This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-shot spatial layout conditioning for text-to-image diffusion models
Marlène Careil∗
Meta AI, LTCI, Télécom Paris, IP Paris

Guillaume Couairon∗
Meta AI, Sorbonne Université
Matthieu Cord
Sorbonne Université, Valeo.ai

Stéphane Lathuilière
LTCI, Télécom Paris, IP Paris

Abstract
Large-scale text-to-image diffusion models have significantly improved the state of the art in generative image
modeling and allow for an intuitive and powerful user interface to drive the image generation process. Expressing spatial constraints, e.g. to position specific objects in particular
locations, is cumbersome using text; and current text-based
image generation models are not able to accurately follow
such instructions. In this paper we consider image generation from text associated with segments on the image canvas, which combines an intuitive natural language interface
with precise spatial control over the generated content. We
propose ZestGuide, a “zero-shot” segmentation guidance
approach that can be plugged into pre-trained text-to-image
diffusion models, and does not require any additional training. It leverages implicit segmentation maps that can be extracted from cross-attention layers, and uses them to align
the generation with input masks. Our experimental results
combine high image quality with accurate alignment of generated content with input segmentations, and improve over
prior work both quantitatively and qualitatively, including
methods that require training on images with corresponding
segmentations. Compared to Paint with Words, the previous
state-of-the art in image generation with zero-shot segmentation conditioning, we improve by 5 to 10 mIoU points on
the COCO dataset with similar FID scores.

1. Introduction
The ability of diffusion models to generate high-quality
images has garnered widespread attention from the research
community as well as the general public. Text-to-image
models, in particular, have demonstrated astonishing capabilities when trained on vast web-scale datasets [16, 33, 35,
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

A realistic photograph of a piece
of cake with a glass and a lemon
in a natural landscape

Jakob Verbeek
Meta AI

Diffusion
Model
Zero-shot
Segmentation
Segmentation
Consistency

Guidance

Figure 1. In ZestGuide the image generation is guided by the gradient of a loss computed between the input segmentation and a
segmentation recovered from attention in a text-to-image diffusion
model. The approach does not require any additional training of
the pretrained text-to-image diffusion model to solve this task.

37]. This has led to the development of numerous image
editing tools that facilitate content creation and aid creative
media design [17, 25, 36]. Textual description is an intuitive
and powerful manner to condition image generation. With
a simple text prompt, even non-expert users can accurately
describe their desired image and easily obtain corresponding results. A single text prompt can effectively convey information about the objects in the scene, their interactions,
and the overall style of the image. Despite their versatility,
text prompts may not be the optimal choice for achieving
fine-grained spatial control. Accurately describing the pose,
position, and shape of each object in a complex scene with
words can be a cumbersome task. Moreover, recent works
have shown the limitation of diffusion models to follow spatial guidance expressed in natural language [1, 7].
On the contrary, semantic image synthesis is a conditional image generation task that allows for detailed spatial
control, by providing a semantic map to indicate the desired
class label for each pixel. Both adversarial [29, 38] and
diffusion-based [43, 44] approaches have been explored to
generate high-quality and diverse images. However, these
approaches rely heavily on large datasets with tens to hundreds of thousands of images annotated with pixel-precise

2174

