This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Causal-DFQ: Causality Guided Data-free Network Quantization
Yuzhang Shang1,2 , Bingxin Xu1 , Gaowen Liu2 , Ramana Rao Kompella2 , Yan Yan1 *
1
Illinois Institute of Technology, 2 Cisco Research
{yshang4, bxu21}@hawk.iit.edu, {yuzshang, gaoliu, rkompell}@cisco.com, yyan34@iit.edu

Abstract
Model quantization, which aims to compress deep neural networks and accelerate inference speed, has greatly
facilitated the development of cumbersome models on mobile and edge devices. There is a common assumption in
quantization methods from prior works that training data
is available. In practice, however, this assumption cannot always be fulfilled due to reasons of privacy and security, rendering these methods inapplicable in real-life situations. Thus, data-free network quantization has recently
received significant attention in neural network compression. Causal reasoning provides an intuitive way to model
causal relationships to eliminate data-driven correlations,
making causality an essential component of analyzing datafree problems. However, causal formulations of data-free
quantization are inadequate in the literature. To bridge this
gap, we construct a causal graph to model the data generation and discrepancy reduction between the pre-trained and
quantized models. Inspired by the causal understanding,
we propose the Causality-guided Data-free Network Quantization method, Causal-DFQ, to eliminate the reliance on
data via approaching an equilibrium of causality-driven intervened distributions. Specifically, we design a contentstyle-decoupled generator, synthesizing images conditioned
on the relevant and irrelevant factors; then we propose a
discrepancy reduction loss to align the intervened distributions of the pre-trained and quantized models. It is worth
noting that our work is the first attempt towards introducing causality to data-free quantization problem. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the efficacy of Causal-DFQ. The
code is available at Causal-DFQ.

1. Introduction
There have been significant advances in deep learning
models in the fields of computer vision [9, 14] and natural language processing [33, 45]. To accommodate the
increasing demand for equipping cumbersome models on
resource-constrained edge devices, researchers have pro* Corresponding author

posed several network quantization methods [18, 57], in
which high-precision parameters are converted into lowprecision ones. To mitigate the performance degradation
induced by model quantization, fine-tuning approaches are
extensively studied to optimize quantized models on the full
training datasets [19, 41, 42, 49]. However, original training
data is sometimes inaccessible in real-world situations due
to the privacy and security concerns. A patient’s electronic
health record, for instance, is typically inaccessible because
the information contained is private. Hence, the fine-tuning
methods requiring training data are no longer applicable in
such real-life scenarios.
To address this issue, researchers have proposed datafree quantization to quantize models without requiring access to real data [1, 2, 24, 43, 51, 54]. For example, ZeroQ [2] is proposed to generate ‘optimal’ fake data, which
learns an input data distribution to best match the batch
normalization statistics of the FP32 model. Nevertheless,
most data-free quantization methods attempt to reconstruct
the original data from the pre-trained model utilizing prior
statistical distribution information of the underlying data,
such as BNS [2, 51, 52], Dirichlet distribution [28] and category information [3]. However, those methods ignore a
powerful tool in the human cognition, i.e., causal reasoning, which commonly aids humans in learning without relying upon data collection. Human cognitive systems are
immune to the data deficiency because humans are more
sensitive to causal relations than data-driven statistical associations [10, 55]. Using causal language, causal reasoning
can extract causal relationship from the pre-trained models
and ignore irrelevant factors by interventions [34].
There are two significant challenges that need to be overcome before causality can be introduced to eliminate the
reliance on data during the quantized model training. First,
constructing an informative causal graph is the fundamental
premise for causal reasoning [30,34], but how causal graphs
should be constructed in a data-free situation is still inadequate in the literature. Second, using causal language to
formalize data generation and network alignment is the key
to connecting causality with data-free quantization, but it
also remains unsolved. These two challenges are the fundamental obstacles that prevent us from employing causality
17437

