This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-Based 3D Human Pose Estimation with Multi-Hypothesis Aggregation
Wenkang Shan1 , Zhenhua Liu3 , Xinfeng Zhang2 , Zhao Wang1 , Kai Han3 ,
Shanshe Wang1,4 , Siwei Ma1,4 , Wen Gao1,4
1
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, Peking University
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{wkshan,zhaowang,sswang,swma,wgao}@pku.edu.cn, xfzhang@ucas.ac.cn,
{liu.zhenhua,kai.han}@huawei.com

Ground truth
3D pose

Abstract
In this paper, a novel Diffusion-based 3D Pose estimation (D3DP) method with Joint-wise reProjection-based
Multi-hypothesis Aggregation (JPMA) is proposed for probabilistic 3D human pose estimation. On the one hand,
D3DP generates multiple possible 3D pose hypotheses for
a single 2D observation. It gradually diffuses the ground
truth 3D poses to a random distribution, and learns a denoiser conditioned on 2D keypoints to recover the uncontaminated 3D poses. The proposed D3DP is compatible
with existing 3D pose estimators and supports users to
balance efficiency and accuracy during inference through
two customizable parameters. On the other hand, JPMA
is proposed to assemble multiple hypotheses generated by
D3DP into a single 3D pose for practical use. It reprojects 3D pose hypotheses to the 2D camera plane, selects
the best hypothesis joint-by-joint based on the reprojection errors, and combines the selected joints into the final pose. The proposed JPMA conducts aggregation at
the joint level and makes use of the 2D prior information, both of which have been overlooked by previous approaches. Extensive experiments on Human3.6M and MPIINF-3DHP datasets show that our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art deterministic and probabilistic approaches
by 1.5% and 8.9%, respectively. Code is available at
https://github.com/paTRICK-swk/D3DP.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D human pose estimation aims to locate
the 3D positions of human body joints from 2D images
or videos. It plays a crucial role in various applications,
such as human-computer interaction, metaverse, and selfdriving. This task can be decomposed into two steps: first
estimating the 2D locations of human joints using off-the-

Contaminated
3D pose

2D keypoint

Gaussian
noise

Output
3D pose

Denoiser
(a) Training

Pure noise
3D pose
Gaussian
distribution
Sampling

Multi-hypothesis
3D pose
2D keypoint
2D keypoint
Output
3D pose
Denoiser

MultiHypothesis
Aggregation

(b) Inference

Figure 1: Thumbnail of our D3DP approach with multihypothesis aggregation. (a) Training: we gradually destroy
the ground truth 3D pose and reverse this process by a denoiser to obtain a clean 3D prediction. (b) Inference: multiple Gaussian noises are passed through the denoiser, which
is conditioned on 2D keypoints, to generate plausible 3D
pose hypotheses. Then, the proposed multi-hypothesis aggregation method is utilized to yield the final output.
shelf 2D keypoint detectors (e.g., CPN [11], OpenPose [6]);
and then mapping these 2D locations to their corresponding 3D positions. In this work, we focus on the latter step,
also known as the 2D-to-3D lifting process, following recent approaches[14, 42, 64, 47].
Existing works can be divided into two categories: deterministic and probabilistic approaches. Deterministic approaches [61, 36, 65, 47, 34] are designed to produce a single, definite 3D pose for each image, which is practical in
real-world applications. Probabilistic approaches [59, 30,
24, 49, 40] represent the 2D-to-3D lifting as a probability
distribution and produce a set of possible solutions for each
image, which allows for uncertainty and ambiguity in the
lifting process. This paper focuses on probabilistic meth-

14761

