This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer
Vision Foundation.
E
D
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
bits
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

(a) Existing image compression pipeline

Water

Coral

Rock

Water

Coral

Rock

Different UWIs share some similar content

nt UWIs share some similar representation

RFD-ECNet: Extreme Underwater Image Compression
with Reference to Feature Dictionary
E
bits

Mengyao Li1 ,
Liquan Shen1∗ ,
Peng Ye2 ,
Guorui Feng1 ,
Zheyin Wang1
D
1
2
Multi-scale Dictionary
Shanghai Universit, Shanghai, China
Fudan University, Shanghai, China

Multi-scale dictionary sdlmy@shu.edu.cn,

jsslq@163.com,

grfeng@shu.edu.cn,

20110720039@fudan.edu.cn
(b) Our motivation and pipeline
wangzy 0831@163.com

Abstract
E

Thriving underwater applications demand efficient extreme compression technology to realize the transmission
of underwater images (UWIs) in very narrow underwater
bandwidth. However, existing image compression methods achieve inferior performance on UWIs because they
do not consider theDictiona
characteristics of UWIs: (1) Multifariry color shift and distance-dependent
ous underwater styles of
clarity, caused by the unique underwater physical imaging;
(2) Massive redundancy between different UWIs, caused
by the fact that different UWIs contain several common
ocean
objects, which have plenty of similarities in strucDecoder
tures and semantics. To remove redundancy among UWIs,
we first construct an exhaustive underwater multi-scale feature dictionary to provide coarse-to-fine reference features
Output
for UWI compression. Subsequently, an extreme UWI compression network with reference to the feature dictionary
(RFD-ECNet)1 is creatively proposed, which utilizes feature
match and reference feature variant to significantly remove
redundancy among UWIs. To align the multifarious underwater styles and improve the accuracy of feature match,
an underwater style normalized block (USNB) is proposed,
which utilizes underwater physical priors extracted from
the underwater physical imaging model to normalize the
underwater styles of dictionary features toward the input.
Moreover, a reference feature variant module (RFVM) is designed to adaptively morph the reference features, improving the similarity between the reference and input features.
Experimental results on four UWI datasets show that our
RFD-ECNet is the first work that achieves a significant BDrate saving of 31% over the most advanced VVC.

1. Introduction
Recently, underwater exploration attracts great attention from governments, scientists, and the public due to
* Corresponding Author.
1 Code is available at https://github.com/lilala0/RFD-ECNet

D
bits

(a) Existing image compression pipeline
Water

Coral

Rock

Different UWIs share some same objects
reference
E

bits

D
reference

Underwater multi-scale
feature dictionary

(b) Our motivation and pipeline

Figure 1: Key ideas of our work. Different UWIs have similarities in texture, structure and semantic, which can be included in an underwater feature dictionary to provide reference for UWI compression. E/D indicates encoder/decoder.
the growing underwater applications. For example, mine
search, nuclear-reactors detection, and underwater power
inspection [1] are parts of homeland security operations. In
addition, marine biology [2] and archaeology [3] are important scientific research for ocean resource development.
Moreover, underwater entertainment [4] such as underwater
live broadcasts is becoming greatly popular with the public.
In these underwater applications, images taken underwater play an essential role. To be transmitted from the deep
sea to the board or ground, underwater images (UWIs) must
be compressed at extremely low bitrates due to the very
narrow underwater wireless acoustic bandwidth of about 20
kbps [5]. However, existing image compression approaches
severely degrade the pixel fidelity (e.g., MSE) of UWIs at
extremely low bitrates (<0.1bpp), which greatly impairs the

12980

