This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sensitivity-Aware Visual Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
Haoyu He1
1

Jianfei Cai1

Jing Zhang2

ZIP Lab, Monash University

Dacheng Tao2
2

Bohan Zhuang1†

The University of Sydney

Abstract
Visual Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) has become a powerful alternative for full fine-tuning so as to
adapt pre-trained vision models to downstream tasks, which
only tunes a small number of parameters while freezing the
vast majority ones to ease storage burden and optimization difficulty. However, existing PEFT methods introduce
trainable parameters to the same positions across different tasks depending solely on human heuristics and neglect
the domain gaps. To this end, we study where to introduce and how to allocate trainable parameters by proposing
a novel Sensitivity-aware visual Parameter-efficient fineTuning (SPT) scheme, which adaptively allocates trainable
parameters to task-specific important positions given a desired tunable parameter budget. Specifically, our SPT first
quickly identifies the sensitive parameters that require tuning for a given task in a data-dependent way. Next, our
SPT further boosts the representational capability for the
weight matrices whose number of sensitive parameters exceeds a pre-defined threshold by utilizing existing structured tuning methods, e.g., LoRA [21] or Adapter [20],
to replace directly tuning the selected sensitive parameters
(unstructured tuning) under the budget. Extensive experiments on a wide range of downstream recognition tasks
show that our SPT is complementary to the existing PEFT
methods and largely boosts their performance, e.g., SPT improves Adapter with supervised pre-trained ViT-B/16 backbone by 4.2% and 1.4% mean Top-1 accuracy, reaching
SOTA performance on FGVC and VTAB-1k benchmarks, respectively. Source code is at https://github.com/
ziplab/SPT.

1. Introduction
To effectively adapt the pre-trained representations to the
downstream tasks, the de-facto choice is full fine-tuning,
which initializes the model with the pre-trained weights and
tunes all the parameters. However, vanilla full fine-tuning
needs to store a separate instance of parameters for each

…

Adapter

Task 1

Adapter

Task T

Any Structured
Tuning Method

Task T

(a)
…

Any Structured
Tuning Method

Task 1
(b)

Figure 1: (a) Existing PEFT methods, such as Adapter [20]
introduce trainable parameters to the same positions for all
downstream tasks. These methods design task-agnostic positions to employ trainable parameters relying on heuristics and neglect consideration of the distinct domain gaps
and characteristics for the downstream tasks. (b) Our
Sensitivity-aware visual Parameter-efficient fine-Tuning
(SPT) introduces trainable parameters to the task-specific
important positions and allocates them with both unstructured and structured tuning granularities, simultaneously.
For structured tuning, SPT can exploit any existing structured tuning methods, such as LoRA [21] or Adapter [20].
Red lines and blocks represent trainable parameters and
modules, while blue lines represent frozen parameters.
task and each deployment scenario. It can be extremely
storage-intensive as the storage cost grows linearly with the
number of possible cases, considering there are vast varieties of downstream tasks and dynamic deployment environments, especially when deploying the large vision models [12, 32, 56] to mobile systems. For example, even storing a single large pre-trained ViT-H [12] model on a local
disk requires at least 2.3GB, while the Top-10 U.S. apps
required only collectively 2.2GB in May 2021.1
Notably, an emerging solution is to replace vanilla
fine-tuning with visual Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
(PEFT) [22, 9, 63, 23], which only tunes a small num-

† Corresponding author. E-mail: bohan.zhuang@gmail.com

1 https://sensortower.com/blog/ios-app-size-growth-2021

11825

