This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Compositional Feature Augmentation for Unbiased Scene Graph Generation
Lin Li1,2 , Guikun Chen1 , Jun Xiao1 , Yi Yang1 , Chunping Wang3 , Long Chen2†
1

Zhejiang University

2

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

3

FinVolution

{mukti, guikun.chen, junx, yangyics}@zju.edu.cn, wangchunping02@xinye.com, longchen@ust.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
As one of the fundamental comprehensive visual scene
understanding tasks, Scene Graph Generation (SGG) has
attracted unprecedented interest from our community and
has made great progress in recent years [29, 47, 44, 2, 4,
35, 24, 26, 21, 43, 23, 32]. Speciﬁcally, SGG aims to trans† Corresponding author. Work was done when Lin Li visited HKUST.

21685

(a)

Extrinsic Info

Scene Graph Generation (SGG) aims to detect all the visual relation triplets <sub, pred, obj> in a given image.
With the emergence of various advanced techniques for better utilizing both the intrinsic and extrinsic information in
each relation triplet, SGG has achieved great progress over
the recent years. However, due to the ubiquitous long-tailed
predicate distributions, today’s SGG models are still easily
biased to the head predicates. Currently, the most prevalent
debiasing solutions for SGG are re-balancing methods, e.g.,
changing the distributions of original training samples. In
this paper, we argue that all existing re-balancing strategies
fail to increase the diversity of the relation triplet features
of each predicate, which is critical for robust SGG. To this
end, we propose a novel Compositional Feature Augmentation (CFA) strategy, which is the ﬁrst unbiased SGG work
to mitigate the bias issue from the perspective of increasing the diversity of triplet features. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst decompose each relation triplet feature into two components:
intrinsic feature and extrinsic feature, which correspond to
the intrinsic characteristics and extrinsic contexts of a relation triplet, respectively. Then, we design two different feature augmentation modules to enrich the feature diversity
of original relation triplets by replacing or mixing up either
their intrinsic or extrinsic features from other samples. Due
to its model-agnostic nature, CFA can be seamlessly incorporated into various SGG frameworks. Extensive ablations
have shown that CFA achieves a new state-of-the-art performance on the trade-off between different metrics.

Intrinsic Info

https://github.com/HKUST-LongGroup/CFA

pole

surfboard

Entity Prediction

holding

on
Predicate Prediction

pole
wave hand

surfboard

Entity Prediction

on

holding

Predicate Prediction

Enhanced Triplet Feature
Triplet Feature of laying on
Triplet Feature of on
Original Decision Boundary
New Decision Boundary

laying on

on laying on

on

(b)

Re-balancing

CFA

Figure 1: (a) The intrinsic and extrinsic information for
SGG. The entity prediction is for the green box, and the
predicate prediction is for the relation between the red and
green boxes. (b) Illustration of the diversity of feature space
and decision boundary between on and laying on before and after using re-balancing and CFA. Each sample denotes the corresponding visual triplet features.

form an image into a visually-grounded graph representation (i.e., scene graph) where each node represents an object instance with a bounding box and each directed edge
represents the corresponding predicate between the two objects. Thus, each scene graph can also be formulated as a
set of visual relation triplets (i.e., <sub, pred, obj>).
Since such structural representations can provide strong explainable potentials, SGG has been widely-used in various
downstream tasks, such as visual question answering, image retrieval, and captioning.
In general, due to the extremely diverse visual appearance of different visual relation triplets, recent SGG meth-

