This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VAD: Vectorized Scene Representation for Efficient Autonomous Driving
Bo Jiang1,⋆,⋄ , Shaoyu Chen1,⋆,⋄ , Qing Xu2 , Bencheng Liao1,⋄ , Jiajie Chen2 ,
Helong Zhou2 , Qian Zhang2 , Wenyu Liu1 , Chang Huang2 , Xinggang Wang1,⊠
1

Huazhong University of Science & Technology

2

Horizon Robotics

{bjiang, shaoyuchen, bcliao, liuwy, xgwang}@hust.edu.cn
{qing.xu, jiajie.chen, helong.zhou, qian01.zhang, chang.huang}@horizon.ai

Abstract
Autonomous driving requires a comprehensive understanding of the surrounding environment for reliable trajectory planning. Previous works rely on dense rasterized
scene representation (e.g., agent occupancy and semantic
map) to perform planning, which is computationally intensive and misses the instance-level structure information.
In this paper, we propose VAD, an end-to-end vectorized
paradigm for autonomous driving, which models the driving scene as a fully vectorized representation. The proposed
vectorized paradigm has two significant advantages. On
one hand, VAD exploits the vectorized agent motion and
map elements as explicit instance-level planning constraints
which effectively improves planning safety. On the other
hand, VAD runs much faster than previous end-to-end planning methods by getting rid of computation-intensive rasterized representation and hand-designed post-processing
steps. VAD achieves state-of-the-art end-to-end planning
performance on the nuScenes dataset, outperforming the
previous best method by a large margin. Our base model,
VAD-Base, greatly reduces the average collision rate by
29.0% and runs 2.5× faster. Besides, a lightweight variant, VAD-Tiny, greatly improves the inference speed (up to
9.3×) while achieving comparable planning performance.
We believe the excellent performance and the high efficiency
of VAD are critical for the real-world deployment of an autonomous driving system. Code and models are available
at https://github.com/hustvl/VAD for facilitating future research.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving requires both comprehensive scene
understanding for ensuring safety and high efficiency for
⋆ Equal contribution; ⋄ This work was done during the internship of
Bo Jiang, Shaoyu Chen, and Bencheng Liao at Horizon Robotics; ⊠ Corresponding author: xgwang@hust.edu.cn

(a) Rasterized Scene Representation
Boundary Vector

Lane Vector

(b) Vectorized Scene Representation
Motion Vector

Ego Vector

Figure 1. Previous paradigms mainly rely on rasterized representation (a) for planning (e.g., semantic map, occupancy map, flow
map, and cost map), which is computationally intensive. The proposed VAD is fully based on the vectorized scene representation
(b) for end-to-end planning. VAD leverages instance-level structure information as planning constraints and guidance, achieving
promising performance and efficiency.

real-world deployment. An autonomous vehicle needs to
efficiently perceive the driving scene and perform reasonable planning based on the scene information.
Traditional autonomous driving methods [23, 14, 7, 48]
adopt a modular paradigm, where perception and planning
are decoupled into standalone modules. The disadvantage
is, the planning module cannot access the original sensor
data, which contains rich semantic information. And since
planning is fully based on preceding perception results, the
error in perception may severely influence planning and can
not be recognized and cured in the planning stage, which
leads to the safety problem.
Recently, end-to-end autonomous driving methods [19,
21, 2, 11] take sensor data as input for perception and
output planning results with one holistic model. Some
works [40, 9, 41] directly output planning results based on
the sensor data without learning scene representation, which
lacks interpretability and is difficult to optimize. Most
works [19, 21, 2] transform the sensor data into rasterized

8340

