This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoLep: Single-View View Synthesis with Locally-Learned Planes and
Self-Attention Occlusion Inference
Cong Wang1 , Yu-Ping Wang2 , Dinesh Manocha3
1

Tsinghua University, 2 The Beijing Institute of Technology, 3 University of Maryland

Abstract
We propose a novel method, LoLep, which regresses
Locally-Learned planes from a single RGB image to
represent scenes accurately, thus generating better novel
views. Without the depth information, regressing appropriate plane locations is a challenging problem. To solve
this issue, we pre-partition the disparity space into bins and
design a disparity sampler to regress local offsets for multiple planes in each bin. However, only using such a sampler makes the network not convergent; we further propose
two optimizing strategies that combine with different disparity distributions of datasets and propose an occlusionaware reprojection loss as a simple yet effective geometric
supervision technique. We also introduce a self-attention
mechanism to improve occlusion inference and present a
Block-Sampling Self-Attention (BS-SA) module to address
the problem of applying self-attention to large feature maps.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach and generate state-of-the-art results on different datasets. Compared to MINE, our approach has an LPIPS reduction of
4.8%∼9.0% and an RV reduction of 74.9%∼83.5%. We
also evaluate the performance on real-world images and
demonstrate the benefits.

1. Introduction
Single-view view synthesis allows a camera to roam
around a scene from a given photograph. It has been used
to generate compelling views for different applications including image editing and augmented or virtual reality. The
underlying techniques require understanding the geometry
of scenes, reasoning about occlusions, and rendering highquality images of novel views in real time.
Many approaches have been proposed to solve this problem [41, 35, 22, 26, 40]. They synthesize novel views by
predicting a naive representation (e.g., depth maps, voxels,
or point clouds) from a single image and generating images
Yu-Ping Wang is the corresponding author (wyp cs@bit.edu.cn).

Figure 1. Comparisons on the KITTI dataset. LoLep generates
state-of-the-art results and even LoLep with fewer planes uses less
memory and generates better novel views than previous methods
with more planes (LoLep-16 vs. MINE-32, MINE-64 and MPI32, LoLep-32 vs. MINE-64), which benefits from locally-learned
planes and self-attention occlusion inference. The batch size is 4.

for novel views using appropriate rendering techniques.
While these methods generate some positive results, they
limit the performance of single-view view synthesis due to
their inability to represent occluded regions well [37]. In
this context, layered representations [37, 38, 45, 21, 20, 13]
are more suitable for single-view view synthesis.
Recently, Multiplane Image (MPI) [45] has gained popularity as a layered representation and has been used for
single-view view synthesis [37]. Specifically, it is an
encoder-decoder structure supervised by multiple images
from different views of a given scene and is used to predict multiple planes of RGB and alpha values from a single
image. MINE [20] combines MPI with NeRF [25] and generalizes MPI into a continuous depth MPI by considering
multiple plane location inputs. This can improve the performance of single-view view synthesis to better infer geometric primitives in a scene. However, these methods sample plane locations randomly, which makes it hard for the
planes to learn optimal scene representations. As a result,

10841

