This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Affective Image Filter: Reﬂecting Emotions from Text to Images
Shuchen Weng#1,2,4
1

Peixuan Zhang#3

Zheng Chang3

Xinlong Wang4

Si Li∗3

Boxin Shi1,2

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3

School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
4

Beijing Academy of Artiﬁcial Intelligence

{shuchenweng,shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, {pxzhang,zhengchang98,lisi}@bupt.edu.cn, wangxinlong@baai.ac.cn
(b) Content consistency

(a) Emotional fidelity
Looking at a photo
with beautiful colors
fills me with a sense
of happiness and joy,
like a burst of
sunshine on a cloudy
day.
Original

CLVA

The person's
isolation and the lack
of color create a
poignant and
melancholic
atmosphere that is
Original impossible to ignore.

AIF

CLIPstyler

AIF

(c) Controllable synthesis

Original

The sight of the
Golden Bridge fills
me with a sense of
calm, like all of my
worries have been left
behind.

AIF
AIF

The Golden Bridge
seems to cast a
shadow that
contributes to an
overall sense of
darkness and sadness.

AIF

The Golden Bridge at
sunset is a place of
respite and
rejuvenation, where I
can escape the chaos
of the world and find
a moment of peace.

AIF

Figure 1: Illustration of the affective image ﬁlter (AIF) task. (a) Compared with CLVA [17], our AIF model acts as a bright and highly
saturated image ﬁlter that tries to evoke speciﬁc emotional responses from human observers based on the given text. (b) Compared with
CLIPstyler [26], our AIF model could maintain the visual elements, e.g., humans and trees, while ﬁlling them with a distinct emotional
tone. (c) Given an arbitrary image and different texts, our AIF model could synthesize a wide range of ﬁltered images, without the need
for individual ﬁne-tuning or optimization of each input text [23, 26].

Abstract
Understanding the emotions in text and presenting them
visually is a very challenging problem that requires a deep
understanding of natural language and high-quality image
synthesis simultaneously. In this work, we propose Affective
Image Filter (AIF), a novel model that is able to understand
the visually-abstract emotions from the text and reﬂect them
to visually-concrete images with appropriate colors and textures. We build our model based on the multi-modal transformer architecture, which uniﬁes both images and texts
into tokens and encodes the emotional prior knowledge.
Various loss functions are proposed to understand complex
emotions and produce appropriate visualization. In addition, we collect and contribute a new dataset with abundant
aesthetic images and emotional texts for training and evaluating the AIF model. We carefully design four quantitative
metrics and conduct a user study to comprehensively eval# Equal contributions. * Corresponding author.

uate the performance, which demonstrates our AIF model
outperforms state-of-the-art methods and could evoke speciﬁc emotional responses from human observers.

1. Introduction
When people share their experiences about events and
subjects on social networks (e.g., Twitter), the text is a direct
medium to express their opinions and establish emotional
connections with other users [22, 43]. Since social media is
a highly active platform with a vast amount of content being
produced every day, inﬂuencers strive to personalize their
content to evoke emotional responses from their followers.
It is well known that “a picture tells a thousand words”.
Images have powerful descriptive abilities, and they could
also become affective stimuli that enable people from various backgrounds to understand emotional intention [66].
This motivates us to think that, given written texts that
reﬂect personal thoughts and feelings, how we can reﬂect visually-abstract emotions from user-provided texts to

10810

