This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Non-Coaxial Event-guided Motion Deblurring with Spatial Alignment
Hoonhee Cho, Yuhwan Jeong, Taewoo Kim, and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology

RGB Camera

Events and Image
are not aligned!

Far Objects

{gnsgnsgml,jeongyh98,intelpro,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Close Objects

Event Camera

The degree of
mismatch varies
within a scene.

(a) Camera Setup

(b) Overlayed Events

(c) Ours

(d) MPRNet

(e) UEVD

Figure 1: The proposed method aims to restore a sharp RGB image from a blurry image by utilizing events provided by a
separate event camera, as shown in (a). Previous event-based motion deblurring methods assume that the image and event are
spatially aligned perfectly. However, in real-world images, except for low-quality APS images, there are misaligned pixels
with events even when the baseline of two cameras is minimized, as in (b). In general, the misalignment between these pixels
depends on the distance to camera. Therefore, as shown in (d) and (e), for distant objects that are partially aligned, the stateof-the-art event-based image deblurring method UEVD [28] performs better than the only image-based method MPRNet [6].
Instead, even when utilizing additional information, the event-based model often fails to preserve details for objects that are
close, compared to the image-based model. On the other hand, our approach robustly restores sharp textures for both near
and distant objects by matching each pixel between the image and event at the feature-level, as in (c).

Abstract
Motion deblurring from a blurred image is a challenging computer vision problem because frame-based cameras
lose information during the blurring process. Several attempts have compensated for the loss of motion information
by using event cameras, which are bio-inspired sensors with
a high temporal resolution. Even though most studies have
assumed that image and event data are pixel-wise aligned,
this is only possible with low-quality active-pixel sensor
(APS) images and synthetic datasets. In real scenarios,
obtaining per-pixel aligned event-RGB data is technically
challenging since event and frame cameras have different
optical axes. For the application of the event camera, we
propose the first Non-coaxial Event-guided Image Deblurring (NEID) approach that utilizes the camera setup composed of a standard frame-based camera with a non-coaxial
project: https://sites.google.com/view/neid2023

single event camera. To consider the per-pixel alignment
between the image and event without additional devices, we
propose the first NEID network that spatially aligns events
to images while refining the image features from temporally
dense event features. For training and evaluation of our
network, we also present the first large-scale dataset, consisting of RGB frames with non-aligned events aimed at a
breakthrough in motion deblurring with an event camera.
Extensive experiments on various datasets demonstrate that
the proposed method achieves significantly better results
than the prior works in terms of performance and speed,
and it can be applied for practical uses of event cameras.

1. Introduction
Motion blur occurs due to the motions during the exposure time since a frame-based camera records the scene
during the exposure time and outputs the averaged signal.
12492

