This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyleDomain: Efficient and Lightweight Parameterizations of StyleGAN for
One-shot and Few-shot Domain Adaptation
Aibek Alanov2,1, *, Vadim Titov2, *, Maksim Nakhodnov2,3 *, Dmitry Vetrov1,2
1

HSE University

2

AIRI

3

Lomonosov Moscow State University

aalanov@hse.ru, titov@2a2i.org, nakhodnov@2a2i.org, dvetrov@hse.ru

Face + Sketch

Face to Dog

Dog to Face

- Sketch + Pixar

Figure 1: Smooth cross-domain image morphing. Morphing in the space of generator weights could be successfully combined
with morphing using StyleDomain directions, i.e. directions in the StyleSpace that can adapt the generator to new domains
(see Section 4).

Abstract
Domain adaptation of GANs is a problem of fine-tuning
GAN models pretrained on a large dataset (e.g. StyleGAN)
to a specific domain with few samples (e.g. painting faces,
sketches, etc.). While there are many methods that tackle
this problem in different ways, there are still many important questions that remain unanswered. In this paper, we
provide a systematic and in-depth analysis of the domain
adaptation problem of GANs, focusing on the StyleGAN
model. We perform a detailed exploration of the most important parts of StyleGAN that are responsible for adapting
the generator to a new domain depending on the similarity
between the source and target domains. As a result of this
study, we propose new efficient and lightweight parameterizations of StyleGAN for domain adaptation. Particularly,
we show that there exist directions in StyleSpace (StyleDomain directions) that are sufficient for adapting to similar
domains. For dissimilar domains, we propose Affine+ and
AffineLight+ parameterizations that allows us to outperform existing baselines in few-shot adaptation while having
significantly less training parameters. Finally, we examine StyleDomain directions and discover their many sur* Equal contribution

prising properties that we apply for domain mixing and
cross-domain image morphing. Source code can be found
at https://github.com/AIRI-Institute/StyleDomain.

1. Introduction
Recent years GANs [12, 20, 21, 19, 5] have shown impressive results in image synthesis and offered many ways
to control the generated data. In particular, the state-of-theart StyleGAN models [20, 21, 19] have many practical applications such as image enhancement [46, 24, 6, 41], image
editing [17, 35, 14, 37, 1, 43, 29], image-to-image translation [31, 16, 36, 11] thanks to their high-quality image
generation and their latent representation that has rich semantics and disentangled controls for localized meaningful
image manipulations. However, it comes at a price, as the
training of StyleGAN requires a large, high-quality dataset
that significantly limits its applicability because many realworld domains are represented by few images. The standard
approach to deal with this problem is transfer learning, i.e.
fine-tuning the model pretrained on the source domain A to
the target domain B.
There are many domain adaptation methods for StyleGAN [18, 39, 50, 52, 23, 45, 28, 31, 4, 11, 55, 44] that

2184

