This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GlueGen: Plug and Play Multi-modal Encoders for X-to-image Generation

Can Qin *, Ning Yu† , Chen Xing† , Shu Zhang† , Zeyuan Chen† ,
Stefano Ermon‡ , Yun Fu , Caiming Xiong† , Ran Xu†


Northeastern University, † Salesforce AI Research, ‡ Stanford University

qin.ca@northeastern.edu, ermon@cs.stanford.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu,
{ning.yu, cxing, shu.zhang, zeyuan.chen, cxiong, ran.xu}@salesforce.com

Sound of
“dog barking”

Abstract
Text-to-image (T2I) models based on diffusion processes
have achieved remarkable success in controllable image
generation using user-provided captions. However, the tight
coupling between the current text encoder and image decoder in T2I models makes it challenging to replace or upgrade. Such changes often require massive ﬁne-tuning or
even training from scratch with the prohibitive expense. To
address this problem, we propose GlueGen, which applies
a newly proposed GlueNet model to align features from
single-modal or multi-modal encoders with the latent space
of an existing T2I model. The approach introduces a new
training objective that leverages parallel corpora to align
the representation spaces of different encoders. Empirical
results show that GlueNet can be trained efﬁciently and enables various capabilities beyond previous state-of-the-art
models: 1) multilingual language models such as XLMRoberta can be aligned with existing T2I models, allowing
for the generation of high-quality images from captions beyond English; 2) GlueNet can align multi-modal encoders
such as AudioCLIP with the Stable Diffusion model, enabling sound-to-image generation; 3) it can also upgrade
the current text encoder of the latent diffusion model for
challenging case generation. By the alignment of various
feature representations, the GlueNet allows for ﬂexible and
efﬁcient integration of new functionality into existing T2I
models and sheds light on X-to-image (X2I) generation.1

1. Introduction
Text-to-image (T2I) generative models have made great
progress in the last few years thanks to algorithmic advances
* This work was done when Can Qin interned at Salesforce AI Research.
Primary contact: qin.ca@northeastern.edu
1 Code will be available at: https://github.com/salesforce/GlueGen

Mixed sound of “dog
barking” and sound
“children playing”

Mix of sound “dog barking”
and text caption “in painting
style by Vincent van Gogh”
 <text>

    

(a) Single Sound

(b) Mixed Sound

(c) Sound-Text Mix

Figure 1. Setting of GlueGen. GlueNet is trying to provide an
adaptable portal for the Stable Diffusion model to input multimodal data, such as text, audio, i.e., (a) and (b), or text-audio hybrid signals, i.e. (c), for X-to-image generation.

and the availability of large-scale paired training datasets
[42, 70, 45, 50, 49]. Diffusion-based T2I generative models in particular have achieved remarkable results in terms
of image quality [24, 36, 3, 47, 35, 73]. Despite these
strong results, controllable generation for these methods is
still challenging: generated images are often not faithful
to the captions, compositional capabilities are lacking, and
prompt engineering is often required to achieve the desired
results [37]. Moreover, most large-scale models have only
been trained on English text captions, greatly limiting their
use across the world.
Recent research has emphasized the crucial role of text
encoders in improving Text-to-Image (T2I) models’ performance, and their ability to comprehend and represent text
is considered a bottleneck for image generation [47, 10].
However, the current T2I models’ text encoders are often
trained on short image captions, which limits their performance on complex prompts and challenges their qual-

23085

