This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CO-PILOT: Dynamic Top-Down Point Cloud with Conditional Neighborhood
Aggregation for Multi-Gigapixel Histopathology Image Representation
Ramin Nakhli, Allen Zhang, Ali Mirabadi, Katherine Rich,
Maryam Asadi, Blake Gilks, Hossein Farahani*, Ali Bashashati*
University of British Columbia

Abstract
Predicting survival rates based on multi-gigapixel
histopathology images is one of the most challenging tasks
in digital pathology. Due to the computational complexities,
Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) has become the conventional approach for this process as it breaks the image into
smaller patches. However, this technique fails to account
for the individual cells present in each patch, while they are
the fundamental part of the tissue. In this work, we developed a novel dynamic and hierarchical point-cloud-based
method (CO-PILOT) for the processing of cellular graphs
extracted from routine histopathology images. By using
bottom-up information propagation and top-down conditional attention, our model gains access to an adaptive
focus across different levels of tissue hierarchy. Through
comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate that our model
can outperform all the state-of-the-art methods in survival
prediction, including the hierarchical Vision Transformer
(ViT), across three datasets and four metrics with only half
of the parameters of the closest baseline. Importantly, our
model is able to stratify the patients into different risk cohorts with statistically different outcomes across three large
datasets, a task that was previously achievable only using genomic information. Furthermore, we publish a large
dataset containing 873 cellular graphs from 188 patients,
along with their survival information, making it one of the
largest publicly available datasets in this context.

1. Introduction
The utilization of deep learning models in the digital processing of medical images has garnered substantial interest in the computer vision community, where these models have been used for a wide range of image types (e.g.,
histopathology images and CT scans) and tasks (e.g., classification, segmentation, and survival prediction) [41, 6, 49,
28, 47, 30, 37, 40, 29]. The ability of these models to learn
meaningful features from raw images with little to no su-

Figure 1: Cellular graph constructed by connecting the adjacent nodes within a 4, 000 × 4, 000 pixels image. The
two enlarged windows demonstrated two different tissue
types with distinct spatial positioning and composition of
the cells. The window on the right demonstrates a highdensity area while the one on the left is associated with a
low-density tissue region.
pervision has created exciting opportunities, especially in
digitized histopathology where unique challenges are posed
due to the large scale and high granularity of input images,
also known as Whole-Slide Images or WSIs (Fig. 1).
The high resolution and intricate details of WSIs (each
image reaching up to 150,000×150,000 pixels in size) can
pose intriguing challenges in computer vision such as memory limit issues during end-to-end training. To address
the computational difficulties, Multiple Instance Learning
(MIL) techniques are often used as the main training strategy. These techniques divide the WSI into smaller patches,
pass them through a pre-trained feature extractor, and aggregate the patch embeddings to provide a representation
for the whole slide. Although MIL has shown promising
results in several tasks, including cancer subtype classi-

21063

