This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Neural Representation for Cooperative Low-light Image Enhancement
Shuzhou Yang1,2 , Moxuan Ding† , Yanmin Wu1 , Zihan Li3 , Jian Zhang∗1
1
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China 3 University of Washington, USA
szyang@stu.pku.edu.cn, zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The following three factors restrict the application of
existing low-light image enhancement methods: unpredictable brightness degradation and noise, inherent gap between metric-favorable and visual-friendly versions, and
the limited paired training data. To address these limitations, we propose an implicit Neural Representation
method for Cooperative low-light image enhancement,
dubbed NeRCo. It robustly recovers perceptual-friendly results in an unsupervised manner. Concretely, NeRCo uniﬁes the diverse degradation factors of real-world scenes
with a controllable ﬁtting function, leading to better robustness. In addition, for the output results, we introduce
semantic-oriented supervision with priors from the pretrained vision-language model. Instead of merely following
reference images, it encourages results to meet subjective
expectations, ﬁnding more visual-friendly solutions. Further, to ease the reliance on paired data and reduce solution
space, we develop a dual-closed-loop constrained enhancement module. It is trained cooperatively with other afﬁliated modules in a self-supervised manner. Finally, extensive
experiments demonstrate the robustness and superior effectiveness of our proposed NeRCo. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Ysz2022/NeRCo.

1. Introduction
Due to the degraded brightness in low-light images covering objects and reducing contrast, low-light images have
severely impacted the subsequent high-level computer visual tasks (e.g., semantic segmentation [15], and object detection [26], etc.). Hence, it is of practical importance to
remedy the brightness degradation for assisting the exploration of sophisticated dark environment. Low-light image
enhancement, which aims to recover the desired content in
degraded regions, has drawn wide attention in recent years
[10, 11, 12, 16, 27, 34].
Corresponding author∗ . Independent researcher† .
This work was supported in part by Shenzhen General Research
Project under Grant JCYJ20220531093215035.

Input

URetinexNet (2022) [47]

NeRCo (Ours)
SCI (2022) [28]
Figure 1: Comparison with two state-of-the-art methods on
the LIME [12] dataset. One can see that we recovered more
authentic color and visual-friendly contents.
Over the past few years, proliﬁc algorithms have been
proposed to address this classic ill-posed problem, which
can be roughly categorized into two groups: conventional model-based methods (e.g., gamma correction [32],
Retinex-based model [33], and histogram equalization [34])
and recent deep learning-based methods [16, 25, 47]. The
former formulates the degradation as a physical model and
treats enhancement as the problem of estimating model parameters, but is limited in characterizing diverse low-light
factors and requires massive hand-crafted priors. The latter elaborates various models to adjust tone and contrast,
which is able to learn from massive data automatically. Essentially, they are trained to learn a mapping from input
to output domain. In real-world scenarios, however, many
samples are far away from the feature space of input domain, causing a trained model to lack stable effect. We
propose to normalize the degradation before enhancement
to bring these samples closer to the input domain. Besides,
existing supervised methods highly rely on paired training
data and mainly attempt to produce metric-favorable results,

12918

