This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3DHumanGAN: 3D-Aware Human Image Generation with 3D Pose Mapping
Zhuoqian Yang1,2†
Shikai Li1
Wayne Wu1
Bo Dai1
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL
zhuoqian.yang@epfl.ch

lishikai@pjlab.org.cn

wuwenyan0503@gmail.com

daibo@pjlab.org.cn

Figure 1: 3DHumanGAN. View-consistent full-body human images generated by our 3D-aware generative adversarial network (GAN). We
show random sampled eight humans, each of them is in three view-angles.

1. Introduction
Abstract
We present 3DHumanGAN, a 3D-aware generative adversarial network that synthesizes photo-like images of fullbody humans with consistent appearances under different
view-angles and body-poses. To tackle the representational
and computational challenges in synthesizing the articulated
structure of human bodies, we propose a novel generator
architecture in which a 2D convolutional backbone is modulated by a 3D pose mapping network. The 3D pose mapping
network is formulated as a renderable implicit function conditioned on a posed 3D human mesh. This design has several
merits: i) it leverages the strength of 2D GANs to produce
high-quality images; ii) it generates consistent images under
varying view-angles and poses; iii) the model can incorporate the 3D human prior and enable pose conditioning.
Our model is adversarially learned from a collection of web
images needless of manual annotation.
† Work done as research engineer at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
Project page: https://3dhumangan.github.io/

Human image generation is a long-standing topic in computer vision and graphics with applications across multiple
areas of interest including movie production, social networking and e-commerce. Compared to physically-based methods, data-driven approaches are preferred due to the photolikeness of their results, versatility and ease of use [61]. In
this work, we are interested in synthesizing full-body human images with a 3D-aware generative adversarial network
(GAN) that produces appearance-consistent images under
different view-angles and body-poses.
Rapid developments have been seen in using 3D-aware
GANs to generate view-consistent images of human faces
[44, 56, 5, 4, 13, 68, 21]. However, these methods have
limited capacity when dealt with complex and articulated
objects such as human bodies. To begin with, methods based
solely on neural volume rendering [5, 44, 56] are too memory
inefficient. Rendering human bodies requires a volumetric
representation that is much more dense than that of faces,
which makes it computationally infeasible. A line of work
improves the computational efficiency and rendering quality

23008

