This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ENVIDR: Implicit Differentiable Renderer with Neural Environment Lighting
Ruofan Liang1,2 Huiting Chen1 Chunlin Li1 Fan Chen1 Selvakumar Panneer3 Nandita Vijaykumar1,2
1

Ground Truth

University of Toronto

Ours

2

Vector Institute

Ref-NeRF [35]

VolSDF [43]

3

Intel Labs
NVDiffRec [26]

NVDiffRecMC [14]

Figure 1: Compared to prior work, ENVIDR has more accurate surface reconstruction and higher quality rendering for shiny
objects with inter-reflections, as depicted for this “toaster” scene. The project page: nexuslrf.github.io/ENVIDR

Abstract
Recent advances in neural rendering have shown great
potential for reconstructing scenes from multiview images.
However, accurately representing objects with glossy surfaces remains a challenge for existing methods. In this
work, we introduce ENVIDR, a rendering and modeling
framework for high-quality rendering and reconstruction of
surfaces with challenging specular reflections. To achieve
this, we first propose a novel neural renderer with decomposed rendering components to learn the interaction between surface and environment lighting. This renderer is
trained using existing physically based renderers and is decoupled from actual scene representations. We then propose an SDF-based neural surface model that leverages
this learned neural renderer to represent general scenes.
Our model additionally synthesizes indirect illuminations
caused by inter-reflections from shiny surfaces by marching
surface-reflected rays. We demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-art methods on challenging shiny scenes,
providing high-quality rendering of specular reflections
while also enabling material editing and scene relighting.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [24] has emerged as a
promising approach to many important 3D computer vision
and graphics tasks. By integrating deep learning with traditional volume rendering techniques, NeRF enables highquality 3D scene modeling and reconstruction with photo-

realistic rendering quality with significant recent research
that has achieved impressive results [25, 26, 28, 20]. While
NeRF can synthesize novel views with photo-realistic quality, they often struggle to accurately represent surfaces
with high specular reflectance. Instead of learning a solid,
smooth surface for these regions, NeRF models tend to interpret the view-dependent specular reflections as virtual
lights or images underneath the actual surfaces (Figure 2).
This leads to learning inaccurate surface geometry in the
shiny regions. These virtual lights can also interfere with
normal directions and negatively affect performance in inverse rendering tasks such as relighting and environment
estimation. This challenge has also been observed and analyzed by prior work, Verbin et al. [35], but is yet to be fully
addressed.
Prior work largely takes one of two major approaches to
address the challenge of learning reflection in neural rendering. The first approach involves explicitly representing virtual lights or images underneath the surface to account for
complex view-dependent appearance [13, 42, 17, 34]. The
original NeRF [24] and its extensions such as [21, 2, 45]
also synthesize complex reflections in this way (Figure 2).
Although this approach at large can improve rendering quality, it often sacrifices the accuracy of the reconstructed surface and limits the ability to edit scenes, such as relighting. Alternatively, the second approach incorporates knowledge of inverse rendering to model the interaction between
light and surface [47, 49, 6, 26]. By decomposing rendering parameters, these methods can achieve material editing

79

