This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unaligned 2D to 3D Translation with Conditional
Vector-Quantized Code Diffusion using Transformers
Abril Corona-Figueroa1
Sam Bond-Taylor1
Neelanjan Bhowmik1
1
1,2
Yona Falinie A. Gaus
Toby P. Breckon
Hubert P. H. Shum1
Chris G. Willcocks1
Department of {1 Computer Science | 2 Engineering}, Durham University, Durham, UK
https://abrilcf.github.io/publications/CodeDiff3D

Abstract
Generating 3D images of complex objects conditionally from a few 2D views is a difficult synthesis problem,
compounded by issues such as domain gap and geometric misalignment. For instance, a unified framework such
as Generative Adversarial Networks cannot achieve this
unless they explicitly define both a domain-invariant and
geometric-invariant joint latent distribution, whereas Neural Radiance Fields are generally unable to handle both issues as they optimize at the pixel level. By contrast, we
propose a simple and novel 2D to 3D synthesis approach
based on conditional diffusion with vector-quantized codes.
Operating in an information-rich code space enables highresolution 3D synthesis via full-coverage attention across
the views. Specifically, we generate the 3D codes (e.g. for
CT images) conditional on previously generated 3D codes
and the entire codebook of two 2D views (e.g. 2D X-rays).
Qualitative and quantitative results demonstrate state-ofthe-art performance over specialized methods across varied evaluation criteria, including fidelity metrics such as
density, coverage, and distortion metrics for two complex
volumetric imagery datasets from in real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
3D imaging is essential in several fields, from clinical applications with Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and
Computed Tomography (CT) modalities [13, 48], to virtual/augmented reality [8,27], self-driving vehicles [23,31],
and security [42, 45]. However, the diverse range of available imaging devices exhibit differences in cost, quality, and
accessibility, which has led to an increased interest in leveraging 2D imaging for 3D acquisition. For instance, in hospitals, CT from biplanar X-rays could minimize patient exposure to a substantial dose of ionizing radiation [12]. Similarly, at airports, volumetric reconstruction from security
baggage screening could be more effective at detecting pro-

2D
views

2D VQ-VAE

2D view
encodings

Absorbing Diﬀusion Transformer

3D encoding

3D VQ-VAE

3D
output

Figure 1. The proposed approach independently learns a discrete
information-rich codebook for 2D and 3D domains with two VQVAEs. New 3D samples are then synthesized conditional on the
complete codebook of multiple 2D views with a transformer.

hibited items [43,44]. The capability to seamlessly translate
between these imaging domains, eliminating their limitations, is a high-impact application; however, this remains a
difficult conditional generative modeling problem.
Generating accurate 3D representations from 2D images
poses a significant challenge in the field of computer vision. Approaches must account for complex shape topologies, fine-grained textures, domain differences, and incomplete input information. Current methods aim to solve this
under-constrained problem by relying on cycle consistency
losses [50] for disentangling 3D shape properties like appearance and viewpoint from a single input image [3], improving fine-grained 3D mesh attributes [21], for 3D-aware
face image generation by distilling StyleGAN2 latent space
[32] and recovering 3D shapes from videos [47]. Despite

14585

