This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Studying How to Efficiently and Effectively Guide Models with Explanations
Sukrut Rao⇤ , Moritz Böhle⇤ , Amin Parchami-Araghi, Bernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
{sukrut.rao,mboehle,mparcham,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Despite being highly performant, deep neural networks
might base their decisions on features that spuriously correlate with the provided labels, thus hurting generalization.
To mitigate this, ‘model guidance’ has recently gained popularity, i.e. the idea of regularizing the models’ explanations to ensure that they are “right for the right reasons”
[49]. While various techniques to achieve such model guidance have been proposed, experimental validation of these
approaches has thus far been limited to relatively simple
and / or synthetic datasets. To better understand the effectiveness of the various design choices that have been explored in the context of model guidance, in this work we
conduct an in-depth evaluation across various loss functions, attribution methods, models, and ‘guidance depths’
on the PASCAL VOC 2007 and MS COCO 2014 datasets.
As annotation costs for model guidance can limit its applicability, we also place a particular focus on efficiency.
Specifically, we guide the models via bounding box annotations, which are much cheaper to obtain than the commonly used segmentation masks, and evaluate the robustness of model guidance under limited (e.g. with only 1% of
annotated images) or overly coarse annotations. Further,
we propose using the EPG score as an additional evaluation metric and loss function (‘Energy loss’). We show that
optimizing for the Energy loss leads to models that exhibit
a distinct focus on object-specific features, despite only using bounding box annotations that also include background
regions. Lastly, we show that such model guidance can improve generalization under distribution shifts. Code available at: https://github.com/sukrutrao/Model-Guidance

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) excel at learning predictive features that allow them to correctly classify a set of
training images with ease. The features learnt on the training set, however, do not necessarily transfer to unseen images: i.e., instead of learning the actual class-relevant fea* Equal contribution.

bicycle

(a)

person

cat

car

person

Explanations
without
Guidance
Explanations
with
Guidance

(b)
Waterbird
on land

Input Image

Bounding Box
Guidance

Without
Guidance

With
Guidance

Landbird
Confidence: 97%

Waterbird
Confidence: 87%

Relevant

Fig. 1: (a) Model guidance increases object focus. Models may
rely on irrelevant background features or spurious correlations
(e.g. presence of person provides positive evidence for bicycle,
center row, col. 1). Guiding the model via bounding box annotations can mitigate this and consistently increases the focus on
object features (bottom row). (b) Model guidance can improve
accuracy. In the presence of spurious correlations in the training
data, non-guided models might focus on the wrong features. In the
example image in (b), the waterbird is incorrectly classified to be
a landbird due to the background (col. 3). Guiding the model via
bounding box annotation (as shown in col. 2), the model can be
guided to focus on the bird features for classification (col. 4).

tures, DNNs might memorize individual images (cf. [18]) or
exploit spurious correlations in the training data (cf. [68]).
For example, if bikes are highly correlated with people in
the training data, a model might learn to associate the presence of a person in an image as positive evidence for a bike
(e.g. Fig. 1a, col. 1, rows 1-2), which can limit how well it
generalizes. Similarly, a bird classifier might rely on background features from the bird’s habitat, and fail to correctly
classify in a different habitat (cf. Fig. 1b cols. 1-3 and [42]).
To detect such behaviour, recent advances in model interpretability have provided attribution methods (e.g. [53,
62, 57, 6]) to understand a model’s reasoning. These methods typically provide attention maps that highlight regions
of importance in an input to explain the model’s decisions

1922

