This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly-Supervised Text-driven Contrastive Learning for Facial Behavior
Understanding
Xiang Zhang1
1

Taoyue Wang1

Xiaotian Li1

Huiyuan Yang2

State University of New York at Binghamton

{zxiang4, twang61, xli210, lyin}@binghamton.edu

Abstract
Contrastive learning has shown promising potential for
learning robust representations by utilizing unlabeled data.
However, constructing effective positive-negative pairs for
contrastive learning on facial behavior datasets remains
challenging. This is because such pairs inevitably encode the subject-ID information, and the randomly constructed pairs may push similar facial images away due to
the limited number of subjects in facial behavior datasets.
To address this issue, we propose to utilize activity descriptions, coarse-grained information provided in some
datasets, which can provide high-level semantic information about the image sequences but is often neglected in previous studies. More specifically, we introduce a two-stage
Contrastive Learning with Text-Embeded framework for
Facial behavior understanding (CLEF). The first stage is a
weakly-supervised contrastive learning method that learns
representations from positive-negative pairs constructed using coarse-grained activity information. The second stage
aims to train the recognition of facial expressions or facial
action units by maximizing the similarity between the image and the corresponding text label names. The proposed
CLEF achieves state-of-the-art performance on three inthe-lab datasets for AU recognition and three in-the-wild
datasets for facial expression recognition.

1. Introduction
Facial expression is one of the most natural signals to analyze human emotion and behavior. Ekman [13] has indicated that facial expressions of emotion are universal across
human cultures and categorized them, apart from neutral expression, into six categories: anger, disgust, fear, happiness,
sadness, and surprise. Then contempt was added as another
basic emotion, according to the work [35]. Furthermore, facial expressions are coded by specific facial muscle movements, called Action Units (AUs) in Facial Action Coding
System (FACS) [14]. Automatic Facial Expression Recognition (FER) and Action Unit recognition (AUR) have been

2

Lijun Yin1

Rice University
hy48@rice.edu

anchor

(a) Self-supervised contrastive learning pairs
pos
Activity-I:
Talk to the
experimenter and
listen to a joke ...

Anchor
neg

Activity-II:
Experience an
unpleasant smell.
The target ...

(b) Activity-based weakly-supervised contrastive learning pairs

Figure 1: (a) shows the self-supervised contrastive learning paring, where green represents positive pairs and red
represents negative pairs. In a batch, the only positive samples for an anchor are its augmentations, while all others
are negative. Even if the last image is similar (same person
and same expression) to the anchor, it will be pushed away
from the anchor as a negative sample. (b) is the illustration of the proposed weakly-supervised contrastive learning method: samples from the same activity in a batch are
selected as positive and the remaining are negative. The
textual activity descriptions are used as coarse-grained information to guide contrastive learning, for example, “talk
to the experimenter and listen to a joke ...”
core problems in facial analysis, attracting significant interest in the computer vision community.
Recently, many deep learning-based approaches [29, 54,
39, 42, 56, 18, 4] have been proposed and achieved state-of-

20751

