This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data Augmented Flatness-aware Gradient Projection for Continual Learning
Enneng Yang1 Li Shen2 * Zhenyi Wang3 * Shiwei Liu4 Guibing Guo1 * Xingwei Wang1
1
Northeastern University, China 2 JD Explore Academy, China
3
University of Maryland, USA 4 The University of Texas at Austin, USA
ennengyang@stumail.neu.edu.cn, {mathshenli,wangzhenyineu}@gmail.com,
shiwei.liu@austin.utexas.edu, {guogb,wangxw}@swc.neu.edu.cn
Abstract
The goal of continual learning (CL) is to continuously
learn new tasks without forgetting previously learned old
tasks. To alleviate catastrophic forgetting, gradient projection based CL methods require that the gradient updates of
new tasks are orthogonal to the subspace spanned by old
tasks. This limits the learning process and leads to poor
performance on the new task due to the projection constraint
being too strong. In this paper, we ﬁrst revisit the gradient
projection method from the perspective of ﬂatness of loss
surface, and ﬁnd that unﬂatness of the loss surface leads
to catastrophic forgetting of the old tasks when the projection constraint is reduced to improve the performance of
new tasks. Based on our ﬁndings, we propose a Data Augmented Flatness-aware Gradient Projection (DFGP) method
to solve the problem, which consists of three modules: data
and weight perturbation, ﬂatness-aware optimization, and
gradient projection. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst perform a ﬂatnessaware perturbation on the task data and current weights to
ﬁnd the case that makes the task loss worst. Next, ﬂatnessaware optimization optimizes both the loss and the ﬂatness
of the loss surface on raw and worst-case perturbed data to
obtain a ﬂatness-aware gradient. Finally, gradient projection updates the network with the ﬂatness-aware gradient
along directions orthogonal to the subspace of the old tasks.
Extensive experiments on four datasets show that our method
improves the ﬂatness of loss surface and the performance of
new tasks, and achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance
in the average accuracy of all tasks.

1. Introduction
Humans can learn a series of continuously encountered
tasks without forgetting previously learned knowledge. In
recent years, many researches target for making the neural network achieve continual learning (CL) ability like hu* Corresponding author.

Figure 1: New tasks’ accuracy (Higher Better) of GPM,
SGD, and MTL on CIFAR-100 dataset, where a signiﬁcant
performance gap exists between GPM and SGD/MTL.
mans [38, 47]. One of the main challenge of CL is to mitigate
the catastrophic forgetting [40, 17, 53] of the knowledge of
previous tasks when learning new tasks [51].
To alleviate catastrophic forgetting of old tasks, several
works [57, 15, 8, 27, 43] propose to constrain the gradient
update direction of the new tasks. The new tasks only update
the network along the orthogonal direction to the gradient
subspaces deemed for the old tasks. Compared to other
methods, the recently proposed Gradient Projection Memory
(GPM) [43] shows better performance in CL. However, we
observe poor performance for the new tasks in GPM. As
shown in Fig. 1, by comparing vanilla SGD (which learns
new tasks without any gradient constraints) or MTL (which
learns all tasks simultaneously and can be seen as an upper
bound for CL) with GPM, we ﬁnd that the performance of
new tasks with GPM has a large gap compared with SGD and
MTL. When learning the 10-th task T 10, MTL and SGD can
achieve 85.40% and 83.00% accuracy, respectively, while
GPM can only achieve 74.50%. This vast gap has prompted
us to explore the reasons behind it and devise effective ways
to address this issue.
In this paper, we ﬁrst revisit the ‘stability-plasticity’
dilemma [33] in GPM from the perspective of the ﬂatness
of loss surface (we provide the formal deﬁnition of ﬂatness
in the appendix). We ﬁnd that the projection threshold in
GPM is a key factor in improving the performance of new

5630

