This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SceneRF: Self-Supervised Monocular 3D Scene Reconstruction
with Radiance Fields
Anh-Quan Cao, Raoul de Charette
Inria
https://astra-vision.github.io/SceneRF

Abstract
3D reconstruction from a single 2D image was extensively covered in the literature but relies on depth supervision at training time, which limits its applicability. To relax the dependence to depth we propose SceneRF, a selfsupervised monocular scene reconstruction method using
only posed image sequences for training. Fueled by the recent progress in neural radiance fields (NeRF) we optimize
a radiance field though with explicit depth optimization and
a novel probabilistic sampling strategy to efficiently handle large scenes. At inference, a single input image suffices to hallucinate novel depth views which are fused together to obtain 3D scene reconstruction. Thorough experiments demonstrate that we outperform all baselines for
novel depth views synthesis and scene reconstruction, on
indoor BundleFusion and outdoor SemanticKITTI. Code is
available at https://astra-vision.github.io/SceneRF .

1. Introduction
Humans evolve in a 3D physical world where even the
slightest motion requires a thorough understanding of their
surroundings to avoid collisions. While binocular vision
is an evident evolutionary edge, physiological studies suggest that humans can sense depth even with monocular vision [31]. Despite a long-standing line of research [68, 80,
63] this is yet unequaled by computer vision algorithms,
which mostly rely on multiple-views to reconstruct complex
scenes [56]. However, estimating 3D from a single view
would unveil novel applications in a world flooded with
consumer cameras where mobile robots, like autonomous
cars, still require costly depth sensors [6, 4].
A small portion of the 3D field addressed reconstruction of complex scenes from a single image [26, 81, 8, 12]
but they all require depth supervision which discourage
acquisition of image-only datasets. Meanwhile, Neural
Radiance Field [42] (NeRF), which optimizes a radiance
field self-supervisedly from one or more views, unraveled

Figure 1: SceneRF overview. From a single input image,
SceneRF synthesizes novel depth/views, at arbitrary poses,
which are then fused to estimate 3D reconstruction. It relies on an image-conditioned NeRF (here, f (·)) trained selfsupervisedly on image sequences with pose.

many descendants [74] with unprecedented performance on
novel views synthesis. They are however, mostly limited
to objects when it comes to single-view input [40, 48, 44].
For complex scenes, besides [34] all train on synthetic
data [60] or require additional geometrical cues to train on
real data [54, 14, 56]. Reducing the need of supervision
on complex scenes would lower our dependency to costlyacquired datasets.
In this work, we address single-view reconstruction
of complex (and possibly large) scenes, in a fully selfsupervised manner. SceneRF trains only with sequences
of posed images to optimize a large neural radiance fields
(NeRF). Fig. 1 illustrates inference where a single RGB image suffices to reconstruct the 3D scene from the fusion of
synthesized novel depths/views, sampled at arbitrary locations. We build upon PixelNeRF [77] and propose specific design choices to explicitly optimize depth. Because

9387

