This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Chordal Averaging on Flag Manifolds and Its Applications
Nathan Mankovich
Colorado State University

Tolga Birdal
Imperial College London

Abstract
This paper presents a new, provably-convergent algorithm for computing the flag-mean and flag-median of a set
of points on a flag manifold under the chordal metric. The
flag manifold is a mathematical space consisting of flags,
which are sequences of nested subspaces of a vector space
that increase in dimension. The flag manifold is a superset
of a wide range of known matrix spaces, including Stiefel
and Grassmanians, making it a general object that is useful
in a wide variety computer vision problems.
To tackle the challenge of computing first order flag
statistics, we first transform the problem into one that involves auxiliary variables constrained to the Stiefel manifold. The Stiefel manifold is a space of orthogonal frames,
and leveraging the numerical stability and efficiency of
Stiefel-manifold optimization enables us to compute the
flag-mean effectively. Through a series of experiments, we
show the competence of our method in Grassmann and rotation averaging, as well as principal component analysis.

1. Introduction
Subspace analysis is a key workhorse of machine learning since various forms of data and parameter sets admit a
compact representation as a subspace of a high-dimensional
vector space. Diffusion imaging data [19] or appearance
variations of objects (e.g. human faces) under variable lighting can be effectively modeled by low dimensional linear
spaces [10], while a video as a whole can be modeled as the
subspace that spans the observed frames [34].
A large body of the aforementioned approaches leverage the mathematical framework of Grassmanian manifolds
thanks to the ease in dealing with the confounding variability in observations [21, 22, 23, 27]. As such, they rely on
statistical analysis tools inherently requiring mean or variance estimations on matrix manifolds [14, 15, 34]. Yet,
(i) they have been found to be susceptible to outliers, and
(ii) while Grassmanians were suitable for analyzing tall
data where the ambient dimension is much larger than the
number of data points, they become less effective when it

Figure 1: Chordal averaging on the flag manifold
FL(1, 2; 3). The average (shown in purple) of the input (red
and blue) lines remain in the average of the input planes.
comes to wide data where the data dimension is relatively
small [29]. In such cases, the more structured flag manifolds
have been found to be more effective [29].
A flag manifold is a nested series of subspaces geometrically generalizing Grassmanians. Any multilevel, multiresolution, or multiscale phenomena is likely to involve
flags, whether implicitly or explicitly. This makes flag manifolds instrumental in dimensionality reduction, clustering,
learning deep feature embeddings, visual domain adaptation, deep neural network compression and dataset analysis [35, 29, 50]. Thus, computing statistics on flag manifolds becomes an essential prerequisite powering several
downstream applications. In this paper, we propose an
approach for computing first order statistics on (oriented)
flag manifolds (c.f . Fig. 1)1 . In particular, endowing flag
manifolds with the non-canonical chordal metric, we first
transform the (weighted) flag-mean problem into an equivalent minimization on the Stiefel manifold, the space of orthonormal frames, via the method of Lagrange multipliers.
We then leverage Riemannian Trust-Region (RTR) optimizers [12, 11] to obtain the solution. Subsequently, we introduce an iteratively reweighted least squares (IRLS) scheme
to estimate the more robust flag-median as an L1 flag-mean.
Finally, we show how several common problems in computer vision such as motion averaging, can be translated
onto averages on flag manifolds using group contraction operators [43]. In particular, our contributions are:
• We introduce a new algorithm for computing flagprototypes (e.g. flag-mean and -median) of a set of points
lying on the flag-manifold.
• Analogous to our flag-mean, we introduce an IRLS mini1 While our averages are for general flag-manifolds, we do provide oriented averages for flag manifolds of type 1, 2, 3, . . . , d − 1 in d-D space.

3881

