This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-Shot Video Classification via Representation Fusion and
Promotion Learning

1

Haifeng Xia1 *, Kai Li2 , Martin Renqiang Min2 , Zhengming Ding1
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University, 2 NEC Labs, America
{hxia,zding1}@tulane.edu, {kaili,renqiang}@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Recent few-shot video classification (FSVC) works
achieve promising performance by capturing similarity
across support and query samples with different temporal
alignment strategies or learning discriminative features via
Transformer block within each episode. However, they ignore two important issues: a) It is difficult to capture rich
intrinsic action semantics from a limited number of support instances within each task. b) Redundant or irrelevant
frames in videos easily weaken the positive influence of discriminative frames. To address these two issues, this paper proposes a novel Representation Fusion and Promotion
Learning (RFPL) mechanism with two sub-modules: metaaction learning (MAL) and reinforced image representation
(RIR). Concretely, during training stage, we perform online
learning for seeking a task-shared meta-action bank to enrich task-specific action representation by injecting global
knowledge. Besides, we exploit reinforcement learning to
obtain the importance of each frame and refine the representation. This operation maximizes the contribution of discriminative frames to further capture the similarity of support and query samples from the same category. Our RFPL
framework is highly flexible that it can be integrated with
many existing FSVC methods. Extensive experiments show
that RFPL significantly enhances the performance of existing FSVC models when integrated with them.

1. Introduction
Due to the emergence of deep learning [43, 18, 15],
video action recognition has obtained impressive improvement by learning informative semantics from raw videos
[23, 38]. These achievements heavily rely on the powerful
supervision of considerable well-labeled videos to optimize
deep neural networks [32, 41]. However, the collection and
annotation of training samples become laborious and expensive, especially for video sequences. Hence, such a learning
* Work done during the internship at NEC Laboratories America.

paradigm does not always feasible for many practical applications [7, 29]. This conflict motivates investigations on
few-shot video classification (FSVC) which aims to learn a
model of good generalization performance from a few labeled video samples [4, 35, 37].
The mainstream solutions to FSVC typically adopt
metric-based meta-learning [30, 12] fashion by training
model across multiple episodes where each includes one
support set with a few annotated videos and the other query
set with unlabeled instances. For inference, the well-trained
model measures the similarities across support and query
videos within each episode to determine which categories
the query samples come from [17]. However, it is difficult
to precisely assess frame-wise relationships within video
sequences, since their temporal information has significant
divergence or even mismatch. To overcome such a challenge, the intuitive strategy is to achieve temporal alignment among cross-video frames. For example, OTAM [4]
develops a variant of dynamic time wrapping (DTW) [27]
to find the optimal alignment path via the frame-level cumulative distance function. Similarly, ITANet [45] explores
implicit temporal alignment via a traversal strategy. Moreover, TRX [28] develops multiple tuples of sub-sequence
to achieve action matching. And STRM [35] studies selfattention mechanisms to emphasize channel representation
in a single video. HyRSM [37] presents a set matching concept to explore temporal alignment without frame-level ordering across various videos.
Although these existing works have achieved appealing
results, they tend to encounter performance bottlenecks due
to ignorance of the following two issues. First, the limited number of labeled samples within each individual task
hardly provides sufficient support to assist model learning
the essential action semantics for the recognition task. Second, there are redundant or irrelevant frames in videos;
treating these less informative frames in the same way as
the other informative ones likely weakens the discriminability of the learned video representations, and thus triggers a
negative effect on solving the FSVC task.
In this paper, we propose a novel Representation Fusion

19311

