This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniDexGrasp++: Improving Dexterous Grasping Policy Learning via
Geometry-aware Curriculum and Iterative Generalist-Specialist Learning
Weikang Wan 1 * Haoran Geng 1,3 * Yun Liu 2
Zikang Shan 1 Yaodong Yang 1,3 Li Yi 2 He Wang 1†
1
Peking University 2 Tsinghua University
3
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence

UniDex

rasp

Figure 1: In this work, we present a novel dexterous grasping policy learning pipeline, UniDexGrasp++. Same to
UniDexGrasp[69], UniDexGrasp++ is trained on 3000+ different object instances with random object poses under a table-top
setting. It significantly outperforms the previous SOTA and achieves 85.4% and 78.2% success rates on the train and test set.

Abstract
We propose a novel, object-agnostic method for learning a universal policy for dexterous object grasping from
realistic point cloud observations and proprioceptive information under a table-top setting, namely UniDexGrasp++.
To address the challenge of learning the vision-based
policy across thousands of object instances, we propose
Geometry-aware Curriculum Learning (GeoCurriculum)
and Geometry-aware iterative Generalist-Specialist Learning (GiGSL) which leverage the geometry feature of the task
and significantly improve the generalizability. With our proposed techniques, our final policy shows universal dexterous grasping on thousands of object instances with 85.4%
and 78.2% success rate on the train set and test set which
outperforms the state-of-the-art baseline UniDexGrasp by
11.7% and 11.3%, respectively.
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Robotic grasping is a fundamental and extensively studied problem in robotics, and it has recently gained broader
attention from the computer vision community. Recent
works [61, 6, 17, 23, 65, 16, 12] have made significant
progress in developing grasping algorithms for parallel
grippers, using either reinforcement learning or motion
planning. However, traditional parallel grippers have limited flexibility, which hinders their ability to assist humans
in daily life.
Consequently, dexterous grasping is becoming more important, as it provides a more diverse range of grasping
strategies and enables more advanced manipulation techniques. The high dimensionality of the action space (e.g.,
24 to 30 degrees of freedom) of a dexterous hand is a key
advantage that provides it with high versatility and, at the
same time, the primary cause of the difficulty in executing a
successful grasp. What’s more, the complex hand articulation significantly degrades motion planning-based grasping

3891

