This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Affine-Consistent Transformer for Multi-Class Cell Nuclei Detection
Junjia Huang1,2†
Haofeng Li2†
Xiang Wan2
Guanbin Li1∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Research Institute of Sun Yat-sen University in Shenzhen,
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
huangjj77@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {lhaof,wanxiang}@sribd.cn, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Pathology Image (Target)

Abstract

A major task of pathologists is to make a diagnosis with
digital pathological images, which are obtained by scanning tissue slides with a whole-slide scanner [33, 42]. In
this process, a pathologist is required to provide the grading of tumors and to classify benign and malignant diseases [31, 15], by locating and identifying certain histological structures such as lymphocytes, cancer nuclei, and
glands. In some applications, instead of locating pixels on
each nucleus boundary, it could be useful to quantify the
† Junjia Huang and Haofeng Li contribute equally to this work.
∗ Guanbin Li is the corresponding author.

Predict

1. Introduction

Model Prediction

Target

Multi-class cell nuclei detection is a fundamental prerequisite in the diagnosis of histopathology. It is critical
to efficiently locate and identify cells with diverse morphology and distributions in digital pathological images. Most
existing methods take complex intermediate representations
as learning targets and rely on inflexible post-refinements
while paying less attention to various cell density and fields
of view. In this paper, we propose a novel Affine-Consistent
Transformer (AC-Former), which directly yields a sequence
of nucleus positions and is trained collaboratively through
two sub-networks, a global and a local network. The local branch learns to infer distorted input images of smaller
scales while the global network outputs the large-scale predictions as extra supervision signals. We further introduce
an Adaptive Affine Transformer (AAT) module, which can
automatically learn the key spatial transformations to warp
original images for local network training. The AAT module
works by learning to capture the transformed image regions
that are more valuable for training the model. Experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed method significantly
outperforms existing state-of-the-art algorithms on various
benchmarks.

Targets Generation

Instances
(Hovernet)

Dots Map
(MCSpatNet)

Bounding Boxes
(Yolox)

Centroids
(Ours)

Figure 1. The visual comparison of predictions and training targets
between existing methods and ours. Different types of nuclei are
marked by red, green and blue boxes or centroids. Our method can
predict a sequence of position coordinates and categorical labels of
nuclei directly from an input pathological image.

different categories of cells. For example, the counts of tumor cells and lymphocytes have been utilized as an effective
prognostic marker [12]. Thus, in this paper, we do not focus
on predicting the nucleus sizes or boundaries, but only aim
at inferring the types and rough locations of cell nuclei in
digital slide images, following the previous work [1].
In the early stage, automatic nucleus detection and classification have been achieved by handcrafted features based
methods[35, 3, 49, 4]. These methods lack sufficient accuracy and generalization, while deep learning (DL) models
can tackle these issues via learning robust representations.
For nuclei detection, existing DL methods can be divided
into three groups, according to the different forms of prediction targets. As Figure 1 shows, the first group is to
outline the contour or to locate the region of each single
nucleus via pixel-wise prediction [14, 9, 16, 41, 29, 30].
These methods rely on the high-quality boundary annotation of nuclei that are expensive and time-consuming. The
second group [17, 1, 38] is to pixel-wisely predict centroids
or dilated centroids (‘Dots Map’ in Figure 1), by convert-

21384

