This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP2Point: Transfer CLIP to Point Cloud Classification with Image-Depth
Pre-Training
Tianyu Huang1,3 Bowen Dong1 Yunhan Yang1,4 Xiaoshui Huang2
Rynson W.H. Lau3 Wanli Ouyang2 Wangmeng Zuo1,5†
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 City University of Hong Kong
4
The University of Hong Kong 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
tyhuang0428@gmail.com, rynson.lau@cityu.edu.hk, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

CLIP Transfer

1. Introduction
Vision-language (V-L) pre-training has achieved great
success in computer vision. Benefiting from large-scale
† Corresponding Author: Wangmeng Zuo (wmzuo@hit.edu.cn)

N

FT1
FT2

N

CLIP Visual
Encoder
Depth
Encoder

K

FTK

FD
1

Softmax

Pre-training across 3D vision and language remains under development because of limited training data. Recent works attempt to transfer vision-language (V-L) pretraining methods to 3D vision. However, the domain gap
between 3D and images is unsolved, so that V-L pre-trained
models are restricted in 3D downstream tasks. To address this issue, we propose CLIP2Point, an image-depth
pre-training method by contrastive learning to transfer
CLIP to the 3D domain, and adapt it to point cloud classification. We introduce a new depth rendering setting
that forms a better visual effect, and then render 52,460
pairs of images and depth maps from ShapeNet for pretraining. The pre-training scheme of CLIP2Point combines cross-modality learning to enforce the depth features for capturing expressive visual and textual features
and intra-modality learning to enhance the invariance of
depth aggregation. Additionally, we propose a novel Gated
Dual-Path Adapter (GDPA), i.e., a dual-path structure
with global-view aggregators and gated fusion for downstream representative learning. It allows the ensemble
of CLIP and CLIP2Point, tuning pre-training knowledge
to downstream tasks in an efficient adaptation. Experimental results show that CLIP2Point is effective in transferring CLIP knowledge to 3D vision. CLIP2Point outperforms other 3D transfer learning and pre-training networks, achieving state-of-the-art results on zero-shot, fewshot, and fully-supervised classification. Codes are available at: https://github.com/tyhuang0428/CLIP2Point.

Textural
Encoder

+

image of a car
image of a chair
Textual Prompt
K
image of a [CLASS] ……
image of a plane
Depth Map
Rendering

Abstract

FD
2

FD
N

Figure 1. Overall architecture of CLIP transfer learning on the 3D
domain. Point clouds are first projected to multi-view depth maps,
and then aggregated by the CLIP visual encoder. Comparison with
textual prompts presents the classification prediction. However,
we argue that the domain gap exists between depth maps and CLIP
pre-training images. To this end, a pre-trained depth encoder via
CLIP2Point is proposed.

data, V-L pre-trained models [34, 47] transfer language
knowledge to visual understanding, which can be fine-tuned
to multiple downstream tasks. However, pre-training across
3D vision and language remains an open question, due to
the lack of sufficient training data. For example, Contrastive
Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) [34] takes more than
400M image-text pairs as training data. In contrast, few
studies have been given to pre-training across 3D vision and
language. Moreover, even the conventional 3D pre-training
method PointContrast [45] is trained on ScanNet [11] with
only 100k pairs of point clouds from 1,513 scenes. Due
to the limitation of 3D pre-training, most existing 3D deep
networks [33, 42] are trained from scratch on specific downstream datasets.
One remedy is to leverage the existing successful V-L
pre-trained model for 3D vision tasks. To this end, one may
first convert the 3D point clouds to multi-view 2D depth
maps [37, 15, 16, 43]. By simply treating 2D depth maps as
images, PointCLIP [53] applies CLIP to 3D tasks, providing
zero-shot and few-shot settings in the point cloud classification with textual prompting. However, its results are still
limited since the rendered depth maps are much different
from the image domain of the CLIP training dataset. And

22157

