This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Model Transferability through the Lens of Potential Energy
Xiaotong Li1,2

Zixuan Hu1

Yixiao Ge3

Ying Shan3

Ling-Yu Duan1,2 *

1

2

School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China,
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China, 3 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG, Beijing, China
lixiaotong@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yixiaoge, yingsshan}@tencent.com,
{hzxuan, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Transfer learning has become crucial in computer vision
tasks due to the vast availability of pre-trained deep learning models. However, selecting the optimal pre-trained
model from a diverse pool for a specific downstream task
remains a challenge. Existing methods for measuring the
transferability of pre-trained models rely on statistical correlations between encoded static features and task labels,
but they overlook the impact of underlying representation dynamics during fine-tuning, leading to unreliable results, especially for self-supervised models. In this paper,
we present an insightful physics-inspired approach named
PED to address these challenges. We reframe the challenge of model selection through the lens of potential energy and directly model the interaction forces that influence fine-tuning dynamics. By capturing the motion of dynamic representations to decline the potential energy within
a force-driven physical model, we can acquire an enhanced
and more stable observation for estimating transferability.
The experimental results on 10 downstream tasks and 12
self-supervised models demonstrate that our approach can
seamlessly integrate into existing ranking techniques and
enhance their performances, revealing its effectiveness for
the model selection task and its potential for understanding
the mechanism in transfer learning. Code is available at
https://github.com/lixiaotong97/PED.

1. Introduction
Transfer learning has achieved remarkable success in
computer vision by fine-tuning models pre-trained on largescale datasets (e.g., ImageNet [16]) for downstream tasks.
However, the proliferation of various network designs and
training strategies presents a challenge in selecting an optimal model from the extensive range of options for a particular downstream task. While fine-tuning each poten* Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. We analogy the physical concept and consider the transfer learning dynamics in the perspective of potential energy. The
objective to push apart different classes can be viewed as an interaction “force” to decline the system “potential energy” and the
dynamics can be seen as a process from unstable to stable point of
the energy plane.

tial model in a brute-force manner is a direct approach for
model selection, it is computationally infeasible due to the
growing number of model candidates.
To address this challenge, prior studies [31, 46, 40, 36]
have endeavored to efficiently measure the transferability
of pre-trained models related to the separability of encoded
representations. The principle underlying these approaches
is to select a pre-trained model that can effectively segregate
its initial features using the ground-truth labels (i.e., image
classes) in the downstream task.
While the aforementioned methodology is effective for
ranking supervised pre-trained models, which are originally
optimized toward class separability, it is not always reliable for ranking un/self-supervised pre-trained models [20].
These models have emerged as dominant in transfer learning and have exhibited superior performance compared to
supervised learning models. Nevertheless, self-supervised
models exhibit different properties due to the discrepancy
between pre-training target and downstream classification
objective [20]. We argue that the limitations of the existing separability-based methodology stem from its inability
to consider the underlying representation dynamics during

5429

