This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeILF++: Inter-Reflectable Light Fields for Geometry and Material Estimation
Jingyang Zhang1 Yao Yao2B * Shiwei Li1 Jingbo Liu1 Tian Fang1
David McKinnon1 Yanghai Tsin1 Long Quan3∗
1

Apple
1

2

Nanjing University

3

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

{jingyang zhang, shiwei, jingbo, fangtian, dmckinnon, ytsin}@apple.com
2

yaoyao@nju.edu.cn

3

quan@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
We present a novel differentiable rendering framework
for joint geometry, material, and lighting estimation from
multi-view images. In contrast to previous methods which
assume a simplified environment map or co-located flashlights, in this work, we formulate the lighting of a static
scene as one neural incident light field (NeILF) and one
outgoing neural radiance field (NeRF). The key insight of
the proposed method is the union of the incident and outgoing light fields through physically-based rendering and
inter-reflections between surfaces, making it possible to disentangle the scene geometry, material, and lighting from
image observations in a physically-based manner. The proposed incident light and inter-reflection framework can be
easily applied to other NeRF systems. We show that our
method can not only decompose the outgoing radiance into
incident lights and surface materials, but also serve as a
surface refinement module that further improves the reconstruction detail of the neural surface. We demonstrate on
several datasets that the proposed method is able to achieve
state-of-the-art results in terms of geometry reconstruction
quality, material estimation accuracy, and the fidelity of
novel view rendering.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D scene information from multi-view
images is a persistent challenge in the field of computer vision and computer graphics. The Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF) approach [13], which uses differentiable volume
rendering to jointly optimize scene geometry and appearance, offers a novel solution and has demonstrated great results in novel view synthesis and neural surface reconstruction. While NeRF successfully models the outgoing radiance of a scene, it fails to disentangle the incident lighting
* Research done while at Apple.

NeILF Base Color

Our Base Color

NeILF PBR

Our PBR

VolSDF Normal

Our Normal

Figure 1. Compared with the baseline that simply runs NeILF [28]
following VolSDF [29], the proposed approach is able to jointly
optimize the scene geometry and material. The neural surface,
material, and final rendering quality are improved.

and surface properties from the radiance, preventing its use
in downstream applications such as object relighting and
material property editing.
Recent works have acknowledged the problem and proposed to further decompose the outgoing radiance into the
material and environmental lighting. Some of them adopt
simplified lighting models to reduce the computational
complexity, including co-located flash light [16, 3, 2, 20]
and environment map [34, 36, 4, 15, 5]. These models are
insufficient to model all kinds of lighting configurations,
such as non-distant light sources and inter-reflections between surfaces. Recently, the Neural Incident Light Field
(NeILF) [28] instead models arbitrary static lighting con-

3601

