This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HoloAssist: an Egocentric Human Interaction Dataset
for Interactive AI Assistants in the Real World
Xin Wang1∗ Taein Kwon1,2∗ Mahdi Rad1 Bowen Pan1† Ishani Chakraborty1 Sean Andrist1
Dan Bohus1 Ashley Feniello1 Bugra Tekin1† Felipe Vieira Frujeri1 Neel Joshi1 Marc Pollefeys1,2
1
Microsoft 2 ETH Zurich

Abstract
Building an interactive AI assistant that can perceive,
reason, and collaborate with humans in the real world has
been a long-standing pursuit in the AI community. This
work is part of a broader research effort to develop intelligent agents that can interactively guide humans through
performing tasks in the physical world. As a first step in this
direction, we introduce HoloAssist, a large-scale egocentric
human interaction dataset, where two people collaboratively
complete physical manipulation tasks. The task performer
executes the task while wearing a mixed-reality headset that
captures seven synchronized data streams. The task instructor watches the performer’s egocentric video in real time and
guides them verbally. By augmenting the data with action
and conversational annotations and observing the rich behaviors of various participants, we present key insights into
how human assistants correct mistakes, intervene in the task
completion procedure, and ground their instructions to the
environment. HoloAssist spans 166 hours of data captured
by 350 unique instructor-performer pairs. Furthermore, we
construct and present benchmarks on mistake detection, intervention type prediction, and hand forecasting, along with
detailed analysis. We expect HoloAssist will provide an important resource for building AI assistants that can fluidly
collaborate with humans in the real world. Data can be
downloaded at https://holoassist.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed incredible progress in
general-purpose AI agents that assist humans with various
open-world tasks, especially in the digital world. AI systems powered by large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT [27] can answer users’ questions and assist them with
various text-based tasks. However, these AI assistants do not
have sufficient first-hand experience in the physical world
and thus cannot perceive world states and actively intervene
*Co-first authors; †Work done at Microsoft

Two-Person Interactive Assistive Task Completion

Task performer

Instructor

Multimodal Data

Instructor: Now let's make the controller,
put the controller on the pad.

... The student
unlocked
the
Joy Con straps
from the Joy
Con controllers,
removed
the
straps, and then
attached the Joy
Con controllers
to the Nintendo
Switch tablet. …

(6) IMU, (7) audio

(8) text

Student:
Here?

(1) RGB, (2) eye
gaze, (3) hand pose

(4) head pose,
(5) depth

Instructor:
Yes!

Figure 1: HoloAssist features a two-person interactive assistive task completion setting. The task performer wears an
AR device and completes the tasks while the captured data is
streamed over the network to a remote instructor watching it
on the laptop. The instructor provides verbal guidance to the
student. HoloAssist includes seven modalities captured live
and human annotated text descriptions as the 8th modality.
in the task completion procedure.
Building an AI assistant that can perceive, reason and
interact in the physical world has attracted attention from
researchers across different fields in computer vision [7,
23, 37, 38], human-computer interaction [6, 8, 15, 29],
robotics [5, 32], and industrial practitioners. For example,
AR Guides [1], which aims to guide users to complete complex tasks, has become popular with the development of
augmented reality (AR) devices. However, existing systems
often rely on pre-defined instructions or formulate the virtual
assistant as a question answering [37, 38] or video under1
20270

