This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DPF-Net: Combining Explicit Shape Priors in Deformable Primitive Field
for Unsupervised Structural Reconstruction of 3D Objects
Qingyao Shuai, Chi Zhang, Kaizhi Yang, Xuejin Chen*
National Engineering Laboratory for Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology and Application
University of Science and Technology of China
{qyshuai21, chih, ykz0923}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xjchen99@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised methods for reconstructing structures face
significant challenges in capturing the geometric details
with consistent structures among diverse shapes of the same
category. To address this issue, we present a novel unsupervised structural reconstruction method, named DPF-Net,
based on a new Deformable Primitive Field (DPF) representation, which allows for high-quality shape reconstruction using parameterized geometric primitives. We design
a two-stage shape reconstruction pipeline which consists of
a primitive generation module and a primitive deformation
module to approximate the target shape of each part progressively. The primitive generation module estimates the
explicit orientation, position, and size parameters of parameterized geometric primitives, while the primitive deformation module predicts a dense deformation field based
on a parameterized primitive field to recover shape details.
The strong shape prior encoded in parameterized geometric
primitives enables our DPF-Net to extract high-level structures and recover fine-grained shape details consistently.
The experimental results on three categories of objects in
diverse shapes demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization ability of our DPF-Net on structural reconstruction
and shape segmentation.

1. Introduction
Objects of the same category typically share common
parts, for example, the seat, backrest, and legs of chairs.
These parts form the concise and compact structure of the
objects. Extracting this part-level structure from 3D objects
is essential in many applications that require part-level prediction, such as shape editing, dynamics simulation, and
physical reasoning, including path planning and grasping.
Many supervised approaches [13, 33, 16, 15, 30] have
been proposed to learn a latent structural representation for
* Corresponding author

3D shapes. However, these methods require part-level annotations of 3D objects, which are very time-consuming to
obtain. Unsupervised structural reconstruction methods attempt to learn structural representations of objects by fitting
the target shape with a set of geometric primitives, such as
cuboids [26, 25, 31], planes [4], and convexes [8]. Although
some methods have shown the ability to predict structureconsistent results from unlabeled objects, they tend to generate over-partitioned structures in regions of rich geometric details. Implicit functions [14, 6, 18] have shown their
strong power for modeling geometric details and been applied for structural shape reconstruction [5, 17]. However,
under the unsupervised learning scheme, these methods extract high-level inter-category common structures from reconstruction error only. Without any structural supervision
and shape priors, they face significant challenges in approximating detailed shapes in diverse structures.
Taking advantage of the expression power of the implicit
functions for geometric details and the generalization ability of geometric primitives to extract high-level structures,
we propose a novel deformable primitive field representation that integrates the implicit deformation field and parameterized primitives. Considering the shape resemblance
between man-made object parts to geometric primitives, we
propose a new explicit structure representation based on
simple geometric primitives. In contrast to existing methods that assemble basic geometric primitives to fit the target
shape, we consider primitives as structural proxies which
can be further deformed for shape refinement. To support
deformation to fit the geometric details of each part, we
design a field-based representation for primitives, named
parameterized primitive field (PPF), which can be learned
end-to-end. To improve the expression ability of the primitive fields for detailed geometry, we further concatenate an
implicit deformation field to bridge the gap between the abstract structural representation and fine-grained shape details of diverse 3D shapes.
Specifically, we propose DPF-Net, a novel unsupervised structural reconstruction method to approximate tar-

14321

