This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Inadequately Pre-trained Models in Transfer Learning
Andong Deng1,† , Xingjian Li2,5,† , Di Hu3,* , Tianyang Wang4 , Haoyi Xiong2 , Cheng-Zhong Xu5
1
University of Central Florida 2 Baidu Research 3 Renmin University of China
4
University of Alabama at Birmingham 5 University of Macau

Abstract
Transfer learning has been a popular learning paradigm
in the deep learning era, especially in annotationinsufficient scenarios. Better ImageNet pre-trained models have been demonstrated, from the perspective of architecture, by previous research to have better transferability
to downstream tasks[26]. However, in this paper, we find
that during the same pre-training process, models at middle
epochs, which are inadequately pre-trained, can outperform fully trained models when used as feature extractors
(FE), while the fine-tuning (FT) performance still grows
with the source performance. This reveals that there is not
a solid positive correlation between top-1 accuracy on ImageNet and the transferring result on target data. Based
on the contradictory phenomenon between FE and FT that
a better feature extractor fails to be fine-tuned better accordingly, we conduct comprehensive analyses on features
before the softmax layer to provide insightful explanations.
Our discoveries suggest that, during pre-training, models
tend to first learn spectral components corresponding to
large singular values and the residual components contribute more when fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved tremendous success in modern computer vision with the aid of the strong supervision
of well-labeled datasets, such as ImageNet[10]. However,
data annotation is notoriously labor-extensive and timeconsuming, especially in some specific domains where expertise is highly required. In such scenarios, transfer learning is of great interest for practitioners to train deep models with a small labeled dataset. Fortunately, existing efforts observe that when training on large-scale datasets,
middle features of DNNs exhibit remarkable transferability to various downstream tasks [80, 75]. This facilitates
popular deep transfer learning paradigms of fine-tuning a
pre-trained model (FT) or simply employing the pre-trained
† Equal contribution. Work is partly done when Andong was an intern
at Baidu Research. * Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Toy experiment of transfer learning from a ResNet18[19]
model pre-trained on CIFAR10[28] to a subset of MNIST[29]. FE
means viewing the pre-trained model as a feature extractor, and FT
means fine-tuning the whole model. It can be seen from the figure
that the 5th-epoch model brings the best FE performance, which
suggests that further pre-training on the source task would harm
the feature quality for the target task. When fine-tuning the whole
model, more adequate pre-training tends to deliver higher transfer
learning performance.

model as a feature extractor (FE). With relatively sufficient labeled examples, fine-tuning the whole network usually achieves higher performance. Despite this, FE is still
important when training resources are limited, or end-toend training is not feasible. For example, some applications combine DNN features and other handcrafted features to obtain both accurate and explainable shallow classifiers [37, 55, 54].
Despite the ubiquitous utilization of pre-trained models,
it still remains mysterious how such models benefit transfer
learning. Several works pioneer to explore this plausible yet
essential problem. [26] systematically investigates whether
better-performing models on source tasks, e.g. ImageNet,
necessarily yield better performances on downstream tasks.
They confirm this hypothesis for both FE and FT, over deep
architectures with different capacities. However, recent
works in the domain of adversarial training discover that an

19397

