This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probabilistic Human Mesh Recovery in 3D Scenes from Egocentric Views
Siwei Zhang1

Qianli Ma1,3 Yan Zhang1 Sadegh Aliakbarian2 Darren Cosker2 Siyu Tang1
1
ETH Zürich 2 Microsoft 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
{siwei.zhang, qianli.ma, yan.zhang, siyu.tang}@inf.ethz.ch
{coskerdarren, saliakbarian}@microsoft.com

ProHMR

ProHMR-scene

Ours

Figure 1: We propose EgoHMR, a novel scene-conditioned probabilistic method to recover the human mesh from an egocentric view image (typically with the body truncated) given the 3D environment. EgoHMR efficiently leverages the scene
geometry and achieves significantly more plausible human-scene interactions compared to baseline methods, ProHMR [32]
and the extended ProHMR-scene (Sec. 5.3), even with severe body truncations.

Abstract
Automatic perception of human behaviors during social interactions is crucial for AR/VR applications, and an
essential component is estimation of plausible 3D human
pose and shape of our social partners from the egocentric view. One of the biggest challenges of this task is severe body truncation due to close social distances in egocentric scenarios, which brings large pose ambiguities for
unseen body parts. To tackle this challenge, we propose a
novel scene-conditioned diffusion method to model the body
pose distribution. Conditioned on the 3D scene geometry,
the diffusion model generates bodies in plausible humanscene interactions, with the sampling guided by a physicsbased collision score to further resolve human-scene interpenetrations. The classifier-free training enables flexible
sampling with different conditions and enhanced diversity.
A visibility-aware graph convolution model guided by perjoint visibility serves as the diffusion denoiser to incorporate inter-joint dependencies and per-body-part control.
Extensive evaluations show that our method generates bodies in plausible interactions with 3D scenes, achieving both
superior accuracy for visible joints and diversity for invisible body parts. The code is available at https://
sanweiliti.github.io/egohmr/egohmr.html.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of Augmented and Virtual
Reality (AR/VR) devices, understanding human actions,
behaviors and interactions of our social partners (“interactee”) from the egocentric view is a vital component for
head-mounted devices (HMDs) to truly become a virtual
companion for humans. The first step towards the automatic
perception of human behaviors and interactions for HMDs
is to estimate 3D human pose and shape (i.e. human mesh
recovery) of the interactee from egocentic view images.
The research community has extensively studied human
mesh recovery (HMR) from a single RGB image (usually captured with third-person view cameras) by predicting SMPL [39, 50] parameters from global image features
[8, 24, 27, 30, 45]. However, their performance degrade
significantly in egocentric images [78]. A major challenge
presented in egocentric scenarios is frequent body truncation [38, 78], when individuals interact with each other
within close proximity, while the HMD camera has a limited field-of-view. Since human poses are highly reliant on
the surrounding environment, 3D scene structures can potentially provide strong cues to infer invisible body parts,
which is crucial for precise understanding of human behaviors: sitting on a chair and standing on the ground may indicate distinct intentions and future behaviors. Following

7989

