This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-grained Temporal Prototype Learning for Few-shot Video Object
Segmentation
Nian Liu1 Kepan Nan2 Wangbo Zhao3 Yuanwei Liu2 Xiwen Yao2†
Salman Khan Hisham Cholakkal1 Rao Muhammad Anwer1 Junwei Han2 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,5
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence 2 Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
National University of Singapore
4
Australian National University 5 CVL, Linköping University
1,4

Support

Abstract
Few-Shot Video Object Segmentation (FSVOS) aims to
segment objects in a query video with the same category defined by a few annotated support images. However, this task
was seldom explored. In this work, based on IPMT, a stateof-the-art few-shot image segmentation method that combines external support guidance information with adaptive
query guidance cues, we propose to leverage multi-grained
temporal guidance information for handling the temporal
correlation nature of video data. We decompose the query
video information into a clip prototype and a memory prototype for capturing local and long-term internal temporal
guidance, respectively. Frame prototypes are further used
for each frame independently to handle fine-grained adaptive guidance and enable bidirectional clip-frame prototype
communication. To reduce the influence of noisy memory, we
propose to leverage the structural similarity relation among
different predicted regions and the support for selecting reliable memory frames. Furthermore, a new segmentation loss
is also proposed to enhance the category discriminability of
the learned prototypes. Experimental results demonstrate
that our proposed video IPMT model significantly outperforms previous models on two benchmark datasets. Code is
available at https://github.com/nankepan/VIPMT.

1. Introduction
To mitigate the data-hungry issue of modern deep semantic segmentation models [18, 2, 4], few-shot semantic segmentation emerges by only requiring a few support samples
with annotated masks for segmenting the objects of the same
class in new images. Many recent works [25, 32, 13, 16]
have shown very promising results on image data using the
meta-learning scheme. They simulate the inference process
and partition the training set into numerous episodes, in each
† Corresponding author: yaoxiwen517@gmail.com.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Given a few annotated support frames, FSVOS aims to
segment the objects with the same category from a query video (a).
Simply considering single-frame information leads to inconsecutive segmentation results (b), while our method generates accurate
results by using multi-grained temporal prototypes (c).

of which, the model samples a few support images and learns
to guide the segmentation on the query images.
Inspired by the classic Few-Shot Image Semantic Segmentation (FSISS) task, the Few-Shot Video Object Segmentation (FSVOS) task was introduced by [1, 24]. For FSISS,
many works adopt the prototype-based methods, in which a
prototype vector is extracted from the support to encode the
category guidance information, and then a segmentation head
learns to match the prototype with the feature at each query
pixel for performing query segmentation. However, the
intra-class diversity can cause the matching gap between the
support-induced prototype guidance and the query features.
The IPMT model [16] solved this problem by learning an
intermediate prototype that integrates both support-induced
external category guidance knowledge and query-induced
adaptive guidance information. As for FSVOS, video data
additionally show temporal correlation, from which we can
also induce internal temporal guidance. If we ignore this
prior knowledge and simply consider single-frame information, the learned prototypes may vary significantly among
different frames, leading to inconsecutive segmentation results, as shown in Figure 1 (b).

18862

