This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynaMITe: Dynamic Query Bootstrapping for Multi-object Interactive
Segmentation Transformer
Amit Kumar Rana∗

Sabarinath Mahadevan∗
Bastian Leibe

Alexander Hermans

RWTH Aachen University, Germany
firstname.lastname@rwth-aachen.de
https://vision.rwth-aachen.de/dynamite

Abstract
Most state-of-the-art instance segmentation methods rely
on large amounts of pixel-precise ground-truth annotations
for training, which are expensive to create. Interactive segmentation networks help generate such annotations based
on an image and the corresponding user interactions such
as clicks. Existing methods for this task can only process
a single instance at a time and each user interaction requires a full forward pass through the entire deep network.
We introduce a more efficient approach, called DynaMITe,
in which we represent user interactions as spatio-temporal
queries to a Transformer decoder with a potential to segment multiple object instances in a single iteration. Our
architecture also alleviates any need to re-compute image
features during refinement, and requires fewer interactions
for segmenting multiple instances in a single image when
compared to other methods. DynaMITe achieves state-ofthe-art results on multiple existing interactive segmentation
benchmarks, and also on the new multi-instance benchmark
that we propose in this paper.

1. Introduction
Interactive segmentation algorithms enable a user to annotate the objects of interest within a given image with
the help of user interactions such as scribbles and clicks.
Such algorithms have several advantages compared to fullyautomatic segmentation methods, since they enable a user
to select and iteratively refine the objects of interest. Existing interactive segmentation methods [8, 28, 30, 39, 40]
formulate this task as a binary instance segmentation problem, where the single object of interest can be segmented
and corrected using user clicks.
Most of these approaches use deep neural networks to
generate the image features that are conditioned on the user
clicks and previous predictions, and they require the image
* Equal contribution.

level features to be re-computed for every user interaction.
While such a design has been proven to be effective, the
runtime for processing each interaction is proportional to
the size of the feature extractor used, since a forward pass
through the network is needed per interaction [8, 28, 30, 39,
40]. Hence, these methods often have to limit their network
sizes in order to achieve a good runtime performance and
are thus not scalable in this respect.
In addition, the design decision to model interactive segmentation as a binary segmentation problem forces existing
methods to approach multi-instance segmentation tasks as
a sequence of single-instance problems, operating on separate (sometimes cropped and rescaled [8]) image regions.
Consequently, such methods need additional clicks if there
are multiple similar foreground instances in an image, since
each of those instances has to be processed separately with
a disjoint set of user interactions, specifying the foreground
and background. This is inefficient, since it is often the case
that one object instance has to be considered as background
for a different nearby instance, such that a refinement with
a negative click becomes necessary for the current object of
focus.
In this work, we improve on both of the above issues
by proposing a Dynamic Multi-object Interactive segmentation Transformer (DynaMITe), a novel multi-instance approach for interactive segmentation that only requires a single forward pass through the feature extractor and that processes all relevant objects together, while learning a common background representation. Our approach is based on
a novel Transformer-based iterative refinement architecture
which determines instance level descriptors directly from
the spatio-temporal click sequence. DynaMITe dynamically generates queries to the Transformer that are conditioned on the backbone features at the click locations.
These queries are updated during the refinement process
whenever the network receives a new click, prompting the
Transformer to output a new multi-instance segmentation.
Thus, DynaMITe removes the need to re-compute image-

1043

