This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Body Knowledge and Uncertainty Modeling for Monocular 3D Human Body
Reconstruction
Yufei Zhang1 , Hanjing Wang1 , Jeffrey O. Kephart2 , Qiang Ji1
1
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 2 IBM Research
{zhangy76, wangh36, jiq}@rpi.edu, kephart@us.ibm.com

Abstract
While 3D body reconstruction methods have made remarkable progress recently, it remains difficult to acquire
the sufficiently accurate and numerous 3D supervisions required for training. In this paper, we propose KNOWN,
a framework that effectively utilizes body KNOWledge
and uNcertainty modeling to compensate for insufficient
3D supervisions. KNOWN exploits a comprehensive set
of generic body constraints derived from well-established
body knowledge. These generic constraints precisely and
explicitly characterize the reconstruction plausibility and
enable 3D reconstruction models to be trained without any
3D data. Moreover, existing methods typically use images from multiple datasets during training, which can
result in data noise (e.g., inconsistent joint annotation)
and data imbalance (e.g., minority images representing unusual poses or captured from challenging camera views).
KNOWN solves these problems through a novel probabilistic framework that models both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty. Aleatoric uncertainty is encoded in a robust Negative Log-Likelihood (NLL) training loss, while epistemic
uncertainty is used to guide model refinement. Experiments demonstrate that KNOWN’s body reconstruction outperforms prior weakly-supervised approaches, particularly
on the challenging minority images.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D human body configurations from monocular RGB images has broad applications in robotics,
human-computer interaction, and human behaviour analysis. This is a challenging task, as the inherent depth ambiguity under-constrains the reconstruction problem. To alleviate the high dimensionality of the reconstruction space,
deformable body models such as SMPL [54] or GHUM [82]
have been used widely to represent a 3D human body in
terms of body pose and shape parameters. Building upon
these parametric models with the aid of deep learning,

model-based methods have made promising progress on
existing benchmarks [60, 38, 44, 35, 15, 49, 51, 45, 43].
However, obtaining 3D annotations for training deep models often requires a Motion Capture (MoCap) system [73],
which is cumbersome, expensive, and limited to specific
environments and subjects. Moreover, labeling noise can
be introduced when obtaining the 3D annotations by fitting
parametric models to sparse 3D MoCap markers [53, 55]
or generating pseudo-labels using existing reconstruction
models [37, 57, 50]. Thus it is important to reduce the dependency on 3D annotations to the greatest possible extent.
One approach is to employ weak supervisions, such
as utilizing 2D landmark annotations combined with prior
knowledge of constraints on human body pose and shape
that are extracted from data [9, 38, 59, 29, 90, 94, 17, 27,
85]. While this method avoids the demand for 3D annotations, this problem is replaced by another: it is challenging to collect a sufficiently homogeneous and dense data
set from which to extract a precise prior [32]. Moreover,
such data-driven priors do not explicitly capture reconstruction plausibility, as they are only modeled via a blackbox distribution. In this work, we avoid data-driven priors
by exploiting generic body constraints derived from wellestablished studies on human body structure and movements [28, 58, 80] to effectively utilize 2D annotations for
3D body reconstruction.
Another problematic aspect of existing approaches is
that they typically combine images from multiple datasets
for training, neglecting the subsequent problem of data
noise and data imbalance. In particular, data noise can
stem from inconsistent joint definitions across different
datasets [62] and the presence of low quality images [43,
84]. Data imbalance occurs because 3D datasets are rich in
images from videos but suffer from diversity in subjects and
actions, whereas 2D datasets are diverse in subjects, poses,
and backgrounds but usually suffer from having few images
per subject-pose-background combination. KNOWN deals
with the problems of data noise and data imbalance by modeling uncertainty. Specifically, KNOWN employs a novel
probabilistic framework that captures both aleatoric uncer-

9020

