This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Skip-Plan: Procedure Planning in Instructional Videos
via Condensed Action Space Learning
Zhiheng Li1 , Wenjia Geng2 , Muheng Li1 , Lei Chen3 , Yansong Tang2 *, Jiwen Lu1,4 , Jie Zhou1,4
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
3
Beijing University of Science and Technology
4
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
{lizhihan21@,gengwj22@,li-mh20@}mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,chenlei2022@ustb.edu.cn,
{tang.yansong@sz.,lujiwen@,jzhou@}tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Skip-Plan, a condensed action
space learning method for procedure planning in instructional videos. Current procedure planning methods all stick
to the state-action pair prediction at every timestep and generate actions adjacently. Although it coincides with human
intuition, such a methodology consistently struggles with
high-dimensional state supervision and error accumulation
on action sequences. In this work, we abstract the procedure planning problem as a mathematical chain model.
By skipping uncertain nodes and edges in action chains,
we transfer long and complex sequence functions into short
but reliable ones in two ways. First, we skip all the intermediate state supervision and only focus on action predictions. Second, we decompose relatively long chains into
multiple short sub-chains by skipping unreliable intermediate actions. By this means, our model explores all sorts of
reliable sub-relations within an action sequence in the condensed action space. Extensive experiments show Skip-Plan
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the CrossTask and
COIN benchmarks for procedure planning.

1. Introduction
Given the initial and goal visual observations which are
curated from instructional videos [44, 37], the task of procedure planning is to predict a sequence of actions to reach
the indicated goal [7], as illustrated in Figure 1(a). This is
an emerging research direction in the field of video understanding. Procedure planning has worldwide applications
and assists humans with instruction-following tasks, such
as cooking, assembling furniture, electronics repair, etc.

Figure 1. Comparisons of the conventional paradigm and our
proposed Skip-Plan in procedure planning. (a) Problem definition: given the initial and goal visual observations (vstart and
vgoal ), procedure planning is to answer an action sequence to
reach the indicated goal with a pre-defined time horizon T . (b)
Conventional paradigm predicts a state-action pair {s̃t , ãt } at every timestep t, and repeat it step-by-step. (c) Our Skip-Plan
skips state supervision and extracts multiple sub-chains by skipping most intermediate actions. The final action sequence is accumulated from all predicted sub-chains. Skip-Plan significantly
reduces the overall compound error, indicated by the shallower
darkness of the chevron arrows.

* indicates the corresponding author.

10297

