This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Global Perception Based Autoregressive Neural Processes
Jinyang Tai*
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
a1203146411@gmail.com

Abstract
Increasingly, autoregressive approaches are being used
to serialize observed variables based on speciﬁc criteria.
The Neural Processes (NPs) model variable distribution as
a continuous function and provide quick solutions for different tasks using a meta-learning framework. This paper proposes an autoregressive-based framework for NPs, based
on their autoregressive properties. This framework leverages the autoregressive stacking effects of various variables
to enhance the representation of the latent distribution, concurrently reﬁning local and global relationships within the
positional representation through the use of a sliding window mechanism. Autoregression improves function approximations in a stacked fashion, thereby raising the upper
bound of the optimization. We have designated this framework as Autoregressive Neural Processes (AENPs) or Conditional Autoregressive Neural Processes (CAENPs). Traditional NP models and their variants aim to capture relationships between the context sample points, without addressing
either local or global considerations. Speciﬁcally, we capture contextual relationships in the deterministic path and
introduce sliding window attention and global attention to
reconcile local and global relationships in the context sample points. Autoregressive constraints exist between multiple latent variables in the latent paths, thus building a complex global structure that allows our model to learn complex distributions. Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness
of the NPs or CFANPs models for 1D data, Bayesian optimization, and 2D data.

1. Introduction
Neural processes (NPs) are different from traditional
stochastic processes such as Gaussian processes (GPs)
[15, 20] in that GPs are difﬁcult to use due to the necessity of selecting an appropriate kernel function. In practice,
the selection of the right kernel function for different distributions is often a matter of specialized knowledge and ex* Corresponding author

10487

r1

z1

r2

z2

ĂĂ

ĂĂ

rn

zn

r1
r2

r

Z

Z*

ĂĂ

rn

Figure 1. The NPs model [5] (left) represents the context sample
points denoted as r using an average value aggregation. In this
model, the latent distribution is represented by the mean μz and
variance σz normal distribution of a single variable. On the other
model, the BANPs model [14] (right) represents the latent distribution of each context sample point as a single variable with a
mean μn and variance σn normal distribution.

perience. In addition, different kernel functions can result
in different computational complexity and model accuracy.
In contrast, NPs provide a more ﬂexible approach to data
modeling by eliminating the need to select a speciﬁc kernel function. This approach can lead to more efﬁcient and
accurate predictions without requiring extensive knowledge
of the data distribution. NPs [5] is a new model for the
combination of parametric [19, 24] Neural Networks and
Stochastic Processes. In the given data, NPs are modeled
as a new class of Stochastic Processes with a ﬂexible approach to the original data distribution. In particular, NPs
deal with non-trivial function distributions for which it is
difﬁcult to ﬁnd a suitable prior representation of the GPs
function. In this sense, GPs perform data modeling by driving a prior distribution, while NPs perform the same task by
driving the data. While maintaining the ﬂexible properties
of the model during the training process, the NPs are implemented with a meta-learning framework so that they can be
quickly adapted to new functional tasks.
Despite the increasing attention in Stochastic Processes
methods, the NPs model still has several limitations that
hinder its development [13]. One of the main problems

