This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Less is More: Focus Attention for Efficient DETR
Dehua Zheng1,2 Wenhui Dong2 Hailin Hu2 Xinghao Chen2 Yunhe Wang2 *
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
dwardzheng@hust.edu.cn {wenhui.dong, hailin.hu, xinghao.chen, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com

Abstract
DETR-like models have significantly boosted the performance of detectors and even outperformed classical convolutional models. However, all tokens are treated equally
without discrimination brings a redundant computational
burden in the traditional encoder structure. The recent sparsification strategies exploit a subset of informative tokens
to reduce attention complexity maintaining performance
through the sparse encoder. But these methods tend to rely
on unreliable model statistics. Moreover, simply reducing
the token population hinders the detection performance to
a large extent, limiting the application of these sparse models. We propose Focus-DETR, which focuses attention on
more informative tokens for a better trade-off between computation efficiency and model accuracy. Specifically, we reconstruct the encoder with dual attention, which includes
a token scoring mechanism that considers both localization
and category semantic information of the objects from multiscale feature maps. We efficiently abandon the background
queries and enhance the semantic interaction of the finegrained object queries based on the scores. Compared with
the state-of-the-art sparse DETR-like detectors under the
same setting, our Focus-DETR gets comparable complexity while achieving 50.4AP (+2.2) on COCO. The code is
available at torch-version† and mindspore-version‡ .

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision that aims to predict the bounding boxes and classes of
objects in an image, as shown in Fig. 1 (a), which is of great
importance in real-world applications. DETR proposed by
Carion et al.[1] uses learnable queries to probe image features from the output of Transformer encoders and bipartite graph matching to perform set-based box prediction.
* Corresponding author
† https://github.com/huawei-noah/noah-research/tree/master/FocusDETR
‡ https://gitee.com/mindspore/models/tree/master/research/cv/FocusDETR

(a) Image
1

(b) Sparse DETR
foreground

(c) Focus-DETR
foreground

(d) Focus-DETR
object tokens

Huawei Proprietary - Restricted Distribution

Figure 1: Visualization and comparison of tokens selected by
Sparse DETR [26] and our Focus-DETR. (a) is the original images,
(b) and (c) represent the foreground selected by models. (d) indicates the object tokens with more fine-grained category semantic.
Patches with smaller sizes come from higher-level features.

DETR-like models [18, 36, 14, 32, 21, 26, 2, 30, 37] have
made remarkable progress and bridged the gap with the detectors based on convolutional neural networks.
Global attention in the DETR improves the detection performance but suffers from computational burden and inefficiency due to redundant calculation without explicit discrimination for all tokens. To tackle this issue, Deformable
DETR [37] reduces the quadratic complexity to linear complexity through key sparsification, and it has developed into
a mainstream paradigm due to the advantages of leveraging
multi-scale features. Herein, we further analyze the computational burden and latency of components in these models (Fig. 2). As shown in Fig. 2, we observe that the calculation cost of the encoder is 8.8× that of the decoder in
Deformable DETR [37] and 7.0× in DINO [36]. In addition, the latency of the encoder is approximately 4∼8 times
that of the decoder in Deformable DETR and DINO, which
emphasizes the necessity to improve the efficiency in the
encoder module. In line with this, previous works have
generally discussed the feasibility of compressing tokens in
the transformer encoder. For instance, PnP-DETR [29] ab-

6674

