This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BUS : Efficient and Effective Vision-language Pre-training with Bottom-Up
Patch Summarization.
Chaoya Jiang1 , Haiyang Xu2 *, Wei Ye1 *, Qinghao Ye2 , Chenliang Li2 , Ming Yan2 , Bin Bi2
Shikun Zhang1 , Fei Huang2 , Songfang Huang2
1
National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
shuofeng.xhy@alibaba-inc.com, wye@pku.edu.cn
Question: What is the color of the buildings in the far left of the photo?

Abstract

*

Corresponding Author.

(a)

Key Patch
Extraction

Long
Patch
Sequence

What is the color
of the buildings in
the far left of the
photo

Top-20% Text-relevant Patches

Top-70% Top-20%

Text-Guided
Patch Abstraction

、

Large-scale pre-training of vision-language models has
recently received tremendous success on a wide range of
cross-modal tasks [45, 7, 14, 28, 54, 26, 49]. Such visionlanguage models learn cross-modal representations from a

Top-70% Text-relevant Patches

、

1. Introduction

Origin Image

、

Vision Transformer (ViT) based Vision-Language Pretraining (VLP) models have demonstrated impressive performance in various tasks. However, the lengthy visual token sequences fed into ViT can lead to training inefficiency
and ineffectiveness. Existing efforts address the challenge
by either bottom-level patch extraction in the ViT backbone
or top-level patch abstraction outside, not balancing training efficiency and effectiveness well. Inspired by text summarization in natural language processing, we propose a
Bottom-Up Patch Summarization approach named BUS ,
coordinating bottom-level extraction and top-level abstraction to learn a concise summary of lengthy visual token
sequences efficiently. Specifically, We incorporate a TextSemantics-Aware Patch Selector (TSPS) into the ViT backbone to perform a coarse-grained visual token extraction
and then attach a flexible Transformer-based Patch Abstraction Decoder (PAD) upon the backbone for top-level visual abstraction. This bottom-up collaboration enables our
BUS to yield high training efficiency while maintaining or
even improving effectiveness. We evaluate our approach
on various visual-language understanding and generation
tasks and show competitive downstream task performance
while boosting the training efficiency by 50%. Additionally, our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on
many downstream tasks by increasing input image resolution without increasing computational costs over baselines.

Visual Patch
Summary

(b)

Figure 1: Subfigure (a) shows the examples of selected textrelevant patch in the VQA scenario. Subfigure (b) shows the
overview of our proposed bottom-up patch summarization.

large number of image-text pairs by aligning the visual and
linguistic modalities.
Most recent works [14, 49, 26, 20, 11] adopt ViT as the
visual encoder or cross-modal fusion encoder, due to its
excellent ability to model the fine-grained long visual sequences from the image grids or patches.
Despite the impressive progress of ViT-based VLP models, they still face challenges of training inefficiency and
ineffectiveness caused by lengthy visual token sequences.
Firstly, long visual sequences will bring heavy self-attention
calculation for visual representation modeling and crossmodal fusion, leading to time-consuming training. Secondly, long visual sequences contain many redundant
patches irrelevant to the text semantics. For instance, as
illustrated in Figure 1 (a), during the VQA task, when answering the question “What is the color of the buildings in
the far left of the photo?”, about 80% of the image patches
may be irrelevant with the question. On the one hand, those
12900

