This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Personalized Image Generation for Color Vision Deficiency Population
Shuyi Jiang1 , Daochang Liu1 , Dingquan Li2 , Chang Xu1
1
The University of Sydney, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
sjia6973@uni.sydney.edu.au, {daochang.liu, c.xu}@sydney.edu.au, lidq01@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
In the image generation area, many outstanding generative models, such as variational auto-encoder (VAE) [37,
44], generative adversarial network (GAN) [7, 8, 33, 17,
16], and diffusion models [34, 11], are proposed for highquality images generation. However, all the generative
algorithms are only centric to normal viewers, aiming
to facilitate the distribution of generated images close to
the dataset established under normal viewers’ perspective.
The needs of underrepresented populations, like colorimpairment populations, are often neglected in image gen-

CVD Simulations

Degree 100%

Degree 80%

CVD Friendly
Personalized
Recolor
Post-Processing

Latent Traversal

Approximately, 350 million people, a proportion of 8%,
suffer from color vision deficiency (CVD). While image
generation algorithms have been highly successful in synthesizing high-quality images, CVD populations are unintentionally excluded from target users and have difficulties understanding the generated images as normal viewers do. Although a straightforward baseline can be formed
by combining generation models and recolor compensation methods as the post-processing, the CVD friendliness
of the result images is still limited since the input image
content of recolor methods is not CVD-oriented and will
be fixed during the recolor compensation process. Besides, the CVD populations can not be fully served since
the varying degrees of CVD are often neglected in recoloring methods. Instead, we propose a personalized CVDfriendly image generation algorithm with two key characteristics: (i) generating CVD-oriented images aligned with
the needs of CVD populations; (ii) generating continuous personalized images for people with various CVD degrees through disentangling the color representation based
on a triple-latent structure. Quantitative and qualitative experiments indicate our proposed image generation
model can generate practical and compelling results compared to the normal generation model and combination
baselines on several datasets. The code is available at:
https://github.com/Jiangshuyi0V0/CVD-GAN.git

Generated Images

Degree 80%

Degree 60%

Degree 80%

Existing
GANs
(a)

CVD Friendly
Personalized

Degree 40%

CVD-GAN
(Ours)

CVD Friendly
Personalized

(b)

Figure 1. Compared to the combination baseline (a), the proposed CVD-GAN (b) can generate CVD-oriented images directly,
enhancing the friendliness of the image for CVD populations. In
addition, the model can generate personalized friendly images for
CVD populations with varying degrees by disentangling the color
representation based on the triple-latent structure.

eration tasks, causing perception deviation of the generated images. Currently, 350 million people, a proportion
of 8% [22], suffer from color vision deficiency (CVD) resulting from the abnormality of cone cells distributed on the
retina of the eyes. Nevertheless, this sizeable population
is unintentionally excluded as the target audience of image
generation, necessitating the development of an image generation model that is inclusive of all viewers.
So far, hardly any generation algorithm has offered to
serve CVD populations. Some recoloring algorithms [12,
30, 31, 51, 49, 10, 19, 38, 5] can partly alleviate the
problems by post-processing compensation based on the
CVD simulation [3, 32] that provides the perspective of
CVD populations of the given image. There are two main
goals in recoloring methods: restoring the decayed contrast [26, 29, 12, 30, 31, 51] and maintaining the natural-

22571

