This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Neural Implicit Surfaces with Object-Aware Radiance Fields
Yiheng Zhang, Zhaofan Qiu, Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, and Tao Mei
University of Science and Technology of China HiDream.ai Inc.
{yihengzhang.chn, zhaofanqiu, panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, tmei@hidream.ai
Object-Bypassed
Rays

Rays

Implicit
Surfaces

Object-Intersected
Rays

(a) Conventional Schemes

Multi-view Images

Object Surface

Implicit
Surfaces

(b) Object-aware Radiance Fields (Ours)

3D Scene Composition

Object Moving

Object Editing

Skeleton Assignment

(c) Applications on Object Surfaces

Figure 1: The implicit surfaces learnt via (a) conventional scheme which suffers from noisy background geometry representations. In
this work, we introduce (b) an object-aware volumetric scene representation by automatically recognizing rays as object-intersected or
object-bypassed, aiming to highlight the key object surface in the foreground. (c) Such object surface benefits a series of applications, e.g.,
3D scene composition, object moving/editing, and even skeleton assignment.

Abstract
Recent progress on multi-view 3D object reconstruction
has featured neural implicit surfaces via learning highfidelity radiance fields. However, most approaches hinge
on the visual hull derived from cost-expensive silhouette
masks to obtain object surfaces. In this paper, we propose a novel Object-aware Radiance Fields (ORF) to automatically learn an object-aware geometry reconstruction.
The geometric correspondences between multi-view 2D object regions and 3D implicit/explicit object surfaces are
additionally exploited to boost the learning of object surfaces. Technically, a critical transparency discriminator is
designed to distinguish the object-intersected and objectbypassed rays based on the estimated 2D object regions,
leading to 3D implicit object surfaces. Such implicit surfaces can be directly converted into explicit object surfaces
(e.g., meshes) via marching cubes. Then, we build the geometric correspondence between 2D planes and 3D meshes
by rasterization, and project the estimated object regions
into 3D explicit object surfaces by aggregating the object
information across multiple views. The aggregated object
information in 3D explicit object surfaces is further reprojected back to 2D planes, aiming to update 2D object regions and enforce them to be multi-view consistent. Extensive experiments on DTU and BlendedMVS verify the capability of ORF to produce comparable surfaces against the
state-of-the-art models that demand silhouette masks.

1. Introduction
Multi-view 3D reconstruction, i.e., the task of reconstructing 3D geometry/surface of objects from multi-view
2D images, has played a fundamental challenge to computer
vision and computer graphics communities for decades. In
the early stage, the mainstream solution is the classical
Multi-View Stereo (MVS) [3, 5, 12, 20, 34, 35] that exploits
photometric consistency across different camera views to
learn explicit geometry representations (e.g., meshes or
voxel grids). The ultimate reconstruction relies heavily on
the quality of cross-view matching. In practice, such matching often fails to associate objects with sparse textures, resulting in severe artifact or missing parts on surfaces. To
address this issue, recent studies turn their focus on investigating how to represent 3D surfaces as implicit geometry
representations. Many consider learning a continuous implicit function that formulates neural implicit surfaces in
occupancy field [25, 31] or signed distance field [29]. In
between, surface rendering techniques [27, 47, 49] are designed to optimize these fields, leading to impressive reconstruction quality via differentiable rendering from images.
Nevertheless, learning such implicit geometry representations requires additional object masks of scenes, since the
color of each ray is assumed to only correspond to a single
point where a surface intersects with this ray. Moreover,
the gradient of differentiable rendering is only backpropagated to the local surface near intersection, resulting in a
sub-optimal solution for neural implicit surfaces.

17893

