This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Long-range Multimodal Pretraining for Movie Understanding
Dawit Mureja Argaw
KAIST

Joon-Young Lee
Adobe

Markus Woodson
Adobe

In So Kweon
KAIST

Fabian Caba Heilbron
Adobe

Abstract
Music

Learning computer vision models from (and for) movies
has a long-standing history. While great progress has been
attained, there is still a need for a pretrained multimodal
model that can perform well in the ever-growing set of
movie understanding tasks the community has been establishing. In this work, we introduce Long-range Multimodal
Pretraining, a strategy, and a model that leverages movie
data to train transferable multimodal and cross-modal encoders. Our key idea is to learn from all modalities in
a movie by observing and extracting relationships over a
long-range. After pretraining, we run ablation studies on
the LVU benchmark and validate our modeling choices and
the importance of learning from long-range time spans. Our
model achieves state-of-the-art on several LVU tasks while
being much more data efficient than previous works. Finally, we evaluate our model’s transferability by setting a
new state-of-the-art in five different benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Are movies just for entertainment? Arguably they offer
much more than that. Movies are a source of inspiration
for many and a force that influences societal behaviors [1].
Movies are also an active topic of study in the computer vision community [22, 13, 46, 5, 19, 3]. They have served as a
testbed for measuring progress in visual recognition [16, 6],
reasoning [36, 42], and creative editing [10, 31]. Moreover,
movie data has been also leveraged to train computer vision
[9], machine listening [7], and NLP [54] systems. Besides
entertainment, movies are surely an intriguing media that
can help AI models to understand semantics and artistic expressions encoded in a movie style.
While the quest of understanding movies has gained
steady attention, it is still an open question how to develop models that leverage abundant sources of movie data
[19, 37] to tackle all the movie-related tasks that the community has grown over the last decade [5, 26, 48, 41, 3].

Bark

“Beethoven!”

Quiet

Sound

Video

Language

…

…

… “His name is Beethoven, a happy playful dog” …
Long-range Movie Sequence

Figure 1. Learning from Movie Sequences. Movie sequences
offer learning signals when observed for long-ranges. By reading
the language (dialogue), hearing the sounds, and looking at the
video, one can determine that Beethoven, the dog, was barking
and he sleeps in a white and blue wooden dog house.

But, learning from movies is not a straightforward task, especially when no labels are available.
Existing video self-supervised approaches [11, 14, 2, 50,
52], which primarily focus on learning from short clips,
would not leverage the richness of movies, as the value of
movies as training sources emerges from their long-range
dependencies. Moreover, the end-to-end learning scheme
adopted in these works can not be easily extended to movies
as it is computationally infeasible to encode long-form sequences in an end-to-end manner.
Recent works on long-form video understanding [48, 20,
9] have attempted to address these limitations by encoding movie clips using frozen base encoders [48, 9] or statespace models [20]. However, these works exclusively focus
on the video modality for long-range temporal reasoning,
disregarding audio and text signals, and hence are limited to
specific tasks. In this work, we argue that long-form videos
such as movies are rich in visual, auditory, and textual information, and integrating these modalities would lead to a
better and generalizable understanding.

13392

