This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Discovery and Effective Evaluation of Visual Perceptual Similarity:
A Benchmark and Beyond
Oren Barkan*1
Ori Katz4
1

The Open University

Tal Reiss∗2

Roy Hirsch3
2

Jonathan Weill3

Itzik Malkiel3

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

Noam Koenigstein3
3

Tel Aviv University

4

Technion

https://vsd-benchmark.github.io/vsd

Abstract
Visual similarity discovery (VSD) is an important task
with broad e-commerce applications. Given an image of
a certain object, the goal of VSD is to retrieve images of
different objects with high perceptual visual similarity. Although being a highly addressed problem, the evaluation
of proposed methods for VSD is often based on a proxy of
an identification-retrieval task, evaluating the ability of a
model to retrieve different images of the same object. We
posit that evaluating VSD methods based on identification
tasks is limited, and faithful evaluation must rely on expert
annotations. In this paper, we introduce the first large-scale
fashion visual similarity benchmark dataset, consisting of
more than 110K expert-annotated image pairs. Besides this
major contribution, we share insight from the challenges we
faced while curating this dataset. Based on these insights,
we propose a novel and efficient labeling procedure that can
be applied to any dataset. Our analysis examines its limitations and inductive biases, and based on these findings, we
propose metrics to mitigate those limitations. Though our
primary focus lies on visual similarity, the methodologies
we present have broader applications for discovering and
evaluating perceptual similarity across various domains.

1. Introduction
Visual similarity measures the perceptual agreement between two objects based on their visual appearance [50].
Two objects can be similar or dissimilar based on their
color, shape, size, pattern, utility, and more. In fact, all of
these factors and many others take part in determining the
degree of visual similarity between two objects with varying
importance. Therefore, defining the perceived visual similarity based on these factors is challenging. Nonetheless,
* Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Disagreements between visual similarity and identification. Top: Two images associated with the same object, exhibiting
low visual perceptual similarity. Bottom: Two images of two different objects, exhibiting high visual perceptual similarity.

learning visual similarities is a key building block for many
practical utilities such as search, recommendations, etc.
Most existing methods for VSD are based on an identification retrieval task - given a query image of an object, the
identification task deals with retrieving images of an iden-

20007

