This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EfficientViT: Lightweight Multi-Scale Attention for
High-Resolution Dense Prediction

1

Han Cai1 , Junyan Li2 , Muyan Hu3 , Chuang Gan4 , Song Han1
MIT, Zhejiang University, 3 Tsinghua University, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
https://github.com/mit-han-lab/efficientvit
2

Abstract
High-resolution dense prediction enables many appealing real-world applications, such as computational photography, autonomous driving, etc. However, the vast
computational cost makes deploying state-of-the-art highresolution dense prediction models on hardware devices
difficult. This work presents EfficientViT, a new family of
high-resolution vision models with novel lightweight multiscale attention. Unlike prior high-resolution dense prediction models that rely on heavy self-attention, hardwareinefficient large-kernel convolution, or complicated topology structure to obtain good performances, our lightweight
multi-scale attention achieves a global receptive field
and multi-scale learning (two critical features for highresolution dense prediction) with only lightweight and
hardware-efficient operations. As such, EfficientViT delivers remarkable performance gains over previous state-ofthe-art high-resolution dense prediction models with significant speedup on diverse hardware platforms, including mobile CPU, edge GPU, and cloud GPU. Without performance
loss on Cityscapes, our EfficientViT provides up to 8.8× and
3.8× GPU latency reduction over SegFormer and SegNeXt,
respectively. For super-resolution, EfficientViT provides up
to 6.4× speedup over Restormer while providing 0.11dB
gain in PSNR.

1. Introduction
High-resolution dense prediction is a fundamental task
in computer vision and has broad applications in real-world
scenarios, including autonomous driving, medical image
processing, computational photography, etc. Therefore, deploying state-of-the-art (SOTA) high-resolution dense prediction models on hardware devices can benefit many use
cases.
However, there is a large gap between the computational
cost required by SOTA high-resolution dense prediction
models and the limited resources of hardware devices. It

makes using these models in real-world applications impractical. In particular, high-resolution dense prediction
models require high-resolution images and strong context
information extraction ability to work well [2, 41, 53, 58,
54, 47]. Therefore, directly porting efficient model architecture from image classification is unsuitable for highresolution dense prediction.
This work introduces EfficientViT, a new family of
models for efficient high-resolution dense prediction. The
core of EfficientViT is a novel lightweight multi-scale attention module that enables a global receptive field and multiscale learning with hardware-efficient operations. Our module is motivated by prior SOTA high-resolution dense prediction models. They demonstrate that the multi-scale
learning [53, 58], and global receptive field [51] play a critical role in improving the performances. However, they
do not consider hardware efficiency when designing their
models, which is essential for real-world applications. For
example, SegFormer [51] introduces self-attention into the
backbone to have a global receptive field. But its computational complexity is quadratic to the input resolution, making it unable to handle high-resolution images efficiently.
SegNeXt [18] proposes a multi-branch module with largekernel convolutions (kernel size up to 21) to enable a large
receptive field and multi-scale learning. However, largekernel convolution requires exceptional support on hardware to achieve good efficiency [16, 50], which is usually
not available on hardware devices.
Hence, the design principle of our module is to enable these two critical features while avoiding hardwareinefficient operations. Specifically, to have a global receptive field, we propose substituting the inefficient selfattention with lightweight ReLU-based global attention
[28]. By leveraging the associative property of matrix
multiplication, ReLU-based global attention can reduce the
computational complexity from quadratic to linear while
preserving functionality. In addition, it avoids hardwareinefficient operations like softmax, making it more suitable
for hardware deployment (Figure 3).
Furthermore, we propose a novel lightweight multi-scale

17302

