This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Accuracy Estimation of Deep Visual Models using
Domain-Adaptive Adversarial Perturbation without Source Samples
JoonHo Lee1 , Jae Oh Woo2 , Hankyu Moon2 and Kwonho Lee1
1
Samsung SDS, 2 Samsung SDS America
{joonholee,jaeoh.w,hankyu.m,kwonho81.lee}@samsung.com

Abstract
Deploying deep visual models can lead to performance
drops due to the discrepancies between source and target
distributions. Several approaches leverage labeled source
data to estimate target domain accuracy, but accessing labeled source data is often prohibitively difficult due to data
confidentiality or resource limitations on serving devices.
Our work proposes a new framework to estimate model accuracy on unlabeled target data without access to source
data. We investigate the feasibility of using pseudo-labels
for accuracy estimation and evolve this idea into adopting recent advances in source-free domain adaptation algorithms. Our approach measures the disagreement rate between the source hypothesis and the target pseudo-labeling
function, adapted from the source hypothesis. We mitigate
the impact of erroneous pseudo-labels that may arise due
to a high ideal joint hypothesis risk by employing adaptive
adversarial perturbation on the input of the target model.
Our proposed source-free framework effectively addresses
the challenging distribution shift scenarios and outperforms
existing methods requiring source data and labels for training.

1. Introduction
When deep learning models are deployed for target applications, it is common to encounter a degradation in
the accuracy of the models. This degradation is typically
caused by a distributional discrepancy between the source
domain on which models were trained and the target domain where they are being applied. To ensure reliable deployment, it is essential to continually monitor the performance of the deployed model on target data. However, since
target labels are usually not immediately available, this necessity poses a challenging problem, unsupervised accuracy
estimation (UAE) for models.
A few approaches have been developed to predict the
target domain accuracy on unlabeled target data assuming

that labeled source data can be freely accessed [9, 10, 13].
Nakkiran and Bansal [28] have observed that the disagreement rate between two separately trained source models
exhibiting a small test error of ϵ, is remarkably similar to
ϵ across a range of models. Subsequent studies have expanded this finding [5, 18]. They discovered that the expected disagreement rate of multiple pairs of models or
from iterative self-training with the ensemble can effectively estimate model accuracy when tested on previously
unseen data. Despite the noteworthy outcomes, these methods have a crucial limitation: they are solely applicable to
in-distribution test data as indicated in [18]. In the most
realistic scenarios, source and target distributions are supposed to have discrepancies for various reasons. Insufficient
training data is a common cause of generalization issues,
which is particularly relevant in scenarios where knowledge
from synthetic simulation data is applied in real-world applications, such as autonomous driving and robotic manipulations. Also, distribution shifts can occur when input is
distorted during sensing and pre-processing.
Two recent approaches [5, 6] have adopted unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) methods, specifically, DANN
[11] to tackle out-of-distribution UAE. These methods train
supplementary models that learn domain-invariant representations for both the source and the target distributions to
identify the maximum discrepancy between the adapted hypotheses and the source hypothesis [6] or to employ an ensemble of the adapted hypotheses for iterative self-training
[5]. However, focusing on learning domain-invariant representations through DANN can lead to suboptimal outcomes when significant label distribution mismatches occur, increasing the lower bound of the ideal joint hypothesis
risk [35]. As a consequence, the estimation performance of
these methods is negatively affected.
Furthermore, all existing approaches require access to
source samples, except for a few naive techniques like AC
[13]. However, obtaining labeled source data, which are
used to train the model of interest, is often infeasible in
practice due to concerns over the confidentiality of sensitive
data or the computing and storage constraints on the serving

16443

