This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Content-based Pixel Retrieval in Revisited Oxford and Paris
Guoyuan An1 , Woo Jae Kim1 , Saelyne Yang1 , Rong Li3 , Yuchi Huo2,3 , and Sung-Eui Yoon1
1

2

School of Computing, KAIST
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
3
Zhejiang Lab

Abstract
This paper introduces the first two landmark pixel retrieval benchmarks. Pixel retrieval is segmented instance
retrieval. Like semantic segmentation extends classification
to the pixel level, pixel retrieval is an extension of image
retrieval and offers information about which pixels are related to the query object. In addition to retrieving images
for the given query, it helps users quickly identify the query
object in true positive images and exclude false positive images by denoting the correlated pixels. Our user study results show pixel-level annotation can significantly improve
the user experience. Compared with semantic and instance
segmentation, pixel retrieval requires a fine-grained recognition capability for variable-granularity targets. To this
end, we propose pixel retrieval benchmarks named PROxford and PRParis, which are based on the widely used image retrieval datasets, ROxford and RParis. Three professional annotators label 5,942 images with two rounds of
double-checking and refinement. Furthermore, we conduct
extensive experiments and analysis on the SOTA methods
in image search, image matching, detection, segmentation,
and dense matching using our pixel retrieval benchmarks.
Results show that the pixel retrieval task is challenging to
these approaches and distinctive from existing problems,
suggesting that further research can advance the contentbased pixel-retrieval and thus user search experience. The
datasets can be downloaded from this link.

1. Introduction
Image retrieval is a long-standing and fundamental computer vision task and has achieved remarkable advances.
However, because the retrieved ranking list contains false
positive images and the true positive images contain complex co-occurring backgrounds, users may be difficult to
identify the query object from the ranking list. In this paper,

Query
Image
retrieval

Query
Pixel
retrieval

Figure 1. Example scenarios of image retrieval and pixel retrieval
for the same query image. Pixel retrieval offers pixel-level annotation (red outlines) on the target object. Our user study shows
that pixel retrieval can significantly improve the user experience
(Sec. 3). Yellow boxes in the searched results indicate the ground
truth ones. You can check our user study from this link. To start
the user study, please enter any character into the “unique Prolific
ID” blank.

we execute a user study and show that providing pixel-level
annotations can help users better understand the retrieved
results. Therefore, this paper introduces the pixel retrieval
task and its first benchmarks. Pixel retrieval is defined
as searching pixels that depict the query object from the
database. More specifically, it requires the machine to recognize, localize, and segment the query object in database
images in run time, as shown in Figure 1.
Similar to semantic segmentation, which works as an extension of classification and provides pixel-level category
information to the machines, pixel retrieval is an extension of image retrieval. However, pixel retrieval differs
from existing semantic segmentation [11, 62, 21] in two aspects: the fine-grained particular instance recognition and

20507

