This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RAW file

Protected RGB

OSNs

Detected

Forged
MVSS

DRAW: Defending Camera-shooted RAW against Image Manipulation
ROSN

D-RAW

Unprotected RGB OSNs

Forged

Xiaoxiao Hu1,2* , Qichao Ying1,2* , Zhenxing Qian1,2† , Sheng Li1,2 , Xinpeng Zhang1,2MVSS
1
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Key Laboratory of Culture & Tourism Intelligent Computing, Fudan University
ROSN

RAW file

1. Introduction
In the digital world, the credibility of the famous saying “seeing is believing" is largely at risk since nowadays
people can easily manipulate critical content within an image and redistribute the fabricated version via the Internet. Owing to the fact that readers are more susceptible
to well-crafted misleading material, fabricated images can
be a means for some politicians to sway public opinion. In
more severe cases, those fraudulent images can be used to
bolster fake news or criminal investigation.
*Xiaoxiao Hu and Qichao Ying contribute equally to this work.
†Corresponding author: Zhenxing Qian (zxqian@fudan.edu.cn)

Forged

Protected RGB

Forged

Predicted Mask

DRAW

OSNs

Predicted Mask
Detector

RAW files are the initial measurement of scene radiance
widely used in most cameras, and the ubiquitously-used
RGB images are converted from RAW data through Image
Signal Processing (ISP) pipelines. Nowadays, digital
images are risky of being nefariously manipulated. Inspired by the fact that innate immunity is the first line
of body defense, we propose DRAW, a novel scheme of
defending images against manipulation by protecting their
sources, i.e., camera-shooted RAWs. Specifically, we design
a lightweight Multi-frequency Partial Fusion Network
(MPF-Net) friendly to devices with limited computing
resources by frequency learning and partial feature fusion.
It introduces invisible watermarks as protective signal into
the RAW data. The protection capability can not only be
transferred into the rendered RGB images regardless of the
applied ISP pipeline, but also is resilient to post-processing
operations such as blurring or compression. Once the
image is manipulated, we can accurately identify the forged
areas with a localization network. Extensive experiments
on several famous RAW datasets, e.g., RAISE, FiveK and
SIDD, indicate the effectiveness of our method. We hope
that this technique can be used in future cameras as an
option for image protection, which could effectively restrict
image manipulation at the source.

Unprotected RGB OSNs

Detector

Abstract

Figure 1. DRAW improves the performance of image manipulation localization against lossy image operations via imperceptible
protective signal injection into RAW files.

Image manipulation detection [9, 32] and localization [10, 38] has become a critical area of research for
decades, with the goal of distinguishing manipulated images from authentic ones and locating the manipulated areas. While early methods mainly check the integrity of the
images from statistical aspects, e.g., the Photo-Response
Non-Uniformity (PRNU) noise [9] and the fixed pattern
noise (FPN) [23], the uprising of deep networks has greatly
strengthened the capability to find traces left by a variety
of manipulation [10, 40, 19]. However, the adversary is
also continuously evolving both in strength and diversity.
For example, recent deep-network-based image editing algorithms [36, 13] are reported to produce highly realistic images with almost no visible artifacts near the edges.
Therefore, it remains a big issue whether the learned subtle
forensics traces can always be present in the newly forged
images. Also, though some works [38, 39] explicitly handle
lossy online transmission scenarios, they still face limited
performance against well-crafted forgeries, e.g., inpainting,
or lossy image operations, e.g., Gaussian blurring.
Inspired by the fact that innate immunity is the first line
of body defense and the best weapon to mitigate diseases,
safeguarding images against manipulations is an alternative
and promising way of deterring malicious attackers. Indeed,
the ubiquitous 8-bit RGB images are not the pristine format
for reflecting how we perceive the world. They are converted from RAW files via ISP pipelines. Therefore, we

22434

