This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural-PBIR Reconstruction of Shape, Material, and Illumination
Cheng Sun1,2∗
Guangyan Cai1,3∗
Zhengqin Li1
Kai Yan3
Cheng Zhang1
Carl Marshall1
Jia-Bin Huang1,4
Shuang Zhao3
Zhao Dong1
1

Meta RLR

2

National Tsing Hua University
∗

(a) Input images

(b1) Albedo

3

University of California, Irvine

4

University of Maryland, College Park

The authors contribute equally to this paper

(b2) Roughness (b3) Shape & lighting (c1) Novel view

(c2) Relit 1

(c3) Relit 2

Figure 1: Neural-PBIR recovers high-fidelity material (b1,2), shape and lighting (b3), enabling realistic re-rendering (c1-3).

Abstract
Reconstructing the shape and spatially varying surface appearances of a physical-world object as well as its
surrounding illumination based on 2D images (e.g., photographs) of the object has been a long-standing problem
in computer vision and graphics. In this paper, we introduce an accurate and highly efficient object reconstruction
pipeline combining neural based object reconstruction and
physics-based inverse rendering (PBIR). Our pipeline firstly
leverages a neural SDF based shape reconstruction to produce high-quality but potentially imperfect object shape.
Then, we introduce a neural material and lighting distillation stage to achieve high-quality predictions for material and illumination. In the last stage, initialized by the
neural predictions, we perform PBIR to refine the initial
results and obtain the final high-quality reconstruction of
object shape, material, and illumination. Experimental results demonstrate our pipeline significantly outperforms existing methods quality-wise and performance-wise. Code:
https://neural-pbir.github.io/

1. Introduction
Reconstructing geometry, material reflectance, and lighting from images, also known as inverse rendering, is a longstanding challenge in computer vision and graphics. Conventionally, the acquisition of the three intrinsic components has been mainly studied independently. For instance,
multiview-stereo (MVS) [26, 27, 9] and time-of-flight [44]
methods only focus on recovering object geometry, usually

based on diffuse reflectance assumption. Classical material acquisition methods typically assume known or simple
geometries (e.g., a planar surface) with highly controlled illuminations [22, 34, 43], usually created with a light stage
or gantry. This significantly limits their practicality when
such capturing conditions are unavailable.
Recently, the advent of novel techniques enables us to
jointly reconstruct shape, material, and lighting from 2D
images of an object. At a high level, these techniques can be
classified into two categories. Neural reconstruction methods encode the appearance of objects into a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) and optimize the network by minimizing
the rendering errors from different views through differentiable volume ray tracing. NeRF [18] reconstructs a density
field-based radiance field that allows high-quality view synthesis but not relighting. A series of methods [31, 35, 24]
compute the density field from the signed distance function
to achieve high-quality geometry reconstruction. Recent
works [40, 41, 3, 4, 20, 11, 42] seek to fully decompose
shapes, materials, and lighting from input images. However, due to the high computational cost of volume ray tracing and neural rendering, those methods take hours [20, 11]
or a day [3, 42] to run and usually cannot model more complex indirect illumination [40, 41, 3, 4, 20, 11], causing
shadows and color bleeding to be baked into the material reflectance. Several new methods [28, 19, 7] significantly reduce the computational cost of radiance field reconstruction
using hybrid volume representations and efficient MLPs.
We are among the first that adopt these novel techniques for
efficient joint recovery of geometry, material, and lighting.
On the contrary, physics-based inverse rendering (PBIR)

18046

