This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efﬁcient Diffusion Training via Min-SNR Weighting Strategy
Tiankai Hang1 , Shuyang Gu2 ,* Chen Li3 , Jianmin Bao2 , Dong Chen2 ,
Han Hu2 , Xin Geng1 , Baining Guo1 *
1
Southeast University, 2 Microsoft Research Asia,
3
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{tkhang,xgeng,307000167}@seu.edu.cn,{shuyanggu,t-chenli1,jianmin.bao,doch,hanhu}@microsoft.com

30

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, denoising diffusion models [48, 19, 57,
36] have emerged as a promising new class of deep generative models due to their remarkable ability to model complicated distributions. Compared to prior Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), diffusion models have demonstrated superior performance across a range of generation
tasks in various modalities, including text-to-image generation [40, 43, 41, 17], image manipulation [26, 34, 4, 56],
video synthesis [18, 47, 22], text generation [28, 16, 59],
3D avatar synthesis [39, 53], etc. A key limitation of
present denoising diffusion models is their slow convergence rate, requiring substantial amounts of GPU hours for
* Corresponding authors.

20
FID

Denoising diffusion models have been a mainstream
approach for image generation, however, training these
models often suffers from slow convergence. In this paper, we discovered that the slow convergence is partly due
to conﬂicting optimization directions between timesteps.
To address this issue, we treat the diffusion training as
a multi-task learning problem, and introduce a simple
yet effective approach referred to as Min-SNR-γ. This
method adapts loss weights of timesteps based on clamped
signal-to-noise ratios, which effectively balances the conﬂicts among timesteps. Our results demonstrate a significant improvement in converging speed, 3.4× faster than
previous weighting strategies. It is also more effective,
achieving a new record FID score of 2.06 on the ImageNet 256 × 256 benchmark using smaller architectures
than that employed in previous state-of-the-art. The code
is available at https://github.com/TiankaiHang/Min-SNRDiffusion-Training.

baseline
ours

3.4× speedup

10

200

400
600
800
Training Iterations (K)

1000

Figure 1: By leveraging a non-conﬂicting weighting strategy, our method can converge 3.4 times faster than baseline,
resulting in superior performance.

training [41, 40]. This constitutes a considerable challenge
for researchers seeking to effectively experiment with these
models.
In this paper, we ﬁrst conducted a thorough examination of this issue, revealing that the slow convergence rate
likely arises from conﬂicting optimization directions for different timesteps during training. In fact, we ﬁnd that by
dedicatedly optimizing the denoising function for a speciﬁc
noise level can even harm the reconstruction performance
for other noise levels, as shown in Figure 2. This indicates that the optimal weight gradients for different noise
levels are in conﬂict with one another. Given that current denoising diffusion models [19, 12, 36, 41] employ
shared model weights for various noise levels, the conﬂicting weight gradients will impede the overall convergence
rate, if without careful consideration on the balance of these
noise timesteps.
To tackle this problem, we propose the Min-SNR-γ loss
weighting strategy. This strategy treats the denoising process of each timestep as an individual task, thus diffusion

7441

