This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reference-guided Controllable Inpainting of Neural Radiance Fields
Ashkan Mirzaei1,2*
Tristan Aumentado-Armstrong1,2,4*
Marcus A. Brubaker1,3,4
2
1
1,3,4
Jonathan Kelly
Alex Levinshtein
Konstantinos G. Derpanis
Igor Gilitschenski2
1
Samsung AI Centre Toronto 2 University of Toronto 3 York University 4 Vector Institute for AI

Abstract
The popularity of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) for
view synthesis has led to a desire for NeRF editing tools.
Here, we focus on inpainting regions in a view-consistent
and controllable manner. In addition to the typical NeRF
inputs and masks delineating the unwanted region in each
view, we require only a single inpainted view of the scene,
i.e., a reference view. We use monocular depth estimators to back-project the inpainted view to the correct 3D
positions. Then, via a novel rendering technique, a bilateral solver can construct view-dependent effects in nonreference views, making the inpainted region appear consistent from any view. For non-reference disoccluded regions,
which cannot be supervised by the single reference view, we
devise a method based on image inpainters to guide both the
geometry and appearance. Our approach shows superior
performance to NeRF inpainting baselines, with the additional advantage that a user can control the output via a
single inpainted image. Please visit our project page.

A red fence
Input Views
+ Camera Parameters

A rubber duck

Input Masks

Shared Inputs
A flower pot

Inpainted NeRFs

Outputs (Novel Views)

Figure 1: Visualization of our 3D inpainting approach.
Starting from (i) a set of posed images (i.e., standard
structure-from-motion outputs), (ii) a multiview mask set
associated to (i), and (iii) a single inpainted reference image
from among (i), we produce a complete inpainted 3D scene,
via a novel NeRF fitting algorithm. By merely providing a
different reference image, which can be as simple as changing the text input, T, for a single-image text-conditioned
inpainter (e.g., [55]), a user can controllably generate 3D
scenes with the novel desired content.

1. Introduction
There has long been intense interest in manipulating images, due to the broad range of content creation use cases.
Object removal and insertion, corresponding to the image
inpainting task, is among the most studied manipulations.
Current inpainting models are capable of generating perceptually realistic content that conforms to the surrounding
image. Yet, these models are limited to single 2D image
inputs; our goal is to continue progress in applying such
models to the manipulation of full 3D scenes.
The advent of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) has made
transforming real 2D photos into realistic 3D representations more accessible. As algorithmic improvements continue and computational requirements lessen, such 3D representations may become ubiquitous. We are thus interested
in enabling the same manipulations of 3D NeRFs that are
∗ Authors contributed equally.

available for images, particularly inpainting (see Fig. 1).
Inpainting in 3D is non-trivial for a number of reasons,
such as the paucity of 3D data and the need to account
for 3D geometry as well as appearance. Using NeRFs as
a scene representation comes with additional challenges.
First, the “black box” nature of implicit neural representations makes it infeasible to simply edit the underlying
data structure based on geometric understanding. Second,
because NeRFs are trained from images, special considerations are required for maintaining multiview consistency.
Simply independently inpainting the constituent images using powerful 2D inpainters yields viewpoint-inconsistent
imagery (see Fig. 2), leading to visually unrealistic outputs.
One approach is to attempt to resolve these inconsistencies post hoc. For example, NeRF-In [34] simply combines
views via a pixelwise loss. More recently, SPIn-NeRF [42]
improved on this strategy by employing a perceptual loss

17815

