This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decouple Before Interact:
Multi-Modal Prompt Learning for Continual Visual Question Answering
Zi Qian1,2 , Xin Wang1 *, Xuguang Duan1 , Pengda Qin2 , Yuhong Li2 , Wenwu Zhu1 *
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
Alibaba Group
qianz9729@gmail.com, xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn, duan xg@outlook.com
pengda.qpd@alibaba-inc.com, daniel.lyh@alibaba-inc.com, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Classifier

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) [2, 11, 35, 25] aims
to train a machine learning model capable of answering
questions given visual images as accurately as possible.
*Corresponding authors

Fusion Encoder
Visual Textual
Encoder Encoder
(a) Exis4ng Methods
/

/

Decoupled Prompts
Interact

In the real world, a desirable Visual Question Answering model is expected to provide correct answers to
new questions and images in a continual setting (recognized as CL-VQA). However, existing works formulate CLVQA from a vision-only or language-only perspective, and
straightforwardly apply the uni-modal continual learning
(CL) strategies to this multi-modal task, which is improper
and suboptimal. On the one hand, such a partial formulation may result in limited evaluations. On the other
hand, neglecting the interactions between modalities will
lead to poor performance. To tackle these challenging issues, we propose a comprehensive formulation for CL-VQA
from the perspective of multi-modal vision-language fusion.
Based on our formulation, we further propose MulTi-Modal
PRompt LearnIng with DecouPLing bEfore InTeraction
(TRIPLET), a novel approach that builds on a pre-trained
vision-language model and consists of decoupled prompts
and prompt interaction strategies to capture the complex
interactions between modalities. In particular, decoupled
prompts contain learnable parameters that are decoupled
w.r.t different aspects, and the prompt interaction strategies
are in charge of modeling interactions between inputs and
prompts. Additionally, we build two CL-VQA benchmarks
for a more comprehensive evaluation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our TRIPLET outperforms state-ofthe-art methods in both uni-modal and multi-modal continual settings for CL-VQA.

Classiﬁer
Fusion Encoder

Visual Textual a9ach
Encoder Encoder

t
ac Input Feature
er
Int
Space
Int
era

ct

Task 𝑡 + 1

(b) Proposed TRIPLET

: Decoupled Visual / Textual / Fusion Prompts

Task t

: Frozen Parameters

Figure 1: Comparison between (a) existing CL-VQA methods [43, 28] and (b) our proposed TRIPLET model. Existing methods train all the parameters similar to typical
uni-modal CL-methods, while our TRIPLET model trains
parameters in prompts and classifiers, as well as explicitly
model the rich and complex modality-wise interactions.
In real-world dynamic environments [22], an ideal VQA
model is expected to generate answers for new questions,
new images, as well as new question-image simultaneously,
which is recognized as CL-VQA [19], i.e., learn a sequence
of VQA tasks with a single model without suffering from
catastrophic forgetting [27] on previously observed data.
Existing works [19, 28] formulate CL-VQA as a visiononly or language-only continual learning setting, and
straightforwardly apply the uni-model continual learning
(CL) methods to this multi-modal task. However, modeling CL-VQA from such a uni-model view is suboptimal,
posing two challenging issues. First, the existing partial formulation does not take the multi-modal nature of CL-VQA
into account, which leads to a limited view and improper
evaluations. Second, by straightforwardly employing the
uni-model CL methods, existing CL-VQA methods may neglect the rich and complex interactions between modalities,
which leads to deteriorating performance.
To tackle the two challenging issues, we first propose a
comprehensive formulation for CL-VQA explicitly covering both multi-modal and uni-modal perspectives, so that
more extensive evaluations can be conducted in terms of

2953

