This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reconstructed Convolution Module Based Look-Up Tables for Efficient Image
Super-Resolution
Guandu Liu1,3

Yukang Ding2
Mading Li2
Ming Sun2
Xing Wen2
Bin Wang1,3 *
1
School of Software, Tsinghua University
2
Kuaishou Technology
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), China
liugd21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {dingyukang, limading, sunming03}@kuaishou.com
td.wenxing@gmail.com, wangbins@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR) aims to recover the
high-resolution (HR) image from a low-resolution (LR) image and to bring back clearer edges, textures, and details
while increasing the resolution of the input. In the past
decade, deep learning-based SR methods [43, 23, 18, 44,
35, 20, 13, 26, 27] have made remarkable improvements
compared with traditional SR methods (e.g., interpolation
based [17], sparse coding based [34, 33, 40, 5, 12]). How* Corresponding Author

Ours

PSNR(dB)

Look-up table (LUT)-based methods have shown the
great efficacy in single image super-resolution (SR) task.
However, previous methods ignore the essential reason of
restricted receptive field (RF) size in LUT, which is caused
by the interaction of space and channel features in vanilla
convolution. They can only increase the RF at the cost
of linearly increasing LUT size. To enlarge RF with contained LUT sizes, we propose a novel Reconstructed Convolution (RC) module, which decouples channel-wise and
spatial calculation. It can be formulated as n2 1D LUTs to
maintain n × n receptive field, which is obviously smaller
than n × nD LUT formulated before. The LUT generated
by our RC module reaches less than 1/10000 storage compared with SR-LUT baseline. The proposed Reconstructed
Convolution module based LUT method, termed as RCLUT,
can enlarge the RF size by 9 times than the state-of-the-art
LUT-based SR method and achieve superior performance
on five popular benchmark dataset. Moreover, the efficient
and robust RC module can be used as a plugin to improve
other LUT-based SR methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/liuguandu/RC-LUT.

30.6

MuLUT-SDY-X2

30.4

MuLUT-SDY
MuLUT-SD
SP-LUT-M

30.2

SP-LUT-S

30.0
29.8

SP-LUT-L

SR-LUT
0

5

10

15

Volume(MB)

20

Figure 1. Comparison of PSNR and storage on Set5 benchmark
dataset for ×4 SR task. We compare our method with prior LUTbased SR methods. Our method achieves the superior performance
with relatively less LUT storage.

ever, such kind of methods often possess huge amount of
parameters, which has high computation cost and cannot be
practically used on devices with limited computational resources. Exploring the pratical and real-time SR solutions
have been a growing trend in the single image super resolution (SISR) community.
Look-up table (LUT) based super-resolution (SR) methods like SR-LUT [16] cache trained SR network results
for every potential input in a LUT, simplifying inference by
replacing runtime computation with faster indexing. However, this strategy requires a limited receptive field (RF), as
the input space size grows exponentially with an increase
in input pixels. Specifically, SR-LUT has a 2 × 2 input
size, yielding a 3 × 3 RF by rotation ensemble, and requires
b2×2 × r2 bytes to store its LUT for upscaling by a factor of
r (b = 255). For example, a 3 × 3 vanilla convolution generates 2559 mappings, consuming 1.72 TB in LUT form.

12217

