This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpaceEvo: Hardware-Friendly Search Space Design for Efficient INT8 Inference
Xudong Wang∗1,2§ Li Lyna Zhang∗2‡ Jiahang Xu2 Quanlu Zhang2 Yujing Wang3
Yuqing Yang2 Ningxin Zheng2 Ting Cao2 Mao Yang2
1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2 Microsoft Research

3 Microsoft

xudongwang176@gmail.com; {lzhani, jiahangxu, quzha, yujwang, yuqyang, nizhen, ticao, maoyang}@microsoft.com

https://github.com/microsoft/Moonlit/tree/main/SpaceEvo

Abstract
The combination of Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
and quantization has proven successful in automatically
designing low-FLOPs INT8 quantized neural networks
(QNN). However, directly applying NAS to design accurate
QNN models that achieve low latency on real-world devices
leads to inferior performance. In this work, we identify that
the poor INT8 latency is due to the quantization-unfriendly
issue: the operator and configuration (e.g., channel width)
choices in prior art search spaces lead to diverse quantization efficiency and can slow down the INT8 inference
speed. To address this challenge, we propose SpaceEvo, an
automatic method for designing a dedicated, quantizationfriendly search space for each target hardware. The key
idea of SpaceEvo is to automatically search hardwarepreferred operators and configurations to construct the
search space, guided by a metric called Q-T score to quantify how quantization-friendly a candidate search space
is. We further train a quantized-for-all supernet over our
discovered search space, enabling the searched models to
be directly deployed without extra retraining or quantization. Our discovered models, SEQnet, establish new SOTA
INT8 quantized accuracy under various latency constraints,
achieving up to 10.1% accuracy improvement on ImageNet
than prior art CNNs under the same latency. Extensive experiments on real devices show that SpaceEvo consistently
outperforms manually-designed search spaces with up to
2.5× faster speed while achieving the same accuracy.

1. Introduction
INT8 Quantization[27, 19, 10, 3] is a widely used technique for deploying DNNs on edge devices by reducing 4×
in model size and memory cost for full-precision (FP32)
* Equal contribution
§ Work was done during the internship at Microsoft Research
‡ Corresponding author (lzhani@microsoft.com)

Figure 1. INT8 quantized model error distributions (EDF) of different NAS search spaces. We propose to search quantizationfriendly search space for each hardware, which yields significantly
better INT8 model populations than SOTA search spaces.

models. However, prior art DNN models achieve only
marginal speedup from INT8 quantization (in Fig. 2(a)), the
still high latency after quantization making them difficult to
deploy in latency-critical scenarios. Designing models that
achieve high accuracy and low latency after quantization becomes the important but challenging problem.
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is a powerful tool for
automating efficient quantized model design [36, 39, 12,
37, 6]. Recently, OQAT [32] and BatchQuant [1] achieve
remarkable search efficiency and accuracy by adopting a
two-stage paradigm. The first stage trains a weight-shared
quantized supernet assembling all candidate architectures
in the search space. This allows all the sub-networks (subnets) to simultaneously reach comparable quantized accuracy as when trained from scratch individually. The second stage uses typical search algorithms to find subnets with
best quantized accuracy under different FLOPs constraints.
This approach avoids the need to retrain each subnet for accuracy evaluation, greatly improving the search efficiency.

5819

