This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scalable Diffusion Models with Transformers
William Peebles*
UC Berkeley

Saining Xie
New York University

Figure 1: Diffusion models with transformer backbones achieve state-of-the-art image quality. We show selected samples from two of our class-conditional DiT-XL/2 models trained on ImageNet at 512⇥512 and 256⇥256 resolution.

Abstract
We explore a new class of diffusion models based on the
transformer architecture. We train latent diffusion models
of images, replacing the commonly-used U-Net backbone
with a transformer that operates on latent patches. We analyze the scalability of our Diffusion Transformers (DiTs)
through the lens of forward pass complexity as measured by
Gflops. We find that DiTs with higher Gflops—through increased transformer depth/width or increased number of input tokens—consistently have lower FID. In addition to possessing good scalability properties, our largest DiT-XL/2
models outperform all prior diffusion models on the classconditional ImageNet 512⇥512 and 256⇥256 benchmarks,
achieving a state-of-the-art FID of 2.27 on the latter.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is experiencing a renaissance powered by transformers. Over the past five years, neural
architectures for natural language processing [42, 8], vision [10] and several other domains have been subsumed
by transformers [60]. Many classes of image-level generative models remain holdouts to the trend, though—while
transformers see widespread use in autoregressive models [43, 3, 6, 47], they have seen less adoption in other generative modeling frameworks. For example, diffusion models have been at the forefront of recent advances in image
generation [9, 46]; yet, they all adopt a convolutional U-Net
architecture as the de-facto choice of backbone.
* Work done during an internship at Meta AI, FAIR Team.

Code and project page available here.

4195

