This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TexFusion:
Synthesizing 3D Textures with Text-Guided Image Diffusion Models
Tianshi Cao 1,2,3

Karsten Kreis 1
1

NVIDIA,

Sanja Fidler1,2,3
2

University of Toronto,

Nicholas Sharp1,∗
3

Kangxue Yin1,∗

Vector Institute

{tianshic, kkreis, sfidler, nsharp, kangxuey}@nvidia.com
ﬁ

"White humanoid robot, movie poster, main
character of a science ﬁction movie"

"Oil painting of a bald, middle aged
banker with pointed moustache"

"White Mercedes Benz SUV"

"Crocodile skin handbag"

"Portrait photo of Abraham Lincoln, full color"

"Railroad worker wearing high-vis vest"

Figure 1: Text-conditioned 3D texturing results with TexFusion.

Abstract
We present TexFusion (Texture Diffusion), a new method
to synthesize textures for given 3D geometries, using largescale text-guided image diffusion models. In contrast to recent works that leverage 2D text-to-image diffusion models
to distill 3D objects using a slow and fragile optimization
process, TexFusion introduces a new 3D-consistent generation technique specifically designed for texture synthesis
that employs regular diffusion model sampling on different
2D rendered views. Specifically, we leverage latent diffusion models, apply the diffusion model’s denoiser on a set
of 2D renders of the 3D object, and aggregate the different denoising predictions on a shared latent texture map.
Final output RGB textures are produced by optimizing an
intermediate neural color field on the decodings of 2D renders of the latent texture. We thoroughly validate TexFusion and show that we can efficiently generate diverse, high
quality and globally coherent textures. We achieve state-ofthe-art text-guided texture synthesis performance using only
image diffusion models, while avoiding the pitfalls of previous distillation-based methods. The text-conditioning offers
detailed control and we also do not rely on any ground truth
3D textures for training. This makes our method versatile
∗ Equal contribution.

and applicable to a broad range of geometry and texture
types. We hope that TexFusion will advance AI-based texturing of 3D assets for applications in virtual reality, game
design, simulation, and more.

1. Introduction
In the past decade, deep learning-based 3D object generation has been studied extensively [1, 4, 18, 23, 25, 27,
32, 33, 37, 39, 44, 45, 50, 52, 53, 55, 58, 69, 71, 72, 78, 82,
85, 87, 89, 91–93, 95, 97, 100, 101], due to the demand for
high-quality 3D assets in 3D applications such as VR/AR,
simulation, digital twins, etc. While many prior works on
3D synthesis focus on the geometric components of the assets, textures are studied much less, despite the fact that they
are important components of realistic 3D assets which assign colors and materials to meshes to make the rendering
vivid. Recent advances in text-conditioned image diffusion
models trained on internet-scale data [2, 54, 61, 63, 66] have
unlocked the capability to generate images with stunning visual detail and practically unlimited diversity. These highperformance diffusion models have also been used as image
priors to synthesize 3D objects with textures using textual
guidance [40, 48, 59, 84].
In this paper, we aim to perform text-driven high-quality
3D texture synthesis for given meshes, by leveraging the
information about the appearance of textures carried by the
14169

