This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAFARI: Versatile and Efficient Evaluations for Robustness of Interpretability
Wei Huang1,2
Xingyu Zhao2,3
Gaojie Jin2,4
Xiaowei Huang2
1
Purple Mountain Laboratories 2 University of Liverpool
3
WMG, University of Warwick 4 Institute of Software, CAS
{w.huang23,xingyu.zhao,g.jin3,xiaowei.huang}@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract
Interpretability of Deep Learning (DL) is a barrier to
trustworthy AI. Despite great efforts made by the Explainable AI (XAI) community, explanations lack robustness—
indistinguishable input perturbations may lead to different
XAI results. Thus, it is vital to assess how robust DL interpretability is, given an XAI method. In this paper, we identify several challenges that the state-of-the-art is unable to
cope with collectively: i) existing metrics are not comprehensive; ii) XAI techniques are highly heterogeneous; iii)
misinterpretations are normally rare events. To tackle these
challenges, we introduce two black-box evaluation methods, concerning the worst-case interpretation discrepancy
and a probabilistic notion of how robust in general, respectively. Genetic Algorithm (GA) with bespoke fitness function
is used to solve constrained optimisation for efficient worstcase evaluation. Subset Simulation (SS), dedicated to estimate rare event probabilities, is used for evaluating overall
robustness. Experiments show that the accuracy, sensitivity, and efficiency of our methods outperform the state-ofthe-arts. Finally, we demonstrate two applications of our
methods: ranking robust XAI methods and selecting training schemes to improve both classification and interpretation robustness.

that a small perturbation can manipulate the interpretation
while keeping model’s prediction unchanged, e.g., [19, 25].
Moreover, there exists the misinterpretation of Adversarial
Examples (AEs) [50], i.e., adversarial inputs are misclassified2 by the DL model, but interpreted highly similarly to
the benign counterparts. Fig. 1 illustrates examples of the
aforementioned two types of misinterpretations. In this regard, it is vital to assess how robust the coupled DL model
and XAI method are against input perturbations, which motivates this work.

Figure 1: Two types of misinterpretations after perturbation

1. Introduction
A key impediment to the wide adoption of Deep Learning (DL) is its perceived lack of transparency. Explainable
AI (XAI) is a research area that aims at providing the visibility into how a DL model makes decisions, and thus enables the use of DL in vision-based safety critical applications, such as autonomous driving [32], and medical image
analysis [43]. Typically, XAI techniques visualise which
input features are significant to the DL model’s prediction
via attribution maps [4, 21]. However, interpretations1 suffer from the lack of robustness. Many works have shown
1 Despite the subtle difference between interpretability and explainability, we use both terms interchangeably as attributes of DL models in

To answer the question, the first challenge we recognise
is the lack of diverse evaluation metrics from the state-ofthe-art. Most of the existing works focus on adversarial attack [20] and defence [16, 42] on explanations, which essentially answer the binary question of whether there exist any adversarial interpretation in some perturbation distance. On the other hand, evaluation methods mainly study
worst-case metrics, e.g., the maximum change in the resulting explanations when perturbations are made [3] and local
this paper. However, as suggested in [31], we use the terms explanation/interpretation specifically for individual predictions.
2 Without loss of generality, in this paper we assume the DL model is
a classifier if with no further clarification.

1988

