This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Forecast-MAE: Self-supervised Pre-training for Motion Forecasting with
Masked Autoencoders
Jie Cheng1 Xiaodong Mei1 Ming Liu1,2 *
HKUST1 HKUST(GZ)2
{jchengai, xmeiab}@connect.ust.hk,

Abstract
This study explores the application of self-supervised
learning (SSL) to the task of motion forecasting, an area
that has not yet been extensively investigated despite the
widespread success of SSL in computer vision and natural language processing. To address this gap, we introduce Forecast-MAE, an extension of the mask autoencoders
framework that is specifically designed for self-supervised
learning of the motion forecasting task. Our approach includes a novel masking strategy that leverages the strong
interconnections between agents’ trajectories and road networks, involving complementary masking of agents’ future
or history trajectories and random masking of lane segments. Our experiments on the challenging Argoverse 2 motion forecasting benchmark show that Forecast-MAE, which
utilizes standard Transformer blocks with minimal inductive bias, achieves competitive performance compared to
state-of-the-art methods that rely on supervised learning
and sophisticated designs. Moreover, it outperforms the
previous self-supervised learning method by a significant
margin. Code is available at https://github.com/
jchengai/forecast-mae.

eelium@ust.hk

(a)

(b)

(c)

history
reconstructed history

future
reconstructed future

lanes
reconstructed lanes

Figure 1. Reconstruction result on Argoverse 2 validation scenario. (a) The origin scenario. (b) 50% of agents’ trajectory is
masked using a complementary masking strategy (either history
or future is masked). 50% of the lane segments are masked randomly. (c) Scenario reconstructed by the proposed Forecast-MAE.

1. Introduction
Motion forecasting is a rapidly developing research field
that plays a critical role in advanced autonomous driving
systems [22]. This task involves predicting the future trajectories of other vehicles and pedestrians, while taking into
account the intricate interactions and road layouts. The inherent multi-modal driving behaviors of agents, combined
with diverse road networks, make motion forecasting an especially challenging undertaking.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) is an innovative approach
that enables the acquisition of valuable latent features from
unlabelled data. By pre-training the model on pretext tasks
and pseudo-labels derived from the data, and subsequently
* Corresponding author: Ming Liu

fine-tuning on downstream tasks, SSL has demonstrated an
ability to learn more extensive and adaptable latent features,
leading to remarkable advancements in computer vision [3]
and natural language processing (NLP) [10]. Nevertheless,
despite its widespread popularity and success, there remains
a notable lack of exploration of SSL in the motion forecasting domain. We have identified two principal challenges
associated with integrating SSL into motion forecasting:
(i) Motion forecasting pre-training requires annotated
data, which sets it apart from fields such as computer vision and NLP where unlabeled raw inputs are easily accessible. In motion forecasting, we rely on annotated tracking sequences and hand-crafted high-definition maps that
are typically collected by expensive onboard sensors and

8679

