This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Chop & Learn: Recognizing and Generating Object-State Compositions
Nirat Saini*

Hanyu Wang*

Archana Swaminathan

Kamal Gupta

Vinoj Jayasundara

Bo He

Abhinav Shrivastava

University of Maryland, College Park
Chop & Learn Dataset

Abstract
Recognizing and generating object-state compositions
has been a challenging task, especially when generalizing
to unseen compositions. In this paper, we study the task
of cutting objects in different styles and the resulting object
state changes. We propose a new benchmark suite Chop
& Learn, to accommodate the needs of learning objects
and different cut styles using multiple viewpoints. We also
propose a new task of Compositional Image Generation,
which can transfer learned cut styles to different objects,
by generating novel object-state images. Moreover, we also
use the videos for Compositional Action Recognition, and
show valuable uses of this dataset for multiple video tasks.
Project website: https://chopnlearn.github.io.

1. Introduction
Objects often exist in different shapes, colors, and textures in the real-world. These visually discernible properties of objects, also known as states or attributes, can be
inherent to an object (e.g., color) or be a result of an action (e.g., chopped). Generalization to unseen properties
of objects remains an Achilles heel of current data-driven
recognition models (e.g., deep networks) that assume robust training data available for exhaustive object properties.
However, humans (and even animals) [3, 6] can innately
imagine and recognize a large number of objects with varying properties, by composing a few known objects and their
states. This ability to synthesize and recognize new combinations from finite concepts, called compositional generalization is often absent in modern deep learning models [30].
Several recent works have been proposed to study composition in terms of the disentanglement of objects and the
states in images [24, 33, 54, 69] as well as videos [2, 4, 11,
15, 16, 19, 53, 57, 58]. A few works have attempted to improve open-world text-to-image generation models [12, 51]
for the task of compositional generation. However, current
suite of datasets lacks either granular annotations for object
* First two authors contributed equally.

20 Objects

8 Cut Styles

Test

Train

Compositional Image Generation

apple
whole

orange
round slices

apple round slices

Test

Train

Compositional Action Recognition
bellpepper
whole → baton
potato
peel → large cut
bellpepper
whole → large cut

Figure 1. We present Chop & Learn (ChopNLearn), a new
dataset and benchmark suite for the tasks of Compositional Image
Generation and Compositional Action Recognition. It consists of
1260 video clips and 112 object state combinations captured from
multiple viewpoints for 20 objects and 8 cut styles. We also propose two new compositional tasks and benchmarks - (1) Image
Generation: given training images of various objects in various
states, the goal is to generate images of unseen combinations of objects and states. (2) Action Recognition: training videos are used
to recognize objects along with transition from state1 → state2, to
generalize on recognizing unseen object-state transitions.

states or enough data to study how object states evolve under different conditions. Therefore, measuring the compositional generalizability of these models on different tasks
remains an open challenge.
In this paper, we propose a new dataset, Chop &
Learn (ChopNLearn) collected to support studying compositional generalization, the ability to recognize and generate unseen compositions of objects in different states. To
focus on the compositional aspect, we limit our study to a
common task in our daily lives – cutting fruits and vegetables. When using different styles of cutting, these objects
undergo different transformations and the resulting states
are easily recognizable by humans. Our goal is to study
how these different styles can be applied to a variety of

20247

