This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text2Tex: Text-driven Texture Synthesis via Diffusion Models
Dave Zhenyu Chen1

Yawar Siddiqui1 Hsin-Ying Lee2 Sergey Tulyakov2
1
2
Technical University of Munich
Snap Research
https://daveredrum.github.io/Text2Tex/

Matthias Nießner1

Figure 1: We introduce Text2Tex, a text-driven architecture for 3D texture synthesis. Given object geometries and text
prompts as input, Text2Tex generates high quality and consistent textures via depth-aware inpainting and refinement.

Abstract
We present Text2Tex, a novel method for generating highquality textures for 3D meshes from the given text prompts.
Our method incorporates inpainting into a pre-trained
depth-aware image diffusion model to progressively synthesize high resolution partial textures from multiple viewpoints. To avoid accumulating inconsistent and stretched
artifacts across views, we dynamically segment the rendered
view into a generation mask, which represents the generation status of each visible texel. This partitioned view
representation guides the depth-aware inpainting model to
generate and update partial textures for the corresponding
regions. Furthermore, we propose an automatic view sequence generation scheme to determine the next best view
for updating the partial texture. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms the
existing text-driven approaches and GAN-based methods.

1. Introduction
Generating high-quality 3D content is an essential component of visual applications in films, games, and upcoming AR/VR scenarios. With an increasing number of 3D
content datasets, the computer vision community has wit-

nessed significant progress in the field of 3D geometry generation [12, 39, 61, 66, 38]. Despite the remarkable success
in modeling 3D geometries in recent years, fully automatic
3D content generation is still hindered by the laborious human efforts required to design textures. Therefore, automating the texture design process through alternative guidance,
such as text, has become an intriguing but challenging research problem.
Recently, text-to-image generators have shown remarkable progress in the 2D domain leveraging diffusion model
architectures, enabling high resolution 2D content generation based on textual descriptions [1, 48]. However, there
are notable challenges for producing 3D textures via such
2D vision-language prior knowledge. Specifically, the synthesized textures are expected to be not only with high fidelity to the language cues, but also of high and consistent quality for target meshes. As such, previous attempts
to paint 3D geometry from text inputs often fail to deliver
well-textured 3D content.
In this paper, we introduce Text2Tex, a novel texture synthesis method that seamlessly texturizes 3D objects using a pre-trained depth-aware text-to-image diffusion model. The method renders a target mesh from multiple viewpoints and inpaints the missing appearance with a

18558

