This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Teaching CLIP to Count to Ten
Roni Paiss1,2 Ariel Ephrat1 Omer Tov1
Shiran Zada1
Inbar Mosseri1
Michal Irani1,3
Tali Dekel1,3
1
2
3
Google Research
Tel Aviv University
Weizmann Institute of Science
(a) Image Retrieval Results (from LAION):
“Dogs”

“Photos”

“Hearts”

(b) Relevancy Maps:

“Animals”

“Dogs”

“Photos”

“Hearts”

“Three”

“Animals”

)

“Nine”

Ours

“Six”

Original
CLIP

“Five”

( “Five”,

Original CLIP

Counting-Aware CLIP (Ours)

Figure 1: Inability of CLIP to count. We show that CLIP is insensitive to the number of objects in an image, and demonstrate the effectiveness of our Counting-Aware CLIP. (a) Image retrieval results using text captions of the form “a photo of
ănumberą ăobjectsą”, with different numbers and types of objects. Images that match the caption are marked with ✓;
images that do not are marked with ✗. Our Counting-Aware model retrieves images that depict the requested number of objects, while the original CLIP often retrieves images that contain the wrong number of objects, or images where the number
is explicitly written in the image (e.g. ”nine hearts” - the image contains the number ”9”, but has 11 hearts). (b) Attention
maps demonstrating that our model attends to all matching object instances in the image, unlike the original CLIP.

Abstract
Large vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP,
learn rich joint image-text representations, facilitating advances in numerous downstream tasks, including zero-shot
classification and text-to-image generation. Nevertheless,
existing VLMs exhibit a prominent well-documented limitation – they fail to encapsulate compositional concepts such
as counting. We introduce a simple yet effective method
to improve the quantitative understanding of VLMs, while
maintaining their overall performance on common benchmarks. Specifically, we propose a new counting-contrastive
loss used to finetune a pre-trained VLM in tandem with
its original objective. Our counting loss is deployed over
automatically-created counterfactual examples, each consisting of an image and a caption containing an incorrect
object count. For example, an image depicting three dogs
is paired with the caption “Six dogs playing in the yard”
as a negative example. Our loss encourages discrimination

between the correct caption and its counterfactual variant
which serves as a hard negative example. To the best of
our knowledge, this work is the first to extend CLIP’s capabilities to object counting. Furthermore, we introduce
“CountBench” – a new image-text counting benchmark for
evaluating object counting capabilities. We demonstrate a
significant improvement over state-of-the-art baseline models on this task. Finally, we leverage our counting-aware
CLIP model for image retrieval and text-conditioned image
generation, demonstrating that our model can produce specific counts of objects more reliably than existing ones.

1. Introduction
Since the advent of CLIP [38], training large visionlanguage models (VLMs) has become a prominent
paradigm for representation learning in computer vision.
By observing huge corpora of paired images and captions crawled from the Web, these models learn powerful

3170

