This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

M2T: Masking Transformers Twice for Faster Decoding
Fabian Mentzer
Google Research

Eirikur Agustson
Google Research

Michael Tschannen
Google DeepMind

mentzer@google.com

eirikur@google.com

tschannen@google.com

Abstract
We show how bidirectional transformers trained for
masked token prediction can be applied to neural image
compression to achieve state-of-the-art results. Such models were previously used for image generation by progressivly sampling groups of masked tokens according to
uncertainty-adaptive schedules. Unlike these works, we
demonstrate that predefined, deterministic schedules perform as well or better for image compression. This insight
allows us to use masked attention during training in addition to masked inputs, and activation caching during inference, to significantly speed up our models (⇡4⇥ higher
inference speed) at a small increase in bitrate. 1

1. Introduction
Recently, transformers trained for masked token prediction have successfully been applied to neural image and
video generation [11, 35]. In MaskGIT [11], the authors
use a VQ-GAN [16] to map images to vector-quantized tokens, and learn a transformer to predict the distribution of
these tokens. The key novelty of the approach was to use
BERT-like [13] random masks during training to then predict tokens in groups during inference, sampling tokens in
the same group in parallel at each inference step. Thereby,
each inference step is conditioned on the tokens generated
in previous steps. A big advantage of BERT-like training
with grouped inference versus prior state-of-the-art is that
considerably fewer steps are required to produce realistic
images (typically 10-20, rather than one per token).
These models are optimized to minimize the cross entropy between the token distribution p modeled by the transformer and the true (unknown) token distribution q, as measured via negative log likelihood (NLL). As is known from
information theory, this is equivalent to the bit cost required
to (losslessly) store a sample drawn from q with a model
p [40]. Indeed, any model p that predicts an explicit joint
distribution over tokens in a deterministic way can be turned
into a compression model by using p to entropy code the tokens, rather than sampling them.
1 Code will be released to github.

Figure 1: Rate distortion results on Kodak. Our MT outperforms the prior state-of-the-art ELIC [18]; M2T only incurs a small reduction in rate-distortion performance compared to MT while running about 4⇥ faster on hardware
(see Fig. 4)
Motivated by this, we aim to employ masked transformers for neural image compression. Previous work has
used masked and unmasked transformers in the entropy
model for video compression [38, 25] and image compression [29, 22, 15]. However, these models are often either prohibitively slow [22], or lag in rate-distortion performance [29, 15]. In this paper, we show a conceptually
simple transformer-based approach that is state-of-the-art in
neural image compression, at practical runtimes. The model
is using off-the-shelf transformers, and does not rely on
special positional encodings or multi-scale factorizations,
in contrast to previous work. Additionally, we propose
a new variant combining ideas from MaskGIT-like inputmasked transformers and fully autoregressive attentionmasked transformers. The resulting model masks both the
input and attention layers, and allows us to substantially improve runtimes at a small cost in rate-distortion.
To train masked transformers, the tokens to be masked
in each training step are usually selected uniformly at random. During inference, the models are first applied to mask

5340

