This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Misalign, Contrast then Distill:
Rethinking Misalignments in Language-Image Pretraining
Bumsoo Kim* Yeonsik Jo

Jinhyung Kim

Seunghwan Kim

LG AI Research

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining has emerged
as a prominent approach for training vision and text encoders with uncurated image-text pairs from the web. To
enhance data-efficiency, recent efforts have introduced additional supervision terms that involve random-augmented
views of the image. However, since the image augmentation
process is unaware of its text counterpart, this procedure
could cause various degrees of image-text misalignments
during training. Prior methods either disregarded this discrepancy or introduced external models to mitigate the impact of misalignments during training. In contrast, we propose a novel metric learning approach that capitalizes on
these misalignments as an additional training source, which
we term “Misalign, Contrast then Distill (MCD)”. Unlike
previous methods that treat augmented images and their
text counterparts as simple positive pairs, MCD predicts the
continuous scales of misalignment caused by the augmentation. Our extensive experimental results show that our
proposed MCD achieves state-of-the-art transferability in
multiple classification and retrieval downstream datasets.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have shown that image
representations trained with large-scale uncurated natural
language supervision shows powerful transferability to various downstream tasks [14, 32]. A predominant paradigm in
vision–language pre-training is to use a simple contrastive
loss that makes the embedding of an image and its matching
text description (positive pair) more similar to each other
than other arbitrary image–text pairs (negative pairs) [29].
To achieve a more data-efficient training, following works
actively capitalized on image random augmentation by: (i)
joining language–image pretraining objectives with vision
self-supervision terms [3, 5] between the augmented images [27, 23, 18] and (ii) involving more pairs of posi* Correspondence to: bumsoo.kim@lgresearch.ai

InfoNCE

(a)

(b)
MCD

: cat and dog looking round an empty board.
cat sitting and looking at the right side :
Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of contrastive language–image
objectives of previous works (i.e., InfoNCE) and our MCD for
(a) augmentation that doesn’t harm the correspondence with its
description and (b) augmentation that does. Previous works either disregard these misalignments [23] or leverage external models [18, 9] to mitigate their impact. On the other hand, MCD uses
the continuous degree of misalignments caused by random image
augmentation as a useful source for training various levels of alignments between images and their text descriptions.

tive/negative supervisions between the augmented images
and their original text description [23, 18].
However, since the random image augmentation process
is unaware of its corresponding text, it often results in the
augmented image view to be misaligned with its description (see (b) in Fig.1). These misalignments behave as
noisy training signals for the contrastive loss in language–
image pretraining, thus causing performance degradation if
not properly attended [27]. To mitigate this issue, recent
works have used additional augmentation embeddings [18]
or heavy external off-the-shelf object detectors and summary extractors [9] to match the alignment during training.
Though being straightforward and showing strong performance, these works are limited in that they add unnecessary
burden in both training and inference.
Based on this observation, we start with a simple question: “Instead of treating misalignments as noise to elim-

2563

