This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Composed Image Retrieval with Textual Inversion
∗

Alberto Baldrati1,2
1

∗

Lorenzo Agnolucci1

Marco Bertini1

Alberto Del Bimbo1

University of Florence - Media Integration and Communication Center (MICC)
2
University of Pisa
Florence, Italy - Pisa, Italy
[name.surname]@unifi.it

Abstract
Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) aims to retrieve a target image based on a query composed of a reference image
and a relative caption that describes the difference between
the two images. The high effort and cost required for labeling datasets for CIR hamper the widespread usage of
existing methods, as they rely on supervised learning. In
this work, we propose a new task, Zero-Shot CIR (ZS-CIR),
that aims to address CIR without requiring a labeled training dataset. Our approach, named zero-Shot composEd
imAge Retrieval with textuaL invErsion (SEARLE), maps
the visual features of the reference image into a pseudoword token in CLIP token embedding space and integrates
it with the relative caption. To support research on ZSCIR, we introduce an open-domain benchmarking dataset
named Composed Image Retrieval on Common Objects in
context (CIRCO), which is the first dataset for CIR containing multiple ground truths for each query. The experiments show that SEARLE exhibits better performance
than the baselines on the two main datasets for CIR tasks,
FashionIQ and CIRR, and on the proposed CIRCO. The
dataset, the code and the model are publicly available at

Pre-training on unlabeled data
✓ Expressiveness
✗ Efficiency
Optimization-based
textual inversion

✓ Expressiveness
✓ Efficiency
Textual
Distillation
inversion
network

Unlabeled images
Zero-shot Composed Image Retrieval (ZS-CIR)
Query
is playing with
a red ball

Index
images

Target

text-to-image
retrieval
Textual
inversion
network

a photo of
that is playing
with a red ball

CLIP
text
encoder

Figure 1. Workflow of our method. Top: in the pre-training phase,
we generate pseudo-word tokens of unlabeled images with an
optimization-based textual inversion and then distill their knowledge to a textual inversion network. Bottom: at inference time on
ZS-CIR, we map the reference image to a pseudo-word S∗ and
concatenate it with the relative caption. Then, we use CLIP text
encoder to perform text-to-image retrieval.

https://github.com/miccunifi/SEARLE.

1. Introduction
Given a query composed of a reference image and a relative caption, Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) [24,35] aims
to retrieve target images that are visually similar to the reference one but incorporate the changes specified in the relative caption. The bi-modality of the query provides users
with more precise control over the characteristics of the
desired image, as some features are more easily described
with language, while others can be better expressed visually. Figure 3 shows some query examples.
∗ Equal contribution. Author ordering was determined by coin flip.

CIR datasets consist of triplets (Ir , Tr , It ) composed of
a reference image, a relative caption, and a target image, respectively. Creating a dataset for CIR is expensive as this
type of data is not easily available on the internet, and generating it in an automated way is still very challenging. Thus,
researchers must resort to manual labeling efforts. The
manual process involves identifying pairs of reference and
target images and writing a descriptive caption that captures
the differences between them. This is a time-consuming
and resource-intensive task, especially when creating large
training sets. Current works tackling CIR [2, 3, 11, 22, 24]
rely on supervision to learn how to combine the reference
image and the relative caption. For instance, [2] proposes
a fully-supervised two-stage approach that involves fine-

15338

