This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gradient-Regulated Meta-Prompt Learning
for Generalizable Vision-Language Models
Juncheng Li 1, 2 * †

Minghe Gao 1 *

Mengze Li 1

Longhui Wei 2, 3

Wei Ji 4

Siliang Tang 1

Qi Tian 2

Wenqiao Zhang 4

Tat-Seng Chua 4

Yueting Zhuang 1‡
1

Zhejiang University,

2

Huawei Cloud,

3

University of Science and Technology of China 4 National university of Singapore

{junchengli, 22221320, siliang, mengzeli, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn
{weilonghui1, tian.qi1}@huawei.com, {wenqiao, jiwei, dcscts}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Prompt tuning, a recently emerging paradigm, enables
the powerful vision-language pre-training models to adapt
to downstream tasks in a parameter- and data- efficient
way, by learning the “soft prompts” to condition frozen pretraining models. Though effective, it is particularly problematic in the few-shot scenario, where prompt tuning performance is sensitive to the initialization and requires a
time-consuming process to find a good initialization, thus
restricting the fast adaptation ability of the pre-training
models. In addition, prompt tuning could undermine the
generalizability of the pre-training models, because the
learnable prompt tokens are easy to overfit to the limited
training samples. To address these issues, we introduce a
novel Gradient-RegulAted Meta-prompt learning (GRAM)
framework that jointly meta-learns an efficient soft prompt
initialization for better adaptation and a lightweight gradient regulating function for strong cross-domain generalizability in a meta-learning paradigm using only the unlabeled image-text pre-training data. Rather than designing
a specific prompt tuning method, our GRAM can be easily incorporated into various prompt tuning methods in a
model-agnostic way, and comprehensive experiments show
that GRAM brings about consistent improvement for them
in several settings (i.e., few-shot learning, cross-domain
generalization, cross-dataset generalization, etc.) over 11
datasets. Further, experiments show that GRAM enables
the orthogonal methods of textual and visual prompt tuning
to work in a mutually-enhanced way, offering better generalizability beyond the uni-modal prompt tuning methods.

* Equal Contribution.
† Work done when interning at Huawei Cloud.
‡ Corresponding Author.

Method
(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Prompt tuning accuracy varies significantly
with different initialization. (b) As the training continues,
CoOp’s performance drops severely while our GRAM prevents CoOp from overfitting to spurious correlations.

1. Introduction
Pre-trained on vast image-text pairs that cover almost an
infinite range of concepts in the real-world, recent visionlanguage pre-training models [44, 16, 22] have exhibited
impressive generalizability on a wide variety of downstream
tasks [1, 32, 29, 28, 59]. By simply infilling a hand-crafted
prompt template (e.g., “a photo of a [CLASS]”)
with real class names as input to the text encoder, the pretraining models can achieve zero-shot image classification.
While effective, a slight word change in prompt templates
could lead to a huge difference in performance [62]. Thus,
identifying suitable prompts for different tasks requires
time-consuming attempts by experts on an extra large validation set. Instead of manually designing hard prompts (discrete language words), some recent prompt tuning methods [62, 61, 63, 17, 20] are proposed to learn a set of soft
prompts (continuous embeddings) using a few labeled data.
Despite clear improvements on the downstream tasks,

2551

