This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TAPIR: Tracking Any Point with per-frame Initialization and temporal
Refinement
Carl Doersch∗

Yi Yang∗
Yusuf Aytar∗

Mel Vecerik∗†
Joao Carreira∗

Dilara Gokay∗
Ankush Gupta∗
∗‡
Andrew Zisserman

∗

†
Google DeepMind
University College London
‡
VGG, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Abstract
Davis

We present a novel model for Tracking Any Point (TAP)
that effectively tracks any queried point on any physical surface throughout a video sequence. Our approach employs
two stages: (1) a matching stage, which independently locates a suitable candidate point match for the query point
on every other frame, and (2) a refinement stage, which updates both the trajectory and query features based on local correlations. The resulting model surpasses all baseline
methods by a significant margin on the TAP-Vid benchmark,
as demonstrated by an approximate 20% absolute average
Jaccard (AJ) improvement on DAVIS. Our model facilitates
fast inference on long and high-resolution video sequences.
On a modern GPU, our implementation has the capacity to
track points faster than real-time. Given the high-quality
trajectories extracted from a large dataset, we demonstrate
a proof-of-concept diffusion model which generates trajectories from static images, enabling plausible animations.
Visualizations, source code, and pretrained models can be
found at https://deepmind-tapir.github.io.

1. Introduction
The problem of point level correspondence —i.e., determining whether two pixels in two different images are projections of the same point on the same physical surface—
has long been a fundamental challenge in computer vision,
with enormous potential for providing insights about physical properties and 3D shape. We consider its formulation as
“Tracking Any Point” (TAP) [12]: given a video and (potentially dense) query points on solid surfaces, an algorithm
should reliably output the locations those points correspond
to in every other frame where they are visible, and indicate
frames where they are not – see Fig. 4 for illustration.
Our main contribution is a new model: TAP with
per-frame Initialization and temporal Refinement (TAPIR),

Average Jaccard

60

TAPIR

Kinetics

50

PIPs
COTR

40

TAPNet

30

Kubric-VFS

RAFT
20
2020

2021

2022

2023

Figure 1. Retrospective evolution of point tracking performance
over time on the recent TAP-Vid-Kinetics and TAP-Vid-DAVIS
benchmarks, as measured by Average Jaccard (higher is better).
In this paper we introduce TAPIR, which significantly improves
performance over the state-of-the-art. This unlocks new capabilities, which we demonstrate on motion-based future prediction.

which greatly improves over the state-of-the-art on the
recently-proposed TAP-Vid benchmark [12]. There are
many challenges to TAP: we must robustly estimate occlusions and recover when points reappear (unlike optical
flow and structure-from-motion keypoints), meaning that
search must be incorporated; yet when points remain visible for many consecutive frames, it is important to integrate
information about appearance and motion across many of
those frames in order to optimally predict positions. Furthermore, little real-world ground truth is available to learn
from, so supervised-learning algorithms need to learn from
synthetic data without overfitting to the data distribution
(i.e., sim2real).
There are three core design decisions that define TAPIR.
The first is to use a coarse-to-fine approach. This approach
has been used across many high-precision estimation prob-

10061

