This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Coordinate Quantized Neural Implicit Representations for Multi-view
Reconstruction
Sijia Jiang, Jing Hua, Zhizhong Han
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
sijiajiang@wayne.edu, jinghua@wayne.edu, h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
In recent years, huge progress has been made on learning neural implicit representations from multi-view images
for 3D reconstruction. As an additional input complementing coordinates, using sinusoidal functions as positional
encodings plays a key role in revealing high frequency details with coordinate-based neural networks. However, high
frequency positional encodings make the optimization unstable, which results in noisy reconstructions and artifacts
in empty space. To resolve this issue in a general sense,
we introduce to learn neural implicit representations with
quantized coordinates, which reduces the uncertainty and
ambiguity in the field during optimization. Instead of continuous coordinates, we discretize continuous coordinates
into discrete coordinates using nearest interpolation among
quantized coordinates which are obtained by discretizing
the field in an extremely high resolution. We use discrete
coordinates and their positional encodings to learn implicit
functions through volume rendering. This significantly reduces the variations in the sample space, and triggers more
multi-view consistency constraints on intersections of rays
from different views, which enables to infer implicit function
in a more effective way. Our quantized coordinates do not
bring any computational burden, and can seamlessly work
upon the latest methods. Our evaluations under the widely
used benchmarks show our superiority over the state-of-theart. Our code is available at https://github.com/
MachinePerceptionLab/CQ-NIR.

1. Introduction
Learning implicit representations from multi-view images is a challenge in reconstructing 3D geometry in a
scene. The latest methods learn implicit representations using coordinate-based neural networks to infer signed distance or occupancy fields [43, 67, 66, 13, 63, 68, 64, 61,
62, 16, 25, 50] through volume rendering. By shooting
rays across the fields, we render RGB values at a pixel

by integrating colors and geometry at 3D queries sampled
along a ray through volume rendering. The images rendered from neural implicit functions are compared with the
ground truth images, which measures errors to improve the
neural implicit fucntions.
Learning high fidelity implicit representations requires
to use positional encodings [39, 43, 63, 64] as a complement to coordinates, which remedies the incapability
of coordinate-based neural networks in modeling high frequency details. Positional encodings are vectors formed by
sinusoidal functions of coordinates with both low and high
frequencies [55, 59], where the frequency band is shown as
the key factor to capture details in different scenes. However, higher frequency turns out to bring noises, which results in artifacts on surfaces and in empty spaces. To stabilize the optimization with high frequency positional encodings, some methods [18, 64, 45] learn soft masks to gradually expose high frequency components over training iterations. However, this masking strategy relies on training
iterations and numbers of frequency components, which is
tedious to tune in a general sense.
To resolve this issue, we propose to use quantized coordinates to learn neural implicit representations from multiview images. Instead of continuous coordinates and positional encodings of continuous coordinates in previous
methods [39, 63, 68, 64, 61, 62, 16, 71], we use discrete coordinates and positional encodings of discrete coordinates
as the input of coordinate-based neural networks, where we
discretize the field in an extremely high resolutions. Our
insight here is to decrease the uncertainty and ambiguity in
the field during optimization. We achieve this by introducing discrete coordinates with two reasons. On the one hand,
we enable networks to merely observe a finite set of discrete
coordinates rather than infinite continuous variations, which
simplifies the optimization by significantly reducing variations in the sample space. On the other hand, a discrete coordinate covers an area rather than a point, hence rays from
different views are more easily to have overlapped samples
with each other. This triggers more multi-view consistency
constraints to take effect at these intersections, which leads

18358

