This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AGG-Net: Attention Guided Gated-convolutional Network for
Depth Image Completion
Dongyue Chen1,2,3,∗ , Tingxuan Huang1,∗ , Zhimin Song1 , Shizhuo Deng1,2 , Tong Jia1,3
1
College of Information Science and Engineering,
Northeastern University Shenyang 110819, Liaoning, China
2
National Frontiers Science Center for Industrial Intelligence and Systems Optimization,
Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, Liaoning, China
3
Foshan Graduate School of Innovation, Northeastern University, Foshan 528311, Guangdong, China
chendongyue@ise.neu.edu.cn, cangshuhuang@gmail.com

Recently, stereo vision based on lightweight RGBD cameras has been widely used in various fields. However, limited by the imaging principles, the commonly used RGB-D
cameras based on TOF, structured light, or binocular vision
acquire some invalid data inevitably, such as weak reflection, boundary shadows, and artifacts, which may bring adverse impacts to the follow-up work. In this paper, we propose a new model for depth image completion based on the
Attention Guided Gated-convolutional Network (AGG-Net),
through which more accurate and reliable depth images can
be obtained from the raw depth maps and the corresponding
RGB images. Our model employs a UNet-like architecture
which consists of two parallel branches of depth and color
features. In the encoding stage, an Attention Guided GatedConvolution (AG-GConv) module is proposed to realize the
fusion of depth and color features at different scales, which
can effectively reduce the negative impacts of invalid depth
data on the reconstruction. In the decoding stage, an Attention Guided Skip Connection (AG-SC) module is presented
to avoid introducing too many depth-irrelevant features to
the reconstruction. The experimental results demonstrate
that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
on the popular benchmarks NYU-Depth V2, DIML, and
SUN RGB-D. https://github.com/htx0601/AGG-Net

1. Introduction
Depth sensing is critical in applications such as autonomous driving [4], robot navigation [22], and scene reconstruction [1]. The commonly used depth sensors include
LiDAR, Time-of-Flight, or binocular camera. However,
most of the acquired depth images will inevitably be ac-

Ours

Abstract

Raw depth

sg1997k@gmail.com, dengshizhuo@ise.neu.edu.cn, jiatong@ise.neu.edu.cn

(a) NYU-Depth V2

(b) DIML

(c) SUN RGB-D

Figure 1. Typical raw depth images with invalid data in the popular
benchmark datasets (a) NYU-Depth V2, (b) DIML, and (c) SUN
RGB-D, and the completion results of our method.

companied by many invalid areas caused by weak or direct
reflections, far distance, bright light, and other environmental noises, as shown in Fig. 1. These invalid data will have
severe diverse impacts on the following process. Therefore,
depth completion has become necessary for most applications based on depth images.
Although many approaches based solely on raw depth
images have been proposed, their performance is severely
limited because of the absence or uncertainty of invalid
data. Therefore, researchers consider introducing RGB information to guide the depth completion [7] through two
typical manners. The traditional one fills invalid pixels
based on their valid neighbors according to some given
rules, such as joint bilateral filters [2], fast marching [24],
and Markov random field [16]. However, these methods are
generally not fast nor sufficiently accurate. The other approach predicts invalid pixels with the deep neural network,
which usually employs an auto-encoder to extract depth and

8853

