This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UMFuse: Unified Multi View Fusion for Human Editing applications
Rishabh Jain*
MDSR Adobe

Mayur Hemani
MDSR Adobe

Jingwan Lu
Adobe Research

Mausoom Sarkar
MDSR Adobe

Abstract
Numerous pose-guided human editing methods have
been explored by the vision community due to their extensive practical applications. However, most of these methods
still use an image-to-image formulation in which a single
image is given as input to produce an edited image as output. This objective becomes ill-defined in cases when the
target pose differs significantly from the input pose. Existing
methods then resort to in-painting or style transfer to handle occlusions and preserve content. In this paper, we explore the utilization of multiple views to minimize the issue
of missing information and generate an accurate representation of the underlying human model. To fuse knowledge
from multiple viewpoints, we design a multi-view fusion network that takes the pose key points and texture from multiple source images and generates an explainable per-pixel
appearance retrieval map. Thereafter, the encodings from
a separate network (trained on a single-view human reposing task) are merged in the latent space. This enables us
to generate accurate, precise, and visually coherent images
for different editing tasks. We show the application of our
network on two newly proposed tasks - Multi-view human
reposing and Mix&Match Human Image generation. Additionally, we study the limitations of single-view editing and
scenarios in which multi-view provides a better alternative.
Datasplits and results can be found at Project Webpage.

1. Introduction
Automating person-image editing can be of great value
to business applications for advertisements, commercial
merchandising, as well as individual creativity. Pose-based
*rishabhj@adobe.com

Duygu Ceylan
Adobe Research

Krishna Kumar Singh
Adobe Research

Balaji Krishnamurthy
MDSR Adobe

image editing is a class of human image editing workflows where the end result depends on an input human
pose. These include human reposing, garment virtual tryon [10, 40, 4] etc. Recent methods for person-image editing
[28, 18, 33, 6, 3, 23, 34] have made great strides in producing accurate edit results from a single image of a person.
However, they suffer from textural, shape, and color artifacts because a single image may not have sufficient information to produce an accurate rendition of the person in the
desired target pose. In this work, we present a novel poseguided human image generation method that can incorporate multiple images as well as leverage existing singleview reposing models to improve the editing results significantly.
In most contemporary methods for pose-guided human
image reposing [28, 18, 33, 6, 3, 23], a deep neural network
transforms a source image of a person into a target pose
specified as a sequence of keypoints. The network takes a
single source image of a person, the pose of the person in
that image (source pose), and the target pose as input, and
produces an image corresponding to the person in the target pose. The source image supplies the color and texture
information for guiding the generation of the target pose
image. However, the target pose can be significantly different from the source pose, such as when a part of the human
body or clothing obscured in the original image might appear in the target pose. In such cases, the network must
infer those regions of the output from the context. We posit
that using multiple source images of the same person is an
effective solution to this problem. This is also practical for
real-world applications as companies usually have multiple
photos of a human model in distinct poses. However, this
approach requires mapping parts of the target image to parts
of the source images based on how their textures match up
geometrically, which is a non-trivial task. In this paper, we
present a framework that can extend existing single-view
networks for multi-view reposing task by effectively com-

7182

