This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Interactive Keypoint Detection
Jie Yang1,2 * , Ailing Zeng1† , Feng Li1 , Shilong Liu1 , Ruimao Zhang2† , Lei Zhang1
1
International Digital Economy Academy
2
School of Data Science, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
{jieyang5@link,zhangruimao@}cuhk.edu.cn
{zengailing,lifeng,liushilong,leizhang}@idea.edu.cn

https://github.com/IDEA-Research/Click-Pose
Model localizes all keypoints

AP=62.6

User corrects a few wrong keypoints

AP=100

(a) In-domain annotation

AP=49.9

Model refines other keypoints

AP=100

(b) Out-of-domain annotation

(c) 4 extra keypoints annotation

Figure 1: We demonstrate the effects of Click-Pose in three keypoint annotation scenarios. For scenarios (a) and (b), the left
figures show the model-only’s initial keypoint localization, followed by the corrected keypoints (red points) obtained through
user clicks. The right figures display the final results obtained by Click-Pose after automatically refining other keypoints and
corresponding human boxes. For scenario (c), the left figure illustrates the original task of detecting 17 keypoints, while the
right figure shows the adaptability of Click-Pose in detecting additional 4 keypoints.

Abstract
This work proposes an end-to-end neural interactive keypoint detection framework named Click-Pose, which can
significantly reduce more than 10 times labeling costs of
2D keypoint annotation compared with manual-only annotation. Click-Pose explores how user feedback can cooperate with a neural keypoint detector to correct the predicted
keypoints in an interactive way for a faster and more effective annotation process. Specifically, we design the pose
error modeling strategy that inputs the ground truth pose
combined with four typical pose errors into the decoder and
trains the model to reconstruct the correct poses, which enhances the self-correction ability of the model. Then, we
attach an interactive human-feedback loop that allows receiving users’ clicks to correct one or several predicted
keypoints and iteratively utilizes the decoder to update all
other keypoints with a minimum number of clicks (NoC) for
efficient annotation. We validate Click-Pose in in-domain,
out-of-domain scenes, and a new task of keypoint adaptation. For annotation, Click-Pose only needs 1.97 and 6.45
NoC@95 (at precision 95%) on COCO and Human-Art, re* Work done during an internship at IDEA.
† Corresponding author.

ducing 31.4% and 36.3% efforts than the SOTA model (ViTPose) with manual correction, respectively. Besides, without user clicks, Click-Pose surpasses the previous end-toend model by 1.4 AP on COCO and 3.0 AP on Human-Art.

1. Introduction
Multi-person keypoint detection aims to localize 2D coordinates of keypoints for each person in images, as in
Fig. 1. It has garnered significant attention in research and
industry, particularly in sports, entertainment, and surveillance applications. The development of deep models for
various applications heavily depends on a large volume of
training data with labels (e.g., COCO [12, 23]). As the
amount of data increases, the manual annotations of dense
human keypoints are quite time-consuming, labor-intensive,
and cost-prohibitive. As demonstrated in Fig. 2, annotating
a single person with 17 keypoints would take about 230 seconds. For a dataset of 50K images with an average of four
people per image, this process would require 532 hours.
Additionally, there may exist omissions, localization deviation, and mislabeling in the manual annotation process.
To reduce the manual effort, an intuitive annotation process can use a state-of-the-art (SOTA) model [42] to obtain
15122

