This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint Implicit Neural Representation for High-fidelity and Compact Vector Fonts
Chia-Hao Chen
Tsinghua University

Ying-Tian Liu
Tsinghua University

Zhifei Zhang
Adobe Research

jh-chen20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

liuyingt23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

zzhang@adobe.com

Yuan-Chen Guo
Tsinghua University

Song-Hai Zhang
Tsinghua University

guoyc19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

shz@tsinghua.edu.cn

Target
DeepVecFont
Ours
Sharper Corner
Im2Vec

DeepVecFont

Ours

Multi-Implicit

More Compact Contour

dense control
points

Smooth Interpolation

Fancy Style Reconstruction

Figure 1: Overview of our vector font generation results. Our approach reconstructs font shapes with sharper corners and
more compact contours while enabling smooth interpolation between different font styles.

Abstract
Existing vector font generation approaches either struggle to preserve high-frequency corner details of the glyph or
produce vector shapes that have redundant segments, which
hinders their applications in practical scenarios. In this paper, we propose to learn vector fonts from pixelated font images utilizing a joint neural representation that consists of a
signed distance field (SDF) and a probabilistic corner field
(CF) to capture shape corner details. To achieve smooth
shape interpolation on the learned shape manifold, we establish connections between the two fields for better alignment. We further design a vectorization process to extract
high-quality and compact vector fonts from our joint neural
representation. Experiments demonstrate that our method
can generate more visually appealing vector fonts with a
higher level of compactness compared to existing alternatives.

1. Introduction
The automatic generation of stylized fonts has important
applications in art and design. The vector font is preferred
to the pixelated font image by virtue of its scalability in
rendering and compactness in storage and therefore has become mainstream.
Existing vector font generation methods either directly
work on the vector format [3, 25, 34], or perform vectorization on the generated pixelated font image [26]. The
former mainly represents a glyph shape as a sequence of
Scalable Vector Graphic (SVG) drawing commands and
learns to generate such sequences by ground truth vector
supervision or utilizing a differentiable vector shape renderer [15]. Despite the ability of this representation for
capturing fine shape details, these methods suffer from the
ambiguity brought by the nature of the many-to-one mapping from the drawing commands to the rendered shape, in
which case different drawing commands could produce the
same-looking shape. This ambiguity often leads to redun-

5538

