This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Global-aware Kernel for Image Harmonization
Xintian Shen1 * Jiangning Zhang2 * Jun Chen1 Shipeng Bai1
Yue Han1 Yabiao Wang2 Chengjie Wang2,3 Yong Liu1†
1

APRIL Lab, Zhejiang University

2

Youtu Lab, Tencent

3

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

[22132133, 186368, junc, shipengbai, 22132041]@zju.edu.cn,
[caseywang, jasoncjwang]@tencent.com, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Image harmonization aims to solve the visual inconsistency problem in composited images by adaptively adjusting the foreground pixels with the background as references.
Existing methods employ local color transformation or region matching between foreground and background, which
neglects powerful proximity prior and independently distinguishes fore-/back-ground as a whole part for harmonization. As a result, they still show a limited performance
across varied foreground objects and scenes. To address
this issue, we propose a novel Global-aware Kernel Network (GKNet) to harmonize local regions with comprehensive consideration of long-distance background references.
Specifically, GKNet includes two parts, i.e., harmony kernel prediction and harmony kernel modulation branches.
The former includes a Long-distance Reference Extractor
(LRE) to obtain long-distance context and Kernel Prediction Blocks (KPB) to predict multi-level harmony kernels
by fusing global information with local features. To achieve
this goal, a novel Selective Correlation Fusion (SCF) module is proposed to better select relevant long-distance background references for local harmonization. The latter employs the predicted kernels to harmonize foreground regions with local and global awareness. Abundant experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method for image
harmonization over state-of-the-art methods, e.g., achieving 39.53dB PSNR that surpasses the best counterpart by
+0.78dB ↑; decreasing fMSE/MSE by 11.5%↓/6.7%↓ compared with the SoTA method. Code will be available at here.

1. Introduction
Image composition aims to synthesize foreground objects from one image into another, which is a common task
in image editing. However, human eyes could clearly dis* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Local-translation

(b) Region-matching

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of background reference methods in harmonization. Blue/Red region represent foreground/background,
respectively, and white/red arrows refer to interaction/injection,
respectively. (a) Local-translation methods reference nearby pixels. (b) Region-matching methods transfer reference with a unified
view of fore-/back-ground region. (c) Our method interacts longdistance reference and injects it with short-distance consideration.

tinguish synthetic images due to the visual inconsistency
between foreground and background in composited images.
In attempting to solve the photo-unrealistic problem, image
harmonization is proposed to adjust the foreground objects
based on the illumination and color tone in background environment, which plays an important role in image editing.
Traditional image harmonization approaches are mainly
based on low-level feature matching, which is only effective for specific scenes. Recently, numerous learning-based
methods have achieved remarkable progress by addressing image harmonization as a generation task. Existing
learning-based methods could be categorized from two angles, i.e., local-translation and region-matching. 1) The
former employs a convolutional encoder-decoder to learn a
foreground pixel-to-pixel translation [41, 8]. But a shallow
CNN only captures limited surrounding background. As
shown in Figure 1a, these approaches harmonize the current
pixel with local references, which is insufficient for harmonization as inner foreground pixels could not attach background reference. Besides, related long-distance references
are effective in some cases. 2) The latter region matching
methods [29, 7] distinguish foreground and background regions as two styles or domains. As shown in Figure 1b,
they tackle harmonization as a matching problem with a

7535

