This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Model Personalization in Federated Learning
via Client-Specific Prompt Generation
Fu-En Yang1,2
Chien-Yi Wang2
Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2
1
2
National Taiwan University
NVIDIA
{f07942077, ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw, chienyiw@nvidia.com

Abstract

With access to web-scale training data (e.g., LAION5B [43]), deep learning has demonstrated remarkable
achievements across computer vision [19, 18, 41] and natural language understanding [12, 54, 2]. However, in realworld scenarios, user data is typically scattered across various domains, such as hospital sites or edge devices. Due to
increasing risks of privacy breaches and stricter privacy protection regulations [9], centralized learning schemes are not

Client N

(a) FedAvg
Prompt
Generator

Client 1

…

1. Introduction

…

Federated learning (FL) emerges as a decentralized
learning framework which trains models from multiple distributed clients without sharing their data to preserve privacy. Recently, large-scale pre-trained models (e.g., Vision
Transformer) have shown a strong capability of deriving
robust representations. However, the data heterogeneity
among clients, the limited computation resources, and the
communication bandwidth restrict the deployment of largescale models in FL frameworks. To leverage robust representations from large-scale models while enabling efficient
model personalization for heterogeneous clients, we propose a novel personalized FL framework of client-specific
Prompt Generation (pFedPG), which learns to deploy a
personalized prompt generator at the server for producing
client-specific visual prompts that efficiently adapts frozen
backbones to local data distributions. Our proposed framework jointly optimizes the stages of personalized prompt
adaptation locally and personalized prompt generation
globally. The former aims to train visual prompts that
adapt foundation models to each client, while the latter observes local optimization directions to generate personalized prompts for all clients. Through extensive experiments
on benchmark datasets, we show that our pFedPG is favorable against state-of-the-art personalized FL methods under various types of data heterogeneity, allowing computation and communication efficient model personalization.

Client 1

Client N

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) FedAvg and (b) our approach.
Instead of updating and transporting entire models θ, our FL
method learns to generate personalized prompts P by implicitly
e − P for efficient
observing local optimization directions ∆P = P
model personalization on top of frozen foundation models.

preferable. With the aim of collaboratively training models without exposing users’ private data, Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a prominent distributed learning framework and has garnered growing research interest.
This privacy-preserving learning paradigm has been widely
adopted in applications like medical image diagnosis [6],
face recognition [31], and person re-identification [57].
Without the need of data sharing among clients, the
mainstream FL approach of FedAvg [34] learns a global
model by averaging model parameters trained on clients’
private data. However, data distributed in each client might
be heterogeneous in terms of domain discrepancy [29] or
imbalanced class distribution [26]. Sharing a global model
across heterogeneous data clients is prone to highly deviate
from their local distribution, leading to severe performance
degradation [44, 33]. Previous FL works [28, 26] propose
types of constraints (e.g., L2 [28] or contrastive regularization [26]) to prevent the local training to be divergent
from each other. To better handle the inevitable data het-

19159

