This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffDreamer: Towards Consistent Unsupervised Single-view Scene
Extrapolation with Conditional Diffusion Models
Shengqu Cai1,2⇤
Eric Ryan Chan1
Songyou Peng2,3
Mohamad Shahbazi2
2
2,4
Anton Obukhov
Luc Van Gool
Gordon Wetzstein1
1
Stanford University 2 ETH Zürich 3 MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 4 KU Leuven

Figure 1: DiffDreamer (Top) is a novel diffusion-based approach for scene extrapolation. It exhibits high spatio-temporal
consistency, a desired property missing in prior art, such as InfNat-0 [40] (Bottom). We check for consistency by extracting
keypoints from the sequences with COLMAP, resulting in point clouds of vastly different sizes and sparsity (Right).

Abstract
Scene extrapolation—the idea of generating novel views
by flying into a given image—is a promising, yet challenging task.
For each predicted frame, a joint inpainting
and 3D refinement problem has to be solved, which is ill
posed and includes a high level of ambiguity. Moreover,
training data for long-range scenes is difficult to obtain
and usually lacks sufficient views to infer accurate camera poses. We introduce DiffDreamer, an unsupervised
framework capable of synthesizing novel views depicting
a long camera trajectory while training solely on internetcollected images of nature scenes. Utilizing the stochastic nature of the guided denoising steps, we train the diffusion models to refine projected RGBD images but condition the denoising steps on multiple past and future frames
for inference. We demonstrate that image-conditioned diffusion models can effectively perform long-range scene extrapolation while preserving consistency significantly better
than prior GAN-based methods. DiffDreamer is a powerful
and efficient solution for scene extrapolation, producing impressive results despite limited supervision. Project page:
https://primecai.github.io/diffdreamer.

1. Introduction
3D content creation tools are the foundation of emerging metaverse applications, among many others. Current
approaches primarily rely on heavy manual labor, making
the process expensive and inefficient. We set out to make
3D content creation automated and accessible. More specifically, an important downstream task we approach is consistent scene extrapolation. Given a single image and a
long camera trajectory flying into the scene, the goal of
consistent scene extrapolation is to synthesize a multiviewconsistent 3D scene along the camera trajectory. In other
words, we want to teach a machine to hallucinate content
when flying into the image while maintaining multiview
consistency, thereby extrapolating the scene realistically.
Successfully addressing this task opens up a wide range of
potential applications in virtual reality, 3D content creation,
synthetic data creation, and 3D viewing platforms.
Consistent scene extrapolation is extremely challenging
as it tries to tackle two difficult tasks simultaneously: consistent single-view novel view synthesis (NVS) and longrange extrapolation. Consistent single-view novel view
synthesis has been studied for a long time. Many methCorresponding author: Shengqu Cai (shengqu@stanford.edu).

2139

