This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RICO: Regularizing the Unobservable for Indoor Compositional Reconstruction
Zizhang Li1 , Xiaoyang Lyu2 , Yuanyuan Ding1 , Mengmeng Wang1 , Yiyi Liao1 ,* Yong Liu1∗
1

Zhejiang University, 2 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Recently, neural implicit surfaces have become popular
for multi-view reconstruction. To facilitate practical applications like scene editing and manipulation, some works
extend the framework with semantic masks input for the
object-compositional reconstruction rather than the holistic perspective. Though achieving plausible disentanglement, the performance drops significantly when processing the indoor scenes where objects are usually partially
observed. We propose RICO to address this by regularizing the unobservable regions for indoor compositional
reconstruction. Our key idea is to first regularize the
smoothness of the occluded background, which then in
turn guides the foreground object reconstruction in unobservable regions based on the object-background relationship. Particularly, we regularize the geometry smoothness of occluded background patches. With the improved
background surface, the signed distance function and the
reversedly rendered depth of objects can be optimized to
bound them within the background range. Extensive experiments show our method outperforms other methods on synthetic and real-world indoor scenes and prove the effectiveness of proposed regularizations. The code is available at
https://github.com/kyleleey/RICO

Figure 1. Comparison of [37] (Top) and ours (Bottom). Different
objects are visualized in different colors. Previous reconstructions
are connected with large artifacts. Taking the partially observed
cubic object’s front and back views (in red and green rectangles
respectively) as an example, [37] can only get the visible surface,
while ours can complement the complete body.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D geometry from images is a fundamental problem in computer vision and has many downstream applications like VR/AR and game assets creation.
With the advance of neural implicit representations [20], recent reconstruction methods [25, 36, 41, 43] can recover accurate geometry from multi-view images. However, existing methods typically regard the whole scene as an entirety
and reconstruct everything altogether, thus preventing applications like scene editing. In indoor scenes with plenty of
reconfigurable objects, a disentangled object-compositional
reconstruction, i.e. decomposing the geometry into different
instantiated objects and background, can be more suitable
* Corresponding authors.

for further applications like moving the sofa in the scene.
In this paper, we aim to recover the room-level indoor
scenes with decomposed geometry of individual objects and
background. We assume that multi-view posed images and
semantic masks that assign different labels to each instantiated object and the background are given as input. Existing object-compositional methods [9, 45, 40] concentrate
more on the rendering performance rather than the underlying geometry, and thus can not be directly used for reconstruction. The most recent work ObjSDF [37] learns an
object-compositional signed distance function (SDF) field
by proposing a transform function between SDF values and
semantic logits. Specifically speaking, ObjSDF predicts
multiple SDF values at each 3D point for different seman-

17761

