This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoTIF: Learning Motion Trajectories with Local Implicit Neural
Functions for Continuous Space-Time Video Super-Resolution
Yi-Hsin Chen*

Si-Cun Chen*
Yi-Hsin Chen
Yen-Yu Lin
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan

Wen-Hsiao Peng

{yhchen12101, sicun.mapl, karta6120}.cs09@nycu.edu.tw
lin@cs.nycu.edu.tw wpeng@cs.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
This work addresses continuous space-time video superresolution (C-STVSR) that aims to up-scale an input video
both spatially and temporally by any scaling factors. One
key challenge of C-STVSR is to propagate information temporally among the input video frames. To this end, we
introduce a space-time local implicit neural function. It
has the striking feature of learning forward motion for a
continuum of pixels. We motivate the use of forward motion from the perspective of learning individual motion trajectories, as opposed to learning a mixture of motion trajectories with backward motion. To ease motion interpolation, we encode sparsely sampled forward motion extracted from the input video as the contextual input. Along
with a reliability-aware splatting and decoding scheme,
our framework, termed MoTIF, achieves the state-of-theart performance on C-STVSR. The source code of MoTIF
is available at https://github.com/sichun233746/MoTIF.

(a) VideoINR [6]

(b) MoTIF

1. Introduction
This work addresses continuous space-time video superresolution (C-STVSR). The task of C-STVSR is to increase
simultaneously the spatial resolution and temporal framerate of an input video by any scaling factors with only one
single model. It is to be distinguished from fixed-scale
space-time video super-resolution (F-STVSR), for which
a model is learned to perform space-time super-resolution
for only one specific spatiotemporal scale. As compared
to F-STVSR, C-STVSR is more flexible and practical in
real-world scenarios, which often call for up-scaling lowresolution and low-frame-rate videos of varied spatiotemporal resolutions on heterogeneous video-enabled devices.
C-STVSR remains largely under-explored. One trivial
solution to C-STVSR is to perform continuous video frame
interpolation [2, 11, 21, 20, 33], followed by interpolat* Both authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1: Illustrations of (a) VideoINR [6] and (b) MoTIF.
The red dash lines highlight their major differences.
ing individual video frames with continuous image superresolution [5, 34, 14], or the other way around. However,
their divide-and-conquer nature of treating C-STVSR as
two independent sub-tasks–i.e. temporal interpolation and
spatial super-resolution–misses the opportunity to attain the
best achievable performance. By leveraging the spatiotemporal information in an end-to-end optimized fashion, some
recent works [10, 31, 32, 9] for F-STVSR adopt a one-stage
approach, combining the extraction of individual frame features and the temporal aggregation of these features as a unified task. Nonetheless, these F-STVSR methods can hardly
be extended straightforwardly to C-STVSR.
Inspired by continuous image super-resolution [5, 34,
14], VideoINR [6] presents an early attempt at C-STVSR.
Given any query coordinates (x, y, t) in the continuous spa-

23131

