This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TRM-UAP: Enhancing the Transferability of Data-Free Universal Adversarial
Perturbation via Truncated Ratio Maximization
Yiran Liu, Xin Feng, Yunlong Wang, Wu Yang, Di Ming*
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Chongqing University of Technology
Chongqing, China
lyr199804@qq.com, {xfeng, ylwang, yangwu, diming}@cqut.edu.cn

Abstract
Aiming at crafting a single universal adversarial perturbation (UAP) to fool CNN models for various data samples, universal attack enables a more efficient and accurate evaluation for the robustness of CNN models. Early
universal attacks craft UAPs depending on data priors.
For more practical applications, the data-free universal attacks that make UAPs from random noises have aroused
much attention recently. However, existing data-free UAP
methods perturb all the CNN feature layers equally via
the maximization of the CNN activation, leading to poor
transferability. In this paper, we propose a novel datafree universal attack without depending on any real data
samples through truncated ratio maximization, which we
term as TRM-UAP. Specifically, different from the maximization of the positive activation in convolution layers,
we propose to optimize the UAP generation from the ratio of positive and negative activations. To further enhance the transferability of universal attack, TRM-UAP not
only performs the ratio maximization merely on low-level
generic features via the truncation strategy, but also incorporates a curriculum optimization algorithm that can
effectively learn the diversity of artificial images. Extensive experiments on the ImageNet dataset verify that TRMUAP achieves a state-of-the-art average fooling rate and
excellent transferability on different CNN models as compared to other data-free UAP methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/RandolphCarter0/TRMUAP.

1. Introduction
Early research [26] shows that tiny and imperceptible
perturbations can seriously disturb the prediction results of
deep neural networks (DNNs), especially for image recognition tasks [3]. Adversarial Examples (AEs), crafted by
adding tiny perturbations deliberately to benign samples,
* Corresponding Author: Di Ming

are not only imperceptible in computer vision tasks but also
prone to transfer among the DNN models. Therefore, AEs
have been regarded as a serious threat to DNN models since
the development of deep learning [1].
To explore the impact of AEs, many methods are proposed to craft the adversarial perturbation that is highly
transferable to various DNN models (i.e., with a high fooling rate on other DNN models). However, the AEs generated by these works are explicitly designed for some specific samples and often fail to perturb other samples that
are even from the same dataset. Different from the aforementioned image-specific attack, the universal attack that
generates image-agnostic universal adversarial perturbation
(UAP) was proposed in [16]. The UAP in a universal attack
setting is trained from prior knowledge, such as substitute
data, surrogate model, etc. By adding the UAP to benign
samples, universal attacks can generate numerous AEs all
together in a very short period. Furthermore, the universal
attack can fool most DNN models that are trained from similar datasets, and can greatly reduce the computational cost
of crafting AEs, making adversaries more applicable to real
scenarios than the image-specific attacks [4, 6, 34].
Whereas, no matter the image-specific attacks or the universal attacks, well-annotated training data (e.g., [21, 9, 7])
or substitute data (e.g., [16, 12, 22, 19]) is required to generate AEs. In practice, obtaining a well-labeled large-scale
dataset is challenging and costly, especially for some applications with critical security demand, where less prior
knowledge is available. Recently, researchers have investigated data-free universal attack methods [18, 17, 14, 20,
33], where AEs are generated directly from random noises
rather than data priors. Compared with previous methods
that disturb the gradient or maximize the classification loss
in data-dependent scenarios, current data-free UAP methods explore the feature-based perturbation, which tries to
maximize the activation (e.g., ReLU) of convolutional neural network (CNN) features. It is shown that feature-based
UAP methods achieved highly efficient and applicable universal attack without using any data priors [4, 6, 34]. How-

4762

