This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Benchmark for Chinese-English Scene Text Image Super-resolution
Jianqi Ma1,2 , Zhetong Liang2 , Wangmeng Xiang1 , Xi Yang1,2 , Lei Zhang1,2
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University; 2 OPPO Research
{csjma, cswmxiang, cslzhang, csxyang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, zhetongliang@163.com

Abstract
Scene Text Image Super-resolution (STISR) aims to recover high-resolution (HR) scene text images with visually pleasant and readable text content from the given lowresolution (LR) input. Most existing works focus on recovering English texts, which have relatively simple character structures, while little work has been done on the more
challenging Chinese texts with diverse and complex character structures. In this paper, we propose a real-world
Chinese-English benchmark dataset, namely Real-CE, for
the task of STISR with the emphasis on restoring structurally complex Chinese characters. The benchmark provides 1,935/783 real-world LR-HR text image pairs (contains 33,789 text lines in total) for training/testing in 2×
and 4× zooming modes, complemented by detailed annotations, including detection boxes and text transcripts. Moreover, we design an edge-aware learning method, which
provides structural supervision in image and feature domains, to effectively reconstruct the dense structures of Chinese characters. We conduct experiments on the proposed
Real-CE benchmark and evaluate the existing STISR models with and without our edge-aware loss. The benchmark, including data and source code, is available at
https://github.com/mjq11302010044/Real-CE.

1. Introduction
Text images are different from natural images in that the
main contents are composed of words and characters to express different meanings and ideas. Due to limited sensor resolution and long photographing distance, the captured text images often have degraded quality with blurry
and noisy contents, impairing the readability of the text.
Therefore, scene text image super-resolution (STISR) is demanded to reconstruct clear and legible text contents.
STISR has long been studied in the computer vision
community [30, 40, 36, 31]. The traditional STISR methods
investigate various priors on text restoration and hand-craft
the text super-resolution process [1, 8]. Since the manually designed priors cannot represent the complex text struc-

tures and degradation process, the traditional methods have
limited performance. Deep learning based STISR methods train convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on datasets
with low-resolution (LR) and high-resolution (HR) text image pairs, which can learn the complex text priors through
data and reconstruct high-quality text images.
In deep learning based STISR [30, 40, 36, 31], datasets
play an important role in model training and evaluation, because the image pairs encode the text transformation from
low to high resolution. In the early stage, synthetic datasets
are widely used [30, 40, 31], in which high-quality text
images are collected as HR ground truths, and the LR
images are generated by imposing synthetic degradations
(e.g., bicubic downsampling or blurring) on the HR images.
Since the real-world degradations are quite different from
the synthetic ones, the STISR models trained on the synthetic datasets have limited performance on real-world LR
text images. To alleviate this problem, Wang et al. [35] built
a real-world text image dataset called TextZoom. The LR
and HR text images in TextZoom are captured with different camera focal lengths and undergo the real-world degradation process. TextZoom provides a benchmark for the
STISR task, which allows standardized evaluation of STISR
methods in terms of text recognition precision.
Though the TextZoom dataset has largely facilitated the
research of real-world STISR [35, 4, 25, 6, 46, 26, 47], it
has some limitations. First, TextZoom only contains English texts composed of limited number of characters (i.e.,
26 letters) with simple stroke structures. As a result, models trained on TextZoom will produce inferior results on
structurally complex characters like Chinese. Examples are
shown in Figure 1(b). One can see that the model trained
on TextZoom produces visually unpleasant artifacts on the
reconstructed Chinese texts. This is because Chinese texts
have a much larger number of characters, and many of them
have complex structures. Thus, it is a more challenging
task for performing STISR on Chinese texts. Moreover,
TextZoom focuses on small and fixed-size text images (i.e.,
32 × 128), and thus the models trained on TextZoom cannot generalize to texts with various resolutions. Therefore,
new dataset and benchmark are highly demanded for the re-

19452

