This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Adverse-Weather-Component Suppression Network
via Weather Messenger and Adversarial Backpropagation
Yijun Yang1,2 , Angelica I. Aviles-Rivero3 , Huazhu Fu4 , Ye Liu5 , Weiming Wang6 , Lei Zhu1,2†
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 University of Cambridge
4
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
5
Tianjin University 6 Hong Kong Metropolitan University

Abstract
Although convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
been proposed to remove adverse weather conditions in single images using a single set of pre-trained weights, they
fail to restore weather videos due to the absence of temporal information. Furthermore, existing methods for removing adverse weather conditions (e.g., rain, fog, and snow)
from videos can only handle one type of adverse weather.
In this work, we propose the first framework for restoring
videos from all adverse weather conditions by developing
a video adverse-weather-component suppression network
(ViWS-Net). To achieve this, we first devise a weatheragnostic video transformer encoder with multiple transformer stages. Moreover, we design a long short-term temporal modeling mechanism for weather messenger to early
fuse input adjacent video frames and learn weather-specific
information. We further introduce a weather discriminator with gradient reversion, to maintain the weatherinvariant common information and suppress the weatherspecific information in pixel features, by adversarially predicting weather types. Finally, we develop a messengerdriven video transformer decoder to retrieve the residual
weather-specific feature, which is spatiotemporally aggregated with hierarchical pixel features and refined to predict the clean target frame of input videos. Experimental results, on benchmark datasets and real-world weather
videos, demonstrate that our ViWS-Net outperforms current state-of-the-art methods in terms of restoring videos
degraded by any weather condition.

1. Introduction
Adverse weather conditions (including rain, fog and
snow) often degrade the performance of outdoor vision
† Lei Zhu (leizhu@ust.hk) is the corresponding author.

systems, such as autonomous driving and traffic surveillance, by reducing environment visibility and corrupting
image/video content. Removing these adverse weather effects is challenging yet a promising task. While many
video dehazing/deraining/desnowing methods have been
proposed, they mainly address one type of weather degradation. As they require multiple models and sets of weights
for all adverse weather conditions, resulting in expensive
memory and computational costs, they are unsuitable for
real-time systems. Additionally, the system would have
to switch between a series of weather removal algorithms,
making the pipeline more complicated and less practical for
real-time systems.
Recently, Li et al. [18] proposed an All-in-One bad
weather removal network that can remove any weather condition from an image, making it the first algorithm to provide a generic solution for adverse weather removal. Following this problem setting, several single-image multiadverse-weather removal methods [8, 38] have been developed to remove the degradation effects by one model instance of a single encoder and single decoder. While significant progress has been witnessed for the single-image
multi-adverse-weather removal task, we believe that videolevel algorithms can achieve better results by utilizing the
temporal redundancy from neighboring frames to reduce the
inherent ill-posedness in restoration tasks.
Therefore, a generic framework that can transform an
image-level algorithm into its video-level counterpart is
highly valuable. However, two bottlenecks need to be addressed: 1) how to effectively maintain the temporal coherence of background details across video frames, and 2)
how to prevent the perturbation of multiple kinds of weather
across video frames.
To tackle the aforementioned bottlenecks, we present the
Video Adverse-Weather-Component Suppression Network
(ViWS-Net), the first video-level algorithm that can remove all adverse weather conditions with only one set of
13200

