This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Knowledge Distillation to Self-Knowledge Distillation: A Unified
Approach with Normalized Loss and Customized Soft Labels

1

Zhendong Yang1,2∗ Ailing Zeng2 Zhe Li3 Tianke Zhang1 Chun Yuan1† Yu Li2†
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School 2 International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yangzd21,ztk21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

axel.li@outlook.com

{zengailing, liyu}@idea.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge Distillation (KD) uses the teacher’s logits as
soft labels to guide the student, while self-KD does not need
a real teacher to require the soft labels. This work unifies the formulations of the two tasks by decomposing and
reorganizing the generic KD loss into a Normalized KD
(NKD) loss and customized soft labels for both target class
(image’s category) and non-target classes named Universal Self-KD (USKD). We decompose the KD loss and find
the non-target loss from it forces the student’s non-target
logits to match the teacher’s, but the sum of the two nontarget logits is different, preventing them from being identical. NKD normalizes the non-target logits to equalize their
sum. It can be generally used for KD and self-KD to better
use the soft labels for distillation. USKD generates customized soft labels for both target and non-target classes
without a teacher. It smooths the target logit of the student
as the soft target label and uses the rank of the intermediate feature to generate the soft non-target labels with Zipf’s
law. For KD with teachers, NKD achieves state-of-the-art
performance on CIFAR-100 and ImageNet, boosting the ImageNet Top-1 accuracy of Res-18 from 69.90% to 71.96%
with a Res-34 teacher. For self-KD without teachers, USKD
is the first method that can be effectively applied to both
CNN and ViT models with negligible additional time and
memory cost, resulting in new state-of-the-art results, such
as 1.17% and 0.55% accuracy gains on ImageNet for MobileNet and DeiT-Tiny, respectively. Code is available at
https://github.com/yzd-v/cls_KD.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have significantly advanced the performance in many tasks [8, 9,
* This work was done when Zhendong was an intern at IDEA.
† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed NKD and USKD for distillation loss calculations. NKD normalizes the non-target logits, using
the soft labels more effectively, and achieves better performance.
Meanwhile, USKD sets customized soft labels for both target and
non-target classes, and can be applied to both CNNs and ViTs.

27, 29]. In general, a larger model performing better needs
more computing resources. On the other hand, smaller
models have lower computation complexity but are less
competitive than larger models. To bridge this gap and
improve the performance of smaller models, knowledge
distillation (KD) has been proposed [11]. The core idea
of KD is to employ the teacher’s prediction logits as soft
labels to guide the student. Self-knowledge distillation
(self-KD) [33, 47] is inspired by the knowledge distillation
method, but it does not require an actual teacher. Instead,
it designs soft labels through auxiliary branches or special
distribution. The similarity between KD and self-KD is that
they utilize soft labels for distillation loss, while the key
difference is in how they obtain the soft labels. This paper
aims to 1) improve the utilization of soft labels for distillation loss and 2) propose a general and effective method to
obtain customized soft labels for self-KD. The targets make
us obtain the soft labels with a teacher and use our modified
distillation loss for better performance. Alternatively, when
we lack a teacher, we can use the proposed self-KD method

17185

