This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MRM: Masked Relation Modeling for Medical Image Pre-Training with Genetics
Qiushi Yang1
1

Wuyang Li1

City University of Hong Kong

2

Baopu Li3

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

{qsyang2-c, wuyangli2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk.

Yixuan Yuan1,2 *
3

Independent Researcher

bpli.cuhk@gmail.com

yxyuan@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Modern deep learning techniques on automatic multimodal medical diagnosis rely on massive expert annotations, which is time-consuming and prohibitive. Recent
masked image modeling (MIM)-based pre-training methods
have witnessed impressive advances for learning meaningful representations from unlabeled data and transferring to
downstream tasks. However, these methods focus on natural images and ignore the specific properties of medical
data, yielding unsatisfying generalization performance on
downstream medical diagnosis. In this paper, we aim to
leverage genetics to boost image pre-training and present
a masked relation modeling (MRM) framework. Instead
of explicitly masking input data in previous MIM methods
leading to loss of disease-related semantics, we design relation masking to mask out token-wise feature relation in both
self- and cross-modality levels, which preserves intact semantics within the input and allows the model to learn rich
disease-related information. Moreover, to enhance semantic relation modeling, we propose relation matching to align
the sample-wise relation between the intact and masked features. The relation matching exploits inter-sample relation
by encouraging global constraints in the feature space to
render sufficient semantic relation for feature representation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed
framework is simple yet powerful, achieving state-of-theart transfer performance on various downstream diagnosis
tasks. Codes are available at https://github.com/
CityU-AIM-Group/MRM .

1. Introduction
In the medical diagnosis [44, 34, 38, 28, 6, 5], the largescale multimodal biobank data, e.g., images and genetics, is necessary for a reliable diagnosis, overcoming the
limited scale and disease information of a single-modality
* Corresponding author.

This work was supported by Hong Kong Research Grants Council
(RGC) General Research Fund 14220622, 14204321, and Innovation and
Technology Commission-Innovation and Technology Fund ITS/100/20.

Figure 1. Comparison of different masking strategies on natural and medical data. (a): Existing MIM methods mask out input natural images and infer the missing content to learn semantic
representations via reconstruction task. (b): Recent pre-training
approaches for disease diagnosis explicitly employ MIM on input medical data (e.g., medical images and genome), whilst they
are prone to lose tiny disease regions and cause non-tractable reconstruction. (c): Our method masks token-wise feature relation
across multimodal data and matches sample-wise relation between
the intact and masked features, preserving intact semantic regions
and enriching relation information.

dataset. However, the prohibitive expert annotations of
large-scale datasets make it difficult to train a conventional
deep model [44, 45, 41, 46, 47]. Particularly, in this multimodal scenario, the requirements of the experts in various
medical fields prevent enough annotation access, severely
limiting the grounding of the automatic diagnosis system.
To address this, the most prospering trend [16, 43, 4,
34, 13, 35, 36, 12, 27] is self-supervised pre-training, e.g.,
masked image modeling (MIM) [16, 43, 13, 42], aiming to
train a label-free model with adequate generalization capacity. Existing MIM methods [16, 43, 4, 25, 13, 42, 49] mask
out a high portion of patches within input images and infer the missing content, as suggested in Figure 1 (a). They
make use of contextual information to glance the semantics
and reconstruct the entire images, which performs a maskand-reconstruct task to pre-train the model without annotation and transfer meaningful representations to various

21452

