This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Is Imitation All You Need? Generalized Decision-Making with Dual-Phase
Training
2,6

3

1

Yao Wei ,Yanchao Sun , Ruijie Zheng3 , Sai Vemprala5 , Rogerio Bonatti , Shuhang Chen 5
1
2,6
5
1?
Ratnesh Madaan , Zhongjie Ba , Ashish Kapoor and Shuang Ma
1
Microsoft 2 Zhejiang University 3 University of Maryland ,College Park
5
Scaled Foundations 6 Jiaxing Research Institute, Zhejiang University
?

Project lead. Corresponding to yunyikristy@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce DualMind, a generalist agent designed to
tackle various decision-making tasks that addresses challenges posed by current methods, such as overfitting behaviors and dependence on task-specific fine-tuning. DualMind
uses a novel “Dual-phase” training strategy that emulates
how humans learn to act in the world. The model first learns
fundamental common knowledge through a self-supervised
objective tailored for control tasks and then learns how to
make decisions based on different contexts through imitating behaviors conditioned on given prompts. DualMind
can handle tasks across domains, scenes, and embodiments
using just a single set of model weights and can execute
zero-shot prompting without requiring task-specific finetuning. We evaluate DualMind on MetaWorld [40] and
Habitat [31] through extensive experiments and demonstrate its superior generalizability compared to previous
techniques, outperforming other generalist agents by over
50% and 70% on Habitat and MetaWorld, respectively. On
the 45 tasks in MetaWorld, DualMind achieves over 30
tasks at a 90% success rate. Our source code is available
at https://github.com/yunyikristy/DualMind.

1. Introduction
Transformer-based models, combined with large-scale
data, have shown success in generalizing across various
tasks in both language and vision. Notable examples include BERT [11], GPT [28], MAE [16], CLIP [27] and
Flamingo [1], etc. Recently, there has been a significant focus on developing such general-purpose models for sequential decision-making and control tasks, such as GATO [32].
The prominent approach is to train a decoder-only Transformer with Imitation Learning (IL) on massive datasets
from all targeted tasks. By training with prompts, the model
can perform zero-shot inference with just task prompts.

Phase I: Self-supervised learning on
state-action interactions from
diverse episodes

DualMind

Task 1
Task 2

Phase II: Imitation Learning from
prompts conditions

Task 3
Task 4
Task N

Navigate to:
Navigate to:
Navigate to the <sofa>
“open the door”

Figure 1: A high-level overview of DualMind’s Dual-phase
training scheme.
However, such IL-based approaches to general-purpose
models face limitations when it comes to sequential control tasks, as highlighted below: (1) Memorizing behaviors hinders generalization to diverse tasks: Imitating expert behaviors can lead to memorization and over-fitting of
specific behaviors that may not be applicable to new situations or variations of tasks, thus limiting the model’s ability to generalize. This limitation is particularly challenging
when dealing with a wide range of decision-making tasks
that have vastly different configurations, transition functions, and state and action spaces. (2) Dependence on highquality data impedes practical application: IL methods rely
heavily on the availability of high-quality expert demonstrations, which can be difficult and expensive to obtain. When
the available data is of low quality or not representative of
the target task, the performance of the model may suffer.
In light of the aforementioned limitations, selfsupervised pretraining has emerged as a viable solution.
By focusing on learning common underlying information,
a pretrained model can be better equipped to handle diverse
tasks. Recently, a study known as SMART [36] has demonstrated the potential of self-supervised pretraining for multi-

16221

