This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DDG-Net: Discriminability-Driven Graph Network for Weakly-supervised
Temporal Action Localization
Xiaojun Tang1 , Junsong Fan23 , Chuanchen Luo2 , Zhaoxiang Zhang234 , Man Zhang1∗, and Zongyuan Yang1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS, HongKong, China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, UCAS, China
2

{tangxiaojun, zhangman, yangzongyuan0}@bupt.edu.cn,
{junsong.fan, luochuanchen2017, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Weakly-supervised temporal action localization (WTAL)
is a practical yet challenging task. Due to large-scale
datasets, most existing methods use a network pretrained
in other datasets to extract features, which are not suitable
enough for WTAL. To address this problem, researchers design several modules for feature enhancement, which improve the performance of the localization module, especially modeling the temporal relationship between snippets. However, all of them omit that ambiguous snippets
deliver contradictory information, which would reduce the
discriminability of linked snippets. Considering this phenomenon, we propose Discriminability-Driven Graph Network (DDG-Net), which explicitly models ambiguous snippets and discriminative snippets with well-designed connections, preventing the transmission of ambiguous information and enhancing the discriminability of snippet-level representations. Additionally, we propose feature consistency
loss to prevent the assimilation of features and drive the
graph convolution network to generate more discriminative
representations. Extensive experiments on THUMOS14 and
ActivityNet1.2 benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of
DDG-Net, establishing new state-of-the-art results on both
datasets. Source code is available at https://github.
com/XiaojunTang22/ICCV2023-DDGNet.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization (TAL) is a significant yet
challenging task in video understanding. It aims to localize the start and end timestamps of the action proposals of interest and recognize their categories in untrimmed
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. An example of ambiguous snippets. The orange and
green curves denote the attention weights generated by RGB and
optical flow separately. The black horizontal line represents the
threshold.

videos [2, 49, 54]. It has attracted great attention in
academia and industry due to potential applications for
video retrieval, surveillance, and anomaly detection. Fullsupervised temporal action localization [6, 31, 32, 46, 50,
56, 66, 68] has made significant progress in recent years.
However, these methods require frame-level annotations,
which are time-consuming and labor-intensive for largescale datasets. Therefore, a number of researchers pay essential attention to weakly-supervised temporal action lo-

6622

