This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LaPE: Layer-adaptive Position Embedding for Vision Transformers
with Independent Layer Normalization
Runyi Yu1,3∗
1

Zhennan Wang2∗ Yinhuai Wang1∗ Kehan Li1,3
Haoyi Duan5 Xiangyang Ji4
Jie Chen1,2,3B

Chang Liu4

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China
4
Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China
jiechen2019@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Shared LN

Position information is critical for Vision Transformers
(VTs) due to the permutation-invariance of self-attention
operations. A typical way to introduce position information
is adding the absolute Position Embedding (PE) to patch
embedding before entering VTs. However, this approach
operates the same Layer Normalization (LN) to token embedding and PE, and delivers the same PE to each layer.
This results in restricted and monotonic PE across layers,
as the shared LN affine parameters are not dedicated to
PE, and the PE cannot be adjusted on a per-layer basis.
To overcome these limitations, we propose using two independent LNs for token embeddings and PE in each layer,
and progressively delivering PE across layers. By implementing this approach, VTs will receive layer-adaptive and
hierarchical PE. We name our method as Layer-adaptive
Position Embedding, abbreviated as LaPE, which is simple, effective, and robust. Extensive experiments on image
classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation
demonstrate that LaPE significantly outperforms the default
PE method. For example, LaPE improves +1.06% for CCT
on CIFAR100, +1.57% for DeiT-Ti on ImageNet-1K, +0.7
box AP and +0.5 mask AP for ViT-Adapter-Ti on COCO,
and +1.37 mIoU for tiny Segmenter on ADE20K. This is
remarkable considering LaPE only increases negligible parameters, memory, and computational cost.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformer (VT) has become one of the most
popular research topics due to its superior performance on
∗ Equal Contribution.
B Corresponding author.
https://github.com/Ingrid725/LaPE

Project page:

Token
Embedding

Visualization of PE correlation
1-D sinusoidal PE

⊕

Position
Embedding

layer1

2

3

4

5

LN

Monotonic and Unadjusted

(a) Default PE joining method
Independent LN
Token
Embedding

LNT

Position
Embedding

LNP

Visualization of PE correlation
1-D sinusoidal PE

layer1

2

3

4

5

⊕

Hierarchical and Layer-adaptive

(b) The proposed LaPE

Figure 1. A brief illustration of the default PE joining method
and our proposed LaPE. We take T2T-ViT-7 with 1-D sinusoidal
PE as an example, and we visualize the position correlation of first
5 layers to explain the emphasis and advantages of our method.
(a) By default, token embedding and PE are coupled together and
treated with the same Layer Normalization (LN) in each layer.
This yields monotonic and limited position correlations. (b) We
argue that each layer’s token embedding and PE need independent
LNs (LNT , LNP ). In this way, the expressiveness of PE is enhanced and the position correlations are adjusted into hierarchical
and layer-adaptive.

various computer vision tasks, such as image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation. ViT
[10] is the first pure transformer model for image classification, which outperforms CNNs when applied to large
training data. Since then, many works based on ViT [10]
have sprung up. Lots of work improves the tokenization
[14, 44], self-attention mechanism [23, 45, 35, 9], archite-

5886

