This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CleanCLIP: Mitigating Data Poisoning Attacks in Multimodal Contrastive
Learning
Hritik Bansal *
UCLA

Nishad Singhi *
University of Tübingen

Yu Yang †
UCLA

hbansal@ucla.edu

nishad.singhi@student.uni-tuebingen.de

yuyang@cs.ucla.edu

Fan Yin †
UCLA

Aditya Grover ‡
UCLA

Kai-Wei Chang ‡
UCLA

fanyin20@cs.ucla.edu

adityag@cs.ucla.edu

kwchang@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Multimodal contrastive pretraining has been used to
train multimodal representation models, such as CLIP, on
large amounts of paired image-text data. However, previous studies have revealed that such models are vulnerable
to backdoor attacks. Specifically, when trained on backdoored examples, CLIP learns spurious correlations between the embedded backdoor trigger and the target label,
aligning their representations in the joint embedding space.
Injecting even a small number of poisoned examples, such
as 75 examples in 3 million pretraining data, can significantly manipulate the model’s behavior, making it difficult
to detect or unlearn such correlations. To address this issue, we propose CleanCLIP, a finetuning framework that
weakens the learned spurious associations introduced by
backdoor attacks by independently re-aligning the representations for individual modalities. We demonstrate that
unsupervised finetuning using a combination of multimodal
contrastive and unimodal self-supervised objectives for individual modalities can significantly reduce the impact of
the backdoor attack. Additionally, we show that supervised
finetuning on task-specific labeled image data removes the
backdoor trigger from the CLIP vision encoder. We show
empirically that CleanCLIP maintains model performance
on benign examples while erasing a range of backdoor attacks on multimodal contrastive learning. Code and pretrained checkpoints are available at https://github.
com/nishadsinghi/CleanCLIP.

1. Introduction
In the development of AI, a long-standing goal has
been to learn general-purpose representations from diverse
* Equal Contribution

† Equal Contribution

‡ Equal Advising

modalities [3]. In this regard, multimodal contrastive methods such as CLIP [45], ALIGN [26], and BASIC [42] have
enabled joint representations of images and text by training
on large-scale, noisy, and uncurated image-text pairs from
the web. During training, the model brings the representations of matched image-text pairs closer in the embedding
space while pushing the representations of unmatched pairs
further apart. Remarkably, these models achieve impressive
zero-shot classification performance on ImageNet [14] and
demonstrate robustness to natural distribution shift datasets
like ImageNet-V2 [46], ImageNet-R [23] and ImageNetSketch [54], all without any access to labeled data during
representation learning, also known as pretraining.
Despite the successes of multimodal contrastive learning, recent studies by [6, 5] have shown that these models are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Poisoning even a
small fraction of the pretraining data (e.g., 75 out of 3 million training samples) with specialized triggers injected into
randomly selected images and replacing their matched captions with proxy captions for the target label, e.g., “a photo
of a banana”, where ‘banana’ is the target label, can result
in a backdoor attack (Figure 4a). During pretraining on poisoned data, the model minimizes the multimodal contrastive
loss by bringing the representations of the poisoned images
with the backdoor trigger close to the text representation of
the matched captions containing the target label. As a result, CLIP learns the multimodal spurious co-occurrence
between the presence of the backdoor trigger in the image
and the target label in the caption (Figure 4b).
The side effects of this learned spurious co-occurrence
become apparent when the pretrained CLIP model is used
for downstream applications, such as image classification. To illustrate, we sample a subset of 500 clean images C = {I1 , . . . , I500 }, belonging to different classes in
the ImageNet-1K validation set, and create a dirty subset
D = {Iˆ1 , . . . , Iˆ500 } by embedding a backdoor trigger tg

112

