This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PolicyCleanse: Backdoor Detection and Mitigation for
Competitive Reinforcement Learning
Junfeng Guo1
1

Ang Li2

Lixu Wang3

Cong Liu4

University of Maryland, College Park 2 Simular Research 3 Northwestern University 4 UC Riverside
{junfeng.guo}@utdallas.edu

{me@angli}.ai

{lixuwang2025}@u.northwestern.edu

{congl}@ucr.edu

Abstract
While real-world applications of reinforcement learning
(RL) are becoming popular, the security and robustness of
RL systems are worthy of more attention and exploration. In
particular, recent works have revealed that, in a multi-agent
RL environment, backdoor trigger actions can be injected
into a victim agent (a.k.a. Trojan agent), which can result in
a catastrophic failure as soon as it sees the backdoor trigger
action. To ensure the security of RL agents against malicious
backdoors, in this work, we propose the problem of Backdoor Detection in a multi-agent competitive reinforcement
learning system, with the objective of detecting Trojan agents
as well as the corresponding potential trigger actions, and
further trying to mitigate their Trojan behavior. In order to
solve this problem, we propose PolicyCleanse that is
based on the property that the activated Trojan agent’s accumulated rewards degrade noticeably after several timesteps.
Along with PolicyCleanse, we also design a machine
unlearning-based approach that can effectively mitigate the
detected backdoor. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
the proposed methods can accurately detect Trojan agents,
and outperform existing backdoor mitigation baseline approaches by at least 3% in winning rate across various types
of agents and environments.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is proposed to train smart
agents to take actions that can help them to acquire maximum accumulative rewards in a given environment. Such
incentive-driven properties make people believe RL can learn
general human-level intelligent agents [34], and in recent
years, RL has demonstrated its effectiveness in various applications and fields such as computer vision [2, 18, 36], game
playing [37], robotics technology [28], and traffic control

[30]. Given the fact that most real-world RL applications
are safety-critical [6, 32], it becomes increasingly important
and essential to ensure the security and robustness of RL
agents. Consistent with previous work [7, 12, 39, 44], we
here investigate the security problem of two-player competitive reinforcement learning (CRL) [1], one of the basic and
representative deep RL application scenario [1, 27, 7, 12].
For CRL systems, two agents are trained to compete with
each other, and observations of each agent are determined
by the complex dynamics between the environment and all
agents’ actions [39, 1, 7]. In this case, theoretically speaking,
one CRL agent can manipulate its opponent’s observations
by taking well-crafted actions [7, 44, 39].
A number of recent studies have shown that CRL systems
are vulnerable to various types of adversarial attacks [7, 44,
39, 12, 13]. One of the most representative attacks is the
backdoor attack (e.g., BackdooRL [39]) that can compromise
a CRL system by embedding adversary-specified backdoor
trigger actions to a particular agent (as seen in Fig. 1). More
specifically, in the training phase, BackdooRL embeds a
sequence of trigger actions into a victim agent, which we
call the Trojan agent. Then during inference, if an agent
is compromised to take inconspicuous trigger actions, the
Trojan agent fails as soon as it observes such trigger actions.
Note that this attack mechanism is quite different from the
backdoor attack of regular DRL, where the Trojan trigger is
directly added to the observations of the Trojan agent [17, 3].
To better ensure the security of CRL, in this work, we consider a problem named Backdoor Detection in CRL, which
aims at detecting and mitigating the potential backdoor risk
associated with a pre-trained RL agent. The problem is much
more challenging than the case of conventional RL as the
complexity of dynamics between the agents and the environment in multi-agent scenarios is too high to model and
analyze. What’s more, unlike the backdoor detection problem in supervised learning [10, 38, 11, 23, 5], the backdoor

4699

