This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Vision-and-Language Navigation from YouTube Videos
Kunyang Lin1 2 * Peihao Chen1 * Diwei Huang1 Thomas H. Li6 Mingkui Tan1 5† Chuang Gan3 4
1
3

South China University of Technology, 2 Information Technology R&D Innovation Center of Peking University,

UMass Amherst, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 5 Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education,
6

Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School

Abstract

tion ability of agents to unseen environments. Existing
VLN methods attempt to cope with this challenge via selfsupervised pre-training on vision-and-language datasets.
As shown in Figure 1 (a), some previous works [30, 19, 36,
7] learn the agents on simulated navigation environments
and manual-labeled data. The other works [14, 13, 42] seek
to construct path-instruction pairs by using web image data,
which is shown in Figure 1 (b). Despite their promising
performance, existing agents still suffer from the following limitations. 1) Training on simulated datasets is limited
to a restricted number of environments. 2) Constructing a
trajectory by simply concatenating web images leads to unreasonable room layouts, which hamper the agent to learn
layout reasoning ability. As a result, VLN agents trained on
such data are brittle to adapt to unseen environments.
Fortunately, there are massive house tour videos on
YouTube, providing real navigation experiences and layout
information but are still under-explored. We can be naturally inspired to let an agent learn VLN ability from such
videos, thereby addressing the limitations of existing methods. An intuitive way is to model the navigation experiences as path-instruction pairs to train the agent. Motivated
by this, we propose a “Lily” agent who Learns Vision-andLanguage Navigation from YouTube Videos. Speciﬁcally,
we ﬁrst develop an in-domain pre-training dataset from
house tour YouTube videos, namely YouTube-VLN, which
comprises VLN-like path-instruction pairs. Our YouTubeVLN dataset has the advantages of diverse environments,
real layouts, and native actions1 , reducing the domain gap
with VLN datasets, as illustrated in Figure 1 (c). Then, we
pre-train the agent using these path-instruction pairs. Beneﬁting from in-domain pre-training on our proposed dataset,
our agent thus generalizes well to unseen environments.
Constructing and utilizing such a dataset, however, is
still far from trivial work and remains an open problem due
to the following challenges. 1) As the nodes in a trajectory are expected to be diverse and informative, it is hard to
determine the locations of trajectory nodes from massive
video frames and represent the visual content in a node.

Vision-and-language navigation (VLN) requires an embodied agent to navigate in realistic 3D environments using
natural language instructions. Existing VLN methods suffer
from training on small-scale environments or unreasonable
path-instruction datasets, limiting the generalization to unseen environments. There are massive house tour videos on
YouTube, providing abundant real navigation experiences
and layout information. However, these videos have not
been explored for VLN before. In this paper, we propose
to learn an agent from these videos by creating a largescale dataset which comprises reasonable path-instruction
pairs from house tour videos and pre-training the agent on
it. To achieve this, we have to tackle the challenges of automatically constructing path-instruction pairs and exploiting
real layout knowledge from raw and unlabeled videos. To
address these, we ﬁrst leverage an entropy-based method
to construct the nodes of a path trajectory. Then, we
propose an action-aware generator for generating instructions from unlabeled trajectories. Last, we devise a trajectory judgment pretext task to encourage the agent to mine
the layout knowledge. Experimental results show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on two popular benchmarks (R2R and REVERIE). Code is available at
https://github.com/JeremyLinky/YouTube-VLN

1. Introduction
An important goal of embodied artiﬁcial intelligence is
to develop agents that can interact with humans in natural
language to carry out real-world tasks. Toward this goal,
vision-and-language navigation (VLN) [1] is a rudimentary
artiﬁcial intelligence task, requiring an indoor agent to navigate in unseen environments following natural instructions.
VLN has attracted widespread attention in the ﬁelds of computer vision and robotics due to its promising applications
such as in-home robots [54] and warehouse assistants [29].
One of the key challenges of VLN is the generaliza* Equal contribution. Email: {imkunyanglin, phchencs}@gmail.com
† Corresponding author. Email: mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn

1 The execution actions that objectively exist

8317

