This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AesPA-Net: Aesthetic Pattern-Aware Style Transfer Networks
Kibeom Hong 1,3,4
Seogkyu Jeon1
Junsoo Lee4
Namhyuk Ahn4
Kunhee Kim2,4
1
4
1
Pilhyeon Lee
Daesik Kim
Youngjung Uh
Hyeran Byun1*
Yonsei University

2

3

KAIST AI

SwatchOn

4

NAVER WEBTOON AI

Pattern Repeatability (ߙ௦௧௬௟௘ ) ՛

1

Content & Style

(a) Ours

(b) StyTr ଶ [9] (c) IEContraAST [4] (d) AdaAttN [24]

(e) MAST [10]

(f) SANet [29]

(g) AdaIN [15]

(h) WCT [22]

Figure 1. Stylization results. Given input pairs (a ﬁxed content and three references), we compare our method (a) with both attention-based
transfer methods (b-f) and global statistic-based methods (g-h). While previous works fail to generate plausible results with various style,
our model successfully conducts artistic style transfer well regardless of different style pattern. (Best viewed in zoomed and color.)

Abstract
To deliver the artistic expression of the target style, recent studies exploit the attention mechanism owing to its
ability to map the local patches of the style image to the
corresponding patches of the content image. However, because of the low semantic correspondence between arbitrary content and artworks, the attention module repeatedly
abuses speciﬁc local patches from the style image, resulting in disharmonious and evident repetitive artifacts. To
overcome this limitation and accomplish impeccable artistic style transfer, we focus on enhancing the attention mechanism and capturing the rhythm of patterns that organize
the style. In this paper, we introduce a novel metric, namely
pattern repeatability, that quantiﬁes the repetition of patterns in the style image. Based on the pattern repeatability, we propose Aesthetic Pattern-Aware style transfer Networks (AesPA-Net) that discover the sweet spot of local and
global style expressions. In addition, we propose a novel
self-supervisory task to encourage the attention mechanism
* Corresponding author
 First author email

1
22758

to learn precise and meaningful semantic correspondence.
Lastly, we introduce the patch-wise style loss to transfer
the elaborate rhythm of local patterns. Through qualitative and quantitative evaluations, we verify the reliability of
the proposed pattern repeatability that aligns with human
perception, and demonstrate the superiority of the proposed
framework. All codes and pre-trained weights are available
at Kibeom-Hong/AesPA-Net.

1. Introduction
Style transfer aims to render the content of a source image using the elements of a style image. Although the
concepts of content and style cannot be rigorously deﬁned,
the research community has been building agreeable ideas,
considering repeating elements such as brush strokes, color
maps, patterns, and certain dominant shapes to be style [11].
Since Gatys et al. [11] pioneered the Neural Style Transfer by using the Gram matrix of deep feature activations
as the style representation, previous works have shown surprising performance in Artistic Style Transfer (AST) by employing the global transformation methods [22, 15, 2] and
patch-wise swapping approaches [5, 33, 17] that leverage

