This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Hyperbolic Attention Network for Fine Hand-object Reconstruction
Zhiying Leng1,2 , Shun-Cheng Wu2 , Mahdi Saleh2 , Antonio Montanaro3 , Hao Yu2 , Yin Wang1 ,
Nassir Navab2 , Xiaohui Liang1,4 *, Federico Tombari2
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, China
2

Computer Aided Medical Procedures, Technical University of Munich, Germany
3
4

Politecnico di Torino, Italy

Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China

{zhiyingleng,liang xiaohui}@buaa.edu.cn, {shuncheng.wu,m.saleh}@tum.de, tombari@in.tum.de

Image embeddings
in Euclidean space

1. Introduction
3D hand-object reconstruction from monocular RGB images is a fundamental task in computer vision. Given a
single RGB image of a hand interacting with an object,
it aims at predicting a 3D mesh of both the hand and the
object under the correct pose and precisely modeling the
hand-object interaction. Although the 3D posed reconstruction has a wide application in human-machine interaction,
robotic grasping/learning, and augmented reality, the chal* corresponding author

Image features
of hand

E

D

Image embeddings
in Hyperbolic space

Image features
of object

DHANet

Reconstructing both objects and hands in 3D from a single RGB image is complex. Existing methods rely on manually defined hand-object constraints in Euclidean space,
leading to suboptimal feature learning. Compared with Euclidean space, hyperbolic space better preserves the geometric properties of meshes thanks to its exponentiallygrowing space distance, which amplifies the differences between the features based on similarity. In this work, we
propose the first precise hand-object reconstruction method
in hyperbolic space, namely Dynamic Hyperbolic Attention
Network (DHANet), which leverages intrinsic properties
of hyperbolic space to learn representative features. Our
method that projects mesh and image features into a unified
hyperbolic space includes two modules, i.e. dynamic hyperbolic graph convolution and image-attention hyperbolic
graph convolution. With these two modules, our method
learns mesh features with rich geometry-image multi-modal
information and models better hand-object interaction. Our
method provides a promising alternative for fine handobject reconstruction in hyperbolic space. Extensive experiments on three public datasets demonstrate that our method
outperforms most state-of-the-art methods.

Existing methods

Abstract

E

D

Input image

Figure 1. Colored dots indicate the features of the hand and the
object. Existing methods learn image features in Euclidean space
but struggle to model the contact region, resulting in separated
colored dots. Our DHANet learns mesh and image features in
hyperbolic space, better modeling the hand-object interaction that
ensures the distribution of colored dots preserves the hand-object
contact relationship. And our method results in a more accurate
reconstruction, highlighted by the red circles.

lenges of this task still remain in two aspects: 1) Reconstructing meshes with the pose and scale consistent with
the input; 2) Fulfilling the physiological rules on hands and
physical characteristics of hand-object interaction.
Existing methods deal with hand-object images or
meshes in Euclidean space [17, 28, 21, 15, 9, 51, 42, 46, 5,
14], which learn image features and regress model parameters of hand and object from Euclidean embeddings. To
accurately reconstruct meshes of hands and objects, especially around the area of mutual occlusion, existing methods [28, 21, 15, 42, 9, 51] optimize the reconstruction by
taking the physical interaction between the hand and the
object as a cue. These methods can be broadly divided into

14894

