This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Confidence-based Visual Dispersal for Few-shot
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Hui Chen2 * Zijia Lin1 Sicheng Zhao2 Guiguang Ding1,2 *
School of Software, Tsinghua University
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
3
Hangzhou Zhuoxi Institute of Brain and Intelligence
Yizhe Xiong1,2,3

1

{xiongyizhe2001, jichenhui2012, schzhao}@gmail.com
linzijia07@tsinghua.org.cn dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation aims to transfer
knowledge from a fully-labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain. However, in real-world scenarios,
providing abundant labeled data even in the source domain
can be infeasible due to the difficulty and high expense of
annotation. To address this issue, recent works consider the
Few-shot Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (FUDA) where
only a few source samples are labeled, and conduct knowledge transfer via self-supervised learning methods. Yet existing methods generally overlook that the sparse label setting hinders learning reliable source knowledge for transfer. Additionally, the learning difficulty difference in target samples is different but ignored, leaving hard target
samples poorly classified. To tackle both deficiencies, in
this paper, we propose a novel Confidence-based Visual
Dispersal Transfer learning method (C-VisDiT) for FUDA.
Specifically, C-VisDiT consists of a cross-domain visual dispersal strategy that transfers only high-confidence source
knowledge for model adaptation and an intra-domain visual dispersal strategy that guides the learning of hard target samples with easy ones. We conduct extensive experiments on Office-31, Office-Home, VisDA-C, and DomainNet benchmark datasets and the results demonstrate that
the proposed C-VisDiT significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art FUDA methods. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/Bostoncake/C-VisDiT.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved considerably high performance in various computer vision tasks, such as instance
recognition [13, 51], semantic segmentation [23, 21, 2], and
* Corresponding author.

object detection [32, 6, 22]. Despite the remarkable success, well-tuned deep models usually suffer from dramatic
performance drops when being applied in real-world scenarios because of the domain gap issue [38, 39, 54, 44],
i.e. the shift between the learnt distribution and the testing
distribution. To cope with such performance degradation,
researchers have been dedicated to unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) [23, 9, 39, 25] aiming at transferring the
learned knowledge from a labeled source domain to another
unlabeled target domain.
Though being promising, UDA assumes that a fullyannotated source domain can be conveniently accessed for
training. However, in some real-world scenarios, such an
assumption is violated, ending up with sparsely labeled
source data. For example, in the field of chip defect detection, it is unrealistic to perfectly annotate massive defect
data in the source domain, due to the strict quality regulation and high expense of annotation [7, 15]. In the medical industry, the high cost and difficulty of labeling also
prohibit providing sufficient labeled source data [42, 53].
Therefore, how to realize UDA with sparsely labeled source
data becomes appealing and has attracted increasing attention [17, 50, 1, 31].
Recently, researchers address this issue by considering
the Few-shot Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (FUDA),
where only a few source samples are labeled. Compared
with UDA, FUDA is more challenging due to the insufficiency of the source knowledge. With only a few labeled
source samples, deep models are difficult to learn a discriminative feature space to represent the complicated semantic information, thus largely affecting the knowledge
transfer. And thus to compensate for the shortage of labeled source data, existing methods [17, 50] generally employ self-supervised learning strategies to mine the latent
correspondence between the source distribution and the target one. Specifically, Kim et al. [17] proposed a cross-

11621

