This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Deeply Unified Depth-aware Panoptic Segmentation
with Bi-directional Guidance Learning
Junwen He1 , Yifan Wang1 , Lijun Wang* 1 , Huchuan Lu1 , Bin Luo2 ,
Jun-Yan He2 , Jin-Peng Lan2 , Yifeng Geng2 , and Xuansong Xie2
1
2

Dalian University of Technology
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group

Abstract

Instance Query

Depth Query

Instance Query

Geometry-Enhanced
Query
Enhancement

Depth-aware panoptic segmentation is an emerging
topic in computer vision which combines semantic and geometric understanding for more robust scene interpretation. Recent works pursue unified frameworks to tackle this
challenge but mostly still treat it as two individual learning tasks, which limits their potential for exploring crossdomain information. We propose a deeply unified framework for depth-aware panoptic segmentation, which performs joint segmentation and depth estimation both in a persegment manner with identical object queries. To narrow
the gap between the two tasks, we further design a geometric query enhancement method, which is able to integrate
scene geometry into object queries using latent representations. In addition, we propose a bi-directional guidance
learning approach to facilitate cross-task feature learning
by taking advantage of their mutual relations. Our method
sets the new state of the art for depth-aware panoptic segmentation on both Cityscapes-DVPS and SemKITTI-DVPS
datasets. Moreover, our guidance learning approach is
shown to deliver performance improvement even under incomplete supervision labels. Code and models are available at https://github.com/jwh97nn/DeepDPS.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding plays a crucial role in autonomous
driving perception systems, but relying solely on 2D representations falls short for advanced systems. To address this
limitation, Depth-aware Panoptic Segmentation (DPS) [44]
has been proposed as a novel approach for geometric scene
understanding, which enables the creation of 3D instance* Corresponding author

Query Linking
Bi-directional
Guidance
Learning

Segmentation
Prediction

Depth
Prediction

Segmentation
Prediction

Depth
Prediction

Segmentation

Prediction
Figure 1: Pipeline comparison of
prior work [55] (left) and
ours (right). We integrate unified queries with geometric
enhancement and mutual learning from cross-modality supervision, towards a deeper unified manner.

level semantic labels from a single image by means of inverse projection. More precisely, the simplified problem
can be decomposed into two sub-tasks: panoptic segmentation and monocular depth estimation.
Early methods [44, 46] tackle this task by simply attaching a dense depth prediction head on top of the off-the-shelf
panoptic segmentation model [7]. However, these methods are intuitively sub-optimal, because the separate taskoriented head design treats these two sub-tasks independently and ignores their mutual relation. Recent methods
[40, 55] propose unified architectures that output both predictions in the same instance-wise manner, and utilize corresponding task-specific kernels (or queries) to jointly produce masks and depth maps for individual instances, which
leverages the mutual benefits between semantic and depth
information (shown in Fig. 1 left).
Despite recent efforts to unify the two sub-tasks, their
learning processes remain largely separate. Specifically,
they employ task-specific loss functions to guide individual
predictions, which overlook the potential benefits of cross-

4111

