This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AG3D: Learning to Generate 3D Avatars from 2D Image Collections
Zijian Dong1,2∗

Xu Chen1,3∗ Jinlong Yang3 Michael J. Black3 Otmar Hilliges1 Andreas Geiger2
1
ETH Zürich, Department of Computer Science 2 University of Tübingen
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent y
Systems, Tübingen

Figure 1: Sampled 3D Human Appearance and Shape. Our generative model is learned from an unstructured 2D image
collection, yet synthesizes novel 3D humans with high-quality appearance and geometry, different identities and clothing
styles including loose clothing such as dresses and skirts. Moreover, our generated 3D humans can be easily animated.

Abstract
While progress in 2D generative models of human appearance has been rapid, many applications require 3D
avatars that can be animated and rendered. Unfortunately,
most existing methods for learning generative models of
3D humans with diverse shape and appearance require 3D
training data, which is limited and expensive to acquire.
The key to progress is hence to learn generative models
of 3D avatars from abundant unstructured 2D image collections. However, learning realistic and complete 3D appearance and geometry in this under-constrained setting remains challenging, especially in the presence of loose clothing such as dresses. In this paper, we propose a new adversarial generative model of realistic 3D people learned from
2D images. Our method captures shape and deformation of
the body and loose clothing by adopting a holistic 3D generator and integrating an efﬁcient, ﬂexible, articulation module. To improve realism, we train our model using multiple
discriminators while also integrating geometric cues in the
form of predicted 2D normal maps. We experimentally ﬁnd
that our method outperforms previous 3D- and articulationaware methods in terms of geometry and appearance. We
validate the effectiveness of our model and the importance
of each component via systematic ablation studies.
* Equal contribution

1. Introduction
Generative models, like GANs [19], can be trained from
large image collections, to produce photo-realistic images
of objects [5, 29–31] and even clothed humans [2, 18, 20,
33, 34, 55]. The output, however, is only a 2D image and
many applications require diverse, high-quality, virtual 3D
avatars, with the ability to control poses and camera viewpoints, while ensuring 3D consistency. To enable the generation of 3D avatars, the research community has been studying generative models that can automatically produce 3D
shapes of humans and/or clothing based on input parameters such as body pose and shape [9, 11, 38, 50]. Despite
rapid progress, most existing methods do not yet consider
texture and require accurate and clean 3D scans of humans
for training, which are expensive to acquire and hence limited in quantity and diversity. In this paper, we develop a
method that learns a generative model of 3D humans with
texture from only a set of unstructured 2D images of various people in different poses wearing diverse clothing; that
is, we learn a generative 3D human model from data that is
ubiquitous on the Internet. See Fig. 1.
Learning to generate 3D shapes and textures of articulated humans from such unstructured image data is a highly
under-constrained problem, as each training instance has a
different shape and appearance and is observed only once
from a particular viewpoint and in a particular pose. Recent

14916

