This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unmasked Teacher: Towards Training-Efficient Video Foundation Models
Kunchang Li1,2,3 * Yali Wang1,3† Yizhuo Li4,3* Yi Wang3
Limin Wang5,3 Yu Qiao3,1†
1
2

Yinan He3

Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5

3

Shanghai AI Laboratory

4

The University of Hong Kong

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University

Code & Models: https://github.com/OpenGVLab/unmasked_teacher

Abstract
Video Foundation Models (VFMs) have received limited exploration due to high computational costs and data
scarcity. Previous VFMs rely on Image Foundation Models (IFMs), which face challenges in transferring to the
video domain. Although VideoMAE has trained a robust ViT
from limited data, its low-level reconstruction poses convergence difficulties and conflicts with high-level cross-modal
alignment. This paper proposes a training-efficient method
for temporal-sensitive VFMs that integrates the benefits of
existing methods. To increase data efficiency, we mask
out most of the low-semantics video tokens, but selectively
align the unmasked tokens with IFM, which serves as the
UnMasked Teacher (UMT). By providing semantic guidance, our method enables faster convergence and multimodal friendliness. With a progressive pre-training framework, our model can handle various tasks including scenerelated, temporal-related, and complex video-language understanding. Using only public sources for pre-training in 6
days on 32 A100 GPUs, our scratch-built ViT-L/16 achieves
state-of-the-art performances on various video tasks.

1. Introduction
Video understanding has emerged as a critical skill for
artificial intelligence systems to analyze and comprehend
videos effectively. The progress in video understanding is
currently driven by the Image Foundation Models (IFMs)
[21, 29, 5, 55], which are trained from massive datasets
and adapted for different downstream tasks [16, 93, 54, 65].
However, IFMs tend to focus more on scenes and objects,
disregarding the essential motion patterns and object interactions required for complex video understanding. The true
Video Foundation Models (VFMs) are underexplored due
to the high computational costs and data scarcity.
* Interns at Shanghai AI Laboratory. † Corresponding authors.

CoCa

> 39,000 kg

70×
Ours

Figure 1: Comparison with SOTA methods. “ZS”
and “FT” refer to “zero-shot” and “fine-tuned”. “T2V”
means video-text retrieval. For Kinetics action recognition, [80] and [70] are excluded since they utilize model
ensemble. With only public sources (i.e., CLIP[55]) for
pre-training, our approach achieves SOTA performances
on scene-related, temporal-related and complex videolanguage benchmarks. Compared with CoCa [85], our
method is much more environmentally friendly with 70×
reduction in carbon emissions. Note that the cost of CLIP
pre-training is ignored since it is publicly available.
While building VFMs on well-learned IFMs reduces
training costs, it poses significant challenges in transferring
knowledge from the image domain to the video domain.
Firstly, due to limited video data and a substantial domain
gap, video post-pretraining may undermine the generality
inherited from IFMs [79]. Moreover, the strong spatial initialization offers a shortcut to perceive videos from scenes
in single frames (e.g., “grass” in “horse riding”), which constrains VFMs from learning spatiotemporal relationships
to recognize and localize temporal-related actions, such as
“opening” and “closing” in Figure 2. Lastly, this paradigm
is difficult to scale up as it requires well-prepared IFMs.
The recent success of VideoMAE [62, 23] offers a dataefficient way to learn effective spatiotemporal features from

19948

