This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Human Dynamics in Autonomous Driving Scenarios
Jingbo Wang1,2 Ye Yuan1 Zhengyi Luo1,3 Kevin Xie1,4 Dahua Lin2 Umar Iqbal1
Sanja Fidler1,4,5 Sameh Khamis1
1

Visible

NVIDIA 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 Carnegie Mellon University
4
University of Toronto 5 Vector Institute

Occluded

Visible

Missing
Missing

Missing

Visible

Missing

Time

Penetration

GLAMR

Sliding

Ours

Figure 1: We compare our method against GLAMR [67], the state-of-the-art method for global human motion mesh recovery. The output
of GLAMR (left) suffers from various physical implausibilities, such as floating, sliding, or terrain penetration. Our method (right) yields
a clear improvement.

Abstract
Simulation has emerged as an indispensable tool for
scaling and accelerating the development of self-driving
systems. A critical aspect of this is simulating realistic and
diverse human behavior and intent. In this work, we propose a holistic framework for learning physically plausible
human dynamics from real driving scenarios, narrowing the
gap between real and simulated human behavior in safetycritical applications. We show that state-of-the-art methods underperform in driving scenarios where video data is
recorded from moving vehicles, and humans are frequently
partially or fully occluded. Furthermore, existing methods
often disregard the global scene where humans are situated,
resulting in various motion artifacts like foot sliding, floating, or ground penetration. To address this challenge, we
propose an approach that incorporates physics with a rein-

forcement learning-based motion controller to learn human
dynamics for driving scenarios. Our framework can simulate physically plausible human dynamics that accurately
match observed human motions and infill motions for occluded body parts, while improving the physical plausibility of the entire motion sequence. Experiments on the challenging Waymo Open Dataset show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art motion capture approaches significantly in recovering high-quality, physically plausible, and
scene-aware human dynamics.

1. Introduction
Self-driving systems have come a long way in recent
years. One major advancement that directly impacted
these systems is the widespread adoption of simulation.
While considerable attention was given to simulating traffic and other vehicles (e.g., TrafficSim [59], GeoSim [3],

20796

