This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hidden Biases of End-to-End Driving Models
Bernhard Jaeger Kashyap Chitta Andreas Geiger
University of Tübingen Tübingen AI Center
{bernhard.jaeger, kashyap.chitta, a.geiger}@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
End-to-end driving systems have recently made rapid
progress, in particular on CARLA. Independent of their major contribution, they introduce changes to minor system
components. Consequently, the source of improvements is
unclear. We identify two biases that recur in nearly all
state-of-the-art methods and are critical for the observed
progress on CARLA: (1) lateral recovery via a strong inductive bias towards target point following, and (2) longitudinal averaging of multimodal waypoint predictions for
slowing down. We investigate the drawbacks of these biases and identify principled alternatives. By incorporating
our insights, we develop TF++, a simple end-to-end method
that ranks first on the Longest6 and LAV benchmarks, gaining 11 driving score over the best prior work on Longest6.

1. Introduction
End-to-end driving approaches have rapidly improved in
performance on the CARLA leaderboard [1], the de-facto
standard for fair online evaluation. Driving scores have increased from under 20 [9, 22] to over 70 [26, 31] in just two
years. However, why recent systems work so well is not
fully understood, as both methods and training sets differ
largely between submissions. Rigorous ablations are expensive due to the large design space of driving systems and the
need to simulate large amounts of driving for evaluation.
In particular, recent methods trained with Imitation
Learning (IL) have shown strong performance [6, 8, 11, 26,
31]. They are trained using offline datasets, yet they can surprisingly recover from the classic compounding error problem of IL [21, 24], as indicated by their high route completions [8, 11, 26, 31]. While they do not utilize HD maps as
input, they are provided with map-based GNSS locations
in the center of the lane (spaced 30 m apart on average)
called target points (TPs) that describe the route the car
should follow. TPs were introduced as an alternative form
of conditioning signals to convey driver intent [9, 22]. Prior
work [13, 14] used discrete navigation commands or NCs
(i.e. follow lane, turn right, ...) instead.
In this paper, we show that TP conditioned models re-

(a) Target point shortcut

(b) Waypoint ambiguity

Figure 1: Hidden biases. (a) When outside their training distribution, current methods extrapolate waypoint predictions to the nearest target point, helping them recover.
(b) The future velocity is multi-modal, but current methods
commit to a single plan, which leads to interpolation.
cover from the compounding error problem because they
use geometric information contained in the TP to reset steering errors periodically (at every TP). This makes them implicitly rely on accurate map information, even though they
are otherwise HD map free. Steering directly towards a
TP is a shortcut [16] that these IL methods learn to exploit. When methods accumulate enough steering error to
be out of distribution during deployment, we observe that
they steer towards the nearest TP. When the TP is close, this
has the effect of driving back to the lane center, where it is in
distribution again. This is illustrated in Fig. 1a. However,
when the TP is far away, this shortcut can lead to catastrophic steering errors (e.g. cutting a turn). We show examples of this behavior for various SotA architectures in
Section 3.1. We demonstrate that the shortcut problem is
intrinsically related to the decoder architecture and that a
transformer decoder [29] can mitigate it.
Another common aspect of the current SotA is that they
use waypoints (future positions of an expert driver) as output representations [8, 11, 31]. We point out that this is an
ambiguous representation as the future velocity is multi-

8240

