This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Aperture Diffraction for Compact Snapshot Spectral Imaging
Tao Lv, Hao Ye, Quan Yuan, Zhan Shi, Yibo Wang, Shuming Wang,* Xun Cao*
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{lvtao, yehao, yuanquan, zhanshi, ybwang}@smail.nju.edu.cn
{wangshuming, caoxun}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
We demonstrate a compact, cost-effective snapshot spectral imaging system named Aperture Diffraction Imaging
Spectrometer (ADIS), which consists only of an imaging
lens with an ultra-thin orthogonal aperture mask and a mosaic filter sensor, requiring no additional physical footprint
compared to common RGB cameras. Then we introduce
a new optical design that each point in the object space
is multiplexed to discrete encoding locations on the mosaic filter sensor by diffraction-based spatial-spectral projection engineering generated from the orthogonal mask.
The orthogonal projection is uniformly accepted to obtain a weakly calibration-dependent data form to enhance
modulation robustness. Meanwhile, the Cascade ShiftShuffle Spectral Transformer (CSST) with strong perception of the diffraction degeneration is designed to solve a
sparsity-constrained inverse problem, realizing the volume
reconstruction from 2D measurements with Large amount
of aliasing. Our system is evaluated by elaborating the
imaging optical theory and reconstruction algorithm with
demonstrating the experimental imaging under a single exposure. Ultimately, we achieve the sub-super-pixel spatial
resolution and high spectral resolution imaging. The code
will be available at: https://github.com/Krito-ex/CSST.

1. Introduction
Snapshot spectral imaging (SSI) refers to the acquisition
of a 3D spatial-spectral data cube containing spectral information at each spatial location in a single exposure [1].
Whereas spectrum is a fundamental property that covers the
physical characteristics of scenes, the visual and discriminative capabilities along the spectral and temporal dimensions
will lead to unparalleled high-dimensional visual capability [2]. Hence, the acquisition of high temporal-spatialspectral resolution data can provide a more comprehensive
and refined observation and measurement of dynamic objects or processes.
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. (a) illustrates the CTIS acquisition method and strategy of using long optical path with sacrificing spatial resolution,
while ADIS reconstructs from aliasing; (b) depicts different imaging methods for mosaic filter sensors.

Compared with scanning strategies of traditional imaging spectrometers along the spatial or spectral dimension,
SSI methods perform specific system designs [3, 4, 5, 6]
based on the intrinsic sparsity of the spatial-spectral information of a scene through predefined and well-calibrated
modulation or projection paradigms, which can achieve
video-level capture of spectral data and have the potential
for a wide range of applications in various scenarios such
as combustion dynamics [7], cellular dynamics [8], industrial monitoring [9].
However, shortcomings in the compactness, the spatialtemporal-spectral resolution of the imaging system, and the
robustness of the modulation limit the application of SSI
where portability is paramount [10, 11]:
SSI systems based on computational imaging methods
recover the spectral cube by encoding the incident light and
solving an underdetermined, sparsity-constrained inverse
problem. However, the current prevailing designs rely on
bulky relay systems, prisms, or other dispersive elements
that result in massive and complex optical systems [10].
Among these, dispersive methods exemplified by CTIS [4]

10574

