This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EQ-Net: Elastic Quantization Neural Networks
Ke Xu1,2 , Lei Han4 , Ye Tian2,3 , Shangshang Yang1,2* and Xingyi Zhang1,2,3
1

2

School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, Hefei, China
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing of Ministry of Education, Hefei, China
3
Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China

Abstract
Current model quantization methods have shown their
promising capability in reducing storage space and computation complexity. However, due to the diversity of quantization
forms supported by different hardware, one limitation of existing solutions is that usually require repeated optimization
for different scenarios. How to construct a model with flexible quantization forms has been less studied. In this paper,
we explore a one-shot network quantization regime, named
Elastic Quantization Neural Networks (EQ-Net), which aims
to train a robust weight-sharing quantization supernet. First
of all, we propose an elastic quantization space (including
elastic bit-width, granularity, and symmetry) to adapt to various mainstream quantitative forms. Secondly, we propose the
Weight Distribution Regularization Loss (WDR-Loss) and
Group Progressive Guidance Loss (GPG-Loss) to bridge
the inconsistency of the distribution for weights and output
logits in the elastic quantization space gap. Lastly, we incorporate genetic algorithms and the proposed Conditional
Quantization-Aware Accuracy Predictor (CQAP) as an estimator to quickly search mixed-precision quantized neural
networks in supernet. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our EQ-Net is close to or even better than its static counterparts as well as state-of-the-art robust bit-width methods.
Code can be available at https://github.com/xuke225/EQNet.

1. Introduction
Deploying intricate deep neural networks(DNN) on edge
devices with limited resources, such as smartphones or IoT
devices, poses a significant challenge due to their demanding
computational and memory requirements. Model quantization [13, 28, 33] has emerged as a highly effective strategy
to mitigate the aforementioned challenge. This technique

involves transforming the floating-point values into fixedpoint values of lower precision, thereby reducing the memory
requirements of the DNN model without altering its original architecture. Additionally, computationally expensive
floating-point matrix multiplications between weights and
activations can be executed more efficiently on low-precision
arithmetic circuits, leading to reduced hardware costs and
lower power consumption.
Despite the evident advantages in terms of power and
costs, quantization incurs added noise due to the reduced precision. However, recent research has demonstrated that neural networks can withstand this noise and maintain high accuracy even when quantized to 8-bits using post-training quantization (PTQ) techniques [26, 30, 27, 24, 46]. PTQ is typically efficient and only requires access to a small calibration
dataset, but its effectiveness declines when applied to lowbit quantization (≤ 4-bits) of neural networks. In contrast,
quantization-aware training (QAT) [52, 7, 14, 11, 4, 21, 29]
has emerged as the prevailing method for achieving low-bit
quantization while preserving near full-precision accuracy.
By simulating the quantization operation during training or
fine-tuning, the network can adapt to the quantization noise
and yield better solutions than PTQ.
Currently, most AI accelerators support model quantization, but the forms of quantization supported by different hardware platforms are not exactly the same [25]. For
example, NVIDIA’s GPU adopts channel-wise symmetric
quantization in TensorRT [31] inference engine, while Qualcomm’s DSP adopts per-tensor asymmetric quantization in
SNPE [34] inference engine. For conventional QAT methods, the different quantization forms supported by hardware
platforms may require repeated optimization of the model
during deployment on multiple devices, leading to extremely
low efficiency of model quantization deployment.
To address the problem of repeated optimization in model
quantization resulting from discrepancies in quantization
schemes, this paper proposes an elastic quantization space

1505

