This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hybrid Spectral Denoising Transformer with Guided Attention
Zeqiang Lai1 , Chenggang Yan2 , Ying Fu1†
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Hangzhou Dianzi University
{laizeqiang, fuying}@bit.edu.cn

cgyan@hdu.edu.cn

Optimization-based Methods

Network-based Methods
HSDT-L

HSDT-S

Abstract

(Ours)

HSDT-M
(Ours)

In this paper, we present a Hybrid Spectral Denoising Transformer (HSDT) for hyperspectral image denoising. Challenges in adapting transformer for HSI arise from
the capabilities to tackle existing limitations of CNN-based
methods in capturing the global and local spatial-spectral
correlations while maintaining efficiency and flexibility. To
address these issues, we introduce a hybrid approach that
combines the advantages of both models with a SpatialSpectral Separable Convolution (S3Conv), Guided Spectral
Self-Attention (GSSA), and Self-Modulated Feed-Forward
Network (SM-FFN). Our S3Conv works as a lightweight alternative to 3D convolution, which extracts more spatialspectral correlated features while keeping the flexibility to
tackle HSIs with an arbitrary number of bands. These features are then adaptively processed by GSSA which performs 3D self-attention across the spectral bands, guided
by a set of learnable queries that encode the spectral signatures. This not only enriches our model with powerful capabilities for identifying global spectral correlations
but also maintains linear complexity. Moreover, our SMFFN proposes the self-modulation that intensifies the activations of more informative regions, which further strengthens the aggregated features. Extensive experiments are conducted on various datasets under both simulated and realworld noise, and it shows that our HSDT significantly outperforms the existing state-of-the-art methods while maintaining low computational overhead. Code is at https:
//github.com/Zeqiang-Lai/HSDT.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral image (HSI) provides substantially more
abundant spectral information than the ordinary color image, which makes it especially utilitarian in the field of remote sensing [3, 4], biometric authentication [54], detection
[41], and geological science [17, 51]. Nevertheless, lim† Corresponding Author.

PSNR (dB)

TRQ3D

(CVPR2021)

(AAAI 2022)

GRUNet
(NeuComp 2022)

(RS 2022)

Restormer

(Ours)

SST

HSDT-(L,M,S)
(Ours)

QRNN3D

T3SC

(TNNLS 2020)

(NeurIPS 2021)

LLRT

(TCYB2020)

(CVPR2017)

KBR
(TPAMI2017)

HSID-CNN

BM4D

(TGRS 2019)

(TIP2012)

Runtime (Sec)

WLRTR

NGMeet
(CVPR2019)

Runtime (Sec)

Figure 1: Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance
while maintaining low computational overhead.

ited by imaging techniques, most existing HSI cameras still
suffer from various types of noise that might degrade the
performance of their applications, which urges the development of robust HSI denoising algorithms.
Motivated by the intrinsic properties of HSI, traditional
HSI denoising approaches [63, 20] often exploit the optimization schemes with priors, e.g., low rankness [67, 58],
non-local similarities [40, 42], spatial-spectral correlation
[47], and global correlation along the spectrum [59]. Whilst
offering appreciable performance, the efficacy of these
methods is largely dependent on the degree of similarity
between the handcrafted priors and the real-world noise
model, and these methods are often challenging to accelerate with modern hardwares due to the complex processing
pipelines. Recent HSI denoising methods based on Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [64, 32, 5] get rid of handcrafted regularizations with learning-based prior and often
run faster with graphic accelerators and machine-learning
frameworks [45]. However, these methods are still insufficient for exploring the characteristics of HSI, e.g., global
and local spectral-spatial correlations. For example, HSIDCNN [64] only considers the correlations between several
adjacent spectral bands. QRNN3D [59] and GRUNet [32]
model the global spectral correlations with quasi-recurrent
units [6] but suffer from the problem of vanished correlations for long-range separate bands due to the recurrent
multiplications of merging weights. Besides, recent methods [59, 66] tend to use 3D convolution to explore the local
spectral-spatial correlations while maintaining the flexibil-

13065

