This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Audio-Enhanced Text-to-Video Retrieval using Text-Conditioned Feature
Alignment
Sarah Ibrahimi1 * Xiaohang Sun2 Pichao Wang2 Amanmeet Garg2
Ashutosh Sanan2 Mohamed Omar2∗
1
University of Amsterdam 2 Amazon Prime Video
s.ibrahimi@uva.nl, {sunking, wpichao, amanmega, ashsanan}@amazon.com, mkamalmomd@gmail.com

Abstract
Text-to-video retrieval systems have recently made significant progress by utilizing pre-trained models trained on
large-scale image-text pairs. However, most of the latest
methods primarily focus on the video modality while disregarding the audio signal for this task. Nevertheless, a recent
advancement by E CLIPSE has improved long-range text-tovideo retrieval by developing an audiovisual video representation. Nonetheless, the objective of the text-to-video
retrieval task is to capture the complementary audio and
video information that is pertinent to the text query rather
than simply achieving better audio and video alignment. To
address this issue, we introduce TEFAL, a TExt-conditioned
Feature ALignment method that produces both audio and
video representations conditioned on the text query. Instead
of using only an audiovisual attention block, which could
suppress the audio information relevant to the text query,
our approach employs two independent cross-modal attention blocks that enable the text to attend to the audio and
video representations separately. Our proposed method’s
efficacy is demonstrated on four benchmark datasets that
include audio: MSR-VTT, LSMDC, VATEX, and Charades,
and achieves better than state-of-the-art performance consistently across the four datasets. This is attributed to the
additional text-query-conditioned audio representation and
the complementary information it adds to the text-queryconditioned video representation.

1. Introduction
The emergence of online streaming services has led to
an enormous and rapidly growing collection of multimedia
assets comprising video and audio. Retrieving semantically
similar content in these assets is crucial for finding information of interest, making it an important aspect of major
* This work was done while Sarah Ibrahimi and Mohamed Omar were
at Amazon Prime Video.

Figure 1. Comparison of our method with the current methods,
text-to-video retrieval with (A) video only, (B) audio-video fusion and (C) proposed text-conditioned audio-video alignment
(TEFAL).

streaming platforms. Text-to-video retrieval is a common
approach to achieve this goal, whereby video content that
best matches a textual description is searched for by learning a joint latent space for text and video representations.
This space allows the text modality input to be matched
with the video modality, enabling the closest videos to be
found through a distance metric.
The rise of large-scale transformer models of vision and
language has led to the development of many multimodal
transformer-based architectures that are commonly evaluated on the text-to-video retrieval task. These architectures
can either be pre-trained on large-scale multimodal datasets
from scratch or use existing pre-trained models, such as
CLIP [29], as starting points or frozen backbones. One
of the earliest CLIP-based model architectures, CLIP4Clip
[26], shows a significant improvement in performance compared to previous state-of-the-art methods [3, 19, 21] on
common text-to-video retrieval benchmarks. By utilizing
only a few video frames per video and a simple technique to aggregate the frame embeddings for each video,
CLIP4Clip demonstrated the utility of a 2D vision transformer to outperform model architectures using 3D videos
as input. Since then, many other works have been built upon
this baseline approach with novel ways of cross-attention
[16], pretext tasks [12], prompting [20], and other architectural modifications. Recently, significant improvements
have been obtained by incorporating post-processing tech-

12054

