This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Pre-training with Pseudo Texts for Text-To-Image
Person Re-identification
†

Zhiyin Shao1,2*, Xinyu Zhang2∗ , Changxing Ding1,3 , Jian Wang2 , Jingdong Wang2
1

South China University of Technology, China 2 Baidu VIS, China 3 Pazhou Lab, China
eezyshao@mail.scut.edu.cn chxding@scut.edu.cn
{zhangxinyu14,wangjian33,wangjingdong}@baidu.com

Abstract
The pre-training task is indispensable for the text-toimage person re-identification (T2I-ReID) task. However,
there are two underlying inconsistencies between these two
tasks that may impact the performance: i) Data inconsistency. A large domain gap exists between the generic images/texts used in public pre-trained models and the specific
person data in the T2I-ReID task. This gap is especially severe for texts, as general textual data are usually unable to
describe specific people in fine-grained detail. ii) Training inconsistency. The processes of pre-training of images
and texts are independent, despite cross-modality learning
being critical to T2I-ReID. To address the above issues,
we present a new unified pre-training pipeline (UniPT) designed specifically for the T2I-ReID task. We first build
a large-scale text-labeled person dataset “LUPerson-T”,
in which pseudo-textual descriptions of images are automatically generated by the CLIP paradigm using a divideconquer-combine strategy. Benefiting from this dataset,
we then utilize a simple vision-and-language pre-training
framework to explicitly align the feature space of the image and text modalities during pre-training. In this way, the
pre-training task and the T2I-ReID task are made consistent with each other on both data and training levels. Without the need for any bells and whistles, our UniPT achieves
competitive Rank-1 accuracy of, i.e., 68.50%, 60.09%, and
51.85% on CUHK-PEDES, ICFG-PEDES and RSTPReid,
respectively. Both the LUPerson-T dataset and code are
available at https://github.com/ZhiyinShao-H/UniPT.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image person re-identification [23] (T2I-ReID)
is a retrieval task that aims to search specific person im* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Text
loss

Image
loss

Cross-modality loss

Text
loss

Cross-modality
loss
Text and image
interaction

Text and image interaction

Textual
Encoder

Visual
Encoder

Visual
Encoder

Generic
images

(a) General Pre-training

Person-specific
texts

Textual
Encoder

Visual
Encoder

A young man is
walking, wearing
a white pure color
t-shirt and black
long pants.

A man is
wearing a white
shirt, a pair of
blue jeans.

April is the
fourth
month.

Generic
texts

Textual
Encoder

Person
images

(b) T2I-ReID

Pseudo Personspecific texts

Person
images

(c) Our UniPT

Figure 1. Pipeline comparison on (a) general pre-training in previous works, (b) T2I-ReID tasks, and (c) our unified pre-training
(UniPT). Our UniPT shares a similar format with the T2I-ReID
pipeline at both the data and training levels.

ages based on natural language descriptions [23]. Compared with large-scale datasets in general image-text retrieval tasks [34, 24, 51], existing T2I-ReID datasets suffer
from limited scale and diversity. Therefore, the prior knowledge learned through large-scale pre-training is critical if
good performance on the T2I-ReID task is to be achieved.
Previous works [60, 56, 44, 25, 30] simply utilize publicly released pre-trained models that have learned from
generic data. In more detail, the visual encoders [14, 6]
are usually pre-trained on ImageNet [33], while the textual encoders [16, 4] learn on hundreds of millions of
words [65, 4]. These models naturally serve as the initial
parameters of visual and textual encoders in T2I-ReID. The
existing literature [48, 35, 8, 57, 42, 5] thus pays more attention to designing various cross-modality modules to mitigate the modality gap [48, 35, 8] and the part-alignment
problems [57, 42, 5] instead. No extant research has yet
investigated how the pre-training task affects the following
T2I-ReID task.
In this paper, we make the first attempt to explicitly re-

11174

