This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diverse Data Augmentation with Diffusions for Effective
Test-time Prompt Tuning
Chun-Mei Feng1 Kai Yu1 * Yong Liu1 Salman Khan2,3 Wangmeng Zuo4
1
Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC),
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI), UAE
3
Australian National University, Canberra ACT, Australia
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
fengcm.ai@gmail.com; yu kai@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
https://github.com/chunmeifeng/DiffTPT

Abstract

Confidence selection
0.9

1. Introduction
Pre-trained vision-language models, such as CLIP [37],
have recently demonstrated promising performance on a va* Corresponding author.

Unconfident yet
correct predictions

Cosine similarity filteration

Benefiting from prompt tuning, recent years have witnessed the promising performance of pre-trained visionlanguage models, e.g., CLIP, on versatile downstream tasks.
In this paper, we focus on a particular setting of learning
adaptive prompts on the fly for each test sample from an unseen new domain, which is known as test-time prompt tuning (TPT). Existing TPT methods typically rely on data augmentation and confidence selection. However, conventional
data augmentation techniques, e.g., random resized crops,
suffers from the lack of data diversity, while entropy-based
confidence selection alone is not sufficient to guarantee prediction fidelity. To address these issues, we propose a novel
TPT method, named DiffTPT, which leverages pre-trained
diffusion models to generate diverse and informative new
data. Specifically, we incorporate augmented data by both
conventional method and pre-trained stable diffusion to exploit their respective merits, improving the model’s ability
to adapt to unknown new test data. Moreover, to ensure
the prediction fidelity of generated data, we introduce a cosine similarity-based filtration technique to select the generated data with higher similarity to the single test sample.
Our experiments on test datasets with distribution shifts and
unseen categories demonstrate that DiffTPT improves the
zero-shot accuracy by an average of 5.13% compared to
the state-of-the-art TPT method.

0.8

Trade-off between
diversity and fidelity
0.3

Should be discarded ?

(a) Augmented views

(b) Diverse augmentation

Figure 1: (a) Prior TPT method [46] uses different augmented
views along with confidence selection, resulting in overly simplistic variants in the test data and unconfident yet correct predictions
being discarded. In comparison, (b) our DiffTPT is effective in
generating data with richer visual appearance variation and selecting generated data with higher prediction fidelity.

riety of downstream tasks without the need for task-specific
training data [62, 61, 28, 39].
This is achieved through well-designed prompts, but
both hand- crafted prompts and prompt tuning have limitations as they are restricted to the training data distribution
of the current domain, making it challenging to generalize
to distributions outside the domain, especially in the zeroshot setting [30]. In this context, test-time prompt tuning
(TPT) [46] has been proposed to learn adaptive prompts on
the fly for each test sample from an unseen new domain,
without any training data or annotations. This setting offers
a more practical approach for dynamic real-world scenarios
where collecting a significant amount of labeled data for an

2704

