This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficiently Robustify Pre-Trained Models
Nishant Jain *
IIT Roorkee

Harkirat Behl
Microsoft Research

Yogesh Singh Rawat
CRCV, UCF

Vibhav Vineet
Microsoft Research

Abstract
A recent trend in deep learning algorithms has been towards training large scale models, having high parameter
count and trained on big dataset. However, robustness of
such large scale models towards real-world settings is still
a less-explored topic. In this work, we first benchmark the
performance of these models under different perturbations
and datasets thereby representing real-world shifts, and
highlight their degrading performance under these shifts.
We then discuss on how complete model fine-tuning based
existing robustification schemes might not be a scalable option given very large scale networks and can also lead them
to forget some of the desired characterstics. Finally, we
propose a simple and cost-effective method to solve this
problem, inspired by knowledge transfer literature. It involves robustifying smaller models, at a lower computation
cost, and then use them as teachers to tune a fraction of
these large scale networks, reducing the overall computational overhead. We evaluate our proposed method under
various vision perturbations including ImageNet-C,R,S,A
datasets and also for transfer learning, zero-shot evaluation setups on different datasets. Benchmark results show
that our method is able to induce robustness to these large
scale models efficiently, requiring significantly lower time
and also preserves the transfer learning, zero-shot properties of the original model which none of the existing methods
are able to achieve.

1. Introduction
Large scale deep neural networks trained on large scale
data have revolutionized the modern AI era. They are significantly effective in solving practical problems of high importance. These include object detection, zero-shot classification, image segmentation, image generation, and many
other applications [18, 25, 27, 39, 5, 29, 35, 9].
Though the large models have shown impressive results on many vision problems [27, 29], their reliability un* Correspondence to Nishant Jain at njain@cs.iitr.ac.in.

Figure 1. ImageNet-C accuracy v/s training time comparison. Our
method is on the pareto-front (achieves better robust accuracy in
much lesser time) compared to the state-of-the-art methods Augmix based Complete fine-tuning and WISE-complete fine-tuning.
The data points labelled with suffix ”C” correspond to CLIP models.

der distribution shift e.g., under illumination changes, geographical variations, camera properties etc., is still underexplored. In this paper, we fist investigate the behavior of
large models under distribution shifts. We analyse popular
models under synthetic perturbations to images [11], natural distribution shifts [10, 13], differently styled images
[31] and dataset shift [2]. Our analysis of models of various sizes, architecture families (transformers or CNNs) and
training modalities (uni or multi-modal) establishes their
brittleness under distribution shifts.
This analysis begs the question: can we induce robustness to large vision models without sacrificing their original
properties? It is critical to simultaneously maintain clean
accuracy on the original datasets, improve robust accuracy
on the shifted data and preserve the transfer learning capabilities of the large models. Further, computation efficiency
during both training and inference is beneficial.
While several prior works can be used to make largescale models robust, they do not possess the desired prop-

5505

