This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probabilistic Precision and Recall
Towards Reliable Evaluation of Generative Models
Dogyun Park
Department of Computer Science, Korea University
Seoul, South Korea

Suhyun Kim*
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
Seoul, South Korea

gg933@korea.ac.kr

dr.suhyun.kim@gmail.com

Abstract
Assessing the fidelity and diversity of the generative model
is a difficult but important issue for technological advancement. So, recent papers have introduced k-Nearest Neighbor
(kNN) based precision-recall metrics to break down the statistical distance into fidelity and diversity. While they provide
an intuitive method, we thoroughly analyze these metrics and
identify oversimplified assumptions and undesirable properties of kNN that result in unreliable evaluation, such as
susceptibility to outliers and insensitivity to distributional
changes. Thus, we propose novel metrics, P-precision and Precall (PP&PR), based on a probabilistic approach that address the problems. Through extensive investigations on toy
experiments and state-of-the-art generative models, we show
that our PP&PR provide more reliable estimates for comparing fidelity and diversity than the existing metrics. The codes
are available at https://github.com/kdst-team/
Probablistic_precision_recall.

1. Introduction
Modern state-of-the-art generative models such as Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [18, 24], Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8, 15, 13, 14], and Score-based
Diffusion Models (SDMs) [12, 17, 29, 6, 32, 25, 30] have
shown outstanding achievements that surpass human evaluative capabilities. Consequently, reliable evaluation metrics
for comparing the performance of generative models are
critical for further technological advancement. The widely
used Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) evaluation metric
[11] has been praised for its robustness and consistency with
human perceptual evaluation. However, FID only provides
a single score and does not diagnose whether the model
lacks fidelity or diversity, two essential aspects for improving
generative models. Recent papers [26, 28, 20, 22, 1] have
introduced various two-value metrics to measure fidelity
* corresponding author

and diversity, respectively. Especially, k-nearest neighbor
(kNN) based metrics such as Improved Precision and Recall
(IP&IR) [20] and Density and Coverage (D&C) [22] have
been used to assess fidelity and diversity on various generative models [6, 35, 2, 24, 13, 4, 23]. The pipeline of these
metrics [20, 22] starts with estimating distribution support
of real and fake distribution by constructing sample-specific
hyperspheres around each sample using kNN. Then, they
measure the expectation of the likelihood of fake (real) samples with respect to the estimated real (fake) distribution
support to represent fidelity (diversity).
Unfortunately, both IP&IR and D&C metrics present
certain challenges that compromise their practical reliability. Specifically, IP&IR operate under the assumption of
constant-density within the distribution support and overlook the overestimation linked to kNN, leading to an inflated
distribution support with constant density. This scenario becomes especially problematic when the distribution houses
outliers, resulting in metric overestimation (See Fig. 1a).
Density metric [22] attempts to address these limitations by
accumulating density over overlapped kNN hyperspheres.
Yet, our findings suggest that it still remains unreliable to
outliers. Furthermore, it tends to exhibit high variance, due
to its extremely wide bound, which further limits the reliability of evaluations. On the other hand, Coverage metric [22]
presents an alternative method that measures robust diversity
even with the presence of outliers in the fake distribution.
However, we show that it suffers from a conceptual limitation that makes it insensitive to changes in fake distribution.
An in-depth discussion of these constraints is provided in
Sec. 2. In the end, these issues underscores the need for careful revision of kNN-based metrics to provide more reliable
evaluations.
We, therefore, propose a novel set of metrics, P-precision
and P-recall (PP&PR), which aim to provide more reliable
estimations for the fidelity and diversity of generative models.
In particular, we derive our metrics based on a probabilistic
approach that relaxes the oversimplified assumptions and
undesirable properties of kNN, addressing the limitations of

20099

