This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pixel-Wise Contrastive Distillation
Junqiang Huang† ‡ Zichao Guo†
Shopee
jq.huang.work@gmail.com zichao.guo@shopee.com

Abstract
We present a simple but effective pixel-level selfsupervised distillation framework friendly to dense prediction tasks. Our method, called Pixel-Wise Contrastive Distillation (PCD), distills knowledge by attracting the corresponding pixels from student’s and teacher’s output feature
maps. PCD includes a novel design called SpatialAdaptor
which “reshapes” a part of the teacher network while preserving the distribution of its output features. Our ablation
experiments suggest that this reshaping behavior enables
more informative pixel-to-pixel distillation. Moreover, we
utilize a plug-in multi-head self-attention module that explicitly relates the pixels of student’s feature maps to enhance the effective receptive field, leading to a more competitive student. PCD outperforms previous self-supervised
distillation methods on various dense prediction tasks. A
backbone of ResNet-18-FPN distilled by PCD achieves 37.4
APbbox and 34.0 APmask on COCO dataset using the detector of Mask R-CNN. We hope our study will inspire future
research on how to pre-train a small model friendly to dense
prediction tasks in a self-supervised fashion.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged as a promising pre-training method due to its remarkable progress on
various computer vision tasks [24, 9, 21, 6, 23, 59]. Models pre-trained by SSL methods attain transfer performance
akin to, or even surpassing that of their supervised pretrained counterparts. However, this advancement of SSL
appears to be confined to larger models. Small models,
such as ResNet-18 [26], exhibit inferior linear probing accuracy as reported in [18, 60, 14]. Considering the necessity of small models for edge devices or resource constraint
regime, it is much essential to tackle this problem.
Recently, the performance lag of small models has been
effectively alleviated by self-supervised distillation [61, 39,
† Equal contribution
‡ Corresponding author

1, 18, 19, 60, 4, 14, 66, 54], where teachers’ (large pretrained models) knowledge is transferred [5, 48, 2, 29] to
students (small models) in a self-supervised learning fashion. Self-supervised distillation methods yield competitive performance for small models, especially on classification tasks (e.g., fine-grained and few-shot classification).
Nevertheless, their improvement on dense prediction tasks
like object detection and semantic segmentation is less pronounced than on classification tasks. This imbalance seemingly suggests that the favorable representations learned by
teachers can only be partially transferred to students. A natural question arises: what obstructs students from inheriting
the knowledge advantageous to dense prediction tasks? In
this study, we seek the answers to this question from the
following aspects.
First, the distillation signals of current self-supervised
distillation methods are mostly at image-level, while the
rich pixel-level knowledge is yet to be utilized. We argue
that it is inefficient for small models to learn representations good for dense prediction tasks from image-level supervision1 . Driven by this, we here present a simple but
effective pixel-level self-supervised distillation framework,
Pixel-Wise Contrastive Distillation (PCD), which extends
the idea of contrastive learning [22] by incorporating pixellevel knowledge distillation. PCD attracts the corresponding pixels from the student’s and the teacher’s output feature maps and separates the student’s pixels and the negative
pixels of a memory queue [24]. With pixel-level distillation
signal, PCD enables more efficient and adequate transfer of
knowledge from the teacher to the student.
Second, it is not straightforward to distill pixel-level
knowledge from the commonly adopted teachers pretrained by image-level SSL methods [24, 9, 21, 6]. These
teachers tend to project images into vectorized features,
thus losing the spatial information which is indispensable
to pixel-to-pixel distillation in our PCD. An intuitive practice to circumvent this issue would be to remove the welltrained projection/prediction head (a non-linear MLP attached to the backbone) and the global pooling layer. The
1 On the other hand, large models pre-trained by image-level SSL methods like MoCo can be quite competitive on dense prediction tasks.

16359

