This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FPR: False Positive Rectiﬁcation for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation

1

Liyi Chen1,2 Chenyang Lei2 Ruihuang Li1 Shuai Li1 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3 * Lei Zhang1∗
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI, CAS
3
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems, CASIA
liyi0308.chen@connect.polyu.hk, {leichenyang7,lishuai9401}@gmail.com,
zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn, {csrhli, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Many weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS)
methods employ the class activation map (CAM) to generate the initial segmentation results. However, CAM often fails to distinguish the foreground from its co-occurred
background (e.g., train and railroad), resulting in inaccurate activation from the background. Previous endeavors
address this co-occurrence issue by introducing external supervision and human priors. In this paper, we present a
False Positive Rectiﬁcation (FPR) approach to tackle the
co-occurrence problem by leveraging the false positives of
CAM. Based on the observation that the CAM-activated regions of absent classes contain class-speciﬁc co-occurred
background cues, we collect these false positives and utilize
them to guide the training of CAM network by proposing
a region-level contrast loss and a pixel-level rectiﬁcation
loss. Without introducing any external supervision and human priors, the proposed FPR effectively suppresses wrong
activations from the background objects. Extensive experiments on the PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO 2014
demonstrate that FPR brings signiﬁcant improvements for
off-the-shelf methods and achieves state-of-the-art performance. Code is available at https://github.com/
mt-cly/FPR.

Label: ‘train’

Label: ‘no train’

CAM

(a) Co-occurance

(b) False Positives

Label: ‘train’

FPR

(c) Ours

Figure 1. The main idea of our approach. (a) Conventional
CAM often suffers from co-occurrence issue, e.g., railroad and
train. (b) The false positives of CAM contain the cues of cooccurred background, (c) which are leveraged in our FPR to distinguish foreground.

reduce the cost, weakly supervised semantic segmentation
(WSSS) has been proposed to employ weaker supervision,
such as image labels [22, 5, 2, 54], bounding box [13, 46],
scribbles [38] and points [3] to train the model. Among
them, WSSS with image-level labels has attracted much attention since image labels can be easily obtained from popular datasets [40, 14, 16] or the Internet. In this work, we
focus on the image-level labels based WSSS.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to assign a semantic label to
each pixel of an input image. Beneﬁting from the strong capability of deep neural network (DNN) to extract semantic
features, tremendous progress [41, 42] has been made on
semantic segmentation with successful applications in autonomous driving, image editing, medical image analysis,
etc. However, the training of a fully supervised segmentation model demands a large number of pixel-level annotations, which is labor-intensive and time-consuming. To

Most existing WSSS methods follow a two-stage
pipeline: estimating the semantic localization maps by
training a CAM [63] classiﬁcation network with imagelevel labels, followed by a reﬁnement stage. Unfortunately,
CAM suffers from two critical problems, i.e., incomplete
estimation and co-occurrence issue. Incomplete estimation
is caused by the fact that CAM only activates the most discriminative parts of objects, which has been well studied

* Corresponding author

1108

