This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boundary-Aware Divide and Conquer: A Diffusion-based Solution for
Unsupervised Shadow Removal

1

Lanqing Guo1 , Chong Wang1 , Wenhan Yang2 , Yufei Wang1 , Bihan Wen1 *
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{lanqing001, wang1711, yufei001, bihan.wen}@ntu.edu.sg, yangwh@pcl.ac.cn

Supervised

Abstract
Recent deep learning methods have achieved superior
results in shadow removal. However, most of these supervised methods rely on training over a huge amount of
shadow and shadow-free image pairs, which require laborious annotations and may end up with poor model generalization. Shadows, in fact, only form partial degradation in images, while their non-shadow regions provide rich
structural information potentially for unsupervised learning. In this paper, we propose a novel diffusion-based
solution for unsupervised shadow removal, which separately modeling the shadow, non-shadow, and their boundary regions. We employ a pretrained unconditional diffusion model fused with non-corrupted information to generate the natural shadow-free image. While the diffusion
model can restore the clear structure in the boundary region by utilizing its adjacent non-corrupted contextual information, it fails to address the inner shadow area due to
the isolation of the non-corrupted contexts. Thus we further
propose a Shadow-Invariant Intrinsic Decomposition module to exploit the underlying reflectance in the shadow region to maintain structural consistency during the diffusive
sampling. Extensive experiments on the publicly available
shadow removal datasets show that the proposed method
achieves a significant improvement compared to existing
unsupervised methods, and even is comparable with some
existing supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Shadow is a ubiquitous phenomenon resulting from partial occlusion of light by occluders. It is critical to remove
these shadows because their detrimental impacts on vision
models, such as object detection and tracking [23, 35, 46].
Unfortunately, in general, it is still an open problem to remove shadows from a single image due to the large variety of shadow shapes and background structures, mak* Corresponding author: Bihan Wen.

PSNR: 35.05
SSIM: 0.979

(a) Input

PSNR: 24.69
SSIM: 0.934

(d) DC-ShadowNet

(b) SP+M-Net
Unsupervised

(c) GT

PSNR: 34.50
SSIM: 0.963

PSNR: 35.41
SSIM: 0.979

(e) G2R

(f) Ours

Figure 1: Shadow removal results on the ISTD [37] dataset.
From (a) to (f): (a) input shadow image, supervised learning results of (b) SP+M-Net [25], (c) corresponding ground
truth shadow-free image, as well as unsupervised learning
results of (d) DC-ShadowNet [20], (e) G2R [29], and (f)
Ours, respectively.
ing it challenging to obtain a generalized solution. Conventional shadow removal methods [9, 45] mainly rely on
carefully designed hand-crafted statistical features, e.g., illumination, gradient, and region consistency, to construct
the optimization function for shadow region removal. However, they totally ignore the natural image prior and the optimization function’s underlying assumptions are frequently
excessively idealistic, leading to unnatural results with artifacts, particularly in real-world scenarios.
Recently, deep-learning based image shadow removal
methods [12, 25, 4, 7, 16, 28, 20] have achieved remarkable progress by learning the pixel-wise mapping between
the shadow images and ground-truth shadow-free ones in a
fully-supervised manner. However, such solutions require
laborious annotations and can easily result in overfitting the
training dataset with poor generalization. More importantly,
shadow removal is a region-wise corrupted problem with
abundant context and structure priors. This information actually provides rich clues to infer the shadow regions solely
based on the single input, demonstrating strong potential
to address the problem using unsupervised learning meth-

13045

