This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CDAC: Cross-domain Attention Consistency in Transformer for Domain
Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Kaihong Wang1 , Donghyun Kim2 , Rogerio Feris3 , Margrit Betke1
1 Boston University, 2 Korea University, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

{kaiwkh, betke}@bu.edu, d kim@korea.ac.kr, rsferis@us.ibm.com

Abstract
While transformers have greatly boosted performance in
semantic segmentation, domain adaptive transformers are
not yet well explored. We identify that the domain gap can
cause discrepancies in self-attention. Due to this gap, the
transformer attends to spurious regions or pixels, which
deteriorates accuracy on the target domain. We propose
Cross-Domain Attention Consistency (CDAC), to perform
adaptation on attention maps using cross-domain attention
layers that share features between source and target domains. Specifically, we impose consistency between predictions from cross-domain attention and self-attention modules to encourage similar distributions across domains in
both the attention and output of the model, i.e., attentionlevel and output-level alignment. We also enforce consistency in attention maps between different augmented views
to further strengthen the attention-based alignment. Combining these two components, CDAC mitigates the discrepancy in attention maps across domains and further boosts
the performance of the transformer under unsupervised domain adaptation settings. Our method is evaluated on various widely used benchmarks and outperforms the stateof-the-art baselines, including GTAV-to-Cityscapes by 1.3
and 1.5 percent point (pp) and Synthia-to-Cityscapes by
0.6 pp and 2.9 pp when combining with two competitive Transformer-based backbones, respectively. Our code
will be publicly available at https://github.com/
wangkaihong/CDAC.

1. Introduction
The Transformer model has shown remarkable performance on various computer vision tasks (e.g., [7, 2, 42, 44])
and often exhibits an outstanding prediction capacity compared to convolutional networks. Meanwhile, it is also relatively “data-hungry” and therefore expects a large amount
of training data in order to achieve strong performance [29].
However, curating a large-scale annotated dataset could be

Source Image

Source-only

DAFormer

Ours

Target Image

Source-only

DAFormer

Ours

Figure 1: Attention map visualization for the query pixel ☆
in source and target domains from different methods. The
attention maps on the source image tend to highlight regions
sharing similar semantic classes. However, the attention
maps on the target image from Source-only and prior work
focus on spurious regions (e.g., left red boxes), which can be
caused by a domain gap. In comparison, CDAC encourages
attention-level adaptation and learns from more diverse and
informative signals from both domains.
a prohibitively expensive engineering task, especially for
those problems that require pixel-level labeling, including
semantic segmentation. Furthermore, deep models often
generalize poorly to new domains such as different cities or
weather in driving scenes. To overcome these issues, the use
of unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has been proposed. UDA allows knowledge transfer from synthetic data
(source domain), where pixel-level annotations are more
cheaply available, to real-world data (unlabeled target domain). Recently, under the UDA setting for semantic segmentation, a Transformer-based method (DAFormer [13])
outperforms previous CNN-based UDA methods across diverse benchmark datasets.
The key component for the success in Transformer is
self-attention, which learns to attend to certain regions of
its input that could be informative to predicting the semantic class of a pixel. However, it is still not clear if the domain gap is completely resolved under the UDA setting.

11519

