This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Diffusion Transformer is a Strong Image Synthesizer
Shanghua Gao1,2 * Pan Zhou2 † Ming-Ming Cheng1 †
1
Nankai University 2 Sea AI Lab

Shuicheng Yan2

{shanghuagao,shuicheng.yan}@gmail.com zhoupan@sea.com cmm@nankai.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) [11, 38] have
been at the forefront of recent advances in image-level
generative models, often surpassing the previously stateof-the-art (SOTA) generative adversarial networks (GANs)
[4, 17, 37, 54]. Additionally, DPMs have demonstrated their
success in numerous other applications, including text-toimage generation [38] and speech generation [24]. DPMs
adopt a time-inverted Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE)
to gradually map a Gaussian noise into a sample by multiple
time steps, with each step corresponding to a network evaluation. In practice, generating a sample is time-consuming
due to the thousands of time steps required for the SDE to
converge. To address this issue, various generation sampling
strategies [21,32,41] have been proposed to accelerate the in* This work was done while S. Gao was a research intern at Sea AI Lab.
† Pan Zhou and Ming-Ming Cheng are joint corresponding authors.

50k

100k
200k
300k
Increasing training steps.
DiT-S/2
MDT-S/2

3000k

DiT-S/2
MDT-S/2

FID-50K

Despite its success in image synthesis, we observe that
diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) often lack contextual reasoning ability to learn the relations among object
parts in an image, leading to a slow learning process. To
solve this issue, we propose a Masked Diffusion Transformer
(MDT) that introduces a mask latent modeling scheme to
explicitly enhance the DPMs’ ability to contextual relation
learning among object semantic parts in an image. During
training, MDT operates in the latent space to mask certain
tokens. Then, an asymmetric masking diffusion transformer
is designed to predict masked tokens from unmasked ones
while maintaining the diffusion generation process. Our
MDT can reconstruct the full information of an image from
its incomplete contextual input, thus enabling it to learn
the associated relations among image tokens. Experimental results show that MDT achieves superior image synthesis performance, e.g., a new SOTA FID score in the ImageNet data set, and has about 3× faster learning speed
than the previous SOTA DiT. The source code is released at
https://github.com/sail-sg/MDT.

MDT

DiT

Abstract

∼3.2×

Training steps (k)

∼3.0×

Training time (days)

Figure 1. Top: Visual examples of MDT/DiT [35]. Down: learning progress comparison between DiT and MDT w.r.t. training
steps/time on 8×A100 GPUs. MDT has about 3× faster learning
speed than DiT while achieving superior FID scores.

ference speed. Nevertheless, improving the training speed of
DPMs is less explored but highly desired. Training of DPMs
also unavoidably requires a large number of time steps to
ensure the convergence of SDEs, making it very computationally expensive, especially in this era where large-scale
models [11,35] and data [9,14,44] are often used to improve
generation performance.
In this work, we ﬁrst observe that DPMs often struggle
to learn the associated relations among object parts in an
image. This leads to its slow learning process during training. Speciﬁcally, as illustrated in Fig. 1, the classical DPM,
DDPM [21] with DiT [35] as the backbone, has learned the
shape of a dog at the 50k-th training step, then learns its
one eye and mouth until at the 200k-th step while missing
another eye. Also, the relative position of two ears is not
very accurate, even at the 300k-th step. This learning process reveals that DPMs fail to learn the associated relations

23164

