This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Incremental Generalized Category Discovery
Bingchen Zhao Oisin Mac Aodha
University of Edinburgh
https://bzhao.me/iNatIGCD

Stage-0
Stage-1
Stage-2
Stage-3

Figure 1: We explore the task of discovering novel categories over time. Here we illustrate visual differences between the
same categories across different continents, where the continent colors represent four different incremental learning stages
from our new iNatIGCD dataset. Each box contains two instances of the same category, where the images are from different
geographical locations. We can see that the background and appearance can change dramatically across different locations.

Abstract
We explore the problem of Incremental Generalized Category Discovery (IGCD). This is a challenging categoryincremental learning setting where the goal is to develop
models that can correctly categorize images from previously seen categories, in addition to discovering novel ones.
Learning is performed over a series of time steps where the
model obtains new labeled and unlabeled data, and discards old data, at each iteration. The difficulty of the problem is compounded in our generalized setting as the unlabeled data can contain images from categories that may
or may not have been observed before. We present a new
method for IGCD which combines non-parametric categorization with efficient image sampling to mitigate catastrophic forgetting. To quantify performance, we propose a
new benchmark dataset named iNatIGCD that is motivated
by a real-world fine-grained visual categorization task. In
our experiments we outperform existing related methods.

1. Introduction
The wealth and complexity of visual information potentially observable by artificial systems deployed in the real
world vastly exceeds the comparative simplicity of our carefully curated benchmark vision datasets. To operate safely
and reliably in challenging environments, these systems
need to be able to correctly recognize previously learned
concepts, not confuse these known concepts with novel
ones, and be able to differentiate novel concepts so that
they can be grouped and efficiently learned. As humans,
we excel at this type of flexible learning in such dynamic
settings [1, 34], and it is clear that we need to endow our
artificial systems with similar desirable abilities.
In the context of visual categorization, there is a rich
body of work that has moved beyond the traditional supervised setting into more open-ended learning paradigms.
For example, in semi-supervised learning, in addition to labeled data, during training we also have access to unlabeled

19137

