This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards High-Fidelity Text-Guided 3D Face Generation and Manipulation
Using only Images
Cuican Yu*1 , Guansong Lu*2 , Yihan Zeng*2 , Jian Sun1 , Xiaodan Liang3 ,
Huibin Li1 , Zongben Xu1 , Songcen Xu2 , Wei Zhang2 , Hang Xu2†
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Sun Yat-sen University
ccy2017@stu.xjtu.edu.cn {luguansong,zengyihan2,xusongcen,wz.zhang}@huawei.com
{jiansun,huibinli,zbxu}@xjtu.edu.cn {xdliang328,chromexbjxh}@gmail.com

He has sideburns.

This woman has arched eyebrows and wavy hair. She is wearing lipstick.

This woman has blond hair and pale skin.

This woman has arched eyebrows and straight hair. She is wearing lipstick.

This young man has bangs and black hair. He is smiling.

This woman has bangs and black hair. She is smiling.

Figure 1. 3D face generations of our TG-3DFace. Given input texts, TG-3DFace can generate high-quality 3D faces with multi-viewconsistent rendered face images and detailed 3D face meshes. Notably, fine-grained facial attributes are well controlled by the input texts.

Abstract
Generating 3D faces from textual descriptions has a multitude of applications, such as gaming, movie, and robotics.
Recent progresses have demonstrated the success of unconditional 3D face generation and text-to-3D shape generation. However, due to the limited text-3D face data pairs,
text-driven 3D face generation remains an open problem.
In this paper, we propose a text-guided 3D faces generation method, refer as TG-3DFace, for generating realistic
3D faces using text guidance. Specifically, we adopt an
unconditional 3D face generation framework and equip it
with text conditions, which learns the text-guided 3D face
generation with only text-2D face data. On top of that,

we propose two text-to-face cross-modal alignment techniques, including the global contrastive learning and the
fine-grained alignment module, to facilitate high semantic
consistency between generated 3D faces and input texts.
Besides, we present directional classifier guidance during
the inference process, which encourages creativity for outof-domain generations. Compared to the existing methods,
TG-3DFace creates more realistic and aesthetically pleasing 3D faces, boosting 9% multi-view consistency (MVIC)
over Latent3D. The rendered face images generated by TG3DFace achieve higher FID and CLIP score than text-to-2D
face/image generation models, demonstrating our superiority in generating realistic and semantic-consistent textures.

∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

15326

