This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Computation Sharing for Multi-Task Visual Scene Understanding
Sara Shoouri

Mingyu Yang

Zichen Fan

Hun-Seok Kim

University of Michigan
{sshoouri,mingyuy,zcfan,hunseok}@umich.edu

Abstract
Solving multiple visual tasks using individual models can
be resource-intensive, while multi-task learning can conserve resources by sharing knowledge across different tasks.
Despite the benefits of multi-task learning, such techniques
can struggle with balancing the loss for each task, leading
to potential performance degradation. We present a novel
computation- and parameter-sharing framework that balances efficiency and accuracy to perform multiple visual
tasks utilizing individually-trained single-task transformers.
Our method is motivated by transfer learning schemes to
reduce computational and parameter storage costs while
maintaining the desired performance. Our approach involves splitting the tasks into a base task and the other
sub-tasks, and sharing a significant portion of activations
and parameters/weights between the base and sub-tasks
to decrease inter-task redundancies and enhance knowledge sharing. The evaluation conducted on NYUD-v2 and
PASCAL-context datasets shows that our method is superior
to the state-of-the-art transformer-based multi-task learning techniques with higher accuracy and reduced computational resources. Moreover, our method is extended to
video stream inputs, further reducing computational costs
by efficiently sharing information across the temporal domain as well as the task domain. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/sarashoouri/EfficientMTL.

1. Introduction
In various computer vision applications, it is required to
obtain a comprehensive understanding of the visual scene
by performing multiple tasks based on a single input image.
These tasks often involve performing dense or pixel-wise
predictions such as semantic segmentation, depth estimation,
surface normal estimation, etc., for practical applications
in autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented or virtual
reality (AR/VR) [68]. Traditionally, these tasks are tackled
individually by training a separate neural network dedicated
to each task. However, this single-task learning can lead

Figure 1: Parameter and activation sharing across task and
temporal domains. First, the base task produces its activations at time t, then passes them to sub-tasks bk to share
the computation across the task domain. Also, the base task
activations at time t are shared with time t + 1 to reduce the
computation across the temporal domain.
to redundant computation and parameters, particularly for
highly correlated tasks, losing the opportunity to perform
faster inference as desired in real-time applications [59].
Multi-task learning (MTL) [6, 16, 34, 70, 73] has been
actively explored as a solution to this problem, which learns
a single unified model to perform multiple tasks simultaneously. This approach allows the model to learn common representations and patterns from multiple supervised
tasks [74], resulting in a more memory- and computationefficient structure than employing multiple single-task networks. Additionally, multi-task networks can potentially
enhance the performance of all tasks by leveraging the crosstask knowledge-sharing mechanism [59]. Due to the benefits
of multi-task learning, numerous multi-task structures have
been proposed to improve task-wise interactions in dense
visual scene understanding [43, 65, 59, 75, 77, 42, 18]. The
recent success of transformer models in many downstream
vision tasks [37, 13, 78, 61, 49, 38] has led to the emergence
of transformer-based multi-task networks [51, 2, 68, 7, 44],
aimed at improving multi-task performance even further.

17130

