This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Active Stereo Without Pattern Projector
Luca Bartolomei∗,†

Matteo Poggi†
∗

Fabio Tosi†

Andrea Conti†

Stefano Mattoccia∗,†

Advanced Research Center on Electronic System (ARCES)
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy

†

{luca.bartolomei5, m.poggi, fabio.tosi5, andrea.conti35, stefano.mattoccia}@unibo.it
https://vppstereo.github.io/
Bad3: 70.09%

Bad3: 0.95%

Bad3: 0.35%

Bad2: 38.94%

Bad2: 11.64%

Bad2: 9.93%

(d)

(e)

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Virtual Pattern Projection for deep stereo. Either in challenging outdoor (top) or indoor (bottom) environments (a), a stereo
network such as PSMNet [8] often struggles (b). By projecting a virtual pattern on images (c), the very same network dramatically improves
its accuracy (d). Further training the model to deal with the augmented images (e) improves the results even more.

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel framework integrating the
principles of active stereo in standard passive camera systems without a physical pattern projector. We virtually
project a pattern over the left and right images according
to the sparse measurements obtained from a depth sensor.
Any such devices can be seamlessly plugged into our framework, allowing for the deployment of a virtual active stereo
setup in any possible environment, overcoming the limitation of pattern projectors, such as limited working range or
environmental conditions. Experiments on indoor/outdoor
datasets, featuring both long and close-range, support the
seamless effectiveness of our approach, boosting the accuracy of both stereo algorithms and deep networks.

1. Introduction
Depth perception is crucial in several computer vision
tasks, including autonomous driving, 3D reconstruction,
robotics, and augmented reality. Inferring depth from standard cameras, according to different setups and strategies,
is one of the most widely deployed techniques due to its

low cost and potentially unbounded image resolution. At
the core of these approaches, using multiple cameras or
a moving one, there is the problem of determining visual
correspondence. However, matching points across frames
is inherently ambiguous in the presence of textureless regions, repetitive patterns, and non-Lambertian materials.
This task is even more challenging when performed densely
for each pixel in the input images. Although deep learning
has achieved excellent results, as witnessed by the recent
literature [53], it is also prone to the well-known domain
shift issue absent in conventional, less accurate hand-crafted
methods. Specifically, since learning-based methods rely on
training data, they suffer severe drops in accuracy when facing different data distributions [52]. A different approach to
depth perception relies on active sensing technologies, such
as LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging), ToF (Time of
Flight), and Radar (Radio Detection and Ranging). However, each technology has limitations. LiDAR technology
is reliable but features a density much lower than the resolution of modern cameras, making it extremely expensive
as density increases. ToF suffers from the same limitation
and is also unreliable under sunlight and at longer distances.
Radar allows for a more extended depth range sensing, but
it is sparser, noisier, and with a narrower vertical field of

18470

