This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DELFlow: Dense Efficient Learning of Scene Flow for Large-Scale Point Clouds
Chensheng Peng1 , Guangming Wang1 , Xian Wan Lo1 , Xinrui Wu1 , Chenfeng Xu2 ,
Masayoshi Tomizuka2 , Wei Zhan2 , and Hesheng Wang1 *
1
Department of Automation, Key Laboratory of System Control and Information Processing of
Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Mechanical Systems Control Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley
{pesiter-swift,wangguangming,kaylex.lo,916806487,wanghesheng}@sjtu.edu.cn
{xuchenfeng,tomizuka,wzhan}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Point clouds are naturally sparse, while image pixels
are dense. The inconsistency limits feature fusion from
both modalities for point-wise scene flow estimation. Previous methods rarely predict scene flow from the entire point
clouds of the scene with one-time inference due to the memory inefficiency and heavy overhead from distance calculation and sorting involved in commonly used farthest point
sampling, KNN, and ball query algorithms for local feature aggregation. To mitigate these issues in scene flow
learning, we regularize raw points to a dense format by
storing 3D coordinates in 2D grids. Unlike the sampling
operation commonly used in existing works, the dense 2D
representation 1) preserves most points in the given scene,
2) brings in a significant boost of efficiency, and 3) eliminates the density gap between points and pixels, allowing
us to perform effective feature fusion. We also present a
novel warping projection technique to alleviate the information loss problem resulting from the fact that multiple points
could be mapped into one grid during projection when computing cost volume. Sufficient experiments demonstrate the
efficiency and effectiveness of our method, outperforming
the prior-arts on the FlyingThings3D and KITTI dataset.
Our source codes will be released on https://github.
com/IRMVLab/DELFlow.

1. Introduction
Scene flow represents the point-wise motion between a
pair of frames, specifically the magnitude and direction of
the 3D motion. As a low-level task, 3D scene flow estimation is beneficial to numerous high-level scene understanding tasks in autonomous driving, such as LiDAR odometry
[46], object tracking [47], and semantic segmentation [18].
* Corresponding Authors. The first two authors contributed equally.

Figure 1. Comparison of current point cloud processing frameworks. (a) 3D grid-based methods. (b) 3D point-based methods. (c) 2D perspective grid-based methods. (d) Our outlier-aware
point-based methods, where outliers are filtered out.

Early works [7, 31] convert point cloud into 3D voxel
grids and process them with 3D Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). However, the computational costs of such
voxel-based methods grow drastically with the resolution.
Besides voxelization (Fig. 1a), recent studies [9, 17, 51, 43]
resort to learning scene flow directly from the raw coordinates of point clouds in 3D space. These point-based methods [17, 51, 45, 40] (Fig. 1b) relies on feature aggregation
from neighborhood points with a PointNet [28, 29] structure. Nevertheless, the most commonly used K Nearest
Neighbors (KNN) and ball query algorithms in solutions
[9, 17, 51, 41] require frequent distance calculation and
sorting between point clouds, which are memory-inefficient
and time-consuming. Therefore, only a limited number of
points are taken as inputs because large-scale input point
clouds indicate more GPU memory consumption. The inefficiency led to the proposal of projection-based methods
[4, 48, 49], where 2D convolutions are applied to the projected point cloud on image plane. As shown in Fig. 1c,
a convolution kernel is used to perform feature extraction
among nine neighbors. Such 2D perspective grid-based
methods suffer from the neighboring outliers and are not
flexible since effective 3D methods cannot be applied.

16901

