This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViperGPT: Visual Inference via Python Execution for Reasoning
Dídac Surís* , Sachit Menon* , Carl Vondrick
Columbia University
viper.cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Answering visual queries is a complex task that requires
both visual processing and reasoning. End-to-end models,
the dominant approach for this task, do not explicitly differentiate between the two, limiting interpretability and generalization. Learning modular programs presents a promising
alternative, but has proven challenging due to the difficulty
of learning both the programs and modules simultaneously.
We introduce ViperGPT, a framework that leverages codegeneration models to compose vision-and-language models
into subroutines to produce a result for any query. ViperGPT
utilizes a provided API to access the available modules, and
composes them by generating Python code that is later executed. This simple approach requires no further training,
and achieves state-of-the-art results across various complex
visual tasks.

1. Introduction
How many muffins can each kid in Figure 1 (top) eat for
it to be fair? To answer this, we might 1) find the children
and the muffins in the image, 2) count how many there are
of each, and 3) reason that ‘fair’ implies an even split, hence
divide. People find it natural to compositionally combine
individual steps together to understand the visual world.
Yet, the dominant approach in the field of computer vision
remains end-to-end models, which do not inherently leverage this compositional reasoning.
Although the field has made large progress on individual
tasks such as object recognition and depth estimation, endto-end approaches to complex tasks must learn to implicitly
perform all tasks within the forward pass of a neural network. Not only does this fail to make use of the advances
in fundamental vision tasks at different steps, it does not
make use of the fact that computers can perform mathematical operations (e.g., division) easily without machine learning. We cannot trust neural models to generalize systematically to different numbers of muffins or children. Endto-end models also produce fundamentally uninterpretable
decisions – there is no way to audit the result of each step

to diagnose failure. As models grow increasingly data and
compute-hungry, this approach grows increasingly untenable. We would like to perform new tasks without additional
training by recombining our existing models in new ways.
What limits us from creating such modular systems for
more complex tasks? In previous years, the pioneering
works of Neural Module Networks [2, 28, 20] attempted to
decompose tasks into simpler modules. By training end-toend with modules rearranged in different ways for different
problems, the hope was that each module would learn their
appropriate function and thereby become reusable. However, numerous issues made this approach difficult to extend
to the real world. In particular, program generation relied
on hand-tuned natural language parsers [2], or otherwise required reinforcement learning from scratch and were thus
difficult to optimize [20, 28]. In each case, program generation was highly domain-limited. Furthermore, learning the
perceptual models jointly with the program generator made
training even more difficult, often failing to produce the intended modular structure [3, 49].
In this work, we present ViperGPT1 , a framework that
overcomes these bottlenecks by leveraging code generating large language models (e.g. GPT-3 Codex [9]) to flexibly compose vision models based on any textual query that
defines the task. It creates customized programs for each
query that take images or videos as argument and return the
result of the query for that image or video. We show that
providing Codex an API exposing various visual capabilities (e.g. find, compute_depth), just as one might provide
an engineer, is sufficient for the creation of these programs.
The model’s prior training on code enables it to reason
about how to use these functions and implement the relevant
logic. Our results demonstrate that this simple approach delivers remarkable zero-shot performance (i.e. without ever
training on task specific images).
Our simple approach enjoys many benefits: it is 1) interpretable, as all the steps are explicit as code function calls
with intermediate values that can be inspected; 2) logical, as
it explicitly uses built-in Python logical and mathematical
operators; 3) flexible, as it can easily incorporate any vision
or language module, only requiring the specification of the

* Equal contribution. Order determined via coin flip and may be listed
either way.

1 We name our method after a snake because it executes Python code.

11888

