This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spectral Graphormer: Spectral Graph-based Transformer for Egocentric
Two-Hand Reconstruction using Multi-View Color Images
Tze Ho Elden Tse1,2 * Franziska Mueller1 Zhengyang Shen1 Danhang Tang1 Thabo Beeler1
Mingsong Dou1 Yinda Zhang1 Sasa Petrovic1 Hyung Jin Chang2 Jonathan Taylor1 Bardia Doosti1
1
2
Google
University of Birmingham
Input

Abstract
We propose a novel transformer-based framework that
reconstructs two high fidelity hands from multi-view RGB
images. Unlike existing hand pose estimation methods,
where one typically trains a deep network to regress hand
model parameters from single RGB image, we consider a
more challenging problem setting where we directly regress
the absolute root poses of two-hands with extended forearm at high resolution from egocentric view. As existing
datasets are either infeasible for egocentric viewpoints or
lack background variations, we create a large-scale synthetic dataset with diverse scenarios and collect a real
dataset from multi-calibrated camera setup to verify our
proposed multi-view image feature fusion strategy. To make
the reconstruction physically plausible, we propose two
strategies: (i) a coarse-to-fine spectral graph convolution
decoder to smoothen the meshes during upsampling and (ii)
an optimisation-based refinement stage at inference to prevent self-penetrations. Through extensive quantitative and
qualitative evaluations, we show that our framework is able
to produce realistic two-hand reconstructions and demonstrate the generalisation of synthetic-trained models to real
data, as well as real-time AR/VR applications.

1. Introduction
3D hand pose estimation is a fundamental problem in
various downstream applications including augmented and
virtual reality (AR/VR) [19, 20, 25, 26, 47, 58, 63]. Research
efforts in designing 3D hand or hand-object reconstruction
networks have shown great effectiveness for single-hand
pose estimation [15, 22, 27, 59, 60, 66]. However, two-hand
pose estimation has received relatively little attention. In
this paper, as illustrated in Fig. 1, we focus on high fidelity
two-hand reconstruction from multi-view RGB images.
With the availability of the InterHand2.6M dataset [46],
various methods have been recently proposed. More recent
* This work was done during an internship at Google.

Front view

Zoomed view

Rotated view

Figure 1: Our method jointly reconstructs high fidelity twohand meshes from multi-view RGB image. The input images shown here are from our synthetic dataset, which contains challenging video sequences of two hands rendered
into egocentric views.
methods focused on alleviating the self-similarity problem
between interacting hands by exploiting hand part segmentation probability [18], joint visibility [33], cascaded refinement modules [65] or keypoints using Transformer [24]. Although they perform well on complex configurations, their
dependence on root joint alignment does not provide absolute root pose recovery when applied to multi-view scenarios, which is especially crucial for interactions in VR.
Moreover, many immersive AR/VR applications require
accurate estimation of two hands including extended forearms as it allows for a more realistic and accurate representation of hand movements and gestures. By including the
forearm, the orientation and movement of the hand in relation to the arm can provide important contextual information for the user’s actions in the virtual environment. Additionally, it can reduce errors and improve the stability of
the tracking system, which is important for maintaining immersion and avoiding disorientation in AR/VR applications.
However, as in many other areas of computer vision, there

14666

