This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gramian Attention Heads are Strong yet Efficient Vision Learners
Jongbin Ryu⋆
Ajou University

Dongyoon Han⋆
NAVER AI Lab

Jongwoo Lim†
Seoul National University

jongbinryu@ajou.ac.kr

dongyoon.han@navercorp.com

jongwoo.lim@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce a novel architecture design that enhances expressiveness by incorporating multiple head classifiers (i.e.,
classification heads) instead of relying on channel expansion or additional building blocks. Our approach employs
attention-based aggregation, utilizing pairwise feature similarity to enhance multiple lightweight heads with minimal
resource overhead. We compute the Gramian matrices to
reinforce class tokens in an attention layer for each head.
This enables the heads to learn more discriminative representations, enhancing their aggregation capabilities. Furthermore, we propose a learning algorithm that encourages
heads to complement each other by reducing correlation
for aggregation. Our models eventually surpass state-ofthe-art CNNs and ViTs regarding the accuracy-throughput
trade-off on ImageNet-1K and deliver remarkable performance across various downstream tasks, such as COCO
object instance segmentation, ADE20k semantic segmentation, and fine-grained visual classification datasets. The
effectiveness of our framework is substantiated by practical experimental results and further underpinned by generalization error bound. We release the code publicly at:
https://github.com/Lab-LVM/imagenet-models.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning opened the door to the emergence of
a plethora of milestone networks [52, 23, 59, 40, 11, 39] that
achieved significant success on ImageNet [48]. Training a
single network with the cross-entropy loss has been a simple
standard for image classification; this also holds for training
multiple networks or multiple features [43, 34, 74, 55, 51,
13]. The methods of extracting multiple features at different
stages aim to aggregate diversified features from an architectural perspective. Previous works [43, 34, 55, 13] expand
their architectures by incorporating many trainable layers
to refine features, relying on the architectural perspective.
⋆ Equal contribution.
† This work was done when Jongwoo Lim was professor at Hanyang
University.

Their success is likely attributed to extra heavy layers that
promote feature diversification. However, it remains uncertain whether the architectures effectively promote learning
favorable less-correlated representations [53, 7, 50, 29, 28].
Additionally, their intentional design for high network capacity with numerous trainable parameters increases computational demands.
In this paper, we present a new design concept of deep
neural networks that learns multiple less-correlated features
at the same time. Since motivated by feature aggregation
methods [43, 34, 74], we aim to avoid excessively overparameterized networks and realize performance improvement through the learning of multiple less-correlated features. Our architecture consists of multiple shallow head
classifiers on top of the backbone instead of increasing depth
or width and without employing complicated decoder-like
architectures. Therefore, it is evident that our architecture
offers a speed advantage, but the potentially limited expressiveness with lightweight heads is problematic. A question
that naturally arises is how can we improve the network capacity of shallow heads with limited trainable parameters?
Our answer centers on the idea of introducing the
Gramian matrix [17, 73] combined with the attention module [65]. The Gramian is identical to the bilinear pooling [36]
that collects the feature correlations so that the attention
can further leverage the information of the Gramian of features. Specifically, we compute the Gramian matrices of
each output of heads before the final predictions and feed
them into each attention as the query, which brings the pairwise similarity of features. This design principle is naturally
scalable to any backbones, including Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) [23, 26, 59, 45, 40], Vision Transformers
(ViTs) [11, 39], and hybrid architectures [9, 20, 75, 63].
We further introduce a learning algorithm that forces
each head to learn different and less correlated representations. The algorithm is based on the proposed decorrelation
loss, which performs like an inverse knowledge distillation
loss [25]. Our proposed framework compels lightweight
heads to learn distinguished and enhanced representations.
It turns out that our trained models can replace complicated
ones through empirical evaluations and effectively be gener-

5841

