This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Segmentation of Humans in Point Clouds with Synthetic Data
Ayça Takmaz∗1 Jonas Schult∗2 Irem Kaftan†1 Mertcan Akçay†1 Bastian Leibe2 Robert Sumner1
Francis Engelmann1,3 Siyu Tang1
1

ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Input Point Cloud

2

RWTH Aachen University, Germany
human-3d.github.io

Human3D

Synthetic Training Data

instances

body parts

3

ETH AI Center, Switzerland

Multi-Human
Body-Part
Segmentation

Real Training Data

instances

body parts

Instance
Segmentation

Figure 1: We propose Human3D, the first end-to-end model for 3D multi-human body-part segmentation in point clouds. Motivated by
the lack of diverse and accurately labeled 3D human datasets, we generate synthetic training data of virtual humans in realistic 3D indoor
scenes and demonstrate its potential in combination with pseudo-labels on real data. Above, we show an in-the-wild example of our model
that is trained on synthetic data and real Kinect depth data, and tested on a reconstructed point cloud scanned with an iPhone LiDAR sensor.

Abstract
Segmenting humans in 3D indoor scenes has become
increasingly important with the rise of human-centered
robotics and AR/VR applications. To this end, we propose the task of joint 3D human semantic segmentation,
instance segmentation and multi-human body-part segmentation. Few works have attempted to directly segment humans in cluttered 3D scenes, which is largely due to the
lack of annotated training data of humans interacting with
3D scenes. We address this challenge and propose a framework for generating training data of synthetic humans interacting with real 3D scenes. Furthermore, we propose
a novel transformer-based model, Human3D, which is the
first end-to-end model for segmenting multiple human instances and their body-parts in a unified manner. The key
advantage of our synthetic data generation framework is
its ability to generate diverse and realistic human-scene interactions, with highly accurate ground truth. Our experiments show that pre-training on synthetic data improves
performance on a wide variety of 3D human segmentation
tasks. Finally, we demonstrate that Human3D outperforms
even task-specific state-of-the-art 3D segmentation methods.

1

Introduction
In this work, we address the task of segmenting humans
∗,† indicate equal contribution.

in point clouds. In particular, we focus on 3D semantic
segmentation (humans vs. background), 3D instance segmentation (masking multiple humans) and 3D multi-human
body-part segmentation (segmenting human instances together with their body parts) as shown in Fig. 1 (right).
As human-centered robotics and embodied AI are becoming more popular, there has been a growing interest
in the development of methods for 2D human segmentation [11, 23, 25, 29, 81, 82, 87] and 3D human detection and
segmentation [14, 36, 38, 64, 78]. While image-based methods have inherent limitations in their ability to reason in
3D, existing 3D methods mainly focus on simplified scenarios in which they only consider individual humans with
pre-defined foreground segmentation masks and minimal
occlusions. Real-life 3D scenarios, however, are typically
cluttered, which can lead to strong occlusions when humans
interact closely with each other and their environment.
3D segmentation of humans in point clouds (or depth
maps) is a critical aspect of perceiving humans in various applications, such as AR/VR and robotics, in which
depth sensors are commonly available and heavily used.
For such applications, using point clouds has certain advantages. First, point clouds provide accurate scale and geometry, and are robust against illumination changes. Second, in the realm of human-related computer vision, point
clouds are less biased towards visual appearance of humans.
This can improve model fairness, and ensures better privacy
when collecting data of real humans.

1292

