This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Helping Hands: An Object-Aware Ego-Centric Video Recognition Model
Chuhan Zhang
VGG, University of Oxford

Ankush Gupta
Google DeepMind, London

Andrew Zisserman
VGG, University of Oxford

czhang@robots.ox.ac.uk

ankushgupta@google.com

az@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce an object-aware decoder for improving
the performance of spatio-temporal representations on egocentric videos. The key idea is to enhance object-awareness
during training by tasking the model to predict hand positions, object positions, and the semantic label of the objects
using paired captions when available. At inference time the
model only requires RGB frames as inputs, and is able to
track and ground objects (although it has not been trained
explicitly for this).
We demonstrate the performance of the object-aware
representations learnt by our model, by: (i) evaluating it for
strong transfer, i.e. through zero-shot testing, on a number
of downstream video-text retrieval and classification benchmarks; and (ii) by using the representations learned as input for long-term video understanding tasks (e.g. Episodic
Memory in Ego4D). In all cases the performance improves
over the state of the art—even compared to networks trained
with far larger batch sizes. We also show that by using
noisy image-level detection as pseudo-labels in training, the
model learns to provide better bounding boxes using video
consistency, as well as grounding the words in the associated text descriptions.
Overall, we show that the model can act as a drop-in
replacement for an ego-centric video model to improve performance through visual-text grounding1 .

1. Introduction
In visual-language models there has been a recent move
to explicitly build object awareness into the vision module by adding specialized and bespoke components, or using entirely object-centric architectures. The motivation
for this partly comes from the attractive compositional nature of objects and their inter-relationships in language,
which enables inexhaustible novel combinations [10, 45],
and partly from infant cognitive studies that stress the im1 Code and models available at:
https://github.com/
Chuhanxx/helping_hand_for_egocentric_videos

portance of objects in early visual development [29, 56, 60].
Examples in the video domain include explicit internal object representations [2], e.g., through RoI-align [17] pooled
features either from a pre-trained region-proposal network
(RPN) [2, 52, 57, 62], or from bounding-box coordinates
taken as input [19, 42, 48, 71]. This contrasts with the
large body of work where standard representations are
learnt end-to-end without any explicit factorization into objects/entities, such as dual-encoder vision-language models
in the image [21, 49] and video domains [4, 64].
In this paper, we take a different (middle) path and instead use a vanilla video transformer architecture and induce object-awareness into the video representation by tasking the model to predict object-level properties, such as their
localization and semantic categories, only during training.
Our target domain is ego-centric video [11, 16], and
we tailor the object properties used to this. In ego-centric
videos the actor [57] is often present through their hands,
and we therefore task the network to predict both the hands
and the principal objects they interact with. As will be
seen, this simple object-aware training boosts the performance of pre-trained video-language architectures significantly, and leads to state-of-art performance across multiple ego-centric benchmarks. During inference, the model
requires only RGB frames as input, and operates as a standard video-language network.
In more detail, our model is built on top of a pre-trained
video-language dual encoder architecture (where there are
separate encoders for the video and text data). We add an
additional, but vanilla, transformer decoder head [61], and
train with DETR/Mask2former [7, 9] query vectors and object loss for hands and other objects. The intuition is that
these additional query vectors help the model to attend to
and track the hands and salient objects in the scene (these
are the ‘helping hands’ of the paper title). Importantly,
we do not require dense frame level ground truth for this
training. Rather, we obtain somewhat noisy and temporally
sparse annotations automatically from a hand object detector [53], and use these to provide prediction targets for the
frames where they are available. This opportunistic use of
annotations is pragmatic as object detectors trained on third-

13901

