This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Models as Masked Autoencoders
Chen Wei1 2 Karttikeya Mangalam1 Po-Yao Huang1 Yanghao Li1
Haoqi Fan1 Hu Xu1 Huiyu Wang1 Cihang Xie3 Alan Yuille2 Christoph Feichtenhofer1
1

FAIR, Meta AI

2

Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
There has been a longstanding belief that generation
can facilitate a true understanding of visual data. In line
with this, we revisit generatively pre-training visual representations in light of recent interest in denoising diffusion
models. While directly pre-training with diffusion models
does not produce strong representations, we condition diffusion models on masked input and formulate diffusion models as masked autoencoders (DiffMAE). Our approach is
capable of (i) serving as a strong initialization for downstream recognition tasks, (ii) conducting high-quality image inpainting, and (iii) being effortlessly extended to video
where it produces state-of-the-art classification accuracy.
We further perform a comprehensive study on the pros and
cons of design choices and build connections between diffusion models and masked autoencoders. Project page.

1. Introduction
“What I cannot create, I do not understand.”
—— Richard P. Feynman, 1988
For many years, there has been a desire to achieve a deeper
understanding of visual data through the process of generation. Early approaches, such as deep belief networks [33]
and denoising autoencoders [72], employed generative pretraining to initialize deep networks for downstream recognition tasks. As generative models can create new samples by
approximating the data distribution, it stands to reason that
such modeling should simultaneously arrive at a semantic
understanding of the raw visual data, as required for recognition tasks, following Feynman.
In line with this philosophy, generative language models, e.g., Generative Pre-trained Transformers or GPTs [3],
obtain a broad understanding of language and an immense
knowledge base, excelling as both a few-shot learner and a
pre-trained base model. Nevertheless, recent explorations
in vision generative pre-training fall out of favor. For example, GAN-based BiGAN [15, 16] and auto-regressive
iGPT [7] noticeably fall short of their concurrent contrastive algorithms despite of using 10× more parame-

3

UC Santa Cruz

Gaussian noise

sampled image

Figure 1. Inference process of DiffMAE, which iteratively unfolds from random Gaussian noise to the sampled output. During
training, the model learns to denoise the input at different noise
levels (from top row to the bottom) and simultaneously performs
self-supervised pre-training for downstream recognition.

ters. The challenge stems, in part, from the divergent focus: While recognition models primarily focus on the highlevel low-frequency structure of images, generation models must also allocate capacity for low-level high-frequency
details [60]. Given this discrepancy, it remains an open
question whether and how generative pre-training can effectively compete with other self-supervised algorithms on
downstream recognition tasks despite its intuitive appeal.
In recent years, the field of image generation has been
dominated by denoising diffusion models [67, 35]. These
models employ a straightforward process of iteratively refining noisy samples. As a result, the generated images are
of impressively high quality, and even better, can generate
an extensive range of diverse samples [50, 59, 64]. In light
of this progress, we revisit the potential of generative pretraining in the context of diffusion models.
To begin with, we directly fine-tune a pre-trained diffusion model [13] on ImageNet classification [11]. Despite its
strong performance for unconditional image generation, the
pre-trained diffusion model only yields a marginal improvement in classification when compared to training the same
architecture from scratch (Sec. 3), and is outperformed by
concurrent self-supervised pre-training algorithms such as
Masked Autoencoders (MAE) [30].

16284

