This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIPTER: Looking at the Bigger Picture in Scene Text Recognition
Aviad Aberdam1 * David Bensaı̈d2† Alona Golts1 Roy Ganz2† Oren Nuriel1
Royee Tichauer1 Shai Mazor1 Ron Litman1
1

AWS AI Labs

2

Technion, Israel

Abstract
Reading text in real-world scenarios often requires understanding the context surrounding it, especially when
dealing with poor-quality text. However, current scene text
recognizers are unaware of the bigger picture as they operate on cropped text images. In this study, we harness
the representative capabilities of modern vision-language
models, such as CLIP, to provide scene-level information to
the crop-based recognizer. We achieve this by fusing a rich
representation of the entire image, obtained from the visionlanguage model, with the recognizer word-level features via
a gated cross-attention mechanism. This component gradually shifts to the context-enhanced representation, allowing for stable fine-tuning of a pretrained recognizer. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our model-agnostic framework, CLIPTER (CLIP TExt Recognition), on leading text
recognition architectures and achieve state-of-the-art results across multiple benchmarks. Furthermore, our analysis highlights improved robustness to out-of-vocabulary
words and enhanced generalization in low-data regimes.

Can You Read These?
PARSeq: part

CLIPTER: exit

CLIPTER: 5

CLIPTER: beer

Figure 1: The Importance of Seeing the Bigger Picture.
Scene context often assists in reading text in real-world scenarios, and in certain cases, it is even vital. Thus, current
crop-based text recognizers are inherently limited (Top). To
address this limitation, our method, CLIPTER, provides the
recognizer with scene information (Bottom).

Mets
Pooling

❆

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author aaberdam@amazon.com.
† Work done during an Amazon internship.

PARSeq: beef

What About Now?

Image Encoder

Recognizing text in real-world settings often involves
leveraging contextual information from the scene, particularly when dealing with blurry, low-resolution, corrupted, or
occluded text, as showcased in Fig. 1. Conversely, learningbased methods typically detect text in the image and then
perform recognition solely on the cropped detected regions,
neglecting valuable scene information [8, 38, 20, 9, 2, 1, 6,
48, 11, 39, 70, 72, 46]. As a result, the practice of operating
on cropped text images is inherently suboptimal.
To overcome this limitation, we explore the use of
vision-language models. These models, pretrained on a vast
corpus of image-caption pairs, exhibit powerful representation capabilities and can be used for numerous downstream
tasks [51, 63, 44, 14, 4, 34, 65, 35]. Unlike models trained
only on visual data, such as MAE [23], vision-language
models are also supervised by the corresponding textual de-

PARSeq: s

Decoder
Gated Fusion
Cross Attention
Encoder

Text Recognizer

Vision Language Model

CLIPTER

Figure 2: CLIPTER – Incorporating Scene Context into
Text Recognizers. Our novel approach employs a frozen
vision-language model, such as CLIP, to extract rich features of the entire scene image. These features are then
fused with the crop-level features using our gated crossattention mechanism, which gradually shifts the pretrained
recognizer to the context-enriched features.
scription. This description brings focus to the crucial details
in the scene, which in turn can assist in reading poor-quality
text, as we show later. Moreover, the image caption can
even contain actual text words in the image, such as busi-

21706

