This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IHNet: Iterative Hierarchical Network Guided by High-Resolution Estimated
Information for Scene Flow Estimation
Yun Wang∗ Cheng Chi∗ Min Lin Xin YangB
Hubei Key Laboratory of Smart Internet, School of Electronic Information and
Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
{wangyun, D202281113, xinyang2014}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Scene flow estimation, which predicts the 3D displacements of point clouds, is a fundamental task in autonomous
driving. Most methods have adopted a coarse-to-fine structure to balance computational efficiency with accuracy, particularly when handling large displacements. However, inaccuracies in the initial coarse layer’s scene flow estimates
may accumulate, leading to incorrect final estimates. To alleviate this, we introduce a novel Iterative Hierarchical Network——IHNet. This approach circulates high-resolution
estimated information (scene flow and feature) from the preceding iteration back to the low-resolution layer of the current iteration. Serving as a guide, the high-resolution estimated scene flow, instead of initializing the scene flow
from zero, provides a more precise center for low-resolution
layer to identify matches. Meanwhile, the decoder’s feature at the high-resolution layer can contribute essential
movement information. Furthermore, based on the recurrent structure, we design a resampling scheme to enhance
the correspondence between points across two consecutive
frames. By employing the previous estimated scene flow
to fine-tune the target frame’s coordinates, we can significantly reduce the correspondence discrepancy between
two frame points, a problem often caused by point sparsity. Following this adjustment, we continue to estimate
the scene flow using the newly updated coordinates, along
with the reencoded feature. Our approach outperforms the
recent state-of-the-art method WSAFlowNet by 20.1% on
FlyingThings3D and 56.0% on KITTI scene flow datasets
according to EPE3D metric. The code is available at
https://github.com/wangyunlhr/IHNet.

1. Introduction
Scene flow estimation on point clouds, which predicts
point-wise 3D motions from two consecutive point clouds,
∗ Equal contribution.

B Corresponding author.

chengchi.hust@gmail.com

is a fundamental task in autonomous driving applications
and robotics. It supplies spatiotemporal motion and matching information for a range of high-level tasks such as
multi-object tracking [36, 30], pose estimation [2], motion segmentation [20, 5, 4], etc. In recent years, due
to advancements in deep learning, neural networks have
emerged as a popular method for processing point clouds.
FlowNet3D [16] proposed an end-to-end scene flow estimation approach that leveraged PointNet++ [22] and introduced two new learnable layers, namely flow embedding
layer and set upconv layer. However, the capacity of the
flow embedding layer (cost volume) is determined by the
matching search region, which is constrained to a single resolution level due to the computational cost.
To strike a balance between accuracy and computational
efficiency while accounting for large displacements, numerous methods employed a coarse-to-fine structure for the
scene flow estimation task, such as PointPWC-Net [35] and
HALFlow [29]. The coarse-to-fine structure is a classical
“encoder-decoder” architecture, consisting of multiple layers. The pipeline first constructs feature pyramid by encoding the input and estimates at the coarsest resolution to
capture large displacements. Layer-by-layer refinement is
then performed from the coarser to finer level. During the
refinement stage, once the scene flow has been estimated at
a coarser level, it is up-sampled and then passed to the finer
level by warping. That is, the search center for matching is
determined based on the previous estimated results. What’s
more, the estimated information from coarser level will be
used to estimate scene flow for finer level.
However, early estimation can lead to errors and result in
the search area missing the true matching point, yielding inaccurate scene flow estimation. To address this, we propose
an Iterative Hierarchical Network (IHNet) based on the observation that the accuracy of downsampled estimation results from finer to coarser level is significantly higher than
that of original coarser level results (initialized from zero),
This is shown in Fig. 1. IHNet aims to mitigate the error
caused by mismatching in coarser resolution by propagating

10073

