This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attention Discriminant Sampling for Point Clouds
Cheng-Yao Hong1
1

Yu-Ying Chou2

Tyng-Luh Liu1

Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
{sensible,liutyng}@iis.sinica.edu.tw

2

National Taiwan University

d07922014@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper describes an attention-driven approach to 3-D
point cloud sampling. We establish our method based on
a structure-aware attention discriminant analysis that explores geometric and semantic relations embodied among
points and their clusters. The proposed attention discriminant sampling (ADS) starts by efficiently decomposing a
given point cloud into clusters to implicitly encode its structural and geometric relatedness among points. By treating
each cluster as a structural component, ADS then draws on
evaluating two levels of self-attention: within-cluster and
between-cluster. The former reflects the semantic complexity entailed by the learned features of points within each
cluster, while the latter reveals the semantic similarity between clusters. Driven by structurally preserving the point
distribution, these two aspects of self-attention help avoid
sampling redundancy and decide the number of sampled
points in each cluster. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that ADS significantly improves classification performance
to 95.1% on ModelNet40 and 87.5% on ScanObjectNN and
achieves 86.9% mIoU on ShapeNet Part Segmentation. For
scene segmentation, ADS yields 91.1% accuracy on S3DIS
with higher mIoU to the state-of-the-art and 75.6% mIoU on
ScanNetV2. Furthermore, ADS surpasses the state-of-the-art
with 55.0% mAP50 on ScanNetV2 object detection.

1. Introduction
Point cloud sampling is an essential step for designing
practical solutions to the respective 3-D computer vision
applications. While existing such techniques mostly rely
on utilizing distance-based geometric information to yield
efficient sampling, their main drawback is the lack of consideration of both the semantic and the structural aspects
of the underlying point cloud distribution, as shown in Figure 1. We aim to introduce a cluster-based formulation that
leverages the proposed discriminant attention analysis to
implicitly achieve structure-aware point cloud sampling.
With the great success of deep learning in solving 2-D
computer vision problems, many studies now have turned

Original Point
Cloud

FPS

Geometry-aware
Reduction

Attention Discriminant
Sampling

ADS

Geometry-semantics
-aware Reduction

Clustering

Figure 1. Overview. Unlike distance-based sampling strategies,
e.g. Farthest Point Sampling (FPS), the proposed structure-aware
Attention Discriminant Sampling (ADS) explores both geometric
and semantic information to improve representation learning and
sampling efficiency for 3-D point clouds.

to dealing with realistic and challenging 3-D tasks. It is
known that 3-D data can often be represented in various
formats, including depth images, volume grids (voxels), multiple flat polygons (meshes), and point clouds. Among them,
point clouds are raw data obtained by scanning objects with
instruments, e.g., LiDAR scanners and multibeam sonars.
Depending on the functionality of the instrument, the point
coordinates can be accompanied with other useful information such as colors and normal vectors. As the point cloud
representation retains original geometry information without any distortion, it is suitable for various applications that
require 3-D scene understanding, including autonomous navigation, virtual reality, robotics, etc. However, the irregular
and unstructured data format often makes learning directly
from raw 3-D point clouds inefficient. Previous approaches
have addressed this issue of vast computation via preprocessing, for example, by projecting point clouds to depth
images [37, 38] and enabling CNNs to tackle the resulting
tasks. The other feasible reduction is to consider voxelization
by simplifying the data into rasterized grid [27, 8, 49], which
is applicable to 3-D convolutional networks. Although such
attempts could ease the computation demand, they may still
lead to unstable performance when dealing with intricate

14429

