This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniKD: Universal Knowledge Distillation for Mimicking Homogeneous or
Heterogeneous Object Detectors
Shanshan Lao1 * Guanglu Song2 Boxiao Liu2 Yu Liu2† Yujiu Yang1†
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Sensetime Research

1

laoss21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {songguanglu, liuboxiao}@sensetime.com
liuyuisanai@gmail.com, yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

RetinaNet

Teacher

Knowledge distillation (KD) has become
a standard
Student with
FitNet object demethod to boost the performance of lightweight
tectors. Most previous works are feature-based, where stuStudent
with detectors.
dents mimic the features of homogeneous
teacher
UniKD
However, distilling the knowledge from the heterogeneous
teacher fails in this manner due to the serious semantic gap,
which greatly limits the flexibility of KD in practical applications. Bridging this semantic gap now requires case-bycase algorithm design which is time-consuming and heavily
relies on experienced adjustment. To alleviate this problem,
we propose Universal Knowledge Distillation (UniKD), introducing additional decoder heads with deformable crossattention called Adaptive Knowledge Extractor (AKE). In
UniKD, AKEs are first pretrained on the teacher’s output to
infuse the teacher’s content and positional knowledge into
a fixed-number set of knowledge embeddings. The fixed
AKEs are then attached to the student’s backbone to encourage the student to absorb the teacher’s knowledge in
these knowledge embeddings. In this query-based distillation paradigm, detection-relevant information can be dynamically aggregated into a knowledge embedding set and
transferred between different detectors. When the teacher
model is too large for online inference, its output can be
stored on disk in advance to save the computation overhead,
which is more storage efficient than feature-based methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our UniKD
can plug and play in any homogeneous or heterogeneous
teacher-student pairs and significantly outperforms conventional feature-based KD.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental computer vision task
that has been widely applied to many practical applications.
* Work done during internship at SenseTime Research.
† Corresponding authors.

mAP: 39.5

Faster
R-CNN

FCOS

mAP: 40.3

mAP: 38.5

Deformable
DETR

RetinaNet
Student

mAP: 44.5

mAP: 31.7
mAP: 34.6

mAP: 33.4

mAP: 33.4

mAP: 31.5

mAP: 35.3

mAP: 34.8

mAP: 34.7

mAP: 33.7

Image

Figure 1: The feature density of different models. First row:
four teachers. Second row: students distilled with FitNet.
Third row: students distilled with UniKD.
In recent years, various frameworks for object detection
have been proposed to improve tdetection performance such
as Faster R-CNN [19], RetinaNet [13], FCOS [21], and Deformable DETR [37]. In practical applications, different detectors often favor different devices due to constraints on
parameter number, inference latency, and even the detector
framework. For example, the high-performance Faster RCNN is not friendly to some edge devices due to the RoI
pooling operator but is often deployed in many cloud devices. Therefore, boosting the accuracy of deployable models in different detector frameworks as much as possible is
the core problem in practical applications.
Knowledge Distillation (KD) [20, 6, 31] methods have
significantly boosted the performance of lightweight student via learning from a high-capacity teacher model. This
learning paradigm explored by researchers on various visual
tasks including high-level visual understanding tasks [19,
13], as well as low-level visual tasks [25, 8]. Current detection KD methods are mostly feature-based [20, 28, 29, 26].
For example, FGD [28] improves the RetinaNet-Res50
from 37.4 mAP to 39.6 mAP by mimicking the RetinaNetRes101. However, these methods are not general enough
because they only consider homogeneous pairs of teachers and students with the same framework. How to flex-

6362

