This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReactioNet: Learning High-order Facial Behavior from Universal
Stimulus-Reaction by Dyadic Relation Reasoning
Xiaotian Li

Taoyue Wang Geran Zhao Xiang Zhang Xi Kang
State University of New York at Binghamton

Lijun Yin

{xli210, twang61, gzhao10, zxiang4, xkang3, lyin}@Binghamton.edu

Abstract
Diverse visual stimuli can evoke various human affective states, which are usually manifested in an individual’s
muscular actions and facial expressions. In lab-controlled
emotion datasets, such a critical component (i.e., stimulus) was commonly designed in a limited way, making researchers incapable of generalizing the universal correlation and causation of stimulus-reaction as well as predicting possible emotions from context, timing, and relation. In
this paper, we collected a large-scale spontaneous facial
behavior database ReactioNet, which contains 1.1 million
coupled stimulus-reaction tuples (visual/audio/caption from
both stimuli and subjects). We introduce a new facial behavior detection scenario, Dyadic Relation Reasoning (DRR),
which aims to detect facial actions by reasoning their relations with stimuli. By aggregating the dyadic information, our method essentially forms a relation prototype Universal Stimulus Reaction (U-SR), which encodes the loworder and high-order relationships between stimulus agents
and facial reactions. A framework with both non-graph and
graph modules is further developed to evaluate DRR-based
facial action unit detection, facial expression recognition,
and scene classification. Specifically, to learn “what”
arouses a facial reaction, the non-graph module associates
and projects the fine-grained stimulus-reaction features into
common subspaces using cross-domain contrastive learning. To learn “how” stimulus-reaction pairs are mutually
related, the graph module adopts Graph Convolution Network to represent, converge, and infer the dyadic U-SR relation under two relation assumptions (i.e., homophily and
heterophily [68]). Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed work. The new dataset will be
available for the research community.

1. Introduction
Human perception [10] is the transformation of external
stimuli into an accessible, subjective, and reportable experience [15], which in consequence arouses human emotions

AU 12 reaction

AU 4 reaction

AU 12 stimulus

AU 4 stimulus

10a
11a
7a

12a
8a

vr4
6a

9a

vr12

3a
5a
2a
1a

4a

vs12

vs4

10b
11b
3b

12b

2b
7b
1b

8b
6b

9b

5b
4b

Figure 1. A hypothetical graph of the common embedding
space. AU 12 reactions vr12 are triggered by the corresponding
stimuli vs12 (e.g., harmless and attractive animals). AU 4 reactions
vr4 are triggered by the stimuli vs4 (e.g., fierce and aggressive creatures). Arrows with distinct colors represent “four types” relations
between the nodes. The samples are one-to-one corresponded.

that are reflected in behavioral responses e.g., face, gesture,
and voice [23, 24]. Various emotions can be elicited by
distinct stimuli, making the selection of appropriate stimuli crucial for creating affective databases. However, most
current spontaneous emotion databases are restricted to labcontrolled environments without real-life experiences, such
as, BP4D [77] with only 10 stimulus activities moderated
by an interviewer, MPED [62] with 28 video stimuli, DEAP
[26] with 40 music videos, BUEEG [37] with mixed stimuli of 6 videos, 11 still pictures, 2 physical experience, and
RML [8] with 10 different emotion sentences. With limited
variety of stimulus scenes, it is difficult to scrutinize the
connection between external stimuli and human reactions
(e.g., via face and voice), neither to generalize the connection statistically.
To overcome this limitation, we created a facial behavior database called “ReactioNet” which includes 2,486 reaction video clips and 1.1 million reaction images in the wild,
along with corresponding stimuli. Each reaction video con-

20774

