This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Sentence Speaks a Thousand Images:
Domain Generalization through Distilling CLIP with Language Guidance

1

Zeyi Huang1
Andy Zhou2
University of Wisconsin-Madison

2

Zijian Lin3
Mu Cai1
Haohan Wang2†
Yong Jae Lee1†
3
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Imperial College London

{zeyihuang, mucai, yongjaelee}@cs.wisc.edu

{andyz3,haohanw}@illinois.edu

z.ling22@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Domain generalization studies the problem of training
a model with samples from several domains (or distributions) and then testing the model with samples from a new,
unseen domain. In this paper, we propose a novel approach
for domain generalization that leverages recent advances in
large vision-language models, specifically a CLIP teacher
model, to train a smaller model that generalizes to unseen
domains. The key technical contribution is a new type of
regularization that requires the student’s learned image representations to be close to the teacher’s learned text representations obtained from encoding the corresponding text
descriptions of images. We introduce two designs of the loss
function, absolute and relative distance, which provide specific guidance on how the training process of the student
model should be regularized. We evaluate our proposed
method, dubbed RISE (Regularized Invariance with Semantic Embeddings), on various benchmark datasets, and show
that it outperforms several state-of-the-art domain generalization methods. To our knowledge, our work is the
first to leverage knowledge distillation using a large visionlanguage model for domain generalization. By incorporating text-based information, RISE improves the generalization capability of machine learning models.

1. Introduction
An image is worth a thousand words, indeed, because of
its power to convey a wealth of information through its visual details. However, a well-written sentence, on the other
hand, has the power to concisely capture the essential information that is common to many different images. By describing a scene with a few carefully chosen words, a writer
can create a mental image in the reader’s mind that conveys
the essence of what is being depicted. This perspective is
particularly useful when communicating information effi† equal advising. Code is available at github.com/OoDBag/RISE

invariant
representations

Text

“A dog”

Figure 1. The key intuition behind our argument. While images
can capture more details, text can directly summarize the core concept to represent the object of interest.

ciently, or when emphasizing a specific scene aspect without getting bogged down in extraneous details. Thus, we
suggest that a sentence speaks a thousand images.
Essential semantic information delivered by an image
plays a pivotal role in helping models generalize to shifted
distributions, whereas other detailed information (e.g., in
the background not relevant to the main object) captured
in images may not be as effective for this purpose. The
study of domain generalization [37] investigates the problem of training a model with samples from several domains (or distributions) and then testing the model with
samples from a new, unseen domain. The training domains are commonly referred to as source domains, and
the test domain is referred to as the target domain. Previous studies have identified a challenge in training effective
domain generalization models due to the models’ tendency
to learn domain-specific features [11]. Consequently, numerous works have focused on regularizing the models to
learn representations that are invariant to domain-specific
features [29, 31, 80, 56, 36, 4, 1, 10, 39, 47, 17]. This regularization ensures that the models extract features that are

11685

