This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RankMixup: Ranking-Based Mixup Training for Network Calibration
Jongyoun Noh

Hyekang Park

Junghyup Lee

Bumsub Ham*

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University
https://cvlab.yonsei.ac.kr/projects/RankMixup
Confidence level

Abstract
Network calibration aims to accurately estimate the level
of confidences, which is particularly important for employing deep neural networks in real-world systems. Recent approaches leverage mixup to calibrate the network’s predictions during training. However, they do not consider the
problem that mixtures of labels in mixup may not accurately
represent the actual distribution of augmented samples. In
this paper, we present RankMixup, a novel mixup-based
framework alleviating the problem of the mixture of labels
for network calibration. To this end, we propose to use
an ordinal ranking relationship between raw and mixupaugmented samples as an alternative supervisory signal to
the label mixtures for network calibration. We hypothesize
that the network should estimate a higher level of confidence for the raw samples than the augmented ones (Fig.1).
To implement this idea, we introduce a mixup-based ranking loss (MRL) that encourages lower confidences for augmented samples compared to raw ones, maintaining the
ranking relationship. We also propose to leverage the ranking relationship among multiple mixup-augmented samples
to further improve the calibration capability. Augmented
samples with larger mixing coefficients are expected to have
higher confidences and vice versa (Fig.1). That is, the order
of confidences should be aligned with that of mixing coefficients. To this end, we introduce a novel loss, M-NDCG, in
order to reduce the number of misaligned pairs of the coefficients and confidences. Extensive experimental results on
standard benchmarks for network calibration demonstrate
the effectiveness of RankMixup.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
advances in numerous computer vision tasks, including image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation. Despite the impressive performance, DNNs trained
using a softmax cross-entropy (CE) loss and one-hot en* Corresponding author.

<

<

<

<

Figure 1: Motivation of RankMixup. We show raw samples of a
cat and dog in red boxes, and mixup-augmented samples in blue
boxes with dashed lines. The mixup-augmented samples are generated by linearly interpolating the raw samples with a mixing coefficient λ. We expect that confidences of the raw samples to be
higher than that of the augmented sample (top). The augmented
samples with larger coefficients λ would have higher confidences
than the samples with smaller coefficients (bottom). Best viewed
in color.

coded labels often output overconfident and/or underconfident probabilities, which do not reflect the actual likelihood [10, 32, 41]. This suggests that the networks are not
able to estimate the level of confidence, leading to inaccurate and unreliable predictions, which restricts practical
applications in real-world systems, particularly for safetysensitive domains, such as medical diagnosis [18] and autonomous driving [9].
To improve the reliability of DNNs, many methods propose to calibrate the output distribution after or during training. Post-hoc approaches adjust miscalibrated probabilities
directly from pretrained networks [7, 10, 12, 21, 27]. Although these approaches are straightforward to apply, calibration performance depends heavily on datasets and networks used for training [25], and they are not robust to
distribution shifts between training and test samples [33].
Training-time approaches [4, 8, 14, 25, 28, 29, 30, 41, 51],
on the other hand, exploit an additional regularization term
along with the CE loss to calibrate the output probabilities

1358

