This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoreauGrad: Sparse and Robust Interpretation of Neural Networks via Moreau
Envelope
Jingwei Zhang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Farzan Farnia
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

jwzhang22@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

farnia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Explaining the predictions of deep neural nets has been
a topic of great interest in the computer vision literature.
While several gradient-based interpretation schemes have
been proposed to reveal the influential variables in a neural net’s prediction, standard gradient-based interpretation
frameworks have been commonly observed to lack robustness to input perturbations and flexibility for incorporating
prior knowledge of sparsity and group-sparsity structures.
In this work, we propose MoreauGrad as an interpretation
scheme based on the classifier neural net’s Moreau envelope. We demonstrate that MoreauGrad results in a smooth
and robust interpretation of a multi-layer neural network
and can be efficiently computed through first-order optimization methods. Furthermore, we show that MoreauGrad can be naturally combined with L1 -norm regularization techniques to output a sparse or group-sparse explanation which are prior conditions applicable to a wide range
of deep learning applications. We empirically evaluate the
proposed MoreauGrad scheme on standard computer vision
datasets, showing the qualitative and quantitative success
of the MoreauGrad approach in comparison to standard
gradient-based interpretation methods 1 .

Original
Interpretation

Attacked
Image

Attacked
Interpretation

Simple
Gradient
“Chain saw”

Integrated
Gradients
Original Image

“Chain saw”

Ours:
SparseMoreauGrad
“Chain saw”

“Chain saw”

Sparsified
SmoothGrad
“Chain saw”

SmoothGrad

“Chain saw”

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved state-ofthe-art performance in many computer vision problems including image classification [11], object detection [29], and
medical image analysis [19]. While they manage to attain
super-human scores on standard image and speech recognition tasks, a reliable application of deep learning models to
real-world problems requires an interpretation of their predictions to help domain experts understand and investigate
the basis of their predictions. Over the past few years, developing and analyzing interpretation schemes that reveal
1 The paper’s code is available at https://github.com/
buyeah1109/MoreauGrad.

Figure 1. Interpretation of Sparse MoreauGrad (ours) vs. standard
gradient-based baselines on an ImageNet sample before and after
adding a norm-bounded interpretation adversarial attack.

the influential features in a neural network’s prediction have
attracted great interest in the computer vision community.
A standard approach for interpreting neural nets’ predictions is to analyze the gradient of their prediction score
function at or around an input data point. Such gradientbased interpretation mechanisms result in a feature saliency
map revealing the influential variables that locally affect
the neural net’s assigned prediction score. Three wellknown examples of gradient-based interpretation schemes
are the simple gradient [21], integrated gradients [24], and

2021

