This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AREA: Adaptive Reweighting via Effective Area for Long-Tailed Classification
Xiaohua Chen1,2
Bo Li1,2

Dayan Wu1
Chule Yang3
Yucan Zhou1 *
Qinghua Hu4
Weiping Wang1,2

1
2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Defense Innovation Institute, Military Academy of Sciences 4 Tianjin University

{chenxiaohua, zhouyucan, wudayan, libo, wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn
yangchule@126.com

huqinghua@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Large-scale data from the real-world usually follow a
long-tailed distribution (i.e., a few majority classes occupy
plentiful training data, while most minority classes have
few samples), making the hyperplanes heavily skewed to the
minority classes. Traditionally, reweighting is adopted to
make the hyperplanes fairly split the feature space, where
the weights are designed according to the number of samples. However, we find that the number of samples in a
class can not accurately measure the size of its spanned
space, especially for the majority class, where the size of
its spanned space is usually larger than the samples’ number because of the high diversity. Therefore, weights designed based on the samples’ number will still compress
the space of minority classes. In this paper, we reconsider
reweighting from a totally new perspective of analyzing the
spanned space of each class. We argue that, besides statistical numbers, relations between samples are also significant
for sufficiently depicting the spanned space. Consequently,
we estimate the size of the spanned space for each category,
namely effective area, by detailedly analyzing its samples’
distribution. By treating samples of a class as identically
distributed random variables and analyzing their correlations, a simple and non-parametric formula is derived to
estimate the effective area. Then, the weight simply calculated inversely proportional to the effective area of each
class is adopted to achieve fairer training. Note that our
weights are more flexible as they can be adaptively adjusted
along with the optimizing features during training. Experiments on four long-tailed datasets show that the proposed
weights outperform the state-of-the-art reweighting methods. Moreover, our method can also achieve better results
on statistically balanced CIFAR-10/100. Code is available

* Corresponding author

Beaver

Clock
Pine_tree
Spanned Space
𝑵𝒆𝒇𝒇 Effective Area

n

𝒆𝒇𝒇

Statistical Number

𝒆𝒇𝒇

𝒆𝒇𝒇
𝑵𝑩𝒆𝒂𝒗𝒆𝒓 > 𝒏𝑩𝒆𝒂𝒗𝒆𝒓 𝑵𝑪𝒍𝒐𝒄𝒌 < 𝒏𝑪𝒍𝒐𝒄𝒌 𝑵𝑷𝒊𝒏𝒆_𝒕𝒓𝒆𝒆 = 𝒏𝑷𝒊𝒏𝒆_𝒕𝒓𝒆𝒆

Figure 1. The effective area and statistical number on CIFAR-100LT under the imbalance ratio of 100. We can see that since samples in “Beaver” are distributed dispersedly with different backgrounds, viewpoints, and poses, their effective area is larger than
the samples’ number. Whereas, the effective area of “Clock” is
smaller than its number of samples, as samples are highly overlapped with limited backgrounds and viewpoints.

at https://github.com/xiaohua-chen/AREA.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks have achieved great improvements on many tasks [16, 23, 55]. Their dramatic performance significantly depends on high-quality annotated
and balanced distributed datasets, such as ImageNet [46]
and COCO [29]. However, data are usually long-tailed in
the real world, where many minority classes occupy a small
number of samples and most samples belong to a few majority classes. Obviously, majority classes will dominate the

19277

