This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

XiNet: Efficient Neural Networks for tinyML
Alberto Ancilotto*, Francesco Paissan*, Elisabetta Farella
Energy Efficient Embedded Digital Architectures (E3DA)
Fondazione Bruno Kessler
{aancilotto,fpaissan,efarella}@fbk.eu

Abstract
The recent interest in the edge-to-cloud continuum
paradigm has emphasized the need for simple and scalable
architectures to deliver optimal performance on computationally constrained devices. However, resource-efficient
neural networks usually optimize for parameter count
and thus use operators such as depthwise convolutions,
which do not maximally exploit the efficiency of resourceconstrained devices. In this article, we propose XiNet, a
novel convolutional neural architecture that targets edge
devices. We derived the XiNet architecture from an extensive real-world efficiency analysis of various neural network operators (e.g., standard, depthwise, and pointwise
convolutions). Compared to other mobile architectures,
our approach substantially improves the performancecomplexity trade-off by optimizing the number of operations, parameters, and working memory (RAM). Moreover,
we show how XiNet can be easily adapted to different devices thanks to Hardware Aware Scaling (HAS), which enables disjoint optimization of RAM, FLASH, and operations
count. We analyze the scaling properties of our architecture
under different hardware constraints and validate it on the
image classification task. Finally, we evaluate the performance of XiNet for object detection on the MS-COCO and
VOC-2012 benchmarks and compare it with state-of-the-art
mobile neural networks, achieving a 70% reduction in energy requirements with similar performance.

1. Introduction
Designing and scaling convolutional neural networks
(ConvNets) for mobile and embedded inference is challenging. Approaches like Xception [1], MobileNetv2 [16], EfficientNet [17], and ShuffleNet [6] aim at optimizing the
trade-off between computational cost and performance. The
design of these architectures relies on the common assump* These authors contributed equally to this research.
This work has been supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement no. 957337 (MARVEL project).

Figure 1. Our proposed architecture allows for a 9× reduction in
RAM and a 2× reduction in operations compared to other tinyML
approaches for the same level of performance. Circle size is proportional to the number of operations.

tion that indirect metrics (usually the number of multiplyaccumulate operations - MAC) can accurately express the
overall efficiency of the ConvNet when deployed on a mobile device. However, this is usually not the case, as demonstrated in many works [16, 18] that analyze the practical efficiency of different operators when deployed on hardware
platforms. Factors such as memory accesses, Arithmetic Intensity [4], and RAM usage are crucial in the efficiency of
the inference and thus should be considered in the development of resource-efficient ConvNets.
Other studies [12, 11] consider these factors and specifically focus on neural network deployment on microcontroller units (MCUs). Nonetheless, these works rely on custom hardware accelerators, and compilers [12, 11] to optimize the inference step; thus, they can not quickly scale
to the variety of embedded platforms available on the market. Another limiting factor of these approaches is the
effort required to adapt the neural networks to new tasks
and devices with different computational constraints since
the architecture design results from a Neural Architecture
16968

