This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STEERER: Resolving Scale Variations for Counting and Localization
via Selective Inheritance Learning

1

Tao Han1 , Lei Bai1 *, Lingbo Liu2 , Wanli Ouyang1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{hantao10200, baisanshi,liulingbo918}@gmail.com, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au
a) The visual comparison for scale variations

Abstract
Scale variation is a deep-rooted problem in object counting, which has not been effectively addressed by existing scale-aware algorithms. An important factor is that
they typically involve cooperative learning across multiresolutions, which could be suboptimal for learning the
most discriminative features from each scale. In this paper,
we propose a novel method termed STEERER (SelecTivE
inhERitance lEaRning) that addresses the issue of scale
variations in object counting. STEERER selects the most
suitable scale for patch objects to boost feature extraction and only inherits discriminative features from lower
to higher resolution progressively. The main insights of
STEERER are a dedicated Feature Selection and Inheritance Adaptor (FSIA), which selectively forwards scalecustomized features at each scale, and a Masked Selection and Inheritance Loss (MSIL) that helps to achieve
high-quality density maps across all scales. Our experimental results on nine datasets with counting and localization tasks demonstrate the unprecedented scale generalization ability of STEERER. Code is available at https:
//github.com/taohan10200/STEERER.

1. Introduction
The utilization of computer vision techniques to count
objects has garnered significant attention due to its potential
in various domains. These domains include but are not limited to, crowd counting for anomaly detection [32, 5], vehicle counting for efficient traffic management [51, 81, 49],
cell counting for accurate disease diagnosis [11], wildlife
counting for species protection [2, 29], and crop counting
for effective production estimation [43].
Numerous pioneers [38, 60, 3, 27, 74, 47, 22, 79, 24]
have emphasized that the scale variations encountered in
counting tasks present a formidable challenge, motivating the development of various algorithms aimed at miti* Corresponding author

Input
Input & Ground truth

Multi-scale feature fusion

STEERER (Ours)

Figure 1: STEERER significantly improves the quality of
the predicted density map, especially for large objects, compared with the classic multi-scale future fusion method [61].

gating their deleterious impact. These algorithms can be
broadly classified into two branches: 1) Learn to scale
methods [37, 78, 54] address scale variations in a twostep manner. Specifically, it involves estimating an appropriate scale factor for a given image/feature patch, followed by resizing the patch for prediction. Most of them
require an additional training task (e.g., predicting the object’s scale) and the predicted density map is further partitioned into multiple parts, 2) Multi-scale fusion methods [36, 39] have been demonstrated to be effective in handling scale variations in various visual tasks, and their concept is also extensively utilized in object counting. Generally, they focus on two types of fusion, namely feature
fusion [22, 79, 80, 59, 4, 61, 44, 50, 31, 83, 69] and density
map fusion [10, 41, 25, 65, 42, 47, 63, 9]. Despite the recent progress, these studies still face challenges in dealing
with scale variations, especially for large objects, as shown
in Fig. 1. The main reason is that the existing multi-scale
methods (e.g. FPN [36]) adapt the same loss to optimize
all resolutions, which poses a great challenge for each resolution to find which scale range is easy to handle. Also,
it results in mutual suppression because counting the same
object accurately at all scales is hard.
Prior research [79, 41, 63] has revealed that different
resolutions possess varying degrees of scale tolerance in

21848

