This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unleashing the Potential of Spiking Neural Networks with Dynamic Confidence
Chen Li*
The University of Manchester
Manchester, United Kingdom

Edward G Jones*
The University of Manchester
Manchester, United Kingdom

chen.li@manchester.ac.uk

edward.jones-3@manchester.ac.uk

Steve Furber
The University of Manchester
Manchester, United Kingdom
steve.furber@manchester.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper presents a new methodology to alleviate the
fundamental trade-off between accuracy and latency in
spiking neural networks (SNNs). The approach involves decoding confidence information over time from the SNN outputs and using it to develop a decision-making agent that
can dynamically determine when to terminate each inference.
The proposed method, Dynamic Confidence, provides
several significant benefits to SNNs. 1. It can effectively optimize latency dynamically at runtime, setting it apart from
many existing low-latency SNN algorithms. Our experiments on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets have demonstrated an average 40% speedup across eight different settings after applying Dynamic Confidence. 2. The decisionmaking agent in Dynamic Confidence is straightforward to
construct and highly robust in parameter space, making it
extremely easy to implement. 3. The proposed method enables visualizing the potential of any given SNN, which sets
a target for current SNNs to approach. For instance, if an
SNN can terminate at the most appropriate time point for
each input sample, a ResNet-50 SNN can achieve an accuracy as high as 82.47% on ImageNet within just 4.71 time
steps on average. Unlocking the potential of SNNs needs
a highly-reliable decision-making agent to be constructed
and fed with a high-quality estimation of ground truth. In
this regard, Dynamic Confidence represents a meaningful step toward realizing the potential of SNNs. Code is
available1 .

* These authors contributed equally to this work.
1 https://github.com/chenlicodebank/

Dynamic-Confidence-in-Spiking-Neural-Networks

Figure 1. The upper-bound performance of SNNs when fully utilizing dynamic strategies at runtime, as shown by the red curves
in a. ResNet18 on CIFAR-10 and b. ResNet-50 on ImageNet.
The black curves represent baseline SNN performance without
dynamic strategies. Additional figures with other settings can be
found in the Supplementary Material. c. The diagram of the proposed Dynamic Confidence, which can be implemented on-the-fly.

1. Introduction
Deep artificial neural networks (ANNs) have achieved
remarkable success in computer vision tasks [24, 37, 30].
These improvements have been accompanied by evergrowing model complexity and neural network depth.
Though the classification accuracy has improved dramatically, the latency and energy cost have also increased, which
poses a challenge for real-world AI applications on edge devices, such as mobile phones, smartwatches, and IoT hardware.
Deep spiking neural networks (SNNs) are promising to
offer power and latency advantages over counterpart deep
artificial neural networks during inference. However, when

13350

