This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Realistic Full-Body Tracking from Sparse Observations via Joint-Level Modeling
Xiaozheng Zheng *

Zhuo Su *
Chao Wen
ByteDance Inc

Zhou Xue †

Xiaojie Jin

Abstract
To bridge the physical and virtual worlds for rapidly
developed VR/AR applications, the ability to realistically
drive 3D full-body avatars is of great significance. Although real-time body tracking with only the head-mounted
displays (HMDs) and hand controllers is heavily underconstrained, a carefully designed end-to-end neural network is of great potential to solve the problem by learning from large-scale motion data. To this end, we propose a two-stage framework that can obtain accurate and
smooth full-body motions with the three tracking signals
of head and hands only. Our framework explicitly models
the joint-level features in the first stage and utilizes them
as spatiotemporal tokens for alternating spatial and temporal transformer blocks to capture joint-level correlations
in the second stage. Furthermore, we design a set of loss
terms to constrain the task of a high degree of freedom,
such that we can exploit the potential of our joint-level modeling. With extensive experiments on the AMASS motion
dataset and real-captured data, we validate the effectiveness of our designs and show our proposed method can
achieve more accurate and smooth motion compared to existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Driving human avatars in VR/AR can help to bridge the
gap between the physical and virtual worlds, and create
a more natural and immersive user experience. However,
in a typical capture setting, only the head and hands are
tracked with Head Mounted Displays (HMD) and hand controllers. With limited inputs, driving the full-body avatar is
inherently an underconstrained problem. Considerable endeavor has been dedicated to addressing the challenge of
inferring full-body human pose exclusively through sparse
AR/VR signals, head and hands. Although recent studies
[5, 8, 9] have shown promising results, they are not suitable for real-time applications like VR body tracking. With
real-time performance in mind, Winkler et al. [39] use reProject page: https://zxz267.github.io/AvatarJLM.
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Our method accurately estimates full-body motion using
only head and hand tracking signals.

inforcement learning for training and outperform kinematic
approaches with fewer artifacts. But their method requires
future frames, which introduces latency to the system. Most
recent work AvatarPoser [16] solves the problem in a more
practical way by combining transformer-based architecture
and inverse-kinetic optimization, setting the benchmark on
large motion capture datasets (AMASS). Despite the success of AvatarPoser across a wide variety of motion classes,
we argue that a learning-based end-to-end method provides
more merits in simplicity, robustness, and generalization
compared with a hybrid method.
Our key insight is that correlations between different
body joints should be explicitly modeled for human pose estimation as body movements are highly structured and coordinated. Especially for the problem of estimating full-body
motion from sparse observations, joint-level modeling is essential as the position and rotation of each joint can affect
each other, and the overall body pose. By taking into account these correlations, we can derive more plausible fullbody motion, even when observations are limited. Therefore, we design a two-stage joint-level modeling framework
to capture these dependencies between body joints for more
accurate and smoother human motion. In the first stage, we
explicitly model the joint-level features. Then we utilize
these features as spatiotemporal tokens in the second stage
for a transformer-based network to capture the joint-level
dependencies for recovering full-body motions.
In the first stage, we explicitly model the joint-level features as 1) joint-rotation features and 2) joint-position features. Joint-rotation offers higher compactness and computational efficiency, whereas joint-position enables more

14678

