This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Safe Semi-supervised Learning: Transferring the Open-set Problem
to A Close-set One
Qiankun Ma* 1 , Jiyao Gao* 1 , Bo Zhan1 , Yunpeng Guo1 , Jiliu Zhou1 and Yan Wang†1
1

School of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China

Abstract

1. Introduction
In the past decade, the development of deep learning
brings prosperity to the field of computer vision, such as
image classification, attributed to the growing scale of la* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: Yan Wang (wangyanscu@hotmail.com).

Close-set

Cat

Dog
Unlabeled Set

Labeled Set
Open-set

Conventional semi-supervised learning (SSL) lies in
the close-set assumption that the labeled and unlabeled
sets contain data with the same seen classes, called indistribution (ID) data. In contrast, safe SSL investigates
a more challenging open-set problem where unlabeled set
may involve some out-of-distribution (OOD) data with unseen classes, which could harm the performance of SSL.
When we are experimenting with the mainstream safe SSL
methods, we have a surprising finding that all OOD data
show a clear tendency to gather in the feature space. This
inspires us to solve the safe SSL problem from a fresh perspective. Specifically, for a classification task with K seen
classes, we utilize a prototype network not only to generate
K prototypes of all seen classes, but also explicitly model an
additional prototype for the OOD data, transferring the Kway classification on the open-set to the (K+1)-way on the
close-set. In this way, the typical SSL techniques (e.g., consistency regularization and pseudo labeling) can be applied
to tackle the safe SSL problem without additional consideration of OOD data processing like other safe SSL methods
do. Particularly, considering the possible low-confidence
pseudo labels, we further propose an iterative negative
learning (INL) paradigm to enforce the network learning
knowledge from complementary labels on wider classes, improving the network’s classification performance. Extensive
experiments on four benchmark datasets show that our approach remarkably lifts the performance on safe SSL and
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Unlabeled Set

Labeled Set

Cat

Dog
(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) An example of close-set and open-set. In open-set,
the unlabeled set contains classes not seen in the labeled set (indicated by red boxes); (b) t-SNE [34] visualization of feature distributions of ID (colored) data and OOD (black) data from CIFAR10
[17], Images of the same category are shown in the same color.

beled data [18, 9, 23]. However, it is time-consuming and
expensive to collect large amounts of labeled data. Numerous methods resort to semi-supervised learning (SSL) to relieve this restriction [33, 19, 32]. By exploring the massive
valuable information from the abundant easy-to-acquire unlabeled data, SSL methods can effectively narrow the performance gap towards the fully-supervised models.
Although the SSL methods are proven to be effective in
improving the classification performance in case of sparse
labels, most of them follow a close-set assumption by default, that is, the labeled data and the unlabeled data share
the same label space. See Figure 1(a) for example, both labeled data and unlabeled data are built on the classes of cat
and dog, which are also called in-distribution (ID) data. Yet,
in many real scenarios, such a simple and crude assumption
often breaks down since the unlabeled data could be collected in the wild [40]. In this case, there will be many samples with unknown classes (or unseen classes) appearing
in the unlabeled dataset, which we call out-of-distribution
(OOD) data, resulting in an open-set problem. As shown in
Figure 1, in the open-set, besides the cat and dog classes in
the labeled set (or seen classes), there are also some unseen
classes, e.g., butterfly, hen, rabbit. Without reliable labels
for these unseen classes, the OOD data may lead to a sig-

16370

