This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling from Similar Tasks for Transfer Learning on a Budget
Kenneth Borup
Aarhus University

Cheng Perng Phoo
Cornell University

Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University

kennethborup@math.au.dk

cpphoo@cs.cornell.edu

bharathh@cs.cornell.edu

We address the challenge of getting efficient yet accurate recognition systems with limited labels. While recognition models improve with model size and amount of data,
many specialized applications of computer vision have severe resource constraints both during training and inference.
Transfer learning is an effective solution for training with
few labels, however often at the expense of a computationally costly fine-tuning of large base models. We propose
to mitigate this unpleasant trade-off between compute and
accuracy via semi-supervised cross-domain distillation from
a set of diverse source models. Initially, we show how to
use task similarity metrics to select a single suitable source
model to distill from, and that a good selection process is
imperative for good downstream performance of a target
model. We dub this approach D ISTILL N EAREST. Though
effective, D ISTILL N EAREST assumes a single source model
matches the target task, which is not always the case. To alleviate this, we propose a weighted multi-source distillation
method to distill multiple source models trained on different
domains weighted by their relevance for the target task into
a single efficient model (named D ISTILLW EIGHTED). Our
methods need no access to source data and merely need
features and pseudo-labels of the source models. When
the goal is accurate recognition under computational constraints, both D ISTILL N EAREST and D ISTILLW EIGHTED
approaches outperform both transfer learning from strong
ImageNet initializations as well as state-of-the-art semisupervised techniques such as FixMatch. Averaged over
8 diverse target tasks our multi-source method outperforms
the baselines by 5.6%-points and 4.5%-points, respectively.
Code: github.com/Kennethborup/DistillWeighted

1. Introduction
Recognition models get more accurate the larger they are
and the more data they are trained on [21, 36, 45]. This is a
problem for many applications of interest in medicine (e.g.
X-ray analysis) or science (e.g. satellite-image analysis)
where both labeled training data, as well as computational

Test Accuracy

Abstract

Our Method

80
78
76
74
72 IN+Transfer
70

ts
st
al
se
ed
on
Inver omWeigh mSelecti DistillEqu illWeight stillNeare
t
d
i
o
s
n
d
i
D
a
n
D
R
Ra

Source-Weighting

Figure 1: Average test accuracy over five target tasks with
different methods for weighting source models for distillation. Our methods outperform the baselines and transfer
learning from ImageNet. See Section 5.3 for details.

resources needed to train such large models, are lacking.
The challenge of limited labeled data can potentially be
alleviated by fine-tuning large-scale “foundation models”
[13, 21, 45]. However, fine-tuning is computationally expensive, especially when one looks at foundation models
with billions of parameters [13]. Unfortunately, all evidence
suggests that larger foundation models perform better at
fine-tuning [21, 45]. This leaves downstream applications
the unpleasant trade-off of expensive computational hardware for fine-tuning large models, or inaccurate results from
smaller models. Motivated by this challenge, we ask can we
train accurate models on tight data and compute budgets
without fine-tuning large foundation models?
To set the scene, we assume the existence of a diverse set
(both in architecture and task) of pre-trained source models
(or foundation models). We do not have the resources to finetune these models, but we assume we can perform inference
on these models and extract features, e.g. through APIs on
cloud services [8, 34]. For the target task, we assume that
labeled data is very limited, but unlabeled data is available.
We then propose a simple and effective strategy for building
an accurate model for the target task: D ISTILL N EAREST.

11431

