This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Conceptual and Hierarchical Latent Space Decomposition for Face Editing
Savas Ozkan Mete Ozay Tom Robinson
Samsung Research UK
savas.ozkan@samsung.com

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) can produce photo-realistic results using an unconditional imagegeneration pipeline. However, the images generated by
GANs (e.g., StyleGAN) are entangled in feature spaces,
which makes it difficult to interpret and control the contents of images. In this paper, we present an encoderdecoder model that decomposes the entangled GAN space
into a conceptual and hierarchical latent space in a selfsupervised manner. The outputs of 3D morphable face models are leveraged to independently control image synthesis
parameters like pose, expression, and illumination. For this
purpose, a novel latent space decomposition pipeline is introduced using transformer networks and generative models. Later, this new space is used to optimize a transformerbased GAN space controller for face editing. In this work,
a StyleGAN2 model for faces is utilized. Since our method
manipulates only GAN features, the photo-realism of StyleGAN2 is fully preserved. The results demonstrate that our
method qualitatively and quantitatively outperforms baselines in terms of identity preservation and editing precision.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [15, 20, 12]
are formulated as a two-step learning procedure via generator and discriminator models. This pipeline can produce photo-realistic images that are hard to distinguish. Especially, generative models such as StyleGAN2 [20] have
become one of the most effective image synthesis tools.
They are capable of generating high-resolution images using nonlinear features learned from low-dimensional feature spaces. In the end, coarse and fine details of synthesized images are simply derived from these spaces. However, existing GAN models do not offer intuitive control,
i.e., not human understandable parameterization, for image
generation. Recent works [16, 39, 32, 36] have shown that
the outputs of GAN models can be edited by disentangling
their features spaces without the need of employing full supervision or updating pre-trained model parameters.

Figure 1: Rather than finding a direct mapping between a
GAN space X of learned features (⋆), and a space P of parameters of face concepts (▲) [39], our method estimates an
intermediate latent space Q whose latent codes (•) are conceptual and hierarchical. After all, a GAN space controller
trained on this space can edit each concept independently
while preserving the details at different abstraction levels of
GANs for face editing.
There have been multiple efforts in the literature to
achieve controllable content manipulation of features of
GANs with supervised and unsupervised learning methods.
In [17, 7], they use labelled data to expand user control
onto a GAN space of features (depicted by X in Fig. 1).
These labels are used to decouple the entangled representations with learnable projections. However, this control
needs costly manual annotations that usually involve gathering many images and labels with clear definitions. Hence,
performance is significantly impacted by the total number
of annotations and the quality of labels. In contrast to the
supervised methods, unsupervised approaches [34, 16, 28]
achieve disentanglement by finding principal directions in
feature spaces without relying on labeled data. In the end,
each direction alters a different visual content so that a semiautomatic control is provided for the existing GAN models.
Other studies [36, 22, 37] have suggested that manipulating
the GAN spaces may be limited by biases present in pretrained models. Hence, their goal is to train a new generator
model from scratch using generative priors for controllable
image synthesis. Although the models have robust control

7248

