This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PlanarTrack: A Large-scale Challenging Benchmark for Planar Object Tracking
Xinran Liu1,3∗ Xiaoqiong Liu2∗ Ziruo Yi2∗ Xin Zhou4∗ Thanh Le2 Libo Zhang1,3†
Yan Huang2 Qing Yang2 Heng Fan2
1
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas, Denton, USA
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Self-Employed

Abstract
Planar object tracking is a critical computer vision problem and has drawn increasing interest owing to its key roles
in robotics, augmented reality, etc. Despite rapid progress,
its further development, especially in the deep learning era,
is largely hindered due to the lack of large-scale challenging
benchmarks. Addressing this, we introduce PlanarTrack, a
large-scale challenging planar tracking benchmark. Specifically, PlanarTrack consists of 1,000 videos with more than
490K images. All these sequences are collected in complex
unconstrained scenarios from the wild, which makes PlanarTrack, compared with existing benchmarks, more challenging but realistic for real-world applications. To ensure
the high-quality annotation, each frame in PlanarTrack is
manually labeled using four corners with multiple-round
careful inspection and refinement. To our best knowledge,
PlanarTrack, to date, is the largest and the most challenging dataset dedicated to planar object tracking. In order to
analyze the proposed PlanarTrack, we evaluate 10 planar
trackers and conduct comprehensive comparisons and indepth analysis. Our results, not surprisingly, demonstrate
that current top-performing planar trackers degenerate significantly on the challenging PlanarTrack and more efforts
are needed to improve planar tracking in the future. In addition, we further derive a variant named PlanarTrackBB
for generic object tracking from our PlanarTrack. Our evaluation of 10 excellent generic trackers on PlanarTrackBB
manifests that, surprisingly, PlanarTrackBB is even more
challenging than several popular generic tracking benchmarks and more attention should be paid to handle such
planar objects, though they are rigid. All benchmarks and
evaluations are released at https://hengfan2010.
github.io/projects/PlanarTrack/.

∗ The authors make equal contributions and are co-first authors.
† Corresponding author: Libo Zhang (libo@iscas.ac.cn).

(a) Example of generic object tracking with rectangular bounding box

,

,

, and

represent the first, second, third and fourth corner point of the planar object

(b) Example of planar object tracking with corner points

Figure 1. Generic object tracking (a) and planar object tracking (b).
The former estimates axis-aligned rectangular bounding boxes for
the target object, while the latter (our focus in this work) calculates
2D transformations of the target object to obtain the corresponding
corner points for localization. All figures throughout this paper are
best viewed in color and by zooming in.

1. Introduction
Planar tracking is an important problem in computer vision. Different than generic tracking which represents object with an axis-aligned bounding box, planar tracking represents target with four corners. Besides, the goal of generic
tracking is to locate the target with axis-aligned rectangular
bounding boxes [10, 38], while planar object tracking aims
to estimate 2D transformations (e.g., homograph) of the target and locate it with corner points (see Fig. 1). Owing to its
importance in robotics and augmented reality (AR), planar
object tracking has attracted increasing attentions in recent
years. In particular, several benchmarks (e.g., [20, 31, 19])
have been specially developed for evaluating and comparing
different planar trackers, which greatly facilitates related research and progress on this topic. Despite this, they are limited in further pushing the frontier of planar tracking.
One of the major issues with existing benchmarks is their

20449

