This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TCOVIS: Temporally Consistent Online Video Instance Segmentation
Junlong Li Bingyao Yu Yongming Rao Jie Zhou Jiwen Lu*
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China

Abstract
In recent years, significant progress has been made
in video instance segmentation (VIS), with many offline
and online methods achieving state-of-the-art performance.
While offline methods have the advantage of producing temporally consistent predictions, they are not suitable for realtime scenarios. Conversely, online methods are more practical, but maintaining temporal consistency remains a challenging task. In this paper, we propose a novel online
method for video instance segmentation, called TCOVIS,
which fully exploits the temporal information in a video clip.
The core of our method consists of a global instance assignment strategy and a spatio-temporal enhancement module, which improve the temporal consistency of the features from two aspects. Specifically, we perform global optimal matching between the predictions and ground truth
across the whole video clip, and supervise the model with
the global optimal objective. We also capture the spatial
feature and aggregate it with the semantic feature between
frames, thus realizing the spatio-temporal enhancement. We
evaluate our method on four widely adopted VIS benchmarks, namely YouTube-VIS 2019/2021/2022 and OVIS,
and achieve state-of-the-art performance on all benchmarks
without bells-and-whistles. For instance, on YouTube-VIS
2021, TCOVIS achieves 49.5 AP and 61.3 AP with ResNet50 and Swin-L backbones, respectively. Code is available
at https://github.com/jun-long-li/TCOVIS.

1. Introduction
Video instance segmentation (VIS) is a challenging and
representative video understanding task recently introduced
in [37]. It aims at detecting, segmenting and tracking instances across a video. VIS is attracting increasing attention for various real-world applications such as video editing, video surveillance, augmented reality and autonomous
driving. Recently introduced VIS methods can be roughly
* Corresponding author

categorized into two groups: offline methods and online
methods. Offline methods [2, 16, 19, 31, 33, 35] take as
input the whole video and perform the segmentation of instance sequence for the whole video at once. Online methods [8, 34, 17, 10, 38], on the contrary, take as input a
video frame by frame and generate the pre-frame object
instances while associating the frame-wise results across
frames. Both offline and online methods have achieved impressing performance on the VIS task.
Offline methods have an inherent advantage in producing
temporally consistent predictions, since delicate temporal
communication and association mechanisms can be adopted
throughout the video [39, 33, 14] to handle the overall temporal information and impose an explicit constraint on the
temporal consistency. However, the video-in and video-out
offline manner is not suitable for real-time scenarios. Conversely, online methods are more practical and making considerable progress but suffer from temporal inconsistency
(as shown in Figure 1), remaining a great challenge.
Online methods rely on specific instance association applied across frames, since only one frame is observed at a
time. Existing association techniques can be grouped into
two categories, including tracking-by-detection and query
propagation-based paradigms. Tracking-by-detection methods [37, 34, 32] generate the per-frame instances independently by existing instance segmentation models [11, 26, 5]
and track instances via tracking heads [37] or instance embeddings matching [34, 15]. In this way, the features of
different frames are isolated before tracking, which results
in temporal inconsistency. Query propagation-based methods [13, 10, 41] are inspired by query-based methods [3, 25]
and they propagate the query across frames to decode a
unique instance without heuristic matching algorithms. Despite the explicit temporal link of queries, the temporal consistency is impaired by the Local Matching and Propagating
(LocPro) scheme, where they first perform local optimal
matching between the predictions and ground truth at the
beginning of the video, and then propagate the assignment
across frames, forcing all features from subsequent frames
to follow. The LocPro is not suitable for the holistic optimization across frames and results in temporal inconsis-

1097

