This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ClothesNet: An Information-Rich 3D Garment Model Repository with
Simulated Clothes Environment
Bingyang Zhou1 , Haoyu Zhou2 *, Tianhai Liang1 *, Qiaojun Yu3 , Siheng Zhao4 , Yuwei Zeng5 , Jun Lv3 ,
Siyuan Luo6 , Qiancai Wang1 , Xinyuan Yu5 , Haonan Chen4 , Cewu Lu3 , Lin Shao5†
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Beihang University 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Nanjing University 5 National University of Singapore 6 Xi’an Jiaotong University

Abstract
We present ClothesNet: a large-scale dataset of 3D
clothes objects with information-rich annotations. Our
dataset consists of around 4400 models covering 11 categories annotated with clothes features, boundary lines,
and keypoints.
ClothesNet can be used to facilitate a variety of computer vision and robot interaction
tasks. Using our dataset, we establish benchmark tasks
for clothes perception, including classification, boundary line segmentation, and keypoint detection, and develop simulated clothes environments for robotic interaction tasks, including rearranging, folding, hanging, and
dressing. We also demonstrate the efficacy of our ClothesNet in real-world experiments. Supplemental materials and dataset are available on our project webpage
at https://sites.google.com/view/clothesnet.

1. Introduction
Clothes-related activities, such as folding, laundry, and
dressing, play an essential role in our everyday lives.
However, achieving autonomous performances of these
tasks poses significant challenges in robotics due to the
high-dimensional state representation and complex dynamics [32, 34, 33]. Directly training robots to learn these skills
in real-world scenarios can be costly and unsafe. An alternative approach is to develop simulated environments with
rich assets where robots can master these skills before transferring to real-world scenes.
This learning paradigm often demands large-scale objects with simulation environments for robots to interact with, utilizing data-driven approaches. While there
is a growing number of large-scale 3D dataset repositories [7, 47, 53, 25], only a limited number offer 3D clothing models. For instance, Deep Fashion3D [54] comprises
* The authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. We present ClothesNet consisting of 4400 clothes mesh
models covering 11 categories. We annotate ClothesNet with
clothes features, boundary lines, and keypoints. To the best of our
knowledge, it is the first large-scale dataset with rich annotations
for clothes-centric robot vision and manipulation tasks. We also
set up the simulation environment for robotic manipulation tasks,
including the hanging, folding, rearranging, and dressing.

around 2000 3D models reconstructed from real garments
across ten categories. SIZER dataset [45] includes approximately 2000 scans, including 100 subjects wearing 10 garment classes. However, these scanned 3D models are not
suitable for loading into robotic simulations for tasks involving substantial deformation due to data representation
or mesh quality. CLOTH3D [4] presents a substantial collection of synthetic 3D models with clothing. GarmentNets [9] generates six garment category meshes based on
CLOTH3D dataset. Nonetheless, specific categories, such
as socks, masks, hats, and ties, are absent from these efforts.
Regarding cloth simulation, differentiable cloth
simulation[28, 22, 41] demonstrates strong potentials,
providing differentiable operations to calculate the gradient
information to enhance the cloth dynamics and mitigate
the high-dimensional of state and action space. They

20428

