This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zenseact Open Dataset: A large-scale and diverse multimodal dataset for
autonomous driving
Mina Alibeigi∗† , William Ljungbergh∗ , Adam Tonderski∗ ,
Georg Hess, Adam Lilja, Carl Lindström, Daria Motorniuk,
Junsheng Fu, Jenny Widahl, Christoffer Petersson
Zenseact
first.last@zenseact.com

Abstract
Existing datasets for autonomous driving (AD) often lack
diversity and long-range capabilities, focusing instead on
360° perception and temporal reasoning. To address this
gap, we introduce Zenseact Open Dataset (ZOD), a largescale and diverse multimodal dataset collected over two
years in various European countries, covering an area 9×
that of existing datasets. ZOD boasts the highest range
and resolution sensors among comparable datasets, coupled with detailed keyframe annotations for 2D and 3D objects (up to 245m), road instance/semantic segmentation,
traffic sign recognition, and road classification. We believe
that this unique combination will facilitate breakthroughs in
long-range perception and multi-task learning. The dataset
is composed of Frames, Sequences, and Drives, designed
to encompass both data diversity and support for spatiotemporal learning, sensor fusion, localization, and mapping. Frames consist of 100k curated camera images with
two seconds of other supporting sensor data, while the 1473
Sequences and 29 Drives include the entire sensor suite for
20 seconds and a few minutes, respectively. ZOD is the
only large-scale AD dataset released under a permissive
license, allowing for both research and commercial use.
More information, and an extensive devkit, can be found
at zod.zenseact.com.

1. Introduction
Road traffic accidents cause more than 1.3 million deaths
and many more nonfatal injuries and disabilities globally
each year [20]. Automated driving has the potential to improve road safety by intervening in accident-prone situations or even controlling the entire ride from start to desti∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Geographical coverage comparison with other
AD datasets using the diversity area metric defined in [25]
(top left), and geographical distribution of ZOD Frames
overlaid on the map. The numbers in the quantized regions
represent the amount of annotated frames in that geographical region. ZOD Frames contain data collected over two
years from 14 different European countries, from the north
of Sweden down to Italy.
nation. Regardless of the level of automation, autonomous
vehicles require sensors such as cameras, GNSS (Global
Navigation Satellite System), IMU (Inertial Measurement
Unit), and range sensors such as radar or LiDAR (Light

20178

