This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improved Visual Fine-tuning with Natural Language Supervision
Junyang Wang1 * Yuanhong Xu2 Juhua Hu3 Ming Yan2 Jitao Sang1,4 Qi Qian5†
1
School of Computer and Information Technology & Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining,
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3
School of Engineering and Technology, University of Washington, Tacoma, WA 98402, USA
4
Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China
5
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{junyangwang, jtsang}@bjtu.edu.cn, {yuanhong.xuyh, ym119608, qi.qian}@alibaba-inc.com, juhuah@uw.edu

Abstract
Fine-tuning a visual pre-trained model can leverage the
semantic information from large-scale pre-training data
and mitigate the over-fitting problem on downstream vision tasks with limited training examples. While the problem of catastrophic forgetting in pre-trained backbone has
been extensively studied for fine-tuning, its potential bias
from the corresponding pre-training task and data, attracts
less attention. In this work, we investigate this problem by
demonstrating that the obtained classifier after fine-tuning
will be close to that induced by the pre-trained model. To
reduce the bias in the classifier effectively, we introduce
a reference distribution obtained from a fixed text classifier, which can help regularize the learned vision classifier.
The proposed method, Text Supervised fine-tuning (TeS),
is evaluated with diverse pre-trained vision models including ResNet and ViT, and text encoders including BERT and
CLIP, on 11 downstream tasks. The consistent improvement with a clear margin over distinct scenarios confirms
the effectiveness of our proposal. Code is available at
https://github.com/idstcv/TeS.

1. Introduction
Fine-tuning a pre-trained visual deep model has become
a prevalent paradigm for vision categorization [21]. By initializing the model with parameters pre-trained on a largescale data set, fine-tuning can effectively transfer the semantic information from the pre-training data to diverse downstream tasks, which is essential to mitigate the over-fitting
problem on data sets with limited training examples [19].
While supervised pre-training methods [21] require full
* Work done during internship at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group.
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed method, TeS. During finetuning, the vision classifier is regularized by reference distributions defined with a fixed text classifier, which is obtained from
class names. In TeS, diverse reference distributions can be obtained for different examples even from the same class (e.g., cats
on the right side).

label information for the whole data set, the recent progress
on self-supervised learning shows that an applicable pretrained model can be obtained from unlabeled data [18].
Consequently, a lot of research efforts have been devoted
to exploring unsupervised pre-training, which can eliminate the labeling cost for a vast amount of examples.
Many effective self-supervised methods have been developed, e.g., instance discrimination [7, 18], cluster discrimination [5, 32], and masked image modeling [17]. Compared
to the supervised counterparts, fine-tuning pre-trained models from these unsupervised methods can achieve comparable or even better performance on downstream tasks.
With the success of pre-training, fine-tuning has thus attracted much attention to leverage the pre-trained model
appropriately for downstream tasks. One main challenge
for fine-tuning is the catastrophic forgetting in pre-trained
backbone [9], that is, after sufficient learning with a large
learning rate, the fine-tuned model becomes far away from

11899

