This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Large-Scale Land Cover Mapping with Fine-Grained Classes via Class-Aware
Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Runmin Dong1,4, Lichao Mou2, Mengxuan Chen1,4, Weijia Li3, Xin-Yi Tong2,
Shuai Yuan1,4, Lixian Zhang1,4, Juepeng Zheng3,4, Xiao Xiang Zhu2, Haohuan Fu1,4,*
1
Tsinghua University 2 Technical University of Munich 3 Sun Yat-Sen University
4
Tsinghua University - Xi’an Institute of Surveying and Mapping Joint Research Center
drm@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, haohuan@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Land cover mapping provides pixel-level information
for urban management, climate change research, ecosystem protection, and other sustainability-related applica* Corresponding author

Band 12/8/4

Band 11/8/2

Sentinel-2 image

Band 8/3/2

Label

Semi-supervised learning has attracted increasing attention in the large-scale land cover mapping task. However, existing methods overlook the potential to alleviate the
class imbalance problem by selecting a suitable set of unlabeled data. Besides, in class-imbalanced scenarios, existing pseudo-labeling methods mostly only pick confident
samples, failing to exploit the hard samples during training. To tackle these issues, we propose a unified ClassAware Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation framework.
The proposed framework consists of three key components.
To construct a better semi-supervised learning dataset, we
propose a class-aware unlabeled data selection method that
is more balanced towards the minority classes. Based on
the built dataset with improved class balance, we propose
a Class-Balanced Cross Entropy loss, jointly considering
the annotation bias and the class bias to re-weight the loss
in both sample and class levels to alleviate the class imbalance problem. Moreover, we propose the Class Center Contrast method to jointly utilize the labeled and unlabeled data. Specifically, we decompose the feature embedding space using the ground truth and pseudo-labels,
and employ the embedding centers for hard and easy samples of each class per image in the contrast loss to exploit
the hard samples during training. Compared with state-ofthe-art class-balanced pseudo-labeling methods, the proposed method improves the mean accuracy and mIoU by
4.28% and 1.70%, respectively, on the large-scale Sentinel2 dataset with 24 land cover classes.

Band 4/3/2

Industrial area

Shrub forest

Lake

Stadium

Paddy field

Park

Pond

Square

Irrigated field

Natural meadow

Fish pond

Road

Dry cropland

Artificial meadow

Snow

Overpass

Garden land

River

Bare land

Railway station

Arbor forest

Urban residential

Rural residential

Airport

Figure 1. Examples of the labeled data. The top row shows
Sentinel-2 images containing 13 bands. The bottom row shows
the corresponding labels. We use a fine-grained classification system with 24 land cover classes in this work.

tions [21, 27]. With the rapid progress of computer vision technology, it is desired to automatically gain largescale and fine-grained land cover information from remote
sensing images to support the demand of existing earth system science studies and bring new opportunities for intelligent city study [31]. However, fine-grained annotations
for land cover mapping are high-cost and time-consuming,
limiting labeled data collection for large-scale applications.
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is a potential solution to
this problem, as it utilizes both existing labeled data and a
large number of unlabeled data [37].
Large-scale land cover mapping with fine-grained
classes usually suffers from class imbalance, as shown in
Figure 1 and 3. The labeled data tends to be biased due to
the difficulty of data collection and label annotation varying by class. The class imbalance leads to suboptimal per-

16783

