This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MST-compression: Compressing and Accelerating Binary Neural Networks
with Minimum Spanning Tree
Quang Hieu Vo, Linh-Tam Tran, Sung-Ho Bae, Lok-Won Kim, Choong Seon Hong*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Kyung Hee University
{2019310178, tamlt, shbae, lwk, cshong}@khu.ac.kr

Abstract
Binary neural networks (BNNs) have been widely
adopted to reduce the computational cost and memory storage on edge-computing devices by using one-bit representation for activations and weights. However, as neural networks become wider/deeper to improve accuracy and meet
practical requirements, the computational burden remains a
signiﬁcant challenge even on the binary version. To address
these issues, this paper proposes a novel method called
Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) compression that learns to
compress and accelerate BNNs. The proposed architecture leverages an observation from previous works that an
output channel in a binary convolution can be computed
using another output channel and XNOR operations with
weights that differ from the weights of the reused channel.
We ﬁrst construct a fully connected graph with vertices corresponding to output channels, where the distance between
two vertices is the number of different values between the
weight sets used for these outputs. Then, the MST of the
graph with the minimum depth is proposed to reorder output calculations, aiming to reduce computational cost and
latency. Moreover, we propose a new learning algorithm
to reduce the total MST distance during training. Experimental results on benchmark models demonstrate that our
method achieves signiﬁcant compression ratios with negligible accuracy drops, making it a promising approach for
resource-constrained edge-computing devices.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been widely applied in many artiﬁcial intelligence applications, especially
vision tasks with high accuracy [27, 14]. However, the cost
of computation and massive storage burden is signiﬁcantly
challenging to deploy DNNs on embedded systems such as
mobile devices and other resource-constrained platforms.
Many approaches have been proposed and demonstrated
* Corresponding Author

X0

Xa
Xb

Xd

X1

X1
Xm
X0

Xq

Xc

Xi

Xe
Xm
Xn

Xj

Xp
a)

Xk
b)

Figure 1. Illustration of kernel compression for BNNs with the Kmean method (a) and the shortest Hamiltonian path (b), in which
adding red connections can further reduce the computational cost
for both of them.

their effectiveness in reducing energy and resources while
maintaining the deep models’ accuracy, including pruning
[12], quantization [7], distillation [15], and efﬁcient hardware implementation [6]. Among these methods, quantization with less bit-width for parameter and activation representation is widely used due to its great beneﬁts and possibility in most practical applications.
Binarized neural network is a particular form of the
quantization method in which weight values and activations
are converted to 1-bit values. Accordingly, multiplications
and accumulation operations can be replaced by XNOR and
Popcount operations [7], respectively. In addition, batch
normalization is simpliﬁed to a threshold comparison [31],
while the pooling can be performed with OR operations
[30]. Consequently, the compression ratio on memory storage and computational cost is signiﬁcantly improved, leading to remarkable performance acceleration. Nevertheless,
the accuracy degradation is the trade-off of minimizing the
bit-width as BNN. Thus, most previous works focus on reducing this accuracy gap [25, 4, 33, 22, 20, 33, 23].
Meanwhile, compressing BNNs has not received much
attention, with only a few prominent methods [32, 9, 31,
17], where the kernel compression [9, 31] gives impressive
results with roughly 50% resources reduction. In particular, given a binary convolution, inspired by an observation
that an output channel can be calculated using another out-

6091

