This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SkeleTR: Towards Skeleton-based Action Recognition in the Wild
Mingze Xu2
Bing Shuai2
Davide Modolo2
Haodong Duan1 *
Zhuowen Tu2
Joseph Tighe2
Alessandro Bergamo2
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
AWS AI Labs
dhd.efz@gmail.com, {xumingze,bshuai,dmodolo,ztu,tighej,bergamo}@amazon.com

Instance-level

Abstract
We present SkeleTR, a new framework for skeleton-based
action recognition. In contrast to prior work, which focuses mainly on controlled environments, we target more
general scenarios that typically involve a variable number
of people and various forms of interaction between people.
SkeleTR works with a two-stage paradigm. It first models the intra-person skeleton dynamics for each skeleton
sequence with graph convolutions, and then uses stacked
Transformer encoders to capture person interactions that
are important for action recognition in general scenarios.
To mitigate the negative impact of inaccurate skeleton associations, SkeleTR takes relative short skeleton sequences
as input and increases the number of sequences. As a unified solution, SkeleTR can be directly applied to multiple
skeleton-based action tasks, including video-level action
classification, instance-level action detection, and grouplevel activity recognition. It also enables transfer learning
and joint training across different action tasks and datasets,
which result in performance improvement. When evaluated
on various skeleton-based action recognition benchmarks,
SkeleTR achieves the state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Skeleton-based action recognition has received increasing attention in recent years due to its robustness against
background and illumination changes [64, 16]. Existing
methods [36, 7, 8, 15] mostly use Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) as backbones and focus on modeling spatiotemporal information from long skeleton sequences separately. While observing promising results in simplified and
controlled environments [46, 32], they are less effective in
more realistic scenarios with a variable number of people
performing diverse actions. First, considering that linking
skeletons (e.g., using skeletons’ confidence scores [64]) in
a long time span may inevitably generate more association
errors [12, 48], requiring long sequences as input can bring
* The work was done during an Amazon internship.

Action Detection

Video-level

Group-level

Action Classification

Activity Recognition
Short Skeleton Sequences

1. Intra-Sequence
Motion Modeling

Drop Kicking
(Kinetics-400)

2. Inter-Sequence
Relationship Modeling

Right Team Passing
(Volleyball)

Left: Stand, Watch (AVA)
Right: Stand, Grab, Watch (AVA)

Figure 1: SkeleTR is a general framework for skeleton action
recognition which can handle different tasks, including videolevel action classification, instance-level action detection, and
group-level activity recognition. It adopts a two-stage paradigm:
the intra-sequence and inter-sequence modeling, respectively.

lots of noises. Second, prior works pay little attention to
modeling the relations among a group of people, which
plays an important role in recognizing both person interactions (e.g., talking to someone [22]) and group activities
(e.g., pass/win-point in a volleyball game [24]).
In this paper, we propose SkeleTR for skeleton action
recognition in real-world scenarios and handle multiple action tasks (i.e., video-level, instance-level, and group-level
action recognition) in a general framework. SkeleTR samples a large number of short skeleton sequences instead of
a few long ones (practice of prior works [64, 16]) from
each video. Each short sequence directly corresponds to an
atomic action of a single person, thus the collection of multiple short sequences in space and time can represent hierarchical actions (with a longer time span) of a single person
or a video-level action involving multiple people. The new
input paradigm can be applied to instance-level and videolevel recognition of actions with different temporal granularities, and it has several unique advantages. First, association errors are less likely to happen in a shorter skeleton
sequence [12, 48]. We show that the improved sequence
consistency leads to better intra-sequence modeling. Second, this new format is more flexible and helps to create
comprehensive yet compact inputs. With a finer temporal
13634

