This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PourIt!: Weakly-supervised Liquid Perception from a Single Image
for Visual Closed-Loop Robotic Pouring
Haitao Lin

Yanwei Fu Xiangyang Xue
Fudan University

{htlin19, yanweifu, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Liquid perception is critical for robotic pouring tasks. It
usually requires the robust visual detection of flowing liquid. However, while recent works have shown promising results in liquid perception, they typically require labeled data
for model training, a process that is both time-consuming
and reliant on human labor. To this end, this paper proposes a simple yet effective framework PourIt!, to serve as a
tool for robotic pouring tasks. We design a simple data collection pipeline that only needs image-level labels to reduce
the reliance on tedious pixel-wise annotations. Then, a binary classification model is trained to generate Class Activation Map (CAM) that focuses on the visual difference between these two kinds of collected data, i.e., the existence of
liquid drop or not. We also devise a feature contrast strategy
to improve the quality of the CAM, thus entirely and tightly
covering the actual liquid regions. Then, the container pose
is further utilized to facilitate the 3D point cloud recovery of
the detected liquid region. Finally, the liquid-to-container
distance is calculated for visual closed-loop control of the
physical robot. To validate the effectiveness of our proposed
method, we also contribute a novel dataset for our task and
name it PourIt! dataset. Extensive results on this dataset
and physical Franka robot have shown the utility and effectiveness of our method in the robotic pouring tasks. Our
dataset, code and pre-trained models will be available on
the project page 1 .

Input: A single RGB-D image

2D liquid perception
& 6-DoF object pose

Missing depth

Refraction of light

6-DoF object pose
& 3D object size

3D liquid modeling
3D point
cloud

Open-loop with only
bottle-to-bottle distance

Prev. method

Closed-loop with
Liquid-to-bottle distance

Ours

Robotics Manipulation

Figure 1. Our visual closed-loop robotic pouring. Unlike [17], our
approach recovers a 3D point cloud of the liquid using the source
container’s pose and 2D liquid perception data. This allows the
robot to pour accurately based on visual feedback, even without
the depth measurement of the liquid.

1. Introduction
Recent advances have seen the great progress in the capabilities of grasping and manipulating the rigid objects.
Haitao Lin is with Academy for Engineering and Technology, and Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Fudan University.
Yanwei Fu and Xiangyang Xue are corresponding authors. Yanwei
Fu is with the School of Data Science, Fudan University, and Fudan
ISTBI—ZJNU Algorithm Centre for Brain-inspired Intelligence, Zhejiang
Normal University, Jinhua, China.
1 Project page. https://hetolin.github.io/PourIt

However, the manipulation of non-rigid objects such as liquids, cloth, and rope remains a formidable challenge due to
the absence of fixed patterns and geometrical shapes associated with flexible properties. Perceiving images of liquid is
particularly challenging due to their reliance on refraction
of light as the primary visual cue and the absence of depth
measurement as shown in Fig. 1 (top left). Thus, further
research to enhance liquid perception would be highly beneficial, especially for robots involved in real-world service

241

