This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diverse Inpainting and Editing with GAN Inversion
Ahmet Burak Yildirim∗

Hamza Pehlivan*
Bahri Batuhan Bilecen
Bilkent University

Aysegul Dundar

{a.yildirim, hamza.pehlivan, batuhan.bilecen}@bilkent.edu.tr
adundar@cs.bilkent.edu.tr

Abstract
Inversion
Smile Edit

Input

HyperStyle

HFGI

StyleRes

Inpaint

Our Framework – Diverse Inpainting and Editing

Erased Input

Smile Edit

Recent inversion methods have shown that real images
can be inverted into StyleGAN’s latent space and numerous edits can be achieved on those images thanks to the semantically rich feature representations of well-trained GAN
models. However, extensive research has also shown that
image inversion is challenging due to the trade-off between
high-fidelity reconstruction and editability. In this paper,
we tackle an even more difficult task, inverting erased images into GAN’s latent space for realistic inpaintings and
editings. Furthermore, by augmenting inverted latent codes
with different latent samples, we achieve diverse inpaintings. Specifically, we propose to learn an encoder and mixing network to combine encoded features from erased images with StyleGAN’s mapped features from random samples. To encourage the mixing network to utilize both inputs, we train the networks with generated data via a novel
set-up. We also utilize higher-rate features to prevent color
inconsistencies between the inpainted and unerased parts.
We run extensive experiments and compare our method with
state-of-the-art inversion and inpainting methods. Qualitative metrics and visual comparisons show significant improvements.

Inverting and Editing

Figure 1. Our framework achieves diverse inpainting and editing
with GAN inversion. Compared to other works that are proposed
to invert and edit images with StyleGAN (HyperStyle [3], HFGI
[30], StyleRes [23]), our framework has advantages, as in the presented example.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) achieve impressive results on unconditional [13, 40, 14, 37] and conditional image generation [31, 9, 18], inpainting [36, 16, 42],
and image editing tasks [1, 4, 8]. Traditionally, each of
these tasks has been explored with a dedicated network
and training pipeline. However, recently it has been shown
that high-quality image editing can be achieved with welltrained GAN models and especially by StyleGAN networks
[13, 14] that are trained to generate images without a condition [28, 30]. This approach achieves numerous edits
via semantically rich feature representations of well-trained
* Joint first authors, contributed equally.

GANs [27, 11, 21, 4]. In this work, we are interested in taking this direction one step further and learning an encoder
for a pretrained GAN that can achieve high-quality image
inversion, diverse inpainting, and editing under one framework.
To benefit from GAN’s image editing capabilities, extensive research is conducted on image inversion algorithms to
find the corresponding latent codes that will generate a particular real image [7, 25, 43, 28]. It is observed that there
exists a trade-off between image reconstruction fidelity and
image editing quality [28]. Studies show that low-rate latent spaces (z, W , or W + for StyleGANs) are limited in
their expressiveness power, and not every image can be in1
23120

