This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Get3DHuman: Lifting StyleGAN-Human into a 3D Generative Model
using Pixel-aligned Reconstruction Priors
Zhangyang Xiong1,2
1

FNii, CUHKSZ

Di Kang3 Derong Jin2 Weikai Chen4
Shuguang Cui2,1 Xiaoguang Han2,1∗
2

SSE, CUHKSZ

3

Tencent AI Lab

4

Linchao Bao3

Tencent America

Figure 1: Generations from Get3DHuman. We export generated shapes and visualize them in Blender. Besides generating
3D textured human models from random codes, our method also supports re-texturing a given shape (bottom left), shape and
texture interpolation (bottom middle), and inversion from a given reference image (bottom right). See Supp. for more results.

Abstract
Fast generation of high-quality 3D digital humans is
important to a vast number of applications ranging from
entertainment to professional concerns. Recent advances
in differentiable rendering have enabled the training of
3D generative models without requiring 3D ground truths.
However, the quality of the generated 3D humans still has
much room to improve in terms of both fidelity and diversity. In this paper, we present Get3DHuman, a novel 3D
human framework that can significantly boost the realism
and diversity of the generated outcomes by only using a
*Corresponding author: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn

limited budget of 3D ground-truth data. Our key observation is that the 3D generator can profit from humanrelated priors learned through 2D human generators and
3D reconstructors. Specifically, we bridge the latent space
of Get3DHuman with that of StyleGAN-Human [13] via
a specially-designed prior network, where the input latent
code is mapped to the shape and texture feature volumes
spanned by the pixel-aligned 3D reconstructor [50]. The
outcomes of the prior network are then leveraged as the supervisory signals for the main generator network. To ensure
effective training, we further propose three tailored losses
applied to the generated feature volumes and the intermediate feature maps. Extensive experiments demonstrate that

9287

