This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Out-of-domain GAN inversion via Invertibility Decomposition for
Photo-Realistic Human Face Manipulation

1

Xin Yang1,2,3 Xiaogang Xu∗4,5 Yingcong Chen∗1,2,3
HKUST (GZ) 2 HKUST 3 HKUST (GZ) - SmartMore Joint Lab
4
Zhejiang Lab 5 Zhejiang University

xin.yang@connect.ust.hk

xgxu@zhejianglab.com

yingcongchen@ust.hk

Input → +Smile

(a) HyperStyle [5]

(b) HFGIe4e [40]

(c) Ourse4e

(d) SAM [28]

(e) DiffCAM [36]

Crop & Align

Paste back
Seamlessly

Figure 1: Out-of-domain GAN inversion and attribute manipulation. Our method maintains out-of-domain objects in the
input image (e.g., background, earrings) and generates high-fidelity attribute-edited results. Please zoom in for detail.

Abstract
The fidelity of Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN)
inversion is impeded by Out-Of-Domain (OOD) areas (e.g.,
background, accessories) in the image. Detecting the OOD
areas beyond the generation ability of the pre-trained model
and blending these regions with the input image can enhance fidelity. The “invertibility mask” figures out these
OOD areas, and existing methods predict the mask with the
reconstruction error. However, the estimated mask is usually inaccurate due to the influence of the reconstruction error in the In-Domain (ID) area. In this paper, we propose a
novel framework that enhances the fidelity of human face in-

version by designing a new module to decompose the input
images to ID and OOD partitions with invertibility masks.
Unlike previous works, our invertibility detector is simultaneously learned with a spatial alignment module. We iteratively align the generated features to the input geometry and reduce the reconstruction error in the ID regions.
Thus, the OOD areas are more distinguishable and can be
precisely predicted. Then, we improve the fidelity of our results by blending the OOD areas from the input image with
the ID GAN inversion results. Our method produces photorealistic results for real-world human face image inversion
and manipulation. Extensive experiments demonstrate our
method’s superiority over existing methods in the quality
of GAN inversion and attribute manipulation. Our code is
available at: AbnerVictor/OOD-GAN-inversion

*Corresponding author.

7492

