This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Be Everywhere - Hear Everything (BEE): Audio Scene Reconstruction by Sparse
Audio-Visual Samples

1

Mingfei Chen 1 Kun Su 1 Eli Shlizerman 1, 2 *
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Washington
2
Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington

Figure 1: Be Everywhere - Hear Everything (BEE): Audio reconstruction of a scene with dynamic emitters at arbitrary
listener locations, leveraging inputs from sparse A/V receivers. Please see supplementary materials for sample videos.

Abstract
Fully immersive and interactive audio-visual scenes are
dynamic such that the listeners and the sound emitters move
and interact with each other. Reconstruction of an immersive sound experience, as it happens in the scene, requires
detailed reconstruction of the audio perceived by the listener at an arbitrary location. The audio at the listener location is a complex outcome of sound propagation through
the scene geometry and interacting with surfaces and also
the locations of the emitters and the sounds they emit. Due
to these aspects, detailed audio reconstruction requires extensive sampling of audio at any potential listener location.
This is usually difficult to implement in realistic real-time
dynamic scenes. In this work, we propose to circumvent the
need for extensive sensors by leveraging audio and visual
samples from only a handful of A/V receivers placed in the
scene. In particular, we introduce a novel method and endto-end integrated rendering pipeline which allows the listener to be everywhere and hear everything (BEE) in a dynamic scene in real-time. BEE reconstructs the audio with
two main modules, Joint Audio-Visual Representation, and
Integrated Rendering Head. The first module extracts the
* Corresponding author: shlizee@uw.edu

informative audio-visual features of the scene from sparse
A/V reference samples, while the second module integrates
the audio samples with learned time-frequency transformations to obtain the target sound. Our experiments indicate
that BEE outperforms existing methods by a large margin
in terms of quality of sound reconstruction, can generalize
to scenes not seen in training and runs in real-time speed.

1. Introduction
It is Friday night, and your favorite jazz band is performing at the Birdland Jazz Club in New York. Your friends
will be attending but you cannot attend in person. Imagine
that instead, it would be possible to join them virtually, as
in the scenario illustrated in Figure 1. Enabling such an immersive experience requires high-fidelity real-time spatial
audio reconstruction of the scene and could unlock novel
experiences in applications of virtual reality, mixed reality,
and immersive live-streaming.
While the dynamic aspects of such scenes are the ones
that make them immersive, these same aspects make audio reconstruction a challenging problem. In particular,
for these scenes, sound reconstruction is an outcome of
(i) scene properties related to sound propagation, such as
17853

