This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Segment Anything
Alexander Kirillov1,2,4 Eric Mintun2 Nikhila Ravi1,2
Tete Xiao3
Spencer Whitehead
Alexander C. Berg
1

project lead

2

joint first author

3

Hanzi Mao2 Chloe Rolland3 Laura Gustafson3
Wan-Yen Lo
Piotr Dollár4
Ross Girshick4

equal contribution

4

directional lead

Meta AI Research, FAIR
valid mask

valid mask

annotate

lightweight mask decoder

data
train

model
image
encoder
prompt
encoder

cat with
black ears

segmentation prompt

model

image

(a) Task: promptable segmentation

prompt

image

(b) Model: Segment Anything Model (SAM)

Segment Anything 1B (SA-1B):
• 1+ billion masks
• 11 million images
• privacy respecting
• licensed images

(c) Data: data engine (top) & dataset (bottom)

Figure 1: We aim to build a foundation model for segmentation by introducing three interconnected components: a promptable segmentation task, a segmentation model (SAM) that powers data annotation and enables zero-shot transfer to a range
of tasks via prompt engineering, and a data engine for collecting SA-1B, our dataset of over 1 billion masks.

Abstract

We introduce the Segment Anything (SA) project: a new
task, model, and dataset for image segmentation. Using our
efficient model in a data collection loop, we built the largest
segmentation dataset to date (by far), with over 1 billion
masks on 11M licensed and privacy respecting images. The
model is designed and trained to be promptable, so it can
transfer zero-shot to new image distributions and tasks. We
evaluate its capabilities on numerous tasks and find that
its zero-shot performance is impressive – often competitive
with or even superior to prior fully supervised results. We
are releasing the Segment Anything Model (SAM) and corresponding dataset (SA-1B) of 1B masks and 11M images
at segment-anything.com to foster research into foundation
models for computer vision. We recommend reading the
full paper at: arxiv.org/abs/2304.02643.

1. Introduction
Large language models pre-trained on web-scale datasets
are revolutionizing NLP with strong zero-shot and few-shot
generalization [10]. These “foundation models” [8] can
generalize to tasks and data distributions beyond those seen
during training. This capability is often implemented with
prompt engineering in which hand-crafted text is used to
prompt the language model to generate a valid textual response for the task at hand. When scaled and trained with
abundant text corpora from the web, these models’ zero and
few-shot performance compares surprisingly well to (even

matching in some cases) fine-tuned models [10, 20]. Empirical trends show this behavior improving with model scale,
dataset size, and total training compute [54, 10, 20, 49].
Foundation models have also been explored in computer
vision, albeit to a lesser extent. Perhaps the most prominent illustration aligns paired text and images from the web.
For example, CLIP [80] and ALIGN [53] use contrastive
learning to train text and image encoders that align the two
modalities. Once trained, engineered text prompts enable
zero-shot generalization to novel visual concepts and data
distributions. Such encoders also compose effectively with
other modules to enable downstream tasks, such as image
generation (e.g., DALL·E [81]). While much progress has
been made on vision and language encoders, computer vision includes a wide range of problems beyond this scope,
and for many of these, abundant training data does not exist.
In this work, our goal is to build a foundation model for
image segmentation. That is, we seek to develop a promptable model and pre-train it on a broad dataset using a task
that enables powerful generalization. With this model, we
aim to solve a range of downstream segmentation problems
on new data distributions using prompt engineering.
The success of this plan hinges on three components:
task, model, and data. To develop them, we address the
following questions about image segmentation:
1. What task will enable zero-shot generalization?
2. What is the corresponding model architecture?
3. What data can power this task and model?

4015

