This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Long-Term Photometric Consistent Novel View Synthesis with Diffusion Models
Jason J. Yu1,2 , Fereshteh Forghani1 , Konstantinos G. Derpanis1,2 , Marcus A. Brubaker1,2
1
York University, 2 Vector Institute for AI
{jjyu,forghani,kosta,marcus.brubaker}@yorku.ca

Source

Sample 1

Sample 2

Time

Time

Figure 1: Given a single source view, our model allows us to sample multiple plausible sets of views over a camera trajectory.
Here, we show two samples (middle and right) of a sequence using the three source views (left). Our method is able to
maintain consistency between observed regions, while plausibly extrapolating unseen regions. Notice that the final frames
reveal regions that are largely unseen in the source view, and show different plausible appearances in each sample.

Abstract
Novel view synthesis from a single input image is a challenging task, where the goal is to generate a new view of
a scene from a desired camera pose that may be separated
by a large motion. The highly uncertain nature of this synthesis task due to unobserved elements within the scene (i.e.
occlusion) and outside the field-of-view makes the use of
generative models appealing to capture the variety of possible outputs. In this paper, we propose a novel generative
model capable of producing a sequence of photorealistic
images consistent with a specified camera trajectory, and a
single starting image. Our approach is centred on an autoregressive conditional diffusion-based model capable of
interpolating visible scene elements, and extrapolating unobserved regions in a view, in a geometrically consistent
manner. Conditioning is limited to an image capturing a
single camera view and the (relative) pose of the new cam-

era view. To measure the consistency over a sequence of
generated views, we introduce a new metric, the thresholded
symmetric epipolar distance (TSED), to measure the number of consistent frame pairs in a sequence. While previous
methods have been shown to produce high quality images
and consistent semantics across pairs of views, we show
empirically with our metric that they are often inconsistent
with the desired camera poses. In contrast, we demonstrate that our method produces both photorealistic and
view-consistent imagery. Additional material is available
on our project page: https://yorkucvil.github.
io/Photoconsistent-NVS/.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis (NVS) methods are generally
tasked with generating new scene views, given a set of existing views. NVS has a long history in computer vision
[6, 18, 2] and has recently seen a resurgence of interest with

7094

