This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Label-Efficient Online Continual Object Detection in Streaming Video
Jay Zhangjie Wu1

David Junhao Zhang1

Wynne Hsu2

Mengmi Zhang3,4

Mike Zheng Shou1 *

1

Show Lab, 2 National University of Singapore
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
CFAR and I2R, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore

Abstract
Humans can watch a continuous video stream and effortlessly perform continual acquisition and transfer of
new knowledge with minimal supervision yet retaining
previously learnt experiences. In contrast, existing continual learning (CL) methods require fully annotated labels to effectively learn from individual frames in a video
stream. Here, we examine a more realistic and challenging
problem—Label-Efficient Online Continual Object Detection (LEOCOD) in streaming video. We propose a plugand-play module, Efficient-CLS, that can be easily inserted
into and consistently improve existing CL algorithms for
object detection in video streams with reduced data annotation costs and model retraining time. We show that our
method has achieved significant improvement with minimal
forgetting across all supervision levels on two challenging CL benchmarks for streaming real-world videos. Remarkably, with only 25% annotated video frames, our proposed method still outperforms the state-of-the-art CL models trained with 100% annotations on all video frames. The
data and source code will be publicly available at https:
//github.com/showlab/Efficient-CLS.

1. Introduction
Humans have the ability to continuously learn from
an ever-changing environment, while retaining previously
learnt experiences. In contrast to human learning, prior
works [3, 2, 11, 34, 7] show that deep neural networks are
prone to catastrophic forgetting. To address the forgetting
problem, existing works in continual learning (CL) primarily focus on class-incremental image classification or object
detection. Their experiment settings are often idealistic and
simplified, where i.i.d. static images are usually grouped by
class and incrementally presented to computational models
in sequence. To learn a particular task containing specific
* Corresponding Author.

classes, an agent can go through all the data of current task
over multiple epochs. After that, the learned classes in current task become unavailable, i.e., no overlaps between the
sets of learned classes and unseen classes.
However, these experiment designs deviate from the online continual learning (OCL) setting in the real world,
where an agent learns from temporally correlated non-i.i.d.
video streams in one single pass. Given context regularities in natural environments, an agent is likely to encounter
cases when objects of previously learnt classes co-occur
with unknown objects from unseen classes, e.g., a computer
mouse and a computer monitor often co-occur. Taking these
considerations, [34] introduces OCL on object detection in
real-world video streams. They evaluate existing CL approaches on this setting and report a huge performance gap
compared with offline training.
Based on the setting in [34], we take a significant step
further and introduce a novel problem setting called LabelEfficient Online Continual Object Detection (LEOCOD),
which highlights two unique challenges. First, the setting
in [34] is such that the CL algorithms are trained with every mini-batch over multiple passes. We tighten the training
recipe in LEOCOD to strictly online, where data is allowed
to have one single pass and models are trained on the entire
video dataset for only one epoch. Second, existing CL models require fully supervised training where box-level ground
truth labels of every object on every video frame have to be
obtained from human annotators. Unlike static images, acquiring human annotations for object detection on videos
can be expensive and daunting. Thus, in LEOCOD, the
video frames per mini-batch are sparsely annotated to alleviate the burdens of extensive human labeling, making
LEOCOD one step closer to real world application.
Cognitive science works [35, 19] show that humans are
efficient at continuously learning from very few annotated
data samples. We get inspirations from the theory of Complementary Learning Systems (CLS) in human brains [18],
and propose a plug-and-play module for the LEOCOD task,
dubbed as Efficient-CLS. In Efficient-CLS, we introduce

19246

