This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scenimefy: Learning to Craft Anime Scene via Semi-Supervised
Image-to-Image Translation
Yuxin Jiang∗

Liming Jiang∗
Shuai Yang Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

{c200203, liming002, shuai.yang, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

Figure 1: Examples of anime scene rendering by Scenimefy. Top row: input images; Bottom row: our translated results.

Abstract
Automatic high-quality rendering of anime scenes from
complex real-world images is of significant practical value.
The challenges of this task lie in the complexity of the
scenes, the unique features of anime style, and the lack
of high-quality datasets to bridge the domain gap. Despite promising attempts, previous efforts are still incompetent in achieving satisfactory results with consistent semantic preservation, evident stylization, and fine details. In this study, we propose Scenimefy, a novel semisupervised image-to-image translation framework that addresses these challenges. Our approach guides the learning
with structure-consistent pseudo paired data, simplifying
the pure unsupervised setting. The pseudo data are derived
uniquely from a semantic-constrained StyleGAN leveraging
rich model priors like CLIP. We further apply segmentationguided data selection to obtain high-quality pseudo supervision. A patch-wise contrastive style loss is introduced to
improve stylization and fine details. Besides, we contribute
a high-resolution anime scene dataset to facilitate future
research. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the su∗ Equal contribution.

periority of our method over state-of-the-art baselines in
terms of both perceptual quality and quantitative performance. Project page: https://yuxinn-j.github.
io/projects/Scenimefy.html.

1. Introduction
Crafting anime scenes requires significant artistic skill
and time, making developing learning-based techniques for
automatic scene stylization of unquestionable practical and
commercial value. Recent advances in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have led to a significant improvement in automatic stylization, but most research in this area
has focused primarily on human faces [41, 33, 22, 20, 42].
Despite its high research value, generating high-quality
anime scenes from complex real-world scene images remains underexplored.
Transferring real scene images into anime styles remains
a formidable challenge due to several factors. 1) The nature
of a scene. Scenes are typically composed of multiple objects with complex relationships among them, and there is
an inherent hierarchy between foreground and background
elements, as shown in Figure 2. 2) The features of anime.
Anime is characterized by unique textures and intricate de-

7357

