This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive and Background-Aware Vision Transformer for Real-Time
UAV Tracking
1

Shuiwang Li1 , Yangxiang Yang1 , Dan Zeng2, *, and Xucheng Wang1
College of Information Science and Engineering , Guilin University of Technology, China
2
Research Institue of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems,
Southern University of Science and Technology, China

lishuiwang0721@163.com, xyyang317@163.com, zengd@sustech.edu.cn, xcwang@glut.edu.cn

Abstract
While discriminative correlation filters (DCF)-based
trackers prevail in UAV tracking for their favorable efficiency, lightweight convolutional neural network (CNN)based trackers using filter pruning have also demonstrated
remarkable efficiency and precision. However, the use of
pure vision transformer models (ViTs) for UAV tracking
remains unexplored, which is a surprising finding given
that ViTs have been shown to produce better performance
and greater efficiency than CNNs in image classification.
In this paper, we propose an efficient ViT-based tracking framework, Aba-ViTrack, for UAV tracking. In our
framework, feature learning and template-search coupling
are integrated into an efficient one-stream ViT to avoid
an extra heavy relation modeling module. The proposed
Aba-ViT exploits an adaptive and background-aware token
computation method to reduce inference time. This approach adaptively discards tokens based on learned halting probabilities, which a priori are higher for background
tokens than target ones. Extensive experiments on six
UAV tracking benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed
Aba-ViTrack achieves state-of-the-art performance in UAV
tracking. Code is available at https://github.com/
xyyang317/Aba-ViTrack.

1. Introduction
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have been employed
in various applications, and recently, UAV tracking has
gained considerable attention in visual tracking [37, 4, 66,
67]. However, unlike general visual tracking, UAV tracking poses unique challenges. Common issues such as extreme view angles, motion blur, and severe occlusion can
degrade tracking precision. Moreover, the limited battery
capacity, computing resources, and low power consumption
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison on UAV123. Compared with DCF-based
and CNN-based trackers, our efficient ViT-based tracker (AbaTrack) sets a new record with 0.864 precision and still runs efficiently at around 180 f ps.

requirements of UAVs impose stringent demands on efficiency [5, 66, 67, 34]. Therefore, a good UAV tracker must
achieve high precision while remaining high efficiency.
As shown in Fig. 1, UAV tracking methods can be
broadly divided into two categories: discriminative correlation filters (DCF)-based trackers and deep convolutional
neural network (CNN)-based trackers. DCF-based trackers are favored because of their high efficiency derived
from operations in the Fourier domain, but they usually
achieve low tracking precision [37, 32, 36, 28]. On the
other hand, CNN-based trackers can easily obtain high precision, but are not suitable for high-efficiency demands. To
combat low efficiency, some lightweight CNN-based trackers are proposed for UAV tracking [5, 66, 67] that employ filter pruning to reduce the parameters of SiamFC++
[70] based on Fisher information [67] or rank information [66, 41], resulting in significant improvements in both
precision and efficiency. Very recently, TCTrack [5] has
been proposed to utilize temporal contexts to enhance UAV
tracking. Different from existing CNN-based tracker, TC-

13989

