This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVDiff : Compact Parameter Space for Diffusion Fine-Tuning
Ligong Han1,2 * Yinxiao Li2 Han Zhang2 Peyman Milanfar2 Dimitris Metaxas1
1
2
Rutgers University
Google Research

Feng Yang2

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in
text-to-image generation, enabling the creation of highquality images from text prompts or other modalities. However, existing methods for customizing these models are limited by handling multiple personalized subjects and the risk
of overfitting. Moreover, their large number of parameters
is inefficient for model storage. In this paper, we propose a
novel approach to address these limitations in existing textto-image diffusion models for personalization. Our method
involves fine-tuning the singular values of the weight matrices, leading to a compact and efficient parameter space
that reduces the risk of overfitting and language-drifting.
We also propose a Cut-Mix-Unmix data-augmentation technique to enhance the quality of multi-subject image generation and a simple text-based image editing framework. Our
proposed SVDiff method has a significantly smaller model
size compared to existing methods (≈2,200 times fewer parameters compared with vanilla DreamBooth), making it
more practical for real-world applications.

A

Style-Mixing

Input
B Images
Input
Images

shape A + style B

shape B + style A

put together

in front of …

change color

a dog wearing…

MultiSubject

SingleImage
Editing

Input Image

Figure 1. Applications of SVDiff . Style-Mixing: mix styles from
personalized objects and create novel renderings; Multi-Subject:
generate multiple subjects in the same scene; Single-Image Editing: text-based editing from a single image.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid advancement of
diffusion-based text-to-image generative models [19, 53,
20, 47, 51], which have enabled the generation of highquality images through simple text prompts. These models
are capable of generating a wide range of objects, styles,
and scenes with remarkable realism and diversity. These
models, with their exceptional results, have inspired researchers to investigate various ways to harness their power
for image editing [31, 37, 79].
In the pursuit of model personalization and customization, some recent works such as Textual-Inversion [16],
DreamBooth [52], and Custom Diffusion [32] have further
unleashed the potential of large-scale text-to-image diffusion models. By fine-tuning the parameters of the pretrained models, these methods allow the diffusion models to
be adapted to specific tasks or individual user preferences.
* Work done during an internship at Google Research.

Despite their promising results, there are still some limitations associated with fine-tuning large-scale text-to-image
diffusion models. One limitation is the large parameter
space, which can lead to overfitting or drifting from the
original generalization ability [52]. Another challenge is
the difficulty in learning multiple personalized concepts especially when they are of similar categories [32].
To alleviate overfitting, we draw inspiration from the efficient parameter space in the GAN literature [50] and propose a compact yet efficient parameter space, spectral shift,
for diffusion model by only fine-tuning the singular values of the weight matrices of the model. This approach
is inspired by prior work in GAN adaptation showing that
constraining the space of trainable parameters can lead to
improved performance on target domain [48, 36, 41, 64].
Comparing with another popular low-rank constraint [22],
the spectral shifts utilize the full representation power of the
weight matrix while being more compact (e.g. 1.7MB for
17323

