This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FineRecon: Depth-aware Feed-forward Network for Detailed 3D Reconstruction
Noah Stier1,2 Anurag Ranjan1 Alex Colburn1 Yajie Yan1
Liang Yang1 Fangchang Ma1 Baptiste Angles1
1

Apple

2

University of California, Santa Barbara

Abstract
Recent works on 3D reconstruction from posed images [17, 23, 24] have demonstrated that direct inference
of scene-level 3D geometry without test-time optimization
is feasible using deep neural networks, showing remarkable
promise and high efficiency. However, the reconstructed geometry, typically represented as a 3D truncated signed distance function (TSDF), is often coarse without fine geometric details. To address this problem, we propose three effective solutions for improving the fidelity of inference-based
3D reconstructions. We first present a resolution-agnostic
TSDF supervision strategy to provide the network with a
more accurate learning signal during training, avoiding
the pitfalls of TSDF interpolation seen in previous work.
We then introduce a depth guidance strategy using multiview depth estimates to enhance the scene representation
and recover more accurate surfaces. Finally, we develop a
novel architecture for the final layers of the network, conditioning the output TSDF prediction on high-resolution
image features in addition to coarse voxel features, enabling sharper reconstruction of fine details. Our method,
FineRecon1 , produces smooth and highly accurate reconstructions, showing significant improvements across multiple depth and 3D reconstruction metrics.

1. Introduction
Reconstruction of 3D scenes from posed images is a
long-standing problem in computer vision, with many applications such as autonomous driving, robotic navigation,
and digital 3D asset creation. The traditional approach is
to estimate depth maps over the input images using multiview stereo (MVS), and then fuse them together to form a
unified 3D model [9, 10, 22]. However, the fusion process
commonly results in missing geometry or artifacts in areas
where the depth maps do not agree, due to effects such as
occlusion, specularity, and transparent or low-texture sur1 https://github.com/apple/ml-finerecon

Figure 1. Our method, FineRecon, recovers highly detailed and
coherent geometry relative to state-of-the-art methods. Our contributions of lossless ground truth sampling, depth-aware feature volume, and point backprojection result in smooth surfaces that preserve high-frequency structures without creating strong artifacts.

faces. Recently, an alternative method has been proposed to
address this issue in Atlas [17], which back-projects learned
image features onto a voxel grid and directly predicts the
scene’s truncated signed distance function (TSDF) using a
3D convolutional neural network (CNN). The main advantage is that the CNN can learn to produce smooth, consistent
surfaces, and to fill in holes that would otherwise result from
low-texture regions and occlusion. Several methods have
proposed improvements to this framework [1, 2, 23, 24],
consistently pushing the state of the art in reconstruction
accuracy. However, despite these efforts, the reconstructions produced by these methods remain coarse. We identify three key factors restricting the accuracy and level of
detail in prior works, and we introduce solutions to address
them, demonstrating their effectiveness within a new system: FineRecon.
First, existing works use tri-linear interpolation to resample the ground-truth TSDF to align with the model’s
voxel grid during training [17, 23, 24]. This allows su-

18423

