This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Optics for Video Snapshot Compressive Imaging
Ping Wang1,2
Lishun Wang2
Xin Yuan2, *
1
Zhejiang University 2 School of Engineering, Westlake University
{wangping,wanglishun,xyuan}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Video snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) aims to capture a sequence of video frames with only a single shot of
a 2D detector, whose backbones rest in optical modulation
patterns (also known as masks) and a computational reconstruction algorithm. Advanced deep learning algorithms
and mature hardware are putting video SCI into practical
applications. Yet, there are two clouds in the sunshine of
SCI: i) low dynamic range as a victim of high temporal multiplexing, and ii) existing deep learning algorithms’ degradation on real system. To address these challenges, this
paper presents a deep optics framework to jointly optimize
masks and a reconstruction network. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
propose a new type of structural mask to realize motionaware and full-dynamic-range measurement. Considering
the motion awareness property in measurement domain, we
develop an efﬁcient network for video SCI reconstruction
using Transformer to capture long-term temporal dependencies, dubbed Res2former. Moreover, sensor response is
introduced into the forward model of video SCI to guarantee end-to-end model training close to real system. Finally,
we implement the learned structural masks on a digital
micro-mirror device. Experimental results on synthetic and
real data validate the effectiveness of the proposed framework. We believe this is a milestone for real-world video
SCI. The source code and data are available at https:
//github.com/pwangcs/DeepOpticsSCI.

D

E
37

Under our framework
(36.69 dB)

PSNR (dB)

36.5
Large Res2former
(36.56 dB)

36

es2former
R 2f
(35.98 dB)

35.5
35

F



1000

2000
FLOPs (G)

STFormer
(36.34 dB)

3000

G

Figure 1. The proposed deep optics framework brings a significant improvement for real-world video SCI as demonstrated in
real results (a), (b), and (c), got by previous SOTA STFormer [34],
current STFormer (under our framework), and our Res2former,
respectively. (d) summarizes the comparison between Res2former
and STFormer in terms of PSNR (vertical axis), FLOPs (horizontal axis), and Parameters (circle radius). The proposed Res2former
achieves competitive performance (35.98 dB) with only 28.15%
FLOPs and 56.57% parameters of STFormer (36.34 dB). By increasing parameters to STFormer’s level, large Res2former can
lead to a better performance (36.56 dB). By the way, STFormer
under our framework can increase by 0.35 dB.

of the original video from the measurement using an advanced algorithm. In a nutshell, video SCI is a hardwareencoder-plus-software-decoder system and its performance
mainly depends on mask and reconstruction algorithm.
For the hardware encoder, random binary mask has been
widely used in both simulation and real video SCI systems, often implemented in a digital micro-mirror device
(DMD) [28, 27] or liquid crystal on silicon (LCOS) [29,
9, 16]. Recently, learned binary mask was also implemented in programmable pixel sensors [21]. For the software decoder, it is an ill-posed inverse problem to retrieve
high-ﬁdelity video from the captured single measurement
and various reconstruction methods [41, 17, 18, 28, 5, 35,
4, 37, 34, 23] have been developed to solve it in recent
years. Conventional optimization algorithms adopt handcrafted priors, e.g., total variation [41] and non-local self-

1. Introduction
Capturing high-dynamic-range (HDR) and high-framerate (HFR) video is a long-term challenge in the ﬁeld of
computational photography. As an elegant solution of HFR,
video snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) optically multiplexes a sequence of video frames, each of which is coded
with a distinct modulation pattern (hereafter called mask),
into a snapshot measurement of a two-dimensional (2D) detector, and computationally reconstructs a decent estimate
* Corresponding author.

10646

