This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-Time Neural Rasterization for Large Scenes
Jeffrey Yunfan Liu1,3†

Yun Chen1,2 * Ze Yang1,2∗ Jingkang Wang1,2
Raquel Urtasun1,2
1

Waabi

2

University of Toronto

3

Sivabalan Manivasagam1,2

University of Waterloo

{jliu, ychen, zyang, jwang, siva, urtasun}@waabi.ai

FPS 126

FPS 141

FPS 144

FPS 134

Figure 1. Neural Scene Rasterization. Our method renders urban driving scenes (1920×1080) at high quality and >100 FPS by
leveraging neural textures and fast rasterization. We reconstruct driving scenes in Bay Area and show the rendering at four streets on the
map. Please refer to our project page https://waabi.ai/neuras/ for more results on driving scenes as well as drone scenes.

Abstract
We propose a new method for realistic real-time novelview synthesis (NVS) of large scenes. Existing neural rendering methods generate realistic results, but primarily
work for small scale scenes (< 50m2 ) and have difficulty
at large scale (> 10000m2 ). Traditional graphics-based
rasterization rendering is fast for large scenes but lacks realism and requires expensive manually created assets. Our
approach combines the best of both worlds by taking a
moderate-quality scaffold mesh as input and learning a neural texture field and shader to model view-dependant effects
to enhance realism, while still using the standard graphics
pipeline for real-time rendering. Our method outperforms
existing neural rendering methods, providing at least 30×
faster rendering with comparable or better realism for large
self-driving and drone scenes. Our work is the first to enable real-time rendering of large real-world scenes.

* Indicates equal contribution. † Work done while an intern at Waabi.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing and rendering images for large-scale
scenes, such as city blocks, holds significant value in fields
such as robotics simulation and virtual reality (VR). In these
fields, achieving a high level of realism and speed is of
utmost importance. VR requires photorealistic renderings
at interactive frame rates for an immersive and seamless
user experience. Similarly, robot simulation development
requires high-fidelity image quality for real world transfer
and high frame rates for evaluation and training at scale,
especially for closed-loop sensor simulation [51].
Achieving both speed and realism in large-scale scene
synthesis has been a long-standing challenge. Recently, a
variety of neural rendering approaches [34, 44, 45] have
shown impressive realism results in novel view synthesis
(NVS). These methods fall into two primary paradigms:
implicit and explicit-based approaches. Implicit-based approaches [34, 6, 37, 65] represent scene geometry and appearance with multi-layer-perceptrons (MLPs) and render
novel views by evaluating these MLPs hundreds of thou-

8416

