This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Aggregation Transformer for Image Super-Resolution
Zheng Chen1 , Yulun Zhang2 ,* Jinjin Gu3,4 , Linghe Kong1∗ , Xiaokang Yang1 , Fisher Yu2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 ETH Zürich, 3 The University of Sydney, 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract
Transformer has recently gained considerable popularity in low-level vision tasks, including image superresolution (SR). These networks utilize self-attention along
different dimensions, spatial or channel, and achieve impressive performance. This inspires us to combine the
two dimensions in Transformer for a more powerful representation capability. Based on the above idea, we propose a novel Transformer model, Dual Aggregation Transformer (DAT), for image SR. Our DAT aggregates features across spatial and channel dimensions, in the interblock and intra-block dual manner. Specifically, we alternately apply spatial and channel self-attention in consecutive Transformer blocks. The alternate strategy enables
DAT to capture the global context and realize inter-block
feature aggregation. Furthermore, we propose the adaptive
interaction module (AIM) and the spatial-gate feed-forward
network (SGFN) to achieve intra-block feature aggregation.
AIM complements two self-attention mechanisms from corresponding dimensions. Meanwhile, SGFN introduces additional non-linear spatial information in the feed-forward
network. Extensive experiments show that our DAT surpasses current methods. Code and models are obtainable
at https://github.com/zhengchen1999/DAT.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR) is a traditional
low-level vision task that focuses on recovering a highresolution (HR) image from a low-resolution (LR) counterpart. As an ill-posed problem with multiple potential
solutions for a given LR input, various approaches have
emerged to tackle this challenge in recent years. Many
of these methods utilize convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [12, 47, 10, 29]. However, the convolution adopts a
local mechanism, which hinders the establishment of global
dependencies and restricts the performance of the model.
Recently, Transformer proposed in natural language processing (NLP) has performed notably in multiple high-level
vision tasks [13, 39, 24, 11, 7]. The core of Transformer
* Corresponding authors: Yulun Zhang, yulun100@gmail.com; Linghe
Kong, linghe.kong@sjtu.edu.cn

Urban100: img_059

HR

Bicubic

CSNLN [29]

SwinIR [20]

CAT-A [9]

DAT (Ours)

Figure 1: Visual comparison (×4) on Urban100. CSNLN,
SwinIR, and CAT-A suffer from blurring artifacts.

is the self-attention (SA) mechanism, which is capable of
establishing global dependencies. This property alleviates
the limitations of CNN-based algorithms. Considering the
potential of Transformer, some researchers attempt to apply Transformer to low-level tasks [20, 44, 42, 9], including
image SR. They explore efficient usages of Transformer on
high-resolution images from different perspectives to mitigate the high complexity of global self-attention [13]. For
the spatial aspect, some methods [20, 46, 9] apply local spatial windows to limit the scope of self-attention. For the
channel aspect, the “transposed” attention [44] is proposed,
which calculates self-attention along the channel dimension
rather than the spatial dimension. These methods all exhibit remarkable results due to the strong modeling ability in
their respective dimensions. Spatial window self-attention
(SW-SA) is able to model fine-grained spatial relationships
between pixels. Channel-wise self-attention (CW-SA) can
model relationships among feature maps, thus exploiting
global image information. Generally, both extracting spatial information and capturing channel context are crucial
to the performance of Transformer in image SR.
Motivated by the aforementioned findings, we propose
the Dual Aggregation Transformer (DAT) for image SR.
Our DAT aggregates spatial and channel features via the
inter-block and intra-block dual way to obtain powerful representation capability. Specifically, we alternately
apply spatial window and channel-wise self-attention in
successive dual aggregation Transformer blocks (DATBs).
Through this alternate strategy, our DAT can capture both
spatial and channel context and realize inter-block feature aggregation between different dimensions. Moreover,
the two self-attention mechanisms complement each other.
Spatial window self-attention enriches the spatial expression of each feature map, helping to model channel depen-

12312

