This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoTDet: Affordance Knowledge Prompting for Task Driven Object Detection
Jiajin Tang* Ge Zheng* Jingyi Yu Sibei Yang†
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
{tangjj,zhengge,yujingyi,yangsb}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
https://toneyaya.github.io/cotdet

(a) cup,
bottle, knife...

Abstract
Task driven object detection aims to detect object instances suitable for affording a task in an image. Its challenge lies in object categories available for the task being
too diverse to be limited to a closed set of object vocabulary for traditional object detection. Simply mapping categories and visual features of common objects to the task
cannot address the challenge. In this paper, we propose
to explore fundamental affordances rather than object categories, i.e., common attributes that enable different objects to accomplish the same task. Moreover, we propose
a novel multi-level chain-of-thought prompting (MLCoT) to
extract the affordance knowledge from large language models, which contains multi-level reasoning steps from task
to object examples to essential visual attributes with rationales. Furthermore, to fully exploit knowledge to benefit object recognition and localization, we propose a knowledgeconditional detection framework, namely CoTDet. It conditions the detector from the knowledge to generate object
queries and regress boxes. Experimental results demonstrate that our CoTDet outperforms state-of-the-art methods consistently and significantly (+15.6 box AP and +14.8
mask AP) and can generate rationales for why objects are
detected to afford the task.

1. Introduction
The traditional object detection task [3, 12, 37, 65], as
shown in Figure 1a, aims to detect object instances of given
categories in an image, so objects of categories such as the
cup, bottle, cake, and knife are detected. In contrast, detection tasks in real-world applications [1, 4], such as intelligent service robots, usually appear in the form of tasks
rather than object categories [38]. For example, when an
intelligent robot is asked to complete the task of “opening
parcels”, the robot needs to autonomously locate the tool
shown in Figure 1b, i.e., a knife. So the core of this type
of task is to detect the object instances in the image that are
* Both authors contributed equally.

† Corresponding author.

Object Detection

(b) GT

(c) Ours,
GGNN, TOIST( )

(d) fork

(e) temperature
probe

Task Driven Object Detection (Open Parcel)

(f) Multi-Level Chain-of-Thought Prompting
Choose objects
to open parcel...
Image

Which common objects?
1. Knife
2. Pen
3. Scissors
4. Screwdriver

Why these
objects?
1. Knife
easily cut paper
easily cut plastic
provide a grip
2. Pen
protect from heat
...

Then visual
features?
Visual Affordance
Knowledge!
Image
a sharp blade
a handle
a sharp tip
...

Figure 1. An example of (a) traditional object detection, (b)(e) task driven object detection, and (f) our multi-level chain-ofthought (MLCoT) prompting large language models (LLMs) to
generate visual affordance knowledge.

most suitable for the task [19, 42]. However, the challenges
for task driven object detection are multi-fold. Previous
methods that directly learn the mapping between objects
and tasks from objects’ visual context features or categories
cannot achieve satisfactory results. As shown in Figure 1c,
the context-based approach GGNN [42] wrongly chooses
vegetable stem for afford task of “opening parcels” because it learns that visually slender objects can open parcels.
Similarly, the category-based approach TOIST [19] considers that no object in the image can perform the “opening
parcels” since it could not even recognize an instance of
the knife in the image. In contrast, people will intelligently
and naturally choose to use the knife to open parcels in the
scene of Figure 1b.
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) like GPT3 [2] and ChatGPT [31] have demonstrated impressive capabilities in encoding general world knowledge from a vast
amount of text data [32, 40, 52]. A naive approach is to
prompt LLMs directly to return “what objects should we
use to open parcels” and leverage the returned object categories to simplify task driven object detection to the traditional one. However, we observe that LLMs usually only

3068

