This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ada3D : Exploiting the Spatial Redundancy with
Adaptive Inference for Efficient 3D Object Detection
Tianchen Zhao12 , Xuefei Ning1∗ , Ke Hong1 , Zhongyuan Qiu2 , Pu Lu1 , Yali Zhao2 ,
Linfeng Zhang1 , Lipu Zhou3 , Guohao Dai4 , Huazhong Yang1 , Yu Wang1 *
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Novauto, 3 Meituan, 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{suozhang1998,foxdoraame}@gmail.com

{zhongyuan.qiu,yali.zhao}@novauto.com.cn

{zhanglinfeng1997,zhoulipu}@outlook.com

daiguohao@sjtu.edu.cn

{hongk21,lup22,yanghz,yu-wang}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Spatial redundancy exists in both
the 3D sparse voxels and 2D BEV features

Abstract
Voxel-based methods have achieved state-of-the-art performance for 3D object detection in autonomous driving. However, their significant computational and memory
costs pose a challenge for their application to resourceconstrained vehicles. One reason for this high resource
consumption is the presence of a large number of redundant
background points in Lidar point clouds, resulting in spatial redundancy in both 3D voxel and BEV map representations. To address this issue, we propose an adaptive inference framework called Ada3D, which focuses on reducing the spatial redundancy to compress the model’s computational and memory cost. Ada3D adaptively filters the
redundant input, guided by a lightweight importance predictor and the unique properties of the Lidar point cloud.
Additionally, we maintain the BEV features’ intrinsic sparsity by introducing the Sparsity Preserving Batch Normalization. With Ada3D, we achieve 40% reduction for 3D
voxels and decrease the density of 2D BEV feature maps
from 100% to 20% without sacrificing accuracy. Ada3D
reduces the model computational and memory cost by 5×,
and achieves 1.52× / 1.45× end-to-end GPU latency and
1.5× / 4.5× GPU peak memory optimization for the 3D
and 2D backbone respectively.

1. Introduction
The perception of the 3D scene plays a vital role in autonomous driving systems. It’s essential that the perception of the surrounding 3D scene is both quick and accurate, which places high demands on both performance and
latency for perception methods.
Voxel-based 3D deep learning methods convert the in* Corresponding Authors

Redundant
background pixels

Redundant
background points

3D

2D

(Only 5% nonzero pixels
projected from 3D voxels)

3D Backbone

Projection

Ada3D

Ada3D

Reduce 40% redundant 3D voxels
5.26x

2D Backbone

4.93x

5x FLOPs and
memory saving

Reduce 80% redundant 2D pixels
1.38x

2.21x

1.38x GPU latency saving
2.21x GPU peak memory

Figure 1: Ada3D is an adaptive inference framework that
exploits the spatial redundancy for both the 3D voxel and
2D BEV features.

put point cloud into sparse voxels by quantizing them into
regular grids, and achieve state-of-the-art performance [13].
However, current voxel-based methods struggle to meet the
real-time demand on self-driving cars due to constrained resources [14]. As a result, it is crucial to improve the efficiency of voxel-based 3D perception methods (e.g., reduce
the GPU latency and peak memory).
There are two main factors contributing to the excessively long processing time for 3D perception methods.
Firstly, the model size is excessive, and it contains timeconsuming operations such as 3D sparse convolution [14].

17728

