This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Simple and Effective Out-of-Distribution Detection
via Cosine-based Softmax Loss
SoonCheol Noh
DongEon Jeong
Jee-Hyong Lee*
Sungkyunkwan University
Suwon, Korea
{yhnuhb27, wjdehddjs, john}@skku.edu

Abstract
Deep learning models need to detect out-of-distribution
(OOD) data in the inference stage because they are trained
to estimate the train distribution and infer the data sampled
from the distribution. Many methods have been proposed,
but they have some limitations, such as requiring additional
data, input processing, or high computational cost. Moreover, most methods have hyperparameters to be set by users,
which have a significant impact on the detection rate. We
propose a simple and effective OOD detection method by
combining the feature norm and the Mahalanobis distance
obtained from classification models trained with the cosinebased softmax loss. Our method is practical because it does
not use additional data for training, is about three times
faster when inferencing than the methods using the input
processing, and is easy to apply because it does not have
any hyperparameters for OOD detection. We confirm that
our method is superior to or at least comparable to stateof-the-art OOD detection methods through the experiments.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are generally designed to target
the closed world. Models are trained based on the assumption that the inputs of the inference stage will be sampled
from the same distribution as the train distribution. This
means that the model may not make correct predictions if
inputs are sampled from other distributions. The model
must be able to distinguish whether the input is from the
train distribution or not. This problem has been established
as the task of out-of-distribution (OOD) detection.
Some researchers tried to detect OOD samples using
confidence scores from classification models. Hendrycks
and Gimpel simply used the confidence scores, but this
approach was not very effective because of the overconfi* Corresponding Author

dence of deep learning models [9]. Hendrycks, Mazeika,
and Dietterich (2019) and Papadopoulos et al. tried to lower
the confidence of OOD samples using auxiliary large OOD
datasets [10, 21]. However, collecting a massive OOD
dataset is highly expensive, and training classification models with such a dataset takes a long time. Liang, Li and
Srikant (2018) simply adopted the input processing technique, which added a small perturbation to the input samples to increase the confidence of in-distirubtion (InD) samples, but they assumed OOD samples were given in advance, which is not practical [16].
Some researchers defined measures to detect OOD samples based on input features learned by classification models. Lee et al. proposed a measure based on Mahalanobis
distance, but they also assumed that OOD samples were
given in advance as Liang et al. did [15, 16]. Sastry and
Oore proposed a measure based on various correlations between features, but their approach was very time-consuming
in evaluating the OOD measure [23]. Hsu et al. tried to obtain the OOD probability by modifying the network structure, which caused the degradation of classification performances [12].
Additional popular technique is the input processing,
which was adopted by most approaches [16, 15, 23]. The input processing is to generate x′ by adding a small perturbation to input data x to make the boundary of in-distribution
compact. It may be helpful to increase the detection accuracy under certain conditions. However, generating the
perturbation takes almost twice of the inference time, so the
total inference becomes three times longer. The OOD detection performance is very susceptible to the size of the
perturbation, so it should be carefully determined.
Some OOD detection approaches had various hyperparameters, including the perturbation size of input processing. The hyperparameters were usually tuned by using additional datasets to maximize the detection performance.
Liang et al. [16] and Lee et al. [15] tuned them with given
OOD samples, and Hsu et al. [12] and Sastry and Oore [23]
used the validation samples. However, it is hard to find out

16560

