This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-domain Visual Entity Recognition:
Towards Recognizing Millions of Wikipedia Entities
Hexiang Hu♠ Yi Luan♠ Yang Chen♠♥† Urvashi Khandelwal♠
Mandar Joshi♠ Kenton Lee♠ Kristina Toutanova♠ Ming-Wei Chang♠
♠ Google Deepmind

♥ Georgia Institute of Technology

Context Image

Input

Knowledge Base
(Wikipedia)
Text Query
OVEN Models

What piece of equipment is placed
on the animal in the image?

What is the model of this vehicle?

What is this building called?

Mcdonnell douglas

Bridle

Bugatti Veyron

Skanderbeg Museum

McDonnell Douglas was a major
American aerospace
manufacturing corporation and
defense contractor formed by …

A bridle is a piece of equipment used
to direct a horse. As defined in the
Oxford English Dictionary, the "bridle"
includes both the headstall that…

The Bugatti Veyron EB 16.4 is a
mid-engine sports car, designed
and developed in Germany by
the Volkswagen Group and …

The National History Museum "Gjergj
Kastrioti Skënderbeu" (Albanian:
Muzeu Historik Kombëtar ), also known
as the Skanderbeg Museum…

Output

Output Entity
(Wikipedia Entity)

Who manufactured the plane?

Figure 1: An illustration of the proposed OVEN task. Examples on the right are sampled from the constructed OVEN-Wiki dataset. OVEN
aims at recognizing entities physically presented in the image or can be directly inferred from the image.

Abstract
Large-scale multi-modal pre-training models such as
CLIP [30] and PaLI [8] exhibit strong generalization on
various visual domains and tasks. However, existing image
classification benchmarks often evaluate recognition on a
specific domain (e.g., outdoor images) or a specific task
(e.g., classifying plant species), which falls short of evaluating whether pre-trained foundational models are universal
visual recognizers. To address this, we formally present
the task of Open-domain Visual Entity recognitioN (OVEN),
where a model need to link an image onto a Wikipedia entity
with respect to a text query. We construct OVEN-Wiki ‡ by repurposing 14 existing datasets with all labels grounded onto
one single label space: Wikipedia entities. OVEN-Wiki challenges models to select among six million possible Wikipedia
entities, making it a general visual recognition benchmark
with the largest number of labels. Our study on state-ofthe-art pre-trained models reveals large headroom in generalizing to the massive-scale label space. We show that
a PaLI-based auto-regressive visual recognition model performs surprisingly well, even on Wikipedia entities that have
never been seen during fine-tuning. We also find existing pretrained models yield different strengths: while PaLI-based
models obtain higher overall performance, CLIP-based mod-

els are better at recognizing tail entities.

1. Introduction
Pre-trained large language models [3, 11], inter alia, have
shown strong transferable text processing and generation
skills in tackling a wide variety of natural language tasks [38,
44, 48] across languages and task formats, while requiring
very few manually labeled per-task examples. At the same
time, while there has been equally impressive progress in
multi-modal pre-training [8, 30], it remains unclear whether
similarly universal visual skills, i.e., recognizing millions
of coarse-grained and fine-grained visual concepts, have
emerged. Are pre-trained multi-modal models capable of
recognizing open-domain visual concepts?
Answering this question requires a visual recognition
dataset with broad coverage of visual domains and tasks,
under a universally defined semantic space. Existing recognition benchmarks such as ImageNet [34, 36], Stanford
Cars [21], or SUN database [52] represent a large number
of visual concepts, but make specific assumptions about the
† Work was done when interned at Google.
‡ Our dataset and evaluation toolkit is publicly available at https:
//open-vision-language.github.io/oven

12065

