This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SYENet: A Simple Yet Effective Network for Multiple Low-Level Vision Tasks
with Real-time Performance on Mobile Device
Weiran Gou∗1,2 , Ziyao Yi∗1,2 , Yan Xiang∗1,2 , Shaoqing Li1,2 , Zibin Liu1,2 , Dehui Kong1,2 , and Ke Xu†1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Mobile Network and Mobile Multimedia Technology
2
Sanechips Technology, Chengdu, China

{gou.weiran, yi.ziyao, xiang.yan1, li.shaoqing1, liu.zibin, kong.dehui,
xu.kevin}@sanechips.com.cn
https://github.com/sanechips-multimedia/syenet

Abstract
With the rapid development of AI hardware accelerators,
applying deep learning-based algorithms to solve various
low-level vision tasks on mobile devices has gradually become possible. However, two main problems still need to
be solved: task-speciﬁc algorithms make it difﬁcult to integrate them into a single neural network architecture, and
large amounts of parameters make it difﬁcult to achieve
real-time inference. To tackle these problems, we propose
a novel network, SYENet, with only 6K parameters, to handle multiple low-level vision tasks on mobile devices in a
real-time manner. The SYENet consists of two asymmetrical branches with simple building blocks. To effectively
connect the results by asymmetrical branches, a Quadratic
Connection Unit(QCU) is proposed. Furthermore, to improve performance, a new Outlier-Aware Loss is proposed
to process the image. The proposed method proves its superior performance with the best PSNR as compared with
other networks in real-time applications such as Image Signal Processing(ISP), Low-Light Enhancement(LLE), and
Super-Resolution(SR) with 2K60FPS throughput on Qualcomm 8 Gen 1 mobile SoC(System-on-Chip). Particularly,
for ISP task, SYENet got the highest score in MAI 2022
Learned Smartphone ISP challenge.

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the thriving development of AI accelerators [54, 77], such as Neural Processor Units(NPUs)
or Graphic Processor Units(GPUs), AI algorithms can be
deployed on mobile devices and achieved great success
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

† Corresponding author: Ke Xu(xu.kevin@sanechips.com.cn)

[65, 73, 94, 99]. Many mobile SoCs, especially those designed for smartphone, tablet, and in-vehicle infotainment
systems, require superior visual quality processing, which
cannot be achieved without leveraging deep networks such
as ISP [43, 46], LLE [7], and SR [8, 11, 14]. However, due
to the tight hardware constraints such as power and computing resources, deploying these algorithms on mobile devices still has several issues as follows.
The ﬁrst issue concerns real-time processing. Usually,
these low-level vision tasks require a 2K60FPS or even
higher real-time performance to satisfy the viewer’s needs.
Although the State-of-the-Arts(SOTAs) [8, 14, 46, 90] dealing with similar tasks have boosted the performance, they
increased the numbers of parameters and computational
cost drastically, which cannot satisfy real-time inference
deployment even on powerful hardware such as serverlevel processors. Moreover, compared with high-level tasks
[94, 99], where the input images could be resized into a
lower resolution such as 128 × 128 or 256 × 256 without noticeable effects, low-level vision tasks cannot do the
same thing as their preliminary goal is to improve the human visual quality. A more detailed discussion about the
constraints of low-level vision tasks is in Appendix G.
The second issue is related to hardware resources on
mobile devices such as Qualcomm’s Snapdragon. As
compared with server-level Central Processing Unit(CPU)
or GPU, mobile SoC usually has limited computing resources such as multiplication-and-accumulation units, limited memory bandwidth, and limited power consumption
budget. Unfortunately, most low-level vision algorithms are
task-speciﬁc [7, 14, 46, 62] and independent to each other,
which makes it difﬁcult to merge into a single architecture. To make things worse, many advanced operators, such
as deformable convolution [106] and 3D-convolution [68],
cannot be directly applied on mobile devices, which further

12182

