This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distribution-Consistent Modal Recovering for Incomplete Multimodal Learning
Yuanzhi Wang, Zhen Cui∗ , Yong Li∗
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional
Information of Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
{yuanzhiwang, zhen.cui, yong.li}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Recovering missing modality is popular in incomplete
multimodal learning because it usually benefits downstream
tasks. However, the existing methods often directly estimate
missing modalities from the observed ones by deep neural
networks, lacking consideration of the distribution gap between modalities, resulting in the inconsistency of distributions between the recovered and the true data. To mitigate this issue, in this work, we propose a novel recovery paradigm, Distribution-Consistent Modal Recovering
(DiCMoR), to transfer the distributions from available
modalities to missing modalities, which thus maintains the
distribution consistency of recovered data. In particular,
we design a class-specific flow based modality recovery
method to transform cross-modal distributions on the condition of sample class, which could well predict a distributionconsistent space for missing modality by virtue of the invertibility and exact density estimation of normalizing flow. The
generated data from the predicted distribution is integrated
with available modalities for the task of classification. Experiments show that DiCMoR gains superior performances
and is more robust than existing state-of-the-art methods
under various missing patterns. Visualization results show
that the distribution gaps between recovered modalities and
missing modalities are mitigated. Codes are released at
https://github.com/mdswyz/DiCMoR.

1. Introduction
Multimodal machine learning dedicates to designing a
strong model for understanding, reasoning, and learning
by fusing multimodal data, such as language, acoustic,
image, et al [15, 24]. Researchers have extensively exploited how to effectively encode the discriminative representations from different modalities [22, 33, 3, 28]. How* The corresponding authors.

Available
modality
Missing
modality
Recovered
modality

(a) Previous recovery paradigm

Available
Transfer Distribution
Recovered

(b) Our proposed DiCMoR

(c) Visualization
of distributions

Ground
Truth

Figure 1. Two paradigms for missing modality recovery. (a) Typical paradigm usually exploits a well-crafted encoder and decoder
modality recovery. (b) Our method transfers the distribution from
the available to the missing modality, aiming to guarantee the distribution consistency. (c) Recovered and ground truth modality
distribution visualization comparison between MCTN [20] (top)
and our DiCMoR (bottom). DiCMoR exhibits a higher degree of
proximity to the ground truth. More results can be found in Fig. 3.

ever, in real world scenarios, the well-trained model may
be deployed when certain modalities are not available, e.g.,
language may be unavailable due to speech recognition errors; acoustic modality may be lost due to background noise
or sensor sensing limitations; visual data may be unavailable due to lighting, occlusion, or social privacy security.
In practice, the problem of missing modality inevitably degrades the multimodal understanding performance.
To address this problem, a straightforward way is to conduct data recovery and then perform downstream tasks on
the recovered data. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), this is a typical
recovery paradigm that has been extensively studied by researchers [23, 20, 34, 16]. The core of this paradigm aims
to design a well-crafted encoder and decoder, and then take
as input the available modality so as to recover the missing modality. Tran et al. [23] proposed a cascaded residual
autoencoder architecture to reconstruct the missing modalities; Lian et al. [16] leveraged graph neural networks to
estimate the missing modalities from partially observed in-

22025

