This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Euclidean Space is Evil: Hyperbolic Attribute Editing
for Few-shot Image Generation
Lingxiao Li1

Yi Zhang2

Shuhui Wang3 *

1

3

Columbia University 2 University of Oxford
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

ll3504@columbia.edu, wolf5965@ox.ac.uk, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn

𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛

Abstract
Dog

Few-shot image generation is a challenging task since
it aims to generate diverse new images for an unseen category with only a few images. Existing methods suffer
from the trade-off between the quality and diversity of generated images. To tackle this problem, we propose Hyperbolic Attribute Editing (HAE), a simple yet effective
method. Unlike other methods that work in Euclidean
space, HAE captures the hierarchy among images using
data from seen categories in hyperbolic space. Given a
well-trained HAE, images of unseen categories can be generated by moving the latent code of a given image toward
any meaningful directions in the Poincaré disk with a fixing radius. Most importantly, the hyperbolic space allows
us to control the semantic diversity of the generated images by setting different radii in the disk. Extensive experiments and visualizations demonstrate that HAE is capable
of not only generating images with promising quality and
diversity using limited data but achieving a highly controllable and interpretable editing process. Code is available
at https://github.com/lingxiao-li/HAE.

1. Introduction
Due to the persistent development of deep learning,
the task of image generation has received significant research attention in recent years. Specifically, the Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [21] and its variants
(e.g., StyleGANv2 [34]) have succeeded in generating highfidelity and realistic images, requiring a large number of
high-quality data for model training. However, considering the long-tail distribution and data imbalance widely exists among different image categories [30], it is difficult for
GANs to be trained on categories with sufficient training
images to generate new realistic and diverse images for a
* Corresponding author

Shih-Tzu
Brown
Hair
Shih-Tzu

White
Hair
Shih-Tzu

Ridgeback

Close
mouthed
Ridgeback

Semantic Hierarchy

∆𝑤!"

Open
mouthed
Ridgeback

∆𝑤!!"

∆𝑤#!"

Hyperbolic Space

Figure 1: Illustration of hierarchical attribute editing in hyperbolic space. Hyperbolic space can naturally and compactly
encode semantic hierarchical structures within a large image data
corpus. Changing the high-level, i.e., category-relevant attribute
∆wr changes the category of an image. While changing lowlevel or category-irrelevant attribute ∆wir varies images within
categories.

category with only a few images. This task is referred to as
few-shot image generation [10, 26, 30, 28, 29, 27, 15]. A
variety of tasks can benefit from improvements in few-shot
image generation, for instance, low-data detection [17] and
few-shot classification [54, 57].
In general, existing GAN-based few-shot image generation mechanisms can be classified into three categories.
Transfer-based methods [10, 39] introduce meta-learning or
domain adaptation on GANs to generate new images by
enforcing knowledge transfer among categories. Fusionbased methods [2, 23, 30, 28] perform feature fusion of
multiple input images in a feature space and generate images via decoding the fused features back to image space.
However, the output is still highly similar to the source images. Transformation-based methods [1, 29, 27, 15] find
intra-category transformations or inject random perturbations to conditional unseen category samples to generate
images without tedious fine-tuning. By representing the
images in the Euclidean feature space, the above learning
mechanisms tend to be over-complicated, and the generated

22714

