This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prune Spatio-temporal Tokens by Semantic-aware Temporal Accumulation
Shuangrui Ding1,3 * Peisen Zhao2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Xiaopeng Zhang2 Rui Qian3 Hongkai Xiong1 Qi Tian2†
2
Huawei Cloud 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

{dsr1212, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn qr021@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
{pszhao93, zxphistory}@gmail.com tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Transformers have become the primary backbone of the
computer vision community due to their impressive performance. However, the unfriendly computation cost impedes
their potential in the video recognition domain. To optimize the speed-accuracy trade-off, we propose Semanticaware Temporal Accumulation score (STA) to prune spatiotemporal tokens integrally. STA score considers two critical factors: temporal redundancy and semantic importance. The former depicts a specific region based on
whether it is a new occurrence or a seen entity by aggregating token-to-token similarity in consecutive frames
while the latter evaluates each token based on its contribution to the overall prediction. As a result, tokens with
higher scores of STA carry more temporal redundancy as
well as lower semantics thus being pruned. Based on the
STA score, we are able to progressively prune the tokens
without introducing any additional parameters or requiring further re-training. We directly apply the STA module
to off-the-shelf ViT and VideoSwin backbones, and the empirical results on Kinetics-400 and Something-Something
V2 achieve over 30% computation reduction with a negligible ∼ 0.2% accuracy drop. The code is released at
https://github.com/Mark12Ding/STA.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been an unstoppable shift in the general backbone design from Convolutional Neural Networks
(ConvNets) to Transformers, which are originally employed
in natural language processing, and has shown promising
potential for various vision tasks [8, 48, 47, 22, 1, 32, 5].
The key component of Transformers is the self-attention
mechanism, which is apt to capture long-range dependencies and empowers ViT to perceive the global reception
field. The seminal work, Vision Transformer (ViT) [8]
* Work done during an internship at Huawei Cloud.
† Corresponding author. Email: tian.qi1@huawei.com.

Figure 1: Kinectics-400 result for ViT and VideoSwin. The
bubble’s area is proportional to FLOPs of a variant in a
model family. ViT/VideoSwin here takes 16/32 × 2242
video. The proposed STA saves over 30% FLOPs for all
model variants with a negligible drop in performance.

closely follows the original Transformer architecture [38].
Equipped with a large-scale model and dataset, ViT outperforms ConvNets in image classification by a considerable
margin. Inspired by this superior scaling behavior, Transformers have gained popularity as a backbone choice and
are widely adopted for image recognition [22, 37], action
recognition [1, 23], semantic segmentation [49, 6], action
detection [43, 12], temporal perception [33, 34], etc.
Despite the promising potential of Transformers in
spatio-temporal vision tasks, such as action recognition, the
quadratic increase in complexity caused by the temporal
dimension makes the video Transformers computationally
unfriendly compared to images. For instance, earlier work
TimeSformer [2], which applies Transformer backbone for
video, required 7.14 Tera FLOPs to achieve 80.7% accuracy
on the Kinetics-400 action recognition benchmark. The excessive computational cost makes it impractical for deployment in real-world scenarios. Therefore, there is an urgent
need to explore ways to profit from the performance gains

16945

