This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProPainter: Improving Propagation and Transformer for Video Inpainting
Shangchen Zhou Chongyi Li Kelvin C.K. Chan Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{s200094, chongyi.li, chan0899, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
https://shangchenzhou.com/projects/ProPainter
ProPainter-480p
(ours)

ProPainter
(ours)

T

Memory
5G

10G

15G

20G

…
E2FGVI
(CVPR22)

FGT
(ECCV22)

FuseFormer
(CVPR21)

Sparse Query Space
(masked window)

Image Prop.
(global)

ISVI
(CVPR22)

…

…

…

Feature Prop.
(local)

E2FGVI-480p
(CVPR22)

STTN
(ECCV20)

Sparse Key/Value Space
(temporal strided window)

STTN-480p
(ECCV20)

CPNet
(ICCV19)

FGVC
(ECCV20)

Faster

(a) Dual-domain Propagation

(d) Input with object mask

(b) Mask-guided Sparse Video Transformer

(e) FuseFormer

(g) E2FGVI

(f) FGT

Slower

(c) Performance Gain

(h) ProPainter (ours)

Figure 1: (a) Dual-domain propagation enables more effective propagation due to its global and reliable nature. (b) Maskguided sparse video Transformer achieves high efficiency by discarding unnecessary and redundant windows. (c) ProPainter
outperforms prior methods while maintaining efficiency. (d-h) In visual comparisons with FuseFormer [22], FGT [42], and
E2 FGVI [19], our ProPainter exhibits superiority in filling complete and rich textures.

Abstract
Flow-based propagation and spatiotemporal Transformer
are two mainstream mechanisms in video inpainting (VI).
Despite the effectiveness of these components, they still suffer
from some limitations that affect their performance. Previous
propagation-based approaches are performed separately either in the image or feature domain. Global image propagation isolated from learning may cause spatial misalignment
due to inaccurate optical flow. Moreover, memory or computational constraints limit the temporal range of feature propagation and video Transformer, preventing exploration of
correspondence information from distant frames. To address
these issues, we propose an improved framework, called
ProPainter, which involves enhanced ProPagation and an efficient Transformer. Specifically, we introduce dual-domain
propagation that combines the advantages of image and feature warping, exploiting global correspondences reliably.
We also propose a mask-guided sparse video Transformer,
which achieves high efficiency by discarding unnecessary

and redundant tokens. With these components, ProPainter
outperforms prior arts by a large margin of 1.46 dB in PSNR
while maintaining appealing efficiency.

1. Introduction
Video inpainting (VI) aims to fill gaps or missing regions in a video with visually consistent content while
ensuring spatial and temporal coherence. This technique
has broad applications, including video completion [10],
object removal [9, 37], video restoration [31], watermark,
and logo removal [19]. VI is challenging because it requires establishing accurate correspondence across distant
frames for information aggregation. To address this challenge, various mechanisms have been explored, such as
3D CNN [6, 11], video internal learning [41, 27], flowguided propagation [37, 10, 43, 42, 19], and video Transformer [22, 42, 19]. Among these mechanisms, flow-guided
propagation and video Transformer have become mainstream
choices for VI due to their promising performance.

10477

