This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdvDiffuser: Natural Adversarial Example Synthesis with Diffusion Models
Xinquan Chen* a,b , Xitong Gao* a , Juanjuan Zhao a , Kejiang Ye a , Cheng-Zhong Xu c
a
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
b
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
c
State Key Lab of IOTSC, University of Macau, Macau S.A.R., China.
{xq.chen,xt.gao,jj.zhao,kj.ye}@siat.ac.cn czxu@um.edu.mo

Abstract
Previous work on adversarial examples typically involves
a fixed norm perturbation budget, which fails to capture
the way humans perceive perturbations. Recent work has
shifted towards natural unrestricted adversarial examples
(UAEs) that breaks `p perturbation bounds but nonetheless
remain semantically plausible. Current methods use GAN
or VAE to generate UAEs by perturbing latent codes. However, this leads to loss of high-level information, resulting in
low-quality and unnatural UAEs. In light of this, we propose
AdvDiffuser, a new method for synthesizing natural UAEs
using diffusion models. It can generate UAEs from scratch
or conditionally based on reference images. To generate natural UAEs, we perturb predicted images to steer their latent
code towards the adversarial sample space of a particular
classifier. We also propose adversarial inpainting based on
class activation mapping to retain the salient regions of the
image while perturbing less important areas. On CIFAR-10,
CelebA and ImageNet, we demonstrate that it can defeat the
most robust models on the RobustBench leaderboard with
near 100% success rates. Furthermore, The synthesized
UAEs are not only more natural but also stronger compared
to the current state-of-the-art attacks. Specifically, compared with GA-attack, the UAEs generated with AdvDiffuser
exhibit 6⇥ smaller LPIPS perturbations, 2 ⇠ 3⇥ smaller
FID scores and 0.28 higher in SSIM metrics, making them
perceptually stealthier. Finally, adversarial training with
AdvDiffuser further improves the model robustness against
attacks with unseen threat models.1

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved unprecedented success in various visual recognition tasks. Despite
* Equal contribution. Correspondence to Xitong Gao.
1 AdvDiffuser is open source and available at https://github.

com/lafeat/advdiffuser.

their remarkable success, DNNs are susceptible to adversarial examples [23], i.e. DNN predictions can be fooled
by adding a tiny and difficult to perceive perturbation to
a natural image. Furthermore, deep models face greater
threats in real-world scenarios from unrestricted adversarial
examples (UAEs) [2]. UAEs can make extensive changes to
images without significantly affecting human perception of
their meanings and faithfulness, and have thus emerged as a
prominent direction in the study of adversarial attacks over
the past few years.
Gradient-based unrestricted adversarial attacks perturbs
original images within predefined perturbation bounds.
Geometry-aware attacks [20] uses proxy models to minimize the `p budget required, and it won the 1st place in a
CVPR Competition on unrestricted adversarial attacks [4].
On the other hand, perceptual attacks [19, 51] optimize perturbations using bounds on perceptual distances, such as
LPIPS [49] and structural similarity [42]. Others consider
image recolorization [36, 37]. However, selecting proxy
models and distance metrics require subjective prior knowledge to generate adversarial examples that appear realistic.
Generative models such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) have the ability to learn and sample from the
data distribution effectively. This is why [38, 50] use them to
generate adversarial examples. These approaches search for
perturbations in the latent space that can cause the targeted
model to misclassify the images after decoding, in order to
find adversarial examples. Nevertheless, perturbing latent
codes alters the high-level semantics of generated images
in a way that is perceptually salient to humans [17]. Such
perturbations can introduce ambiguity in certain image attributes, and visibly distort the original concept, resulting in
UAEs that are often semantically vague and of poor quality.
These UAEs could thus be perceptually very different from
the original examples.
In order to address these issues, we propose AdvDiffuser, a novel generative unrestricted adversarial attack based
on diffusion models [13]. Diffusion models draw inspiration from non-equilibrium thermodynamics, which define a
14562

