This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ICL-D3IE: In-Context Learning with Diverse Demonstrations Updating for
Document Information Extraction
Jiabang He1 , Lei Wang2 *, Yi Hu1 , Ning Liu3 , Hui Liu4 , Xing Xu1†, Heng Tao Shen1
1
Center for Future Media & School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Singapore Management University , 3 Beijing Forestry University
4
Beijing Rongda Technology Co., Ltd.

Abstract

1. Introduction
The task of visually rich document understanding
(VRDU), which involves extracting information from
VRDs [2, 19], requires models that can handle various types
* Corresponding author. lei.wang.2019@phdcs.smu.edu.sg
† Corresponding author. xing.xu@uestc.edu.cn

LaytoutLMv3
/LayoutLMv2

OCR

B-MENU.CNT,…

Test example
(b) Large Language Models

A:MENU.CNT,…

GPT-3/ChatGPT

Context 𝟏:{text:"TAX 5.4",Box:[11,12,32,44]}...Q:What
are the labels for these texts? A:SUB_TOTAL.TAX_PRICE,…

+

…

Large language models (LLMs), such as GPT-3 and
ChatGPT, have demonstrated remarkable results in various
natural language processing (NLP) tasks with in-context
learning, which involves inference based on a few demonstration examples. Despite their successes in NLP tasks,
no investigation has been conducted to assess the ability of LLMs to perform document information extraction
(DIE) using in-context learning. Applying LLMs to DIE
poses two challenges: the modality and task gap. To this
end, we propose a simple but effective in-context learning
framework called ICL-D3IE, which enables LLMs to perform DIE with different types of demonstration examples.
Specifically, we extract the most difficult and distinct segments from hard training documents as hard demonstrations for benefiting all test instances. We design demonstrations describing relationships that enable LLMs to understand positional relationships. We introduce formatting
demonstrations for easy answer extraction. Additionally,
the framework improves diverse demonstrations by updating them iteratively. Our experiments on three widely used
benchmark datasets demonstrate that the ICL-D3IE framework enables Davinci-003/ChatGPT to achieve superior
performance when compared to previous pre-trained methods fine-tuned with full training in both the in-distribution
(ID) setting and in the out-of-distribution (OOD) setting.
Code is available at https://github.com/MAEHCM/
ICL-D3IE.

(a) Pretrained Document Understanding Models

Context 𝒏:{text:"J.S PR",Box:[13 525 469 555]}...Q:What
are the labels for these texts? A:MENU.NM,...

Context:{text
:"1X",Box:[11
13 10 40]}…
Q:What are
the labels for
these texts?

OCR

...
In-context example 𝟏

In-context example 𝒏

Test example

Figure 1: Two approaches for solving the DIE task: (a) previous pre-trained document understanding models [15, 42]
fine-tuned with full training examples, and (b) in-context
learning over LLMs with a few examples.

of documents, such as voice, receipts, forms, emails, and
advertisements, and various types of information, including rich visuals, large amounts of text, and complex document layouts [28, 18, 26]. Recently, fine-tuning based
on pre-trained visual document understanding models has
yielded impressive results in extracting information from
VRDs [41, 13, 22, 23, 15, 21], suggesting that the use of
large-scale, unlabeled training documents in pre-training
document understanding models can benefit information
extraction from VRDs. As shown in Figure 1 (a), a pretrained model such as LayoutLMv3 [15] can predict labels
for entities in a test VRD.
Large language models (LLMs), such as GPT-3 [1],

19485

