This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FastViT: A Fast Hybrid Vision Transformer
using Structural Reparameterization
Pavan Kumar Anasosalu Vasu†

James Gabriel

Jeff Zhu

Oncel Tuzel

Anurag Ranjan†

Apple
Abstract
The recent amalgamation of transformer and convolutional designs has led to steady improvements in accuracy
and efficiency of the models. In this work, we introduce
FastViT, a hybrid vision transformer architecture that obtains the state-of-the-art latency-accuracy trade-off. To this
end, we introduce a novel token mixing operator, RepMixer,
a building block of FastViT, that uses structural reparameterization to lower the memory access cost by removing
skip-connections in the network. We further apply traintime overparametrization and large kernel convolutions to
boost accuracy and empirically show that these choices
have minimal effect on latency. We show that – our model
is 3.5× faster than CMT, a recent state-of-the-art hybrid
transformer architecture, 4.9× faster than EfficientNet, and
1.9× faster than ConvNeXt on a mobile device for the same
accuracy on the ImageNet dataset. At similar latency, our
model obtains 4.2% better Top-1 accuracy on ImageNet
than MobileOne. Our model consistently outperforms competing architectures across several tasks – image classification, detection, segmentation and 3D mesh regression with
significant improvement in latency on both a mobile device and a desktop GPU. Furthermore, our model is highly
robust to out-of-distribution samples and corruptions, improving over competing robust models. Code and models are available at https://github.com/apple/
ml-fastvit

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers [14] have achieved state-of-the-art
performance on several tasks such as image classification,
detection and segmentation [35]. However, these models
have traditionally been computationally expensive. Recent
works [66, 39, 41, 57, 29] have proposed methods to lower
the compute and memory requirements of vision transformers. Recent hybrid architectures [41, 17, 10, 62] effectively
corresponding authors: {panasosaluvasu, anuragr}@apple.com

combine the strengths of convolutional architectures and
transformers to build architectures that are highly competitive on a wide range of computer vision tasks. Our goal is to
build a model that achieves state-of-the-art latency-accuracy
trade-off.
Recent vision and hybrid transformer models [51, 17, 42,
41] follow the Metaformer [65] architecture, which consists of a token mixer with a skip connection followed by
Feed Forward Network (FFN) with another skip connection.
These skip connections account for a significant overhead
in latency due to increased memory access cost [13, 55].
To address this latency overhead, we introduce RepMixer,
a fully reparameterizable token mixer that uses structural
reparameterization to remove the skip-connections. The
RepMixer block also uses depthwise convolutions for spatial mixing of information similar to ConvMixer [53]. However, the key difference is that our module can be reparameterized at inference to remove any branches.
To further improve on latency, FLOPs and parameter
count, we replace all dense k×k convolutions with their factorized version, i.e. depthwise followed by pointwise convolutions. This is a common approach used by efficient architectures [26, 46, 25] to improve on efficiency metrics,
but, naively using this approach hurts performance as seen
in Table 1. In order to increase capacity of the these layers,
we use linear train-time overparameterization as introduced
in [13, 11, 12, 55, 18]. These additional branches are only
introduced during training and are reparameterized at inference.
In addition, we use large kernel convolutions in our network. This is because, although self-attention based token mixing is highly effective to attain competitive accuracy, they are inefficient in terms of latency [39]. Therefore, we incorporate large kernel convolutions in Feed Forward Network (FFN) [14] layer and patch embedding layers. These changes have minimal impact on overall latency
of the model while improving performance.
Thus, we introduce FastViT that is based on three key
design principles– i) use of RepMixer block to remove skip
connections, ii) use of linear train-time overparameteriza-

5785

