This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Noise-aware Learning from Web-crawled Image-Text Data for Image Captioning
Wooyoung Kang* Jonghwan Mun∗ Sungjun Lee∗
Kakao Brain

Byungseok Roh

{edwin.kang, jason.mun, jun.untitled, peter.roh}@kakaobrain.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
The recent introduction of large-scale data of image-text
pairs [5, 42, 20] has brought remarkable advances in computer vision, e.g., CLIP [38] for multi-modal representation
learning and DALL·E [40] for the text-to-image generation
task. This is mainly thanks to the scalability of the data collection process as well as the rich knowledge described in
alt-texts of web-crawled data. Inspired by this, research on
image captioning is also moving towards exploiting large* These authors contributed equally.

47.5
45.0
42.5

CIDEr

Image captioning is one of the straightforward tasks
that can take advantage of large-scale web-crawled data
which provides rich knowledge about the visual world for
a captioning model. However, since web-crawled data contains image-text pairs that are aligned at different levels,
the inherent noises (e.g., misaligned pairs) make it difficult to learn a precise captioning model. While the filtering strategy can effectively remove noisy data, it leads to
a decrease in learnable knowledge and sometimes brings
about a new problem of data deficiency. To take the best
of both worlds, we propose a Noise-aware Captioning
(NoC) framework, which learns rich knowledge from the
whole web-crawled data while being less affected by the
noises. This is achieved by the proposed alignment-levelcontrollable captioner, which is learned using alignment
levels of the image-text pairs as a control signal during
training. The alignment-level-conditioned training allows
the model to generate high-quality captions by simply setting the control signal to the desired alignment level at
inference time. An in-depth analysis shows the effectiveness of our framework in handling noise. With two tasks of
zero-shot captioning and text-to-image retrieval using generated captions (i.e., self-retrieval), we also demonstrate
our model can produce high-quality captions in terms of
descriptiveness and distinctiveness. The code is available
at https://github.com/kakaobrain/noc.

CC3M training MSCOCO evaluation

50.0

40.0
37.5
35.0

Vanilla
Vanilla (Filtering)
Ours

32.5
30.0
0

20

40

Ratio of Noise Injection (%)

60

Figure 1: Zero-shot captioning performance curve on MSCOCO
when varying the ratio of noise injection to data of CC3M. To
deliberately make noise data, we replace captions up to the specified ratio with ones from randomly selected images in the dataset.
Models learned without consideration of noises suffer from performance degradation, even with a data filtering scheme.1 In contrast,
our model is more robust to noises and provides more accurate
captions, indicating the necessity for noise-aware learning.

scale web-crawled image-text paired data [49, 47, 23, 54].
While web-crawled data is effective in learning rich
knowledge about the visual world, it inherently suffers from
noise issues as some text may be unrelated to its paired image. According to our observation from Fig. 1, the quality
of captions generated by a standard captioning model, when
learned without consideration of noises, dramatically deteriorates as more noisy data is included during training.
One straightforward approach to tackle noises in largescale web-crawled data is the CLIP-based filtering strategy [42] where image-text pairs are filtered out according
to their CLIP similarity2 . As shown in Fig. 1, the filtering
strategy improves the quality of captions by leaving only
relatively well-aligned image-text pairs for training. However, in general, filtering methods without oracle criteria in1 For a fair comparison with the filtering scheme reducing the number of
training samples, we train all models for the same steps rather than epochs.
2 Throughout the paper, the term CLIP similarity is used to denote
image-text cosine similarity calculated by the CLIP model, indicating the
quality of the caption for a paired image as described in [18].

2942

