This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Object Segmentation-aware Video Frame Interpolation
Jun-Sang Yoo
Korea University

Hongjae Lee
Korea University

Seung-Won Jung*
Korea University

junsang7777@korea.ac.kr

jimmy9704@korea.ac.kr

swjung83@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Video frame interpolation (VFI) is a very active research topic due to its broad applicability to many applications, including video enhancement, video encoding,
and slow-motion effects. VFI methods have been advanced
by improving the overall image quality for challenging sequences containing occlusions, large motion, and dynamic
texture. This mainstream research direction neglects that
foreground and background regions have different importance in perceptual image quality. Moreover, accurate synthesis of moving objects can be of utmost importance in
computer vision applications. In this paper, we propose
a video object segmentation (VOS)-aware training framework called VOS-VFI that allows VFI models to interpolate
frames with more precise object boundaries. Specifically,
we exploit VOS as an auxiliary task to help train VFI models by providing additional loss functions, including segmentation loss and bi-directional consistency loss. From
extensive experiments, we demonstrate that VOS-VFI can
boost the performance of existing VFI models by rendering clear object boundaries. Moreover, VOS-VFI displays
its effectiveness on multiple benchmarks for different applications, including video object segmentation, object pose
estimation, and visual tracking. The code is available at
https://github.com/junsang7777/VOS-VFI

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation (VFI) is a low-level video processing task synthesizing intermediate frames between consecutive frames to increase the frame rate. VFI has been
widely used in many applications, including slow motion
generation [44, 46, 2, 27], video restoration [67, 31], video
compression [65], and novel view synthesis [17, 29]. Although VFI has been extensively studied in past decades,
there is still room for improvement because moving objects,
occlusions, and cluttered backgrounds make it challenging.
Like other vision tasks, deep learning-based meth* Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Examples of video frame interpolation and video
object segmentation results on the AdaCoF baseline [35].
The proposed VOS-VFI is a training framework that can
improve the performance of the baseline model without increasing the number of parameters and inference time.

ods dominate VFI, which can be classified into kernelbased [35, 46, 15, 55] and flow-based [14, 27, 70, 32, 40]
approaches. The former learns interpolation kernels for two
consecutive frames as an output of a convolutional neural network (CNN) to synthesize an intermediate frame;
whereas the latter finds optical flow between two frames
in the pixel-space or feature-space and generates an intermediate frame by motion compensated prediction. Both
approaches have been advanced by adopting novel architectures or algorithms, including coarse-to-fine architectures [56, 72, 32], attention mechanisms [11, 30], de-

12322

