This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pluralistic Aging Diffusion Autoencoder
Peipei Li1 , Rui Wang1 , Huaibo Huang2 , Ran He2 , Zhaofeng He1⋆
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
CRIPAC&MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{lipeipei, wr bupt, zhaofenghe}@bupt.edu.cn, huaibo.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Figure 1: Our single framework enables various pluralistic face aging tasks, including (a) Text-guided face aging (the first
row), (b) Reference-guided face aging (the second row), (c) Pluralistic face aging with high-level variations (the bottom) and
(d) Pluralistic face aging with low-level variations (the bottom).

Abstract
Face aging is an ill-posed problem because multiple
plausible aging patterns may correspond to a given input.
Most existing methods often produce one deterministic estimation. This paper proposes a novel CLIP-driven Pluralistic Aging Diffusion Autoencoder (PADA) to enhance the diversity of aging patterns. First, we employ diffusion models
to generate diverse low-level aging details via a sequential
denoising reverse process. Second, we present Probabilistic
Aging Embedding (PAE) to capture diverse high-level aging
patterns, which represents age information as probabilistic distributions in the common CLIP latent space. A text⋆ Corresponding author

guided KL-divergence loss is designed to guide this learning. Our method can achieve pluralistic face aging conditioned on open-world aging texts and arbitrary unseen face
images. Qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate that our method can generate more diverse and highquality plausible aging results.

1. Introduction
Face aging aims to model facial appearance changes
across different ages meanwhile maintaining identity information. It is an ill-posed learning problem due to multiple
plausible aging results for a given input. Given various aging images in the last row of Fig. 1, which one meets your

22613

