This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Movement Enhancement toward Multi-Scale Video Feature Representation
for Temporal Action Detection
Zixuan Zhao
Dongqi Wang
Xu Zhao*
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{zhaozixuan, wangdq0124, zhaoxu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Movement is small in the scene

Appearance
Time

Similar

1. Introduction
Temporal Action Detection (TAD) is a significant video
understanding task, which aims to extract video segments
with specific action labels from untrimmed long videos. It
remains a challenging problem because action boundaries
are difficult to determine precisely, which adversely affects
the performance in most works.
Two critical issues stand in the way of detecting action
boundaries robustly from untrimmed videos. The first issue,
which could be called as movement feature submergence,
exists in where either context but not movement itself dominate feature expression, or movement is small in pixel size.
* Corresponding author

Difference
Movement

Background
Region

Movement
Region

Action
Region

(a) Strong class-specific context.

Time

Background
Region

Action
Region

(b) Small movement in pixel size.

Time
Video

…
Snippet
Start

Start

End

End

Feature

Boundary localization is a challenging problem in Temporal Action Detection (TAD), in which there are two main
issues. First, the submergence of movement feature, i.e. the
movement information in a snippet is covered by the scene
information. Second, the scale of action, that is, the proportion of action segments in the entire video, is considerably
variable. In this work, we first design a Movement Enhance
Module (MEM) to highlight movement feature for better action location, and then, we propose a Scale Feature Pyramid Network (SFPN) to detect multi-scale actions in videos.
For Movement Enhance Module, firstly, Movement Feature
Extractor (MFE) is designed to get the movement feature.
Secondly, we propose a Multi-Relation Enhance Module
(MREM) to grasp valuable information correlation both locally and temporally. For Scale Feature Pyramid Network,
we design a U-Shape Module to model different scale actions, moreover, we design the training and inference strategy of different scales, ensuring that each pyramid layer
is only responsible for actions at a specific scale. These
two innovations are integrated as the Movement Enhance
Network (MENet), and extensive experiments conducted on
two challenging benchmarks demonstrate its effectiveness.
MENet outperforms other representative TAD methods on
ActivityNet-1.3 and THUMOS-14.

Similar

Feature
Extraction

Video
Feature

Action
Region

(c) Multi-scale actions.

Figure 1. Movement feature submergence and multi-scale actions.
(a) Strong class-specific context of the accordion leads to video
feature generated by TAC lacking the difference between action
and background. (b) Small movement of Futsal results in less
difference between action area and background area. (c) Multiscale actions have different feature richness and action pattern.

For the first case, as shown in Fig 1(a), the action of Playing Accordion can be easily judged by Accordion, while
this strong class-specific context causes the real movement
information in action area to be submerged. For the second
case, as shown in Fig 1(b), for Futsal, the stadium scene
takes up a large proportion of pixels in the frame, while
the movement information is ignored. This movement feature submergence leads to the feature in background to be
similar with the feature in action area, which blues the action boundaries. If the movement information can be highlighted, the boundary will be easier to be located. However,
this problem has been ignored by prior works [12, 29, 22].
The second issue is the multi-scale of actions in an

13555

