This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FSAR: Federated Skeleton-based Action Recognition with
Adaptive Topology Structure and Knowledge Distillation
Jingwen Guo1 Hong Liu1∗ Shitong Sun2 Tianyu Guo1 Min Zhang3 Chenyang Si4∗
1
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School 2 Queen Mary University of London
3
Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen Graduate School 4 Singapore Nanyang Technological University
{jingwenguo, levigty}@stu.pku.edu.cn
shitong.sun@qmul.ac.uk

hongliu@pku.edu.cn

zhangminmt@hotmail.com

chenyang.si.mail@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing skeleton-based action recognition methods typically follow a centralized learning paradigm, which
can pose privacy concerns when exposing human-related
videos. Federated Learning (FL) has attracted much
attention due to its outstanding advantages in privacypreserving. However, directly applying FL approaches to
skeleton videos suffers from unstable training. In this paper, we investigate and discover that the heterogeneous human topology graph structure is the crucial factor hindering training stability. To address this limitation, we pioneer a novel Federated Skeleton-based Action Recognition
(FSAR) paradigm, which enables the construction of a
globally generalized model without accessing local sensitive data. Specifically, we introduce an Adaptive Topology Structure (ATS), separating generalization and personalization by learning a domain-invariant topology shared
across clients and a domain-specific topology decoupled
from global model aggregation. Furthermore, we explore
Multi-grain Knowledge Distillation (MKD) to mitigate the
discrepancy between clients and server caused by distinct
updating patterns through aligning shallow block-wise motion features. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets
demonstrate that FSAR outperforms state-of-the-art FLbased methods while inherently protecting privacy.

1. Introduction
Skeleton-based action recognition is a valuable research
area with widespread applications in many fields [15, 10,
43] such as human-robot interaction, intelligent security
surveillance, and video understanding. Recent advancements in deep neural networks [41, 38] have shown significant progress in learning discriminative spatial and temporal features from skeleton sequences. Though successful,
these methods heavily rely on massively centralizing hu-

Server
N
n
gr 1   i i ,rK
i 1 n

Aggregating Local
Models Weights to
Update Global Model

Data Free
Download Aggregated
Parameters
Upload Respective
Parameters

Local Model

Local Model

Data Privacy
Protection

Local Model

...
Client #1

Client #2

Client #N

Figure 1. Illustration of Vanilla FSAR. Each client optimizes a
local model with non-shared and sensitive local skeleton videos,
while the server obtain a global model by aggregating local model
parameters without assessing any data. The client-server collaborative learning is iterative to yield a global feature representation
for out-of-the-box deployment with privacy protection.

man skeleton videos, which directly and effectively pose
privacy concerns due to the exposure of human-related information, like motion patterns, behavior tendencies, and
personal identity. For instance, Liao et al. [24, 23] have
developed algorithms to identify individuals based on their
body structures and walking styles. Therefore, centralized
collection of such sensitive data exacerbates the risk of privacy disclosure for each local user site. In response to the
increasing awareness of personal data protection, decentralized training techniques are being developed, with federated
learning being a powerful approach. Thus in this work, we
explore the application of federated learning to skeletonbased action recognition for privacy-preserving of skeleton
data, which has rarely been investigated before.
Federated Learning (FL) is a collaborative learning approach that aims to collectively learn from multiple decentralized edge devices or clients while preserving the security
and privacy of local data [30, 22]. However, many effective FL techniques are image-based tasks, such as person

10400

