This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding the Feature Norm for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Jaewoo Park1,2

Jacky Chen Long Chai1 Jaeho Yoon1 Andrew Beng Jin Teoh1†
1
Yonsei University 2 AiV Co.

Abstract
A neural network trained on a classification dataset often exhibits a higher vector norm of hidden layer features for in-distribution (ID) samples, while producing relatively lower norm values on unseen instances from outof-distribution (OOD). Despite this intriguing phenomenon
being utilized in many applications, the underlying cause
has not been thoroughly investigated. In this study, we demystify this very phenomenon by scrutinizing the discriminative structures concealed in the intermediate layers of a
neural network. Our analysis leads to the following discoveries: (1) The feature norm is a confidence value of a
classifier hidden in the network layer, specifically its maximum logit. Hence, the feature norm distinguishes OOD
from ID in the same manner that a classifier confidence
does. (2) The feature norm is class-agnostic, thus it can
detect OOD samples across diverse discriminative models.
(3) The conventional feature norm fails to capture the deactivation tendency of hidden layer neurons, which may lead
to misidentification of ID samples as OOD instances. To
resolve this drawback, we propose a novel negative-aware
norm (NAN) that can capture both the activation and deactivation tendencies of hidden layer neurons. We conduct
extensive experiments on NAN, demonstrating its efficacy
and compatibility with existing OOD detectors, as well as
its capability in label-free environments.

1. Introduction
Deep learning-based models are increasingly used for
safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving and
medical diagnosis. Despite the effectiveness of deep models
in closed-set environments where all test queries are sampled from the same distribution of train data, the deep models are reported fairly vulnerable [33, 16] to outliers from
out-of-distribution [19, 51] and make highly confident but
invalid predictions thereon [35]. As it is critical to prevent
such malfunction in deploying deep models for open environment applications, the out-of-distribution (OOD) detec† Corresponding author: Andrew Beng Jin Teoh

Figure 1: (left) As a discriminative model is trained, its hidden
layer features exhibit higher vector norm on in-distribution samples (ID) and relatively lower norm on out-of-distribution (OOD)
instances. This phenomenon prevails even when the model reduces the overall feature norm (e.g. by weight decay). (right) As a
result, ID samples are separated from OOD instances with respect
to the feature norm. To see its underlying cause, we analyze the
discriminative structures concealed in the hidden layer.

tion problem has attracted massive attention in recent years
[52].
Despite the importance of this field, only a handful of
works have been devoted to understanding how the deep
network becomes aware of OOD [9, 10, 8, 30, 31]. One particular under-studied signal in OOD detection is the norm of
feature vectors residing in the hidden layers of neural networks. Its known behavior is that a model trained on the ID
data exhibits larger values of feature norm over ID samples
than the OOD instances [7, 53, 3, 28]. However, the studies
are mainly empirical and provide no underlying principle of
the feature norm at a fundamental level.
A preliminary attempt at understanding the feature norm
has been given in the appendix of [45]. The authors of [45]
argue that minimizing the cross entropy (CE) maximizes
the feature norm of ID samples. However, the argument
is not general. As we observe in Fig. 1, training the weightdecayed model decreases the overall feature norm, but the
separation between ID and OOD remains obvious. Hence,
we require a new lens to understand the underlying cause of
feature norm separation.
In this work, we study why the feature norm separates
ID from OOD. To this end, we both theoretically and empirically show that the feature norm is equal to a confidence value of a classifier hidden in the corresponding layer.

1557

