This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatially and Spectrally Consistent Deep Functional Maps
Mingze Sun1

Shiwei Mao1 Puhua Jiang1, 2 Maks Ovsjanikov3 Ruqi Huang1 *
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
LIX, École polytechnique, IP Paris, France

Abstract
Cycle consistency has long been exploited as a powerful prior for jointly optimizing maps within a collection of shapes. In this paper, we investigate its utility
in the approaches of Deep Functional Maps, which are
considered state-of-the-art in non-rigid shape matching.
We first justify that under certain conditions, the learned
maps, when represented in the spectral domain, are already cycle consistent. Furthermore, we identify the discrepancy that spectrally consistent maps are not necessarily spatially, or point-wise, consistent. In light of this, we
present a novel design of unsupervised Deep Functional
Maps, which effectively enforces the harmony of learned
maps under the spectral and the point-wise representation. By taking advantage of cycle consistency, our framework produces state-of-the-art results in mapping shapes
even under significant distortions. Beyond that, by independently estimating maps in both spectral and spatial
domains, our method naturally alleviates over-fitting in
network training, yielding superior generalization performance and accuracy within an array of challenging tests
for both near-isometric and non-isometric datasets. Codes
are available at https://github.com/rqhuang88/Spatiallyand-Spectrally-Consistent-Deep-Functional-Maps.

1. Introduction
Non-rigid shape matching is a fundamental task in shape
analysis, playing a pivotal role in a wide spectrum of applications including texture transfer [1], volume parameterization [31], statistical shape analysis [2, 6], to name a few. In
order to establish correspondences between shapes undergoing non-rigid deformations, early approaches [46, 4, 47]
focus on designing hand-crafted features by exploiting geometric invariance. Nowadays, data-driven techniques have
been widely adopted to learn features in a more flexible
way, leading to significant improvements regarding accu* Corresponding author: ruqihuang@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Figure 1. We train unsupervised non-rigid shape matching
pipelines on the challenging non-isometric dataset DT4D-H,
which involves 8 categories of humanoid shapes undergoing significant distortions. Correspondences are visualized by texture
transfer. Our method (bottom row) outperforms the state-of-theart, AttentiveFMaps [28] (middle row) and UDMSM [9] (top row),
by a large margin.

racy, efficiency, and robustness [10].
A noticeable trend among the learning-based shape
matching approaches is based on the formalism of Deep
Functional Maps (DFM), pioneered by the FMNet [30].
Functional maps [37], as a spectral map representation, allows to encode maps into compact matrices and to express
desirable map priors (e.g., area-preservation, isometry, bijectivity) in simple algebraic forms. In particular, by learning features that optimize functional map priors, several unsupervised DFM frameworks [19, 43, 18, 13, 9, 28] have
been proposed and, remarkably, achieve even comparable
results with respect to the supervised counterparts. On the
other hand, while the majority of DFM works focus on exploring local, pairwise-level map priors, there is relatively
less attention (with the exception of [9]) paid to the problem
of injecting global map priors into DFM pipelines.
As a global map prior, cycle consistency has long
been used as a powerful regularizer for jointly optimizing
maps among shapes, both under point-wise [22] and functional [21, 24] map representation. In this paper, we exploit
the utility of cycle consistency within DFM frameworks and
propose a novel two-branch unsupervised DFM framework,
which promotes cycle consistency in both spectral and spatial domains. We first re-examine the generic DFM frame-

14497

