This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ARNOLD: A Benchmark for Language-Grounded Task Learning
With Continuous States in Realistic 3D Scenes
Ran Gong1∗ , Jiangyong Huang2,5∗ , Yizhou Zhao1 , Haoran Geng2,5 , Xiaofeng Gao1 , Qingyang Wu4 ,
Wensi Ai1 , Ziheng Zhou1 , Demetri Terzopoulos1 , Song-Chun Zhu2,3,5 , Baoxiong Jia5 , Siyuan Huang5
1

4

University of California, Los Angeles, 2 Peking University, 3 Tsinghua University,
Columbia University, 5 National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI

Sim2Real Transfer

Slide the cabinet
75% open

Pull the drawer
half open

Novel Object

Pour [GOAL] of
water to the cup

[GOAL STATE]

Novel Scene
Reorient the bottle 180°
away from the up axis

0%

20%

40%

Continuous Spectrum

80%
Novel State

Figure 1. The ARNOLD benchmark for language-grounded task learning with continuous states in realistic 3D scenes. ARNOLD provides
8 tasks with their demonstrations for learning and a testbed for the generalization abilities of agents over (1) novel goal states, (2) novel
objects, and (3) novel scenes.

Abstract
Understanding the continuous states of objects is essential for task learning and planning in the real world. However, most existing task learning benchmarks assume discrete
(e.g., binary) object goal states, which poses challenges for
the learning of complex tasks and transferring learned policy
from simulated environments to the real world. Furthermore,
state discretization limits a robot’s ability to follow human
instructions based on the grounding of actions and states. To
tackle these challenges, we present ARNOLD, a benchmark
that evaluates language-grounded task learning with continuous states in realistic 3D scenes. ARNOLD is comprised
of 8 language-conditioned tasks that involve understanding
object states and learning policies for continuous goals. To
promote language-instructed learning, we provide expert
* Equal contribution. Corresponding authors: Ran Gong, Jiangyong
Huang, Baoxiong Jia, and Siyuan Huang.

demonstrations with template-generated language descriptions. We assess task performance by utilizing the latest
language-conditioned policy learning models. Our results
indicate that current models for language-conditioned manipulations continue to experience significant challenges in
novel goal-state generalizations, scene generalizations, and
object generalizations. These findings highlight the need
to develop new algorithms that address this gap and underscore the potential for further research in this area.
Project website: https://arnold-benchmark.github.io.

1. Introduction
The ability to ground language is a crucial skill that has
evolved over the course of human history, allowing people
to learn and describe concepts, perform tasks, and communicate with one another. While recent developments have
1
20483

