This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty Guided Adaptive Warping for Robust and Efﬁcient Stereo Matching
Junpeng Jing1,2 * Jiankun Li2 Pengfei Xiong3 Jiangyu Liu2 Shuaicheng Liu2
Yichen Guo1 Xin Deng1† Mai Xu1† Lai Jiang4 Leonid Sigal4
1
Beihang University 2 Megvii Research 3 Shopee 4 University of British Columbia
{junpengjing, cindydeng, MaiXu}@buaa.edu.cn

  

  

  





 

 

   

 

 

 

 

  



  

  



 











Figure 1: Visual and quantitative comparisons between our proposed method and other SOTA methods for robust stereo
matching on ETH3D, Middlebury, and KITTI 2015 (from top to bottom). All results from each method are directly predicted
by a single trained model with ﬁxed parameters without any ﬁne-tuning or adaption. Our method outperforms others both in
cross-domain accuracy and details. Obvious errors and bad cases of other methods are highlighted in the box parts.

Abstract

with learnable parameters, such that the position-speciﬁc
weights can be learned. We show that by empowering the
recurrent network with the UGAC module, stereo matching
can be exploited more robustly and effectively. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method achieves state-ofthe-art performance over the ETH3D, KITTI, and Middlebury datasets when employing the same ﬁxed model over
these datasets without any retraining procedure. To target real-time applications, we further design a lightweight
model based on UGAC, which also outperforms other methods over KITTI benchmarks with only 0.6 M parameters.

Correlation based stereo matching has achieved outstanding performance, which pursues cost volume between
two feature maps. Unfortunately, current methods with
a ﬁxed model do not work uniformly well across various
datasets, greatly limiting their real-world applicability.
To tackle this issue, this paper proposes a new perspective to dynamically calculate correlation for robust stereo
matching. A novel Uncertainty Guided Adaptive Correlation (UGAC) module is introduced to robustly adapt the
same model for different scenarios. Speciﬁcally, a variancebased uncertainty estimation is employed to adaptively adjust the sampling area during warping operation. Additionally, we improve the traditional non-parametric warping

1. Introduction
Stereo matching is a fundamental computer vision task
[31] that aims to estimate the disparity between two rec-

* Work was done while interning at Megvii. † Corresponding authors.

3318

