This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Memory- and Time-Efficient Backpropagation for Training Spiking
Neural Networks
Qingyan Meng1,2 , Mingqing Xiao3 , Shen Yan4 , Yisen Wang3,5 , Zhouchen Lin3,5,6, *, Zhi-Quan Luo1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 2 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
3
National Key Lab. of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
4
Center for Data Science, Peking University 5 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory
qingyanmeng@link.cuhk.edu.cn, {mingqing xiao, yanshen, yisen.wang, zlin}@pku.edu.cn,

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are promising energyefficient models for neuromorphic computing. For training
the non-differentiable SNN methods, the backpropagation
through time (BPTT) with surrogate gradients (SG) method
has achieved high performance. However, this method suffers from considerable memory cost and training time during training. In this paper, we propose the Spatial Learning
Through Time (SLTT) method that can achieve high performance while greatly improving training efficiency compared with BPTT. First, we show that the backpropagation
of SNNs through the temporal domain contributes just a little to the final calculated gradients. Thus, we propose to
ignore the unimportant routes in the computational graph
during backpropagation. The proposed method reduces the
number of scalar multiplications and achieves a small memory occupation that is independent of the total time steps.
Furthermore, we propose a variant of SLTT, called SLTTK, that allows backpropagation only at K time steps, then
the required number of scalar multiplications is further reduced and is independent of the total time steps. Experiments on both static and neuromorphic datasets demonstrate superior training efficiency and performance of our
SLTT. In particular, our method achieves state-of-the-art
accuracy on ImageNet, while the memory cost and training time are reduced by more than 70% and 50%, respectively, compared with BPTT. Our code is available at
https://github.com/qymeng94/SLTT.

1. Introduction
Regarded as the third generation of neural network models [35], Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have recently
* Corresponding author.

2.7

30

SLTT Memory Cost
BPTT Memory Cost
SLTT Training Time
BPTT Training Time

2.3
1.9

25
20
15

1.5

10

1.1
0.7

5
1

2

3

4

5

6

GPU Memory Cost (GB)

Abstract

GPU Training Time per Epoch (h)

luozq@cuhk.edu.cn

0

Time Steps

Figure 1: The training time and memory cost comparison between the proposed SLTT-1 method and the BPTT with SG
method on ImageNet. SLTT-1 achieves similar accuracy as BPTT,
while owning better training efficiency than BPTT both theoretically and experimentally. Please refer to Secs. 4 and 5 for details.

attracted wide attention. SNNs imitate the neurodynamics
of power-efficient biological networks, where neurons communicate through spike trains (i.e., time series of spikes). A
spiking neuron integrates input spike trains into its membrane potential. After the membrane potential exceeds a
threshold, the neuron fires a spike and resets its potential
[21]. The spiking neuron is active only when it experiences
spikes, thus enabling event-based computation. This characteristic makes SNNs energy-efficient when implemented
on neuromorphic chips [38, 11, 43]. As a comparison,
the power consumption of deep Artificial Neural Networks
(ANNs) is substantial.
The computation of SNNs with discrete simulation can
share a similar functional form as recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) [40]. The unique component of SNNs is the nondifferentiable threshold-triggered spike generation function.
The non-differentiability, as a result, hinders the effective

6166

