This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CO-Net: Learning Multiple Point Cloud Tasks at Once with A Cohesive Network
Tao Xie1 , Ke Wang1, ,* Siyi Lu2 , Yukun Zhang3 , Kun Dai1 , Xiaoyu Li1 ,
Jie Xu1 , Li Wang4 , Lijun Zhao1,5, *, Xinyu Zhang4, *, Ruifeng Li1, *
1

Harbin Institute of Technology 2 China Coal Science and Technology Intelligent Storage Technology Co., Ltd.
3
Beijing Institute of Technology 4 Tsinghua University 5 Harbin Institute of Technology, Zhengzhou Research Institute
{xietao1997, wangke, jeff xu, zhaolj, lrf100}@hit.edu.cn
{20s108237, 19S108222, 22S108236}@stu.hit.edu.cn

3220220839@bit.edu.cn

{wangli thu, xyzhang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We present CO-Net, a cohesive framework that optimizes
multiple point cloud tasks collectively across heterogeneous
dataset domains. CO-Net maintains the characteristics of
high storage efficiency since models with the preponderance
of shared parameters can be assembled into a single model.
Specifically, we leverage residual MLP (Res-MLP) block for
effective feature extraction and scale it gracefully along the
depth and width of the network to meet the demands of different tasks. Based on the block, we propose a novel nested
layer-wise processing policy, which identifies the optimal
architecture for each task while provides partial sharing parameters and partial non-sharing parameters inside each
layer of the block. Such policy tackles the inherent challenges of multi-task learning on point cloud, e.g., diverse
model topologies resulting from task skew and conflicting
gradients induced by heterogeneous dataset domains. Finally, we propose a sign-based gradient surgery to promote the training of CO-Net, thereby emphasizing the usage
of task-shared parameters and guaranteeing that each task
can be thoroughly optimized. Experimental results reveal
that models optimized by CO-Net jointly for all point cloud
tasks maintain much fewer computation cost and overall
storage cost yet outpace prior methods by a significant margin. We also demonstrate that CO-Net allows incremental
learning and prevents catastrophic amnesia when adapting
to a new point cloud task.

1. Introduction
With the substantial breakthroughs in deep neural networks, modern architectures deliver significant enhancements in the realm of point cloud analysis [27, 28, 37, 42,
61], such as 3D point classification, 3D point segmentation,
* Corresponding author.

and 3D point detection, etc. Nonetheless, these methods are
inefficient when conducting multiple tasks since they are
generally designed to execute singular task. While parallel computing can alleviate this dilemma, it may introduce
additional overheads, such as memory volumes and storage
expenses that increase proportionately with the quantity of
tasks, which is prohibitively expensive for cutting-edge devices with limited resources (e.g., mobile devices).
Multi-task learning (MTL) [3, 14, 47, 15] provides a
remedy for this problem. In visual tasks, MTL methods
have primarily been introduced to jointly accomplish depth
estimate task, surface normal estimate task, and semantic
segmentation task from a single RGB image [16, 19, 59].
An MTL model is capable of delivering advantages in terms
of complexity, inference time, and learning efficiency due to
the fact that a major portion for the network can be shared
across all tasks. Nonetheless, training multiple tasks concurrently for point cloud presents two critical obstacles:
i) As opposed to typical visual tasks, in which a backbone that executes admirably for image classification task
can be effortlessly fine-tuned to other vision tasks, using
the same backbone to jointly optimize all point cloud tasks
may result in suboptimal solution for some tasks. Thus, it is
preferable to find an optimal backbone for each point cloud
task under resource constraint.
ii) We endeavour to operate multiple point cloud tasks
concurrently by taking heterogeneous dataset domains as
input rather than a regular multi-task dataset. Consequently,
the gradients of different tasks will arise substantial discrepancies in the directions under multi-task learning settings, a
phenomenon known as negative transfer [35].
To tackle the first challenge, we leverage residual MLP
(Res-MLP) block, a basic point feature extraction block
that can accommodate the requirements of various tasks
in terms of the depth and width of the model architecture.
Based on Res-MLP, inspired by slimmable neural networks
[55, 54, 56, 4], we introduce a novel nested layer-wise pro-

3523

