This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parametric Information Maximization for Generalized Category Discovery
Florent Chiaroni*
ÉTS Montreal & Thales Digital Solutions
Montreal, Canada

Jose Dolz
ÉTS Montreal
Montreal, Canada

Amar Mitiche
INRS
Montreal, Canada

Abstract
We introduce a Parametric Information Maximization (PIM) model for the Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) problem. Specifically, we propose a bilevel optimization formulation, which explores a parameterized family of objective functions, each evaluating a
weighted mutual information between the features and
the latent labels, subject to supervision constraints from
the labeled samples.
Our formulation mitigates the
class-balance bias encoded in standard information maximization approaches, thereby handling effectively both
short-tailed and long-tailed data sets. We report extensive experiments and comparisons demonstrating that
our PIM model consistently sets new state-of-the-art performances in GCD across six different datasets, more
so when dealing with challenging fine-grained problems.
Our code: https://github.com/ThalesGroup/
pim-generalized-category-discovery.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods are driving progress in a wide
span of computer vision tasks, particularly when large labeled datasets are easily accessible for training. Obtaining
such large datasets is a cumbersome process, which is often
a limiting factor impeding the scalability of these models.
To alleviate this limitation, semi-supervised learning (SSL)
has emerged as an appealing alternative, which leverages
both labeled and unlabeled data to boost the performance
of deep models. Despite recent success, SSL approaches
work under the closed-set assumption, in which the cate-

Ziko Imtiaz Masud
Thales Digital Solutions
Montreal, Canada

Ismail Ben Ayed
ÉTS Montreal
Montreal, Canada

gories in the labeled and unlabeled subsets share the same
underlying class label space. Nevertheless, this assumption
rarely holds in real scenarios, where novel categories may
emerge in conjunction with known classes, which typically
results in significant drops in the performances of standard
supervised deep learning models. Thus, the ability to detect
whether the input of a deep learning model belongs or not
to a set of known classes seen during training is essential
for robust deployment in a breadth of critical application areas, such as medicine, security, finance, agriculture, marketing and engineering [4, 34]. Thus, devising novel learning
models that can address the realistic open-set scenario is of
paramount importance.
Novel category discovery (NCD) [18, 1] tackles this
problem by exploiting the knowledge learned from a set
of relevant known classes to improve clustering into unknown categories. Nevertheless, NCD assumes the two
sets of classes to be disjoint, which means that the unlabeled dataset contains only instances belonging to the set of
novel categories. Generalized category discovery (GCD)
[42] considers a more general scenario, where unlabeled
data contain instances from both seen and novel classes.
This scenario is particularly challenging, as learning is performed under class distribution mismatch, and the unlabeled data may contain categories never encountered in the
available labeled set.
Contributions: In this work, we address the generalized
category discovery task from an information-theoretic perspective. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We introduce a Parametric Information Maximization
(PIM) model for GCD. Specifically, we propose a bilevel optimization formulation, which explores a parameterized family of objective functions, each evalu-

* Corresponding author: florent.chiaroni.ai@gmail.com
(permanent address)

1729

