This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VoroMesh: Learning Watertight Surface Meshes with Voronoi Diagrams
Nissim Maruani

Roman Klokov

Maks Ovsjanikov

Inria, Université Côte d’Azur
nissim.maruani@inria.fr

LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris
klokov@lix.polytechnique.fr

LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris
maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Pierre Alliez

Mathieu Desbrun

Inria, Université Côte d’Azur
pierre.alliez@inria.fr

Inria Saclay - Ecole Polytechnique
mathieu.desbrun@inria.fr

Abstract
In stark contrast to the case of images, finding a concise, learnable discrete representation of 3D surfaces remains a challenge. In particular, while polygon meshes
are arguably the most common surface representation used
in geometry processing, their irregular and combinatorial
structure often make them unsuitable for learning-based
applications. In this work, we present VoroMesh, a novel
and differentiable Voronoi-based representation of watertight 3D shape surfaces. From a set of 3D points (called
generators) and their associated occupancy, we define our
boundary representation through the Voronoi diagram of
the generators as the subset of Voronoi faces whose two
associated (equidistant) generators are of opposite occupancy: the resulting polygon mesh forms a watertight approximation of the target shape’s boundary. To learn the
position of the generators, we propose a novel loss function, dubbed VoroLoss, that minimizes the distance from
ground truth surface samples to the closest faces of the
Voronoi diagram which does not require an explicit construction of the entire Voronoi diagram. A direct optimization of the Voroloss to obtain generators on the Thingi32
dataset demonstrates the geometric efficiency of our representation compared to axiomatic meshing algorithms and
recent learning-based mesh representations. We further use
VoroMesh in a learning-based mesh prediction task from
input SDF grids on the ABC dataset, and show comparable
performance to state-of-the-art methods while guaranteeing
closed output surfaces free of self-intersections.

1. Introduction
Geometry processing of three-dimensional shapes typically relies on a discrete representation of its surface boundary. Among various boundary representations, point sets
and surface polygon meshes are popular because they are
simple to generate, edit, or render. While most tasks can be

(a) Target surface

(b) Optimization

(c) VoroMesh

Figure 1: VoroMesh at a glance: To fit our representation
to (a) a target shape (top: curve; bottom: surface), (b) the
positions of generators around the shape boundary are optimized based on our VoroLoss, before a binary occupancy
is assigned to each generator; (c) the VoroMesh is then extracted as a subset of the Voronoi diagram of the generators
containing only the Voronoi faces between pairs of generators of opposite occupancy.
efficiently performed with non-learning tools from the standard geometry processing toolbox, some of them (e.g., illposed problems such as reconstruction from sparse data, or
data-driven tasks) require learning tools. Using neural networks with a differentiable (explicit or implicit) boundary
representation can be a powerful way to tackle these problems. Yet, discrete representations such as surface polygon meshes rely on two parts: vertex locations, and vertex
connectivity defining the polygonal facets. The first part,
continuous in nature, is easy to learn, but the second part,
now combinatorial, is substantially more difficult, which
has hampered mesh-based learning methods in the past. Indeed, besides the complexity issues arising from modeling
vertex connectivity, the discrete nature of topological con-

14565

