This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynamicISP: Dynamically Controlled Image Signal Processor
for Image Recognition
Masakazu Yoshimura

Junji Otsuka Atsushi Irie
Sony Group Corporation

Takeshi Ohashi

{masakazu.yoshimura, junji.otsuka, atsushi.irie, takeshi.a.ohashi}@sony.com

Abstract
Differentiable ISP

Image Signal Processors (ISPs) play important roles in
image recognition tasks as well as in the perceptual quality of captured images. In most cases, experts make a
lot of effort to manually tune many parameters of ISPs,
but the parameters are sub-optimal. In the literature, two
types of techniques have been actively studied: a machine
learning-based parameter tuning technique and a DNNbased ISP technique. The former is lightweight but lacks
expressive power. The latter has expressive power, but the
computational cost is too heavy on edge devices. To solve
these problems, we propose “DynamicISP,” which consists
of multiple classical ISP functions and dynamically controls
the parameters of each frame according to the recognition
result of the previous frame. We show our method successfully controls the parameters of multiple ISP functions and
achieves state-of-the-art accuracy with low computational
cost in single and multi-category object detection tasks.

1. Introduction
The image signal processor (ISP) is an important component of modern digital cameras. It converts raw outputs of the sensors, RAW images, into commonly used
standard RGB (sRGB) images, and is composed of many
functions because of its multiple roles. For example, it
calibrates the color sensitivity of each sensor with a color
correction matrix, and improves image quality with demosaicing, denoising, and sharpening. Auto-exposure, autowhite balance, and tone mapping are necessary to mimic the
adaptive and responsive characteristics of the human eye to
produce images that closely resemble the appearance perceived by humans. The human eye cancels out the environment’s luminance with dark or light adaptation and also
cancels out the environment’s color with color adaptation.
As to the response characteristics, it is said that the human
eye non-linearly responds to light intensity roughly obeying
y = x1/3 [38]. These functions for human eye adaptation

Raise the tone
on the stairs.

DNN

The stairs are
too dark to see.

Controller

Figure 1. The concept of proposed DynamicISP. The parameters of
the ISP are controlled dynamically based on what the downstream
recognition model felt.

have another role. Optimizing these functions for compression enables conversion from high dynamic range signals in
the real world to 8-bit sRGB images with little information
loss. The real world has the range from 0.0001 [cd/m2 ]
(starlight) to 1.6 billion [cd/m2 ] [34] (direct sunlight). We
don’t go any further, but ISPs have more functions, like lens
shading correction, dehazer, and bad pixel correction.
ISPs are also needed for image recognition tasks. DNNbased image recognition, which has achieved excellent results recently, shows even better performance with ISPs
[10, 3]. However, ISP hyperparameters commonly require manual tuning by experts, which consumes considerable time [27]. The tuning is necessary for each sensor.
It is ineffective and might be sub-optimal, especially for
image recognition tasks. Easy-to-see images for humans
are not equal to easy-to-recognize images. In fact, recent
works demonstrate that the hyperparameter tuning for image recognition improves the accuracy [27, 46, 35, 39].
To achieve a better ISP for image recognition, we believe
it is important to improve the expressive power of the ISP
since most ISP functions are classical static functions. One
solution is a DNN encoder-decoder-based ISP; many works
indeed achieved state-of-the-art accuracy in image recognition performance [8, 26] and perceptual quality [33, 20].
However, the computation costs are enormous, especially
when high-resolution outputs were required. Devices such
as smartphones have limited computational resources and
require an efficient ISP.

12866

