This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reconstructing Groups of People with Hypergraph Relational Reasoning
Buzhen Huang1

Jingyi Ju1
1

Zhihao Li2

Yangang Wang1 *

Southeast University, China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Figure 1: We exploit human collectiveness and correlation in crowds to improve human mesh recovery in large-scale crowded
scenes (more than 50 people).

Abstract
Due to the mutual occlusion, severe scale variation, and
complex spatial distribution, the current multi-person mesh
recovery methods cannot produce accurate absolute body
poses and shapes in large-scale crowded scenes. To address the obstacles, we fully exploit crowd features for reconstructing groups of people from a monocular image. A
novel hypergraph relational reasoning network is proposed
to formulate the complex and high-order relation correlations among individuals and groups in the crowd. We
first extract compact human features and location information from the original high-resolution image. By conducting the relational reasoning on the extracted individual features, the underlying crowd collectiveness and interaction relationship can provide additional group information for the reconstruction. Finally, the updated individual features and the localization information are used
to regress human meshes in camera coordinates. To facilitate the network training, we further build pseudo ground* Corresponding author. E-mail: yangangwang@seu.edu.cn. All the
authors from Southeast University are affiliated with the Key Laboratory
of Measurement and Control of Complex Systems of Engineering, Ministry of Education, Nanjing, China. This work was supported in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62076061), the
Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20220127).

truth on two crowd datasets, which may also promote future research on pose estimation and human behavior understanding in crowded scenes. The experimental results
show that our approach outperforms other baseline methods both in crowded and common scenarios. The code and
datasets are publicly available at https://github.
com/boycehbz/GroupRec.

1. Introduction
Although immense progress has been made in monocular multi-person human mesh recovery in recent years, the
existing methods still cannot accurately reconstruct groups
of people from large-scale crowded scenes. The top-down
formulation [16, 38, 29, 34] iteratively predicts each individual from tightly cropped image patches, which discards
the interaction relationships and location information in the
original camera coordinates. Alternatively, the bottom-up
formulation [64, 75, 63, 74] parses inter-person interactions with global pixel-level cues and enables its impressive performance on occluded cases. However, bottom-up
methods always fail in large-scale scenes like Fig. 1 since
they require downsampling images to low-resolution (e.g.,
512×512) to satisfy computational constraints.
Recently, a few works have attempted to estimate hu-

14873

