This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAAL: Multimodality-Aware Autoencoder-based Affordance Learning for 3D
Articulated Objects
Yuanzhi Liang1 , Xiaohan Wang2 , Linchao Zhu2 , and Yi Yang2
1

ReLER Lab, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
2
CCAI, Zhejiang University

yuanzhi.Liang@student.uts.edu.au {xiaohan.wang, zhulinchao, yangyics}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Multimodal learning comparison
Intermediate fusion

Early fusion

1. Introduction
Recently, robots have been widely used in various applications in manufacturing, transportation, and other industries. Toward diverse tasks, a fundamental requirement is
to interact with objects by robots. To this end, the robots

Act

Obj

Action Learner

Object Learner

Obj
C

Learner

Interaction Learner

Previous works

Ours: MME

Pipeline comparison

Stage.1

Stage.5
Stage.1

Stage.1

Stage.2

𝐸

𝐸

𝐸

𝐸

𝐷𝐴𝐴𝑃

𝐷𝐴𝐴𝑃 𝐷𝐴𝐴𝑃𝑎 𝐷𝐴𝐼𝑃 𝐷𝐴𝐼𝑃𝑎

Stage.2,3 Iterative

𝐷𝑎

𝐷𝑟

𝐷𝑎

Critic-based Where2Act

𝐷𝑠

𝐸

𝐸

𝐷𝐴𝐴𝑃 𝐷𝐴𝐼𝑃

𝐷𝐴𝐴𝑃 𝐷𝐴𝐼𝑃 𝐷𝐴𝐼𝑃𝑎

Critic-based AdaAfford
C : Concatenate

Act

: Action information

Obj

MME

Stage.4

: Object information

𝐷

Reconstruction

Inferring affordance for 3D articulated objects is a challenging and practical problem. It is a primary problem for
applying robots to real-world scenarios. The exploration
can be summarized as figuring out where to act and how
to act. Correspondingly, the task mainly requires producing actionability scores, action proposals, and success likelihood scores according to the given 3D object information and robotic information. Current works usually directly process multi-modal inputs with early fusion and apply critic networks to produce scores, which leads to insufficient multi-modal learning ability and inefficiently iterative training in multiple stages. This paper proposes a
novel Multimodality-Aware Autoencoder-based affordance
Learning (MAAL) for the 3D object affordance problem. It
is an efficient pipeline, trained in one go, and only requires
a few positive samples in training data. More importantly,
MAAL contains a MultiModal Energized Encoder (MME)
for better multi-modal learning. It comprehensively models
all multi-modal inputs from 3D objects and robotic actions.
Jointly considering information from multiple modalities,
the encoder further learns interactions between robots and
objects. MME empowers the better multi-modal learning
ability for understanding object affordance. Experimental
results and visualizations, based on a large-scale dataset
PartNet-Mobility, show the effectiveness of MAAL in learning multi-modal data and solving the 3D articulated object
affordance problem.

Act

Ours:
AE-based MAAL

𝐸 : Encoder

𝐷

: Decoder

Figure 1. Comparison of methods. MAAL contains a MME module, which provides better multi-modal learning ability. Besides,
previous methods with critics or decoders require multiple training stages. MAAL pipeline only contains one step and is trained
in one go, which is more efficient.

need to understand real-world objects, use grippers or other
manipulators in the robotic system, and interact with given
objects in a given scenario. As a primary problem, the object affordance problem [21, 14] is conceptualized and summarized as the first step for the interaction of robots and
objects. It aims to figure out where and how to interact
with an object by the robot in a given environment. Many
works [4, 29] propose various solutions to solve the affordance problem. However, due to the diversity of instances
and complexity of practical robotic scenarios, the problem
is still far from being resolved.
Specifically, recent works focus on the affordance problem of interacting with 3D articulated objects [30, 9]. Mo
et al. [28] introduce a solid benchmark for learning to manipulate articulated objects. They construct a large-scale

217

