This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Order-preserving Consistency Regularization
for Domain Adaptation and Generalization
Mengmeng Jing1,2 *, Xiantong Zhen2 †, Jingjing Li1 , Cees G. M. Snoek2
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
University of Amsterdam
jingmeng1992@gmail.com zhenxt@gmail.com lijin117@yeah.net
c.g.m.snoek@uva.nl
Label Space

Abstract
Deep learning models fail on cross-domain challenges
if the model is oversensitive to domain-specific attributes,
e.g., lightning, background, camera angle, etc. To alleviate
this problem, data augmentation coupled with consistency
regularization are commonly adopted to make the model
less sensitive to domain-specific attributes. Consistency
regularization enforces the model to output the same representation or prediction for two views of one image. These
constraints, however, are either too strict or not orderpreserving for the classification probabilities. In this work,
we propose the Order-preserving Consistency Regularization (OCR) for cross-domain tasks. The order-preserving
property for the prediction makes the model robust to taskirrelevant transformations. As a result, the model becomes
less sensitive to the domain-specific attributes. The comprehensive experiments show that our method achieves clear
advantages on five different cross-domain tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated their power in
many computer vision tasks, especially when the training
and test sets follow the same distribution. However, when
we deploy a model in a real-world environment, we often
encounter domain shifts between the training and test sets,
which reduces the expected test-set performance and makes
us unable to deploy with confidence [50]. For some safetycritical applications, e.g., tumor recognition [22] and autonomous driving [19], a failing model is fatal.
Image data consists of a variety of attributes such as
shape, color, background, texture, shooting angle, etc.
We refer to one or more task-related attributes as label
* This work was done when Mengmeng Jing was a visiting student at
University of Amsterdam.
† Currently with United Imaging Healthcare, Co., Ltd., China.

horse
donkey
mouse

Augmented

x1
model h

x2
Shared Weights

model h
Consistency
Regularization
Required Output

Original Output

Same

Representation-based

Different but
order-preserving

The proposed OCR

Different and
order-changed

Prediction-based

Figure 1. The required output of three consistency regularizations. Different shapes represent different categories. For different
greens, the darker the color, the larger the classification probability. Representation-based method requires the output to be the
same as the original. OCR only requires an order-preserving output and allows the output to vary. The prediction-based method is
not order-preserving, which may cause the probability of the horse
being classified to mouse is higher than that of donkey although
donkeys are obviously more similar to horses than mice.

attributes, and the remaining irrelevant ones as domainspecific attributes. Wiles et al. [69] demonstrate the
domain-specific attributes cause the distribution shifts, thus
weakening the generalization of the model. Data augmentation coupled with consistency regularization is commonly
employed to make a model invariant to the domain-specific
attributes [68, 8, 27, 59, 4, 10, 11, 21]. Data augmentation
perturbs the data so that the domain-specific information is
incorporated into the perturbed image. By imposing a consistency regularization on the representations of the same
image before and after perturbation, the model becomes less

18916

