This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatio-Temporal Domain Awareness for Multi-Agent Collaborative Perception
Kun Yang1†

Dingkang Yang1† Jingyu Zhang1
Mingcheng Li1
Yang Liu1
Jing Liu1
Hanqi Wang1
Peng Sun2
Liang Song1 *
1
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University 2 Duke Kunshan University
{kunyang20,dkyang20,songl}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-agent collaborative perception as a potential application for vehicle-to-everything communication could
significantly improve the perception performance of autonomous vehicles over single-agent perception. However,
several challenges remain in achieving pragmatic information sharing in this emerging research. In this paper, we
propose SCOPE, a novel collaborative perception framework that aggregates the spatio-temporal awareness characteristics across on-road agents in an end-to-end manner. Specifically, SCOPE has three distinct strengths: i)
it considers effective semantic cues of the temporal context to enhance current representations of the target agent;
ii) it aggregates perceptually critical spatial information
from heterogeneous agents and overcomes localization errors via multi-scale feature interactions; iii) it integrates
multi-source representations of the target agent based on
their complementary contributions by an adaptive fusion
paradigm. To thoroughly evaluate SCOPE, we consider
both real-world and simulated scenarios of collaborative
3D object detection tasks on three datasets. Extensive experiments show the superiority of our approach and the
necessity of the proposed components. The project link is
https://ydk122024.github.io/SCOPE/.

1. Introduction
Perceiving complex driving environments is essential for
ensuring road safety [23] and traffic efficiency [21] in autonomous driving. Despite the rapid development in the
perception ability of intelligent vehicles through deep learning technologies [5, 6, 14, 41, 43], the conventional singleagent perception paradigm remains challenging. Singleagent perception system is generally vulnerable and defective due to the inevitable practical difficulties on the road,
† Equal contributions in no particular order. The work was done when

Dingkang Yang was at the Institute of Meta-Medical, IPASS. The two first
authors thank Runsheng Xu for providing constructive suggestions.
* Corresponding author.

such as restricted detection range and occlusion [47, 48]. To
alleviate the inadequate observation constraints of isolated
agents, multi-agent collaborative perception has emerged as
a promising solution in recent years [17, 29]. With Vehicleto-Everything (V2X) oriented communication applications,
collaborative perception effectively promotes perspective
complementation and information sharing among agents.
Based on recent LiDAR-based 3D collaborative perception datasets [35, 36, 37, 46], several impressive works have
achieved a trade-off between collaborative perception performance and communication bandwidth of Autonomous
Vehicles (AVs) via well-designed mechanisms. These remarkable efforts include knowledge distillation-based intermediate collaboration [17], handshake communication
mechanism [20], V2X-visual transformer [36], and spatial
information selection strategy [10]. However, there is still
considerable room for progress in achieving a pragmatic
and effective collaborative perception. Concretely, existing
methods invariably follow a single-frame static perception
pattern, suffering from the data sparsity shortcoming of 3D
point clouds [47] and ignoring meaningful semantic cues in
the temporal context [49]. The insufficient representation of
the moving objects in the current frame potentially restricts
the perception performance of target vehicles.
Moreover, spatial information aggregation in collaborative perception systems has exposed several problems. For the collaborator-shared message fusion, the
per-agent/location-based fusion strategies of previous attempts [16, 17, 20, 28, 36] fail to deal with feature map
misalignment from heterogeneous agents due to localization errors. Consequently, misleading features from collaborators could lead to object position misjudgment of the
ego vehicle (i.e., receiver) and harm its detection precision. For the ego vehicle message refinement, existing approaches [10, 17, 20, 21, 28, 33] rely on fused representations with collaborator information to implement detection,
abandoning the natural perception advantages of the ego vehicle and introducing the potential noises. The ego-centered
characteristics may contain locally critical spatial information that is not disturbed by noise from collaborative agents

23383

