This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards General Low-Light Raw Noise Synthesis and Modeling
Feng Zhang1 Bin Xu2 Zhiqiang Li1,2 Xinran Liu1 Qingbo Lu2 Changxin Gao1 Nong Sang1†
1
National Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
DJI Technology Co., Ltd
{fengzhangaia, lxryx, cgao, nsang}@hust.edu.cn, {mila.xu, cristopher.li, qingbo.lu}@dji.com

Abstract
Modeling and synthesizing low-light raw noise is a fundamental problem for computational photography and image processing applications. Although most recent works
have adopted physics-based models to synthesize noise, the
signal-independent noise in low-light conditions is far more
complicated and varies dramatically across camera sensors, which is beyond the description of these models. To
address this issue, we introduce a new perspective to synthesize the signal-independent noise by a generative model.
Specifically, we synthesize the signal-dependent and signalindependent noise in a physics- and learning-based manner,
respectively. In this way, our method can be considered as a
general model, that is, it can simultaneously learn different
noise characteristics for different ISO levels and generalize
to various sensors. Subsequently, we present an effective
multi-scale discriminator termed Fourier transformer discriminator (FTD) to distinguish the noise distribution accurately. Additionally, we collect a new low-light raw denoising (LRD) dataset for training and benchmarking. Qualitative validation shows that the noise generated by our proposed noise model can be highly similar to the real noise in
terms of distribution. Furthermore, extensive denoising experiments demonstrate that our method performs favorably
against state-of-the-art methods on different sensors.

1. Introduction
Low-light raw denoising is an important yet challenging problem for the increasingly widespread computational
photography [53]. Due to the powerful computational capability of deep learning, the learning-based low-light raw
denoising algorithms have shown great superiority and become the mainstream manner [10, 21] in recent years. However, since the standard paradigm of deep learning is to learn
a mapping from the low-light noisy raw image to its normal† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Examples of generated and denoised raw images from
our proposed method. (a) Clean raw image, (b) Real noisy raw
image, (c) Generated noisy raw image from our proposed noise
model, (d) Denoised raw image of the denoise network [10]
trained on the image generated by our noise model. Our model
can generate noise at different ISO levels by a single learned noise
model. The results of the visualization and quantitative metric
Kullback-Leibler divergence (KLD) demonstrate that the distribution of the synthetic noise is close to the real noise distribution.
Noise at high ISO levels drowns out the signal, resulting in unsatisfactory image denoising.

light counterpart, this leads to a reliance on the large-scale
dataset of real-world noisy-clean raw image pairs, which is
extremely tedious and labor-intensive to collect.
A naive strategy is to synthesize the low-light noisy raw
images to obtain more paired training data. Existing noise
synthesis methods can be roughly categorized into physicsbased noise models and Deep Neural Network (DNN)based noise models.
Physics-based noise modeling [23, 54, 52] is the most
commonly used noise synthesis method in low-light conditions, which obtains the statistical distribution of different
noise sources by analyzing the physical process of cam-

10820

