This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Better Robustness against Common Corruptions for Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation
Zhiqiang Gao * 1,2 , Kaizhu Huang†1 , Rui Zhang2 , Dawei Liu1 , and Jieming Ma2
1

Duke Kunshan University, Kunshan, China
{Zhiqiang.Gao, Kaizhu.Huang, Dawei.Liu}@dukekunshan.edu.cn
2
Xi’an Jiatong-Liverpool University, Suzhou, China
{Zhiqiang.Gao, Rui.Zhang02, Jieming.Ma}@xjtlu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent studies have investigated how to achieve robustness for unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA). While
most efforts focus on adversarial robustness, i.e. how the
model performs against unseen malicious adversarial perturbations, robustness against benign common corruption
(RaCC) surprisingly remains under-explored for UDA. Towards improving RaCC for UDA methods in an unsupervised manner, we propose a novel Distributionally and Discretely Adversarial Regularization (DDAR) framework in
this paper. Formulated as a min-max optimization with a
distribution distance, DDAR1 is theoretically well-founded
to ensure generalization over unknown common corruptions. Meanwhile, we show that our regularization scheme
effectively reduces a surrogate of RaCC, i.e., the perceptual
distance between natural data and common corruption. To
enable a abetter adversarial regularization, the design of
the optimization pipeline relies on an image discretization
scheme that can transform ”out-of-distribution” adversarial data into “in-distribution” data augmentation. Through
extensive experiments, in terms of RaCC, our method is superior to conventional unsupervised regularization mechanisms, widely improves the robustness of existing UDA
methods, and achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Although Deep Neural Networks have achieved impressive performance for various applications [15, 19, 14, 39,
27, 34], they may not generalize well on new data due to
the data distribution shift problem. One of such shift is
* Majority of the work was done at Duke Kunshan University.
† Corresponding author.
1 The codes are available at https://github.com/gzqhappy/DDAR.

called domain shift where data may come from a new target domain.Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) aims
to address this domain shift with access to labeled source
domain data and unlabeled target domain data. The fundamental objective is to infer the domain-invariant representations [9, 63] from data.
The vanilla UDA task assumes the data of the target domain is all clean without any corruption, which is unfortunately impractical in most cases. In other words, the target domain not only faces the label scarcity problem but
also may suffer from the data corruption problem, including common corruption [16] and adversarial attack [30].
As such, recent studies have investigated how to achieve
robustness for UDA. While most efforts [59, 3, 11] focus on applying Adversarial Training (AT) [29] to improve
UDA’s robustness against the malicious adversarial perturbations [48, 13] (i.e. small perturbations imperceptible to
humans which can however easily fool the model), robustness against benign common corruption (RaCC)[16] surprisingly remains under-explored.
Common corruptions such as noise, blur, and digital
defects that may occur in the real world are more relevant to practical applications [16]. For instance, autonomous cars should be able to identify pedestrians in unusual weather that would incur heavy noise from their sensors [45]. In recent studies, one of the main interests has focused on investigating data-dependent regularization methods [17, 62, 54, 6, 12, 40, 46, 22, 31].
However, conventional methods are not directly applicable to UDA. The primary reason is that most of the previous methods rely on supervised learning, while labels are
not available in UDA tasks. Therefore, an unsupervised
approach needs to be explored. On the other hand, data
augmentation methods commonly come up with trade-offs
between robustness and standard accuracy during or after

18882

