This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HyperReenact: One-Shot Reenactment via Jointly Learning to Refine and
Retarget Faces
Stella Bounareli1 , Christos Tzelepis2 , Vasileios Argyriou1 , Ioannis Patras2 ,
Georgios Tzimiropoulos2
1

2

Source

School of Computer Science and Mathematics, Kingston University London
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London

Target

Ours

Fast BL

PIR

LSR

FD

LIA

Rome

Figure 1: The proposed method, named HyperReenact, aims to synthesize realistic talking head sequences of a source
identity driven by a target facial pose (i.e., 3D head orientation and facial expression). Our method performs both self and
cross-subject reenactment and operates under the one-shot setting (i.e., using a single source frame). We demonstrate that
the proposed framework can effectively reenact the source faces without producing significant visual artifacts, even on the
challenging conditions of extreme head pose difference between the source and the target images (first row) and on crosssubject reenactment (second row). We compare our method against several state-of-the-art works on neural face reenactment,
namely Fast BL [62], PIR [37], LSR [29], FD [9], LIA [53] and Rome [26].

Abstract
In this paper, we present our method for neural face
reenactment, called HyperReenact, that aims to generate
realistic talking head images of a source identity, driven
by a target facial pose. Existing state-of-the-art face reenactment methods train controllable generative models that
learn to synthesize realistic facial images, yet producing
reenacted faces that are prone to significant visual artifacts,
especially under the challenging condition of extreme head
pose changes, or requiring expensive few-shot fine-tuning
to better preserve the source identity characteristics. We
propose to address these limitations by leveraging the photorealistic generation ability and the disentangled properties of a pretrained StyleGAN2 generator, by first inverting
the real images into its latent space and then using a hypernetwork to perform: (i) refinement of the source identity characteristics and (ii) facial pose re-targeting, eliminating this way the dependence on external editing methods that typically produce artifacts. Our method operates under the one-shot setting (i.e., using a single source
frame) and allows for cross-subject reenactment, without

requiring any subject-specific fine-tuning. We compare
our method both quantitatively and qualitatively against
several state-of-the-art techniques on the standard benchmarks of VoxCeleb1 and VoxCeleb2, demonstrating the superiority of our approach in producing artifact-free images, exhibiting remarkable robustness even under extreme
head pose changes. We make the code and the pretrained
models publicly available at: https://github.com/
StelaBou/HyperReenact.

1. Introduction
The recent developments in deep learning and generative
models [24, 25] have led to remarkable progress in the field
of facial image synthesis and editing. Among the tasks that
have drawn benefit from this progress is neural face reenactment, that aims to synthesize photorealistic head avatars.
Specifically, given a source and a target image, the goal of
face reenactment is to generate a new image that conveys
the identity characteristics of the source face and the facial
pose (defined as the 3D head orientation and facial expres-

7149

