This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FB-BEV: BEV Representation from Forward-Backward
View Transformations
Zhiqi Li1,2∗ Zhiding Yu2 Wenhai Wang3 Anima Anandkumar2,4 Tong Lu1 Jose M. Alvarez2
1

National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 2 NVIDIA
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Caltech

Blank
Grid
Blank
Grid
Blank
Grid

Figure 1: Left: Forward projection lifts the image features from 2D to BEV space and weight them based on depth (coded
in different colors). However, forward projection tends to generate sparse BEV projection. Middle: Backward projection
first defines the voxel locations in the 3D space and then projects these points onto the 2D image planes. Dense BEV features
can be generated but the points on the projection ray fetch the same features without distinction. Right: Forward-backward
projection proposed in this work. We use backward projection to refine the necessary BEV grids with reduced sparsity. We
further introduce depth consistency into backward projection and assign each projection a different weight (dashed line).

Abstract
View Transformation Module (VTM), where transformations happen between multi-view image features and
Bird-Eye-View (BEV) representation, is a crucial step in
camera-based BEV perception systems. Currently, the two
most prominent VTM paradigms are forward projection and
backward projection. Forward projection, represented by
Lift-Splat-Shoot, leads to sparsely projected BEV features
without post-processing. Backward projection, with BEVFormer being an example, tends to generate false-positive
BEV features from incorrect projections due to the lack
of utilization on depth. To address the above limitations,
we propose a novel forward-backward view transformation
module. Our approach compensates for the deficiencies
in both existing methods, allowing them to enhance each
other to obtain higher quality BEV representations mutually. We instantiate the proposed module with FB-BEV,
which achieves a new state-of-the-art result of 62.4% NDS
on the nuScenes test set. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/NVlabs/FB-BEV .
BEV-based 3D detection models have gained popularity
due to their unified and comprehensive representation abili* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

ties for multi-camera inputs, enhancing the performance of
both vision-only and multi-modality perception models for
autonomous driving [1–9]. A typical BEV-based detection
model comprises an image backbone, a View Transformation Module (VTM), and a detection head. The VTMs primarily function to project multi-view camera features onto
the BEV plane. There are two main categories of existing
mainstream VTMs based on the projection methods used:
forward projection and backward projection.

1. Introduction
Forward projection. The most intuitive method for projecting camera features onto the BEV plane involves estimating the depth value of each pixel in the image and using
the camera calibration parameters to determine the corresponding position of each pixel in 3D space [10], as shown
in Figure 1 (left). We refer to this process as forward projection, where the 2D pixels take the initiative in projection
and the 3D space passively accepts features from the images. The accuracy of the predicted depth for each pixel is
critical to achieving high-quality BEV features. However,
accurately estimating the depth value of each pixel is challenging [11]. To address this challenge, Lift-Splat-Shoot
(LSS) pioneered the use of depth distribution to model the
uncertainty of each pixel’s depth [1]. One limitation of
16919

