This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Explore and Tell: Embodied Visual Captioning in 3D Environments
Anwen Hu1 , Shizhe Chen2 , Liang Zhang1 , Qin Jin1 *
1
School of Information, Renmin University of China
2
INRIA
{anwenhu,zhangliang00,qjin}@ruc.edu.cn
shizhe.chen@inria.fr

Abstract
While current visual captioning models have achieved
impressive performance, they often assume that the image
is well-captured and provides a complete view of the scene.
In real-world scenarios, however, a single image may not
offer a good viewpoint, hindering fine-grained scene understanding. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel
task called Embodied Captioning, which equips visual captioning models with navigation capabilities, enabling them
to actively explore the scene and reduce visual ambiguity from suboptimal viewpoints. Specifically, starting at
a random viewpoint, an agent must navigate the environment to gather information from different viewpoints and
generate a comprehensive paragraph describing all objects
in the scene. To support this task, we build the ET-Cap
dataset with Kubric simulator, consisting of 10K 3D scenes
with cluttered objects and three annotated paragraphs per
scene. We propose a Cascade Embodied Captioning model
(CaBOT), which comprises of a navigator and a captioner,
to tackle this task. The navigator predicts which actions
to take in the environment, while the captioner generates a paragraph description based on the whole navigation trajectory. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our model outperforms other carefully designed baselines.
Our dataset, codes and models are available at https:
//aim3-ruc.github.io/ExploreAndTell.

1. Introduction
Visual captioning [14, 22, 32, 18, 9] is an essential
vision-and-language task which aims to generate natural
language descriptions of visual contents. In recent years,
many captioning models have been developed and achieved
significant improvements in describing major objects and
relationships in an image [41, 4, 28, 25, 46, 23, 39]. However, the current models typically rely on well-captured im* Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. Existing visual captioning models generate a sentence
to describe a single image, which often fail when the image is
not well-captured at good viewpoints (the captions next to the images are generated by the state-of-the-art BLIP model [23]). To
generate more accurate and comprehensive visual descriptions, we
propose a new Embodied Captioning task which allows agents to
navigate the environment to reduce visual ambiguity of the scene.

ages that provide a good viewpoint of the scene. Unfortunately, in real-world scenarios, capturing such images may
not always be feasible. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the initial
position to capture an image may not provide a complete
view of the scene, and a single image may not be sufficient
to capture all objects within it, potentially leading to incomplete or inaccurate visual captions. To address this limitation, it is essential for visual caption models to navigate the
environment actively and gather information from multiple
viewpoints in order to generate more comprehensive and
accurate visual captions.
In this paper, we propose a novel task called Embodied
Captioning, which integrates such navigation ability into visual captioning. The task requires an agent, which starts at
a random viewpoint in a 3D environment, to navigate the
environment to reduce visual ambiguity of the scene, and
finally generate a comprehensive paragraph that describes
all objects in the scene. Different from existing navigation
tasks [5, 15, 44, 30, 24], our Embodied Captioning task does
not explicitly define a target location to navigate. Instead,
we have an implicit target which is to accurately recognize
all objects along with their attributes and relationships in

2482

