This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FSI: Frequency and Spatial Interactive Learning for Image Restoration
in Under-Display Cameras
Chengxu Liu1,3 , Xuan Wang2 , Shuai Li2 , Yuzhi Wang2 , Xueming Qian1,3
1
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University
MEGVII Technology
3
Shaanxi Yulan Jiuzhou Intelligent Optoelectronic Technology Co., Ltd
liuchx97@gmail.com, {wangxuan02,lishuai,wangyuzhi}@megvii.com, qianxm@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Under-display camera (UDC) systems remove the screen
notch for bezel-free displays and provide a better interactive experience. The main challenge is that the pixel array of light-emitting diodes used for display diffracts and
attenuates the incident light, leading to complex degradation. Existing models eliminate spatial diffraction by maximizing model capacity through complex design and ignore
the periodic distribution of diffraction in the frequency domain, which prevents these approaches from satisfactory
results. In this paper, we introduce a new perspective to
handle various diffraction in UDC images by jointly exploring the feature restoration in the frequency and spatial domains, and present a Frequency and Spatial Interactive Learning Network (FSI). It consists of a series of welldesigned Frequency-Spatial Joint (FSJ) modules for feature
learning and a color transform module for color enhancement. In particular, in the FSJ module, a frequency learning
block uses the Fourier transform to eliminate spectral bias,
a spatial learning block uses a multi-distillation structure to
supplement the absence of local details, and a dual transfer
unit to facilitate the interactive learning between features of
different domains. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed FSI over state-of-the-art models,
through extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations
in three widely-used UDC benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Under-display camera (UDC) systems are the foundation
of full-screen display devices where the lens mounts under the display. It removes screen notches and provides a
higher screen-to-body ratio without disrupting the screen’s
integrity [25, 38]. Recently, rising demand for full-screen
devices enable the study of UDC to attract attention [8, 44].
To implement the full-screen display, it is essential to
densely arrange some organic light-emitting diode (OLED)
in the display area above the camera. However, this de-

Amp. difference with GT

Abstract

Colorful_studio

DISCNet

BNUDC

Freq.

FSI(Ours)

Ground Truth

Figure 1. A comparison between FSI and other SOTA methods
(DISCNet [7], BNUDC [14]) on SYNTH dataset. The upper right
shows the amplitude-frequency curves horizontally oriented on
clipped frequency bands of 0 to 35. The vertical axis indicates
the amplitude difference between different methods and ground
truth. The results of the proposed FSI are superior to others to
approximate the curve of ground truth (best viewed in color).

sign also brings various image degradation. Specifically,
the degradations are mainly due to 1) diffraction artifacts
generated by the periodic gaps between the pixel grids as
apertures1 , illustrated by Fig. 2(a), and 2) color shift from
multiple thin-film layers in an OLED [7, 14, 45]. Besides,
the regions with different diffraction intensities in the image
cause different degrees of degradation, bringing challenges
for diffraction removal. Typically, in Fig. 2(b), around the
light source, diffraction causes flares that saturate one or
more channels of the image, resulting in content loss.
To solve these challenges, recent years have witnessed an
increasing number of UDC image restoration approaches,
which can be categorized into two paradigms. The former makes attempts to leverage the prior knowledge of the
diffraction blur kernel, i.e., point spread function (PSF),
1 Light diffracts as it propagates through obstacles with similar sizes to
its wavelength.

12537

