This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Alleviating Catastrophic Forgetting of Incremental Object Detection
via Within-Class and Between-Class Knowledge Distillation
Mengxue Kang1 , Jinpeng Zhang1 *, Jinming Zhang2 , Xiashuang Wang3 ,
Yang Chen4 , Zhe Ma1 *, Xuhui Huang1
1
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC, Beijing 100043, China
2
Xinjiang University, Xinjiang, 830046, China
3
The Second Academy of China Aerospace Science and Industry Corporation, Beijing 100854, China
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
kangmengxue@hotmail.com, zhjphust@126.com, mazhe thu@163.com

Abstract
Incremental object detection (IOD) task requires a model
to learn continually from newly added data. However, directly fine-tuning a well-trained detection model on a new
task will sharply decrease the performance on old tasks,
which is known as catastrophic forgetting. Knowledge distillation, including feature distillation and response distillation, has been proven to be an effective way to alleviate
catastrophic forgetting. However, previous works on feature
distillation heavily rely on low-level feature information,
while under-exploring the importance of high-level semantic information. In this paper, we discuss the cause of catastrophic forgetting in IOD task as destruction of semantic
feature space. We propose a method that dynamically distills both semantic and feature information with consideration of both between-class discriminativeness and withinclass consistency on Transformer-based detector. Betweenclass discriminativeness is preserved by distilling classlevel semantic distance and feature distance among various
categories, while within-class consistency is preserved by
distilling instance-level semantic information and feature
information within each category. Extensive experiments
are conducted on both Pascal VOC and MS COCO benchmarks. Our method outperforms all the previous CNNbased SOTA methods under various experimental scenarios, with a remarkable mAP improvement from 36.90% to
39.80% under one-step IOD task.

1. Introduction
In real-world scenarios, learning often occurs incrementally from streaming data. However, traditional object de* Corresponding author

(a) Teacher

(d) LwF baseline

(b) Fine-Tune ep1 (c) Fine-Tune ep12

(e) DMD

(f) DMD + IFD

Figure 1. Visualization of semantic feature space of old categories. (a) represents the semantic feature space of old categories
before adding new categories. (b)-(f) represent the semantic feature space of old categories after adding new categories. (b) is
at epoch 1 using fine-tuning method. (c) is at epoch 12 using
fine-tuning method. The top three figures illustrate the cause
of catastrophic forgetting as destruction of within-class consistency and between-class discrimnativeness. (d) using LwF
baseline method. (e) using our DMD method. (f) using DMD
method and IFD method at the same time. The bottom three figures prove that our method can alleviate catastrophic forgetting via maintaining the within-class consistency and betweenclass discrimnativeness from teacher to student.

tection models lack this capability. They usually make implicit assumptions about a fixed or stationary data distribution [9]. Directly fine-tuning a model based on newly added
data may result in a sharp decrease of its performance on
the old data, which is well-known as catastrophic forget-

18894

