This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Nearest Neighbor Guidance for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Jaewoo Park1,2∗ Yoon Gyo Jung3∗ Andrew Beng Jin Teoh1†
1
Yonsei University 2 AiV Co. 3 Northeastern University

Abstract
Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) samples are crucial for machine learning models deployed in open-world
environments. Classifier-based scores are a standard approach for OOD detection due to their fine-grained detection capability. However, these scores often suffer from
overconfidence issues, misclassifying OOD samples distant
from the in-distribution region. To address this challenge,
we propose a method called Nearest Neighbor Guidance
(NNGuide) that guides the classifier-based score to respect
the boundary geometry of the data manifold. NNGuide reduces the overconfidence of OOD samples while preserving the fine-grained capability of the classifier-based score.
We conduct extensive experiments on ImageNet OOD detection benchmarks under diverse settings, including a scenario where the ID data undergoes natural distribution
shift. Our results demonstrate that NNGuide provides a
significant performance improvement on the base detection
scores, achieving state-of-the-art results on both AUROC,
FPR95, and AUPR metrics.

1. Introduction
The open-world environment poses a challenge for classification models as they may encounter input samples with
unknown class labels, i.e., out-of-distribution (OOD) instances [44, 26, 42, 2, 4, 16]. The detection of such anomalous examples is crucial for preventing classifier malfunctions and potential harm. As a result, in safety-critical applications like self-driving [29, 5, 40, 19] and biosynthesis [46, 37], the OOD detection task plays a critical role in
ensuring the dependable deployment of machine learning
models. Therefore, a significant body of research has been
dedicated to OOD detection [45].
The standard approach for OOD detection is to derive
a score function from the trained network, such that the
in-distribution (ID) samples exhibit relatively higher scores
than OOD. One major paradigm in designing the detection
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author: Andrew Beng Jin Teoh

near-OOD

(a)

(b) Classifier Confidence

(c) KNN

(d) NNGuide

Figure 1. (a) Out-of-distribution (OOD) instances can occur
in any white region, including the small area between the indistribution (ID) classes. For instance, given ’cat’ and ’dog’ as
ID classes, images of ’fox’ will be OOD instances near the ID
data. (b) The classifier-based detector (i.e. confidence) assigns low
scores on the small in-between area but suffers overconfidence issues. (c) Based on the distance information, KNN bounds the detection score on far-OOD regions. However, KNN lacks the finegrained detection capability, and thus fails to detect the near-OOD.
(d) NNGuide addresses both of these issues, reducing overconfidence in the far-OOD regions while achieving fine-grained detection.

score is to derive the score function based on the classifier’s output signals, known as ’confidence’. Examples of
classifier-based scores include maximum softmax probability [15] and energy function [24]. A major advantage of the
classifier-based detection scores is their ability to fully utilize the class-dependent information of ID data and provide
fine-grained detection capability. However, the classifierbased scores may suffer from overconfidence in far OOD
samples, limiting their effectiveness [10, 13].
In contrast, distance-based approaches (e.g. nearest
neighbors [35] and Mahalanobis distance [22, 31]) detect
OOD instances based on their distance to the ID data in the
feature space. These approaches can certify low scores for
far OOD regions but may not fully utilize class-dependent
information, resulting in limited fine-grained detection ca-

1686

