This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-granularity Interaction Simulation for Unsupervised
Interactive Segmentation
Kehan Li1,3 Yian Zhao1,3 Zhennan Wang2 Zesen Cheng1,3 Peng Jin1,3
Xiangyang Ji4 Li Yuan1,2,3 Chang Liu4 * Jie Chen1,2,3∗
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
4
Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
liuchang2022@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

jiechen2019@pku.edu.cn

Multi-granularity Proposals

Image

Region
Proposal

Interactive segmentation enables users to segment as
needed by providing cues of objects, which introduces
human-computer interaction for many fields, such as image editing and medical image analysis. Typically, massive and expansive pixel-level annotations are spent to train
deep models by object-oriented interactions with manually labeled object masks. In this work, we reveal that
informative interactions can be made by simulation with
semantic-consistent yet diverse region exploration in an unsupervised paradigm. Concretely, we introduce a Multigranularity Interaction Simulation (MIS) approach to open
up a promising direction for unsupervised interactive segmentation. Drawing on the high-quality dense features produced by recent self-supervised models, we propose to gradually merge patches or regions with similar features to form
more extensive regions and thus, every merged region serves
as a semantic-meaningful multi-granularity proposal. By
randomly sampling these proposals and simulating possible interactions based on them, we provide meaningful interaction at multiple granularities to teach the model to understand interactions. Our MIS significantly outperforms
non-deep learning unsupervised methods and is even comparable with some previous deep-supervised methods without any annotation.

Sampled Mask

MIS
Click
Simulator

···

Prediction

Image & Click

Segmenter
𝑳𝒔𝒆𝒈
Training Phase

Inference Phase

Segmenter

Segmenter

Figure 1. Top: To tackle the reliance on object annotations of
previous interactive segmentation methods caused by interaction
simulation, we propose Multi-granularity Interaction Simulation
(MIS) that simulates interaction by meaningful regions at multiple
granularities. Down: The model learns from MIS to successfully
understand interactions and produce acceptable segmentation.

bounding boxes [20, 32, 43], scribbles [2, 11, 22], and
clicks [44, 17, 25, 35, 8, 36, 24, 9] have been explored.
Among them, the click-based interaction becomes the mainstream due to its simplicity and well-established training
and evaluation protocols.
State-of-the-art methods for click-based interactive segmentation are based on deep learning, following the basic paradigm proposed by Xu et al. [44]. Specifically,
these methods encode clicks to a distance map and adapt
a semantic segmentation model (e.g., FCN [28]) to take
the encoded click map as input, and then train the model
with interaction-segmentation pairs. Since it is impractical
to collect interaction sequences from real users, previous

1. Introduction
Interactive segmentation aims at obtaining high-quality
object masks with limited user interaction, allowing users
to segment objects as needed. During the development
of interactive segmentation, various interactive forms like
* Corresponding author. Project page: https://lkhl.github.io/MIS

666

