This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Game of Bundle Adjustment - Learning Efficient Convergence
Amir Belder *
Technion and Reality Labs, Meta inc.

Refael Vivanti †
Reality Labs, Meta inc.

Ayellet Tal
Technion and Cornel-Tech

amirbelder@campus.technion.ac.il

refaelv@fb.com

ayellet@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Bundle adjustment is the common way to solve localization and mapping. It is an iterative process in which a system of non-linear equations is solved using two optimization
methods, weighted by a damping factor. In the classic approach, the latter is chosen heuristically by the LevenbergMarquardt algorithm on each iteration. This might take
many iterations, making the process computationally expensive, which might be harmful to real-time applications.
We propose to replace this heuristic by viewing the problem in a holistic manner, as a game, and formulating it as a
reinforcement-learning task. We set an environment which
solves the non-linear equations and train an agent to choose
the damping factor in a learned manner. We demonstrate
that our approach considerably reduces the number of iterations required to reach the bundle adjustment’s convergence, on both synthetic and real-life scenarios. We show
that this reduction benefits the classic approach and can be
integrated with other bundle adjustment acceleration methods.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (SLAM) is successfully used in numerous fields, including computer vision [27], augmented reality [1, 22, 32] and autonomous
driving [22, 32, 23]. Its input is a series of 2D images of
a scene taken by a single camera from different viewpoints,
from which a set of 2D matches are extracted. The goal is to
estimate the objects’ 3D locations, and the camera’s poses
(locations and angles) throughout the capturing according
to the 2D matches. See Fig.1 where the 3D locations appear
in black and the camera’s poses form the trajectory in red.
Structure From Motion (SFM) is a similar process where the
images are taken by several cameras [34, 33, 22, 8].
SLAM is commonly solved using the iterative Bundle
Adjustment (BA) process [9, 21]. In fact, BA occupies
roughly 60%–80% of the execution time needed for the
* Equal contribution and corresponding author
† Equal contribution

Figure 1. Given a series of 2D images taken by a camera from
different positions, the iterative Bundle Adjustment (BA) process
evaluates the 3D locations of the objects in the images (in black)
and the camera’s poses, as seen in the red trajectory. We propose a
method to accelerate the process by reducing the number iterations
required for the solving.

mapping [25]. On each iteration the 3D locations and camera poses are first evaluated by a combination of two optimization methods: Gradient descend (GD) and GaussNewton (GN), which are weighted according to a damping factor, termed λ. Then, the evaluated locations are
projected into 2D according to the evaluated poses. The
stopping criterion (convergence) of this iterative process is
usually met when the difference between the evaluated 2D
projections and the initially extracted 2D matches (termed
projection error) is lower than a certain threshold. Due to
computational constraints, if convergence is not achieved
within a fixed number of iterations, the process is stopped.
Two main factors influence the execution time: (1) the
duration of a single iteration, which is mainly affected by
the Hessian’s calculation that GN entails; (2) the required
number of iterations to reach convergence, caused by inefficient choosing of λ. Some previous BA acceleration methods focus on the first factor and reduce the duration of each
iteration, by suggesting efficient ways to calculate and invert the sparse Hessian [32, 13]. The focus of this paper is
on the second factor—decreasing the number of iterations.
In the classic approach, the value of λ is determined heuristically by the Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) algorithm [21] on each iteration. It may change only by one
of two specific constant factors between consecutive itera-

8428

