This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Collage Transfer: Artistic Reconstruction via Material Manipulation
Ganghun Lee, Minji Kim, Yunsu Lee, Minsu Lee,* Byoung-Tak Zhang*
Seoul National University
{khlee, mjkim, yslee, mslee, btzhang}@bi.snu.ac.kr

Figure 1: The results of neural collage transfer. Given an image and materials, each output collage was generated based on
the proposed complexity-aware multi-scale collage method. The sequence of grapes shows our collage generation process.

Abstract
Collage is a creative art form that uses diverse material scraps as a base unit to compose a single image. Although pixel-wise generation techniques can reproduce a
target image in collage style, it is not a suitable method
due to the solid stroke-by-stroke nature of the collage form.
While some previous works for stroke-based rendering produced decent sketches and paintings, collages have received
much less attention in research despite their popularity as
a style. In this paper, we propose a method for learning
to make collages via reinforcement learning without the
need for demonstrations or collage artwork data. We design the collage Markov Decision Process (MDP), which
allows the agent to handle various materials and propose a
model-based soft actor-critic to mitigate the agent’s training burden derived from the sophisticated dynamics of collage. Moreover, we devise additional techniques such as
active material selection and complexity-based multi-scale
collage to handle target images at any size and enhance the
results’ aesthetics by placing relatively more scraps in areas of high complexity. Experimental results show that the
* Corresponding authors

trained agent appropriately selected and pasted materials
to regenerate the target image into a collage and obtained
a higher evaluation score on content and style than pixelwise generation methods. Code is available at https:
//github.com/northadventure/CollageRL.

1. Introduction
Collage, derived from the French word coller meaning
to glue, is a fundamental art form where disparate scraps of
images are assembled and arranged geometrically to create
a complete scene. The intriguing and alluring impression
of collage was influenced by the art movement of Cubism,
particularly the work of Pablo Picasso, and has now become a prevalent art style. However, creating high-quality
collage artworks in the style of artists such as Derek Gores
requires professional-level skills, much like other art forms
such as painting. Collage may seem like a simple variation
of painting, but it is much more challenging when attempted
by artificial agent for several reasons. Unlike predefined
brush strokes in paintings, the strokes of a collage depend
on selecting materials from a diverse range of candidates,
which involves uncertainty. After the material selection,
the complicated manipulation process of cutting and past-

2394

