This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Agglomerative Transformer for Human-Object Interaction Detection
Danyang Tu1 , Wei Sun1 , Guangtao Zhai1B , Wei Shen2B
1
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{danyangtu, sunguwei, zhaiguangtao, wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose an agglomerative Transformer (AGER)
that enables Transformer-based human-object interaction
(HOI) detectors to flexibly exploit extra instance-level cues
in a single-stage and end-to-end manner for the first time.
AGER acquires instance tokens by dynamically clustering
patch tokens and aligning cluster centers to instances with
textual guidance, thus enjoying two benefits: 1) Integrality: each instance token is encouraged to contain all discriminative feature regions of an instance, which demonstrates a significant improvement in the extraction of different instance-level cues and subsequently leads to a new
state-of-the-art performance of HOI detection with 36.75
mAP on HICO-Det. 2) Efficiency: the dynamical clustering mechanism allows AGER to generate instance tokens jointly with the feature learning of the Transformer
encoder, eliminating the need of an additional object detector or instance decoder in prior methods, thus allowing the extraction of desirable extra cues for HOI detection in a single-stage and end-to-end pipeline. Concretely, AGER reduces GFLOPs by 8.5% and improves FPS
by 36%, even compared to a vanilla DETR-like pipeline
without extra cue extraction. The code will be available
at https://github.com/six6607/AGER.git.

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection aims at understanding human activities at a fine-grained level. It involves
both the localization of interacted human-object pairs and
the recognition of their interactions, where the latter poses
the major challenges as a higher-level vision task [9].
Since interactions describe the relations between different instances (i.e., humans and objects), instance-level
cues (e.g., human pose and gaze) are unanimously recognized as pivotal to discriminating subtle visual differences between similar relation patterns in interaction recognition. However, extracting these instance-level cues intuitively indicates a multi-stage pipeline, where an off-theshelf object detector is essential to generate instance proposals firstly [11, 44, 23, 7, 50, 58]. Such a paradigm
struggles in proposal generation, yielding less competitive

Instance queries (human)

Instance tokens (human)

Figure 1: Instance queries vs. instance tokens. Instance queries
typically attend to instance parts, while our instance tokens are
encouraged to contain integral discriminative regions of instances.
More examples are presented in supplementary materials.

performance in model efficiency. In this work, we seek
to explore a single-stage Transformer-based HOI detector
to flexibly and efficiently exploit extra instance-level cues,
thus continuing their success in HOI detection.
The challenge stems from task-bias, i.e., different tasks
have different preferences of discriminative feature regions [61]. Gaze tracking, for example, prefers the discriminative regions of human heads [40], whereas pose estimation favours holistic human body contexts [22]. Therefore,
the crux of building a single-stage pipeline lies in a proper
design of information carrier, which need to ensure the integrality of instance-level representations (IRs), i.e., containing all discriminative regions of an instance to satisfy
the diverse region preferences of different tasks. However,
most popular Transformer-based detectors deal with local
patches, neglecting the integrality of different instances.
Some previous methods partially tackled the above challenge. STIP [58] employs an additional DETR detector to generate instance proposals, which yet suffers from
the low efficiency of the multistage pipeline. Several
works [27, 3, 18] propose to use an additional query-based
instance decoder to extract instance queries individually.
Despite being ingenious, these queries are task-driven and

21614

