This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GPGait: Generalized Pose-based Gait Recognition
Yang Fu1 *, Shibei Meng1 *, Saihui Hou1,2†, Xuecai Hu1 , Yongzhen Huang1,2†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University 2 WATRIX.AI
{yangfu, mengshibei}@mail.bnu.edu.cn, {housaihui, huxc1208, huangyongzhen}@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent works on pose-based gait recognition have
demonstrated the potential of using such simple information to achieve results comparable to silhouette-based methods. However, the generalization ability of pose-based
methods on different datasets is undesirably inferior to
that of silhouette-based ones, which has received little attention but hinders the application of these methods in
real-world scenarios. To improve the generalization ability of pose-based methods across datasets, we propose a
Generalized Pose-based Gait recognition (GPGait) framework. First, a Human-Oriented Transformation (HOT) and
a series of Human-Oriented Descriptors (HOD) are proposed to obtain a unified pose representation with discriminative multi-features. Then, given the slight variations
in the unified representation after HOT and HOD, it becomes crucial for the network to extract local-global relationships between the keypoints. To this end, a Part-Aware
Graph Convolutional Network (PAGCN) is proposed to enable efficient graph partition and local-global spatial feature extraction. Experiments on four public gait recognition
datasets, CASIA-B, OUMVLP-Pose, Gait3D and GREW,
show that our model demonstrates better and more stable
cross-domain capabilities compared to existing skeletonbased methods, achieving comparable recognition results
to silhouette-based ones. Code is available at https:
//github.com/BNU-IVC/FastPoseGait.

1. Introduction
Gait recognition is an essential task in the human identification field. Compared with existing biometric identification methods, such as face, fingerprint, and iris recognition, it can capture long-distance gait features without the
cooperation of subjects. Existing studies of gait recognition can mainly be divided into two streams, appearancebased [4–6, 11, 12, 17, 39] and model-based methods [19,
21, 23, 31, 32, 38]. Specifically, the appearance-based meth* Equal contribution
† Corresponding Author

→CASIA-B

→OUMVLP

→GREW

→Gait3D

Figure 1. GPGait achieves state-of-the-art generalization performance across four popular gait datasets. In each subgraph, three
vertices correspond to the source domain. Arrows (−
→) point to the
target domain. Triangles in different colors represent the generalization ability of different models under cross-domain settings.

ods try to directly learn gait features from the silhouette sequences and have been the dominant approach for a long
time. And the model-based methods try to explicitly estimate human body structures (e.g., keypoints or 3D mesh)
for gait recognition. Despite that the performance is inferior
to the appearance-based methods at the moment, the modelbased methods have their own advantage of being robust to
carrying and clothing, which is appealing to practical applications and thus deserves continuous attention.
Model-based methods mostly take human poses (i.e.,
keypoints) as the input which encodes visual clues for body
structure and proportion in an explicit way. Benefiting from
the rapid development in pose estimation [2, 7, 16, 29] and
graph-based models (GCN [28, 36] and Transformer [24]),
pose-based methods have achieved fairly surprising results
in some cases [31,32,38], e.g., GaitTR [38] introduces Spatial Transformer to establish overall spatial relationships between keypoints. The model achieves much higher accuracy than previous pose-based methods [31, 32] on CASIAB [37], even surpassing the accuracy of appearance-based
methods [4, 6, 11, 20] in clothes-changing conditions.

19595

