This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

eP-ALM: Efficient Perceptual Augmentation of Language Models
Mustafa Shukor1
1

Corentin Dancette1

Sorbonne University

2

Matthieu Cord1,2
Valeo.ai

{firstname.lastname}@sorbonne-universite.fr

Abstract

“no”
Linear

Large Language Models (LLMs) have so far impressed
the world, with unprecedented capabilities that emerge in
models at large scales. On the vision side, transformer models (i.e., ViT) are following the same trend, achieving the
best performance on challenging benchmarks. With the abundance of such unimodal models, a natural question arises;
do we need also to follow this trend to tackle multimodal
tasks? In this work, we propose to rather direct effort to efficient adaptations of existing models, and propose to augment
Language Models with perception. Existing approaches for
adapting pretrained models for vision-language tasks still
rely on several key components that hinder their efficiency. In
particular, they still train a large number of parameters, rely
on large multimodal pretraining, use encoders (e.g., CLIP)
trained on huge image-text datasets, and add significant
inference overhead. In addition, most of these approaches
have focused on Zero-Shot and In Context Learning, with
little to no effort on direct finetuning. We investigate the minimal computational effort needed to adapt unimodal models
for multimodal tasks and propose a new challenging setup,
alongside different approaches, that efficiently adapts unimodal pretrained models. We show that by freezing more
than 99% of total parameters, training only one linear projection layer, and prepending only one trainable token, our
approach (dubbed eP-ALM) significantly outperforms other
baselines on VQA and Captioning across Image, Video, and
Audio modalities, following the proposed setup. The code is
available here: https://github.com/mshukor/eP-ALM.

1. Introduction
Going large scale has led to outstanding performances
that consistently improve across tasks, modalities, and domains on current benchmarks. Most of the progress so far
has been in the vision and language domains. For Computer Vision, the ViT family [20] starts from the tiny model
with 5M parameters to the enormous ViT-e [14] with 4B pa-

Audio Encoder
(AST)

Linear

Image Encoder
(ViT)

Linear

Video Encoder
(TimeSformer)

Language Decoder
(OPT)

Question: “are either of the players
wearing orange socks ?”

Figure 1: Illustration of eP-ALM to adapt unimodal models for
multimodal tasks. The Language Model (Decoder) is augmented
with perceptual context to steer its text generation. To condition
the decoder on a given modality, the [CLS] tokens are extracted
from several layers of a modality-specific encoder and then linearly
projected before concatenation at different levels of the language
decoder. Only unimodal models are used, and all pretrained modules are kept frozen.

rameters and the largest ViT-22B with 22B parameters [19].
More captivating, are the scales of Large Language Models
(LLMs), such as the BLOOM [70] and OPT [102] families,
ranging from hundreds of millions of parameters to 175B, in
addition to other models that go beyond 100B [6, 77, 18] up
to 1T parameters [26]. These huge scales come with a need
for very large pretraining datasets and long training times.
The current prevalent paradigm to solve multimodal tasks,
in particular, Vision-Language tasks is to leverage pretrained
models, and then further train end-to-end [54, 73, 75, 89, 14]
on large image-text datasets. However, the training cost is
huge and unaffordable for much of the community, as these
approaches always train all model parameters, even after
initialization, on a huge amount of data.
With the abundance of unimodal models, a natural question arises;
Do we need also to follow this trend to tackle multimodal

22056

