This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TMA: Temporal Motion Aggregation for Event-based Optical Flow
Sanqing Qu1
Yanping Zhang1
Haotian Liu1
Guang Chen1 *
Zhijun Li1
Alois Knoll2
Changjun Jiang1
1

Tongji University

2

Technical University of Munich

Abstract
Event cameras have the ability to record continuous and
detailed trajectories of objects with high temporal resolution, thereby providing intuitive motion cues for optical flow
estimation. Nevertheless, most existing learning-based approaches for event optical flow estimation directly remould
the paradigm of conventional images by representing the
consecutive event stream as static frames, ignoring the inherent temporal continuity of event data. In this paper, we
argue that temporal continuity is a vital element of eventbased optical flow and propose a novel Temporal Motion
Aggregation (TMA) approach to unlock its potential. Technically, TMA comprises three components: an event splitting strategy to incorporate intermediate motion information underlying the temporal context, a linear lookup strategy to align temporally fine-grained motion features and
a novel motion pattern aggregation module to emphasize
consistent patterns for motion feature enhancement. By
incorporating temporally fine-grained motion information,
TMA can derive better flow estimates than existing methods at early stages, which not only enables TMA to obtain
more accurate final predictions, but also greatly reduces
the demand for a number of refinements. Extensive experiments on DSEC-Flow and MVSEC datasets verify the effectiveness and superiority of our TMA. Remarkably, compared to E-RAFT, TMA achieves a 6% improvement in accuracy and a 40% reduction in inference time on DSECFlow. Code will be available at https://github.
com/ispc-lab/TMA.

1. Introduction
Optical flow aims to compute the velocity of objects on
the image plane without geometry prior and is a fundamental topic in event-based vision [8, 42]. It plays an important role in many applications, such as ego-motion estimation [38, 45], image reconstruction [24], and video frame
interpolation [32, 31]. Recently, learning-based methods [29, 18, 30] have dominated frame-based optical flow
* corresponding author: guangchen@tongii.edu.cn

(a) reference image
E-RAFT

Ours

(b) event frame

(c) E-RAFT output & motion feature (d) our output & motion feature

Figure 1: Accuracy illustrations. (a) Reference image
from DSEC-Flow. (b) Corresponding event frame. (c) The
final flow prediction and visualization of the motion feature
from E-RAFT [11]. (d) The final flow prediction and visualization of the motion feature from our proposed method.
We visualize the motion feature at the initial stage by taking
the average across channels. E-RAFT fails to generate informative motion features and results in blurred boundaries.
In contrast, our method utilizes temporally fine-grained motion information to address the information scarcity issue in
motion features, generating high-quality predictions.
by employing correlation volumes to derive motion features
for flow regression. Inspired by this, several event-based
approaches [11, 34] adopt a similar paradigm by converting
the consecutive event stream into grid-like representations.
Despite encouraging progress, these methods still suffer
from non-negligible limitations, due to the great differences
between event data and conventional images. Distinct from
dense and colorful conventional (RGB) images, event data
features spatial sparsity and a lack of intensity information.
It is prone to result in close matching scores and invalid
regions in the correlation volume. Consequently, less informative motion features are derived and regress inaccurate

9685

