This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Membrane Potential Batch Normalization for Spiking Neural Networks
Yufei Guo,* Yuhan Zhang,* Yuanpei Chen, Weihang Peng, Xiaode Liu, Liwen Zhang,
Xuhui Huang, Zhe Ma†
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC, China
Scientific Research Laboratory of Aerospace Intelligent Systems and Technology, China

Abstract
As one of the energy-efficient alternatives of conventional neural networks (CNNs), spiking neural networks
(SNNs) have gained more and more interest recently. To
train the deep models, some effective batch normalization
(BN) techniques are proposed in SNNs. All these BNs are
suggested to be used after the convolution layer as usually
doing in CNNs. However, the spiking neuron is much more
complex with the spatio-temporal dynamics. The regulated
data flow after the BN layer will be disturbed again by the
membrane potential updating operation before the firing
function, i.e., the nonlinear activation. Therefore, we advocate adding another BN layer before the firing function to
normalize the membrane potential again, called MPBN. To
eliminate the induced time cost of MPBN, we also propose
a training-inference-decoupled re-parameterization technique to fold the trained MPBN into the firing threshold.
With the re-parameterization technique, the MPBN will not
introduce any extra time burden in the inference. Furthermore, the MPBN can also adopt the element-wised form,
while these BNs after the convolution layer can only use
the channel-wised form. Experimental results show that the
proposed MPBN performs well on both popular non-spiking
static and neuromorphic datasets.

1. Introduction
Emerged as a biology-inspired method, spiking neural
networks (SNNs) have received much attention in artificial
intelligence and neuroscience recently [17, 13, 57, 56, 47,
58, 59]. SNNs deal with binary event-driven spikes as their
activations and therefore the multiplications of activations
and weights can be substituted for additions or only keeping silents. Benefitting from such a computation paradigm,
SNNs derive extreme energy efficiency and run efficiently
when implemented on neuromorphic hardware [1, 42, 5].
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author, mazhe thu@163.com.

Despite the SNN has achieved great success in diverse
fields including pattern recognition [12, 21, 19, 14], object detection [30], language processing [55], robotics [9],
and so on, its development is deeply inspired by the experience of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in many
aspects. However, the spiking neuron model along with
the rich spatio-temporal dynamic makes SNNs much different from CNNs, and directly transferring some experience
of CNNs to SNNs without any modifications may be not
a good idea. As one of the famous techniques in CNNs,
the batch normalization(BN) technique shows great advantages. It can reduce the gradient exploding/vanishing problem, flatten the loss landscape, and reduce the internal covariate shift, thus being widely used in CNNs. There are
also some works trying to apply normalization approaches
in the SNN field to help model convergence. For example,
inspired by BN in CNNs, NeuNorm [51] was proposed to
normalize the data along the channel dimension. Considering that the temporal dimension is also important in SNNs,
threshold-dependent batch normalization (tdBN) [62] then
extended the scope of BN to the additional temporal dimension. Subsequently, to better depict the differences of data
flow distributions in different time dimensions, the temporal batch normalization through time (BNTT) [31], postsynaptic potential normalization (PSP-BN) [28], and temporal
effective batch normalization (TEBN) [10] that regulate the
data flows with multiple BNs on different time steps were
proposed.
However, all these BNs proposed in SNNs are advised to
be used after convolution layers as usually doing in CNNs.
This ignores the fact that the nonlinear transformation in
the SNN spiking neuron is much more complex than that
of the ReLU neuron. In the spiking neuron, the data flow
after the convolution layer will be first injected into the
residual membrane potential (MP) coming from the previous time step to generate a new MP at the current time
step. And then the neuron will fire a spike or keep silent
still based on whether or not the new MP is up to the firing threshold. Obviously, though the data flow has been
normalized by the BN after the convolution layer, it will be

19420

