This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DistillBEV: Boosting Multi-Camera 3D Object Detection with Cross-Modal
Knowledge Distillation
Zeyu Wang1,2∗

Dingwen Li1∗ Chenxu Luo1 Cihang Xie2
1
QCraft 2 UC Santa Cruz

Xiaodong Yang1†

Abstract
3D perception based on the representations learned from
multi-camera bird’s-eye-view (BEV) is trending as cameras
are cost-effective for mass production in autonomous driving industry. However, there exists a distinct performance
gap between multi-camera BEV and LiDAR based 3D object detection. One key reason is that LiDAR captures accurate depth and other geometry measurements, while it is
notoriously challenging to infer such 3D information from
merely image input. In this work, we propose to boost the
representation learning of a multi-camera BEV based student detector by training it to imitate the features of a welltrained LiDAR based teacher detector. We propose effective balancing strategy to enforce the student to focus on
learning the crucial features from the teacher, and generalize knowledge transfer to multi-scale layers with temporal
fusion. We conduct extensive evaluations on multiple representative models of multi-camera BEV. Experiments reveal
that our approach renders significant improvement over the
student models, leading to the state-of-the-art performance
on the popular benchmark nuScenes.

1. Introduction
Perceiving 3D environments is essential for autonomous
driving as it is crucial for subsequent onboard modules from
prediction [28, 37] to planning [2, 18]. Although LiDAR
based methods have achieved remarkable progress [15, 25,
26, 42], there have recently been fast growing attentions to
camera based approaches from both academia and industry [1, 32]. Compared to a sensor suite of LiDAR, the cost
of cameras is typically 10 times cheaper, gaining a huge cost
advantage for mass-production OEMs. Additionally, cameras are better suited to detect distant objects and recognize
visual based road elements (e.g., traffic lights and signs).
A straightforward solution for camera based 3D object
detection is the monocular paradigm that has been broadly
* Equal contribution
† Correspondence to xiaodong@qcraft.ai

Figure 1. An overview of performance improvement in terms of
mAP and NDS on the validation set of nuScenes. Enabled by the
proposed cross-modal knowledge distillation method DistillBEV,
a variety of multi-camera BEV based 3D object detectors achieve
consistent and significant performance boost.

studied [27, 30, 36]. However, such methods have to deal
with surrounding cameras separately and require complex
post-processing to fuse detections from multiple views. As
an alternative, the bird’s-eye-view (BEV) based framework
is drawing extensive attentions to offer a holistic feature
representation space from multi-camera images, and has
made substantial improvement [11, 12, 20, 21]. BEV based
framework owns the following inherent merits including (i)
joint feature learning from multi-view images, (ii) unified
detection space without post fusion, (iii) amenability for
temporal fusion, and (iv) convenient output representation
for the downstream prediction and planning.
Despite the advancement achieved in this field, a distinct
performance gap remains between multi-camera BEV and
LiDAR based 3D object detection. For instance, the leading
multi-camera BEV based method is outperformed by its LiDAR counterpart over 15% mAP and 10% NDS on popular
benchmark nuScenes [3]. On the other hand, a data collection fleet can be equipped with both cameras and LiDAR,
while the mass-produced vehicles can be LiDAR-free.
In light of above observations, we present DistillBEV:
a simple and effective cross-model knowledge distillation
approach to bridge the feature learning gap between multicamera BEV and LiDAR based detectors. Our strategy to-

8637

