This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffusionRet: Generative Text-Video Retrieval with Diffusion Model
Peng Jin1,3 * Hao Li1,3 * Zesen Cheng1,3 Kehan Li1,3 Xiangyang Ji4
Chang Liu4 Li Yuan1,2,3† Jie Chen1,2,3†
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
3

2

Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
4

Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

{jp21, cyanlaser, kehanli}@stu.pku.edu.cn

{lihao1984, yuanli-ece}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing text-video retrieval solutions are, in essence, discriminant models focused on maximizing the conditional
likelihood, i.e., p(candidates|query). While straightforward,
this de facto paradigm overlooks the underlying data distribution p(query), which makes it challenging to identify outof-distribution data. To address this limitation, we creatively
tackle this task from a generative viewpoint and model the
correlation between the text and the video as their joint probability p(candidates, query). This is accomplished through
a diffusion-based text-video retrieval framework (DiffusionRet), which models the retrieval task as a process of gradually generating joint distribution from noise. During training,
DiffusionRet is optimized from both the generation and discrimination perspectives, with the generator being optimized
by generation loss and the feature extractor trained with
contrastive loss. In this way, DiffusionRet cleverly leverages the strengths of both generative and discriminative
methods. Extensive experiments on five commonly used textvideo retrieval benchmarks, including MSRVTT, LSMDC,
MSVD, ActivityNet Captions, and DiDeMo, with superior
performances, justify the efficacy of our method. More encouragingly, without any modification, DiffusionRet even
performs well in out-domain retrieval settings. We believe
this work brings fundamental insights into the related fields.
Code is available at https://github.com/jpthu17/DiffusionRet.

1. Introduction
In recent years, text-video retrieval has made significant
progress, allowing humans to associate textual concepts with
video entities and vice versa [67, 66]. Existing methods for
video-text retrieval typically model the cross-modal interac* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: Li Yuan, Jie Chen.

{liuchang2022, xyji}@tsinghua.edu.cn

chenj@pcl.ac.cn

Query: A man speaks to a camera for an interview.

(a) The joint distribution of query and candidates

𝑥𝐾

𝑝𝜑 𝑥𝑘−1 ȁ𝑥𝑘

𝑥𝑘

𝑥𝐾

𝑞 𝑥𝑘 ȁ𝑥𝑘−1
𝑥𝑘

𝑥𝑘−1

𝑥𝑘−1

𝑥0

𝑥0

(b) Diffusion model for generating joint distribution
Figure 1: Diffusion model for text-video retrieval. (a) We
propose to model the correlation between the query and the
candidates as their joint probability. (b) The diffusion model
has demonstrated remarkable generative power in various
fields, and due to its coarse-to-fine nature, we utilize the
diffusion model for joint probability generation.

tion as discriminant models [24, 51]. Under the discriminant
paradigm based on contrastive learning [53], the primary
focus of mainstream methods is to improve the dense feature extractor to learn better representation. This has led
to the emergence of a large number of discriminative solutions [31, 4, 50, 22], and recent advances in large-scale
vision-language pre-training models [56, 41] have pushed
their state-of-the-art performance even further.
However, from a probabilistic perspective, discriminant
models only learn the conditional probability distribution,
i.e., p(candidates|query). This leads to a limitation of dis-

2470

