This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RLSAC: Reinforcement Learning enhanced Sample Consensus
for End-to-End Robust Estimation
Chang Nie1 , Guangming Wang1,3 , Zhe Liu2∗ , Luca Cavalli3 , Marc Pollefeys3,4 , Hesheng Wang1 *
1
Department of Automation, Key Laboratory of System Control
and Information Processing of Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich 4 Microsoft Mixed Reality and AI Zürich Lab
{changnie,wangguangming,liuzhesjtu,wanghesheng}@sjtu.edu.cn
lcavalli@ethz.ch

marc.pollefeys@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract

Sample Consensus-based Robust Estimation
Sample the Minimum Set

Robust estimation is a crucial and still challenging task,
which involves estimating model parameters in noisy environments. Although conventional sampling consensus-based
algorithms sample several times to achieve robustness, these
algorithms cannot use data features and historical information effectively. In this paper, we propose RLSAC, a novel
Reinforcement Learning enhanced SAmple Consensus framework for end-to-end robust estimation. RLSAC employs a
graph neural network to utilize both data and memory features to guide exploring directions for sampling the next
minimum set. The feedback of downstream tasks serves
as the reward for unsupervised training. Therefore, RLSAC can avoid differentiating to learn the features and the
feedback of downstream tasks for end-to-end robust estimation. In addition, RLSAC integrates a state transition
module that encodes both data and memory features. Our
experimental results demonstrate that RLSAC can learn from
features to gradually explore a better hypothesis. Through
analysis, it is apparent that RLSAC can be easily transferred to other sampling consensus-based robust estimation
tasks. To the best of our knowledge, RLSAC is also the first
method that uses reinforcement learning to sample consensus for end-to-end robust estimation. We release our codes
at https://github.com/IRMVLab/RLSAC.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental module in computer vision, robust estimation is crucial for many tasks, such as camera pose estimation [10, 33, 31, 32], motion segmentation [26, 19, 29, 30],
short and wide baseline matching [22, 28], plane fitting [18],
* Corresponding Authors.

The first two authors contributed equally.

Minimum Set

Generate Hypothesis

Hypothesis
Quality

Reinforcement Learning
Environment

Agent
Sample the Action

Action

Execute the Action

Next State
Reward

Remodel

RLSAC
Agent
Sample the Minimum Set
by Neural Network

Action

Environment

Minimum Set

Generate Hypothesis

Next State
Encoded
Data
Reward
Hypothesis
Quality

Apply

2D Line Fitting

Robust Estimation Tasks

Fundamental Matrix Estimation

Figure 1. RLSAC remodel the sampling consensus process. By
modeling the sampling consensus as a reinforcement learning process, RLSAC can achieve end-to-end learning on various robust
estimation tasks.

and line fitting [12, 20]. However, it is still difficult to exclude disturbances while estimating accurate models. To
address this issue, sampling consensus-based algorithms are
widely used, which are represented by the RANdom SAmple Consensus (RANSAC) [16] algorithm. It first samples
the minimum set required for the task, e.g., a minimum set
size of 2 for 2D line fitting. Then, the hypothesis is solved
by the minimum set. Next, all data is divided into inliers
and outliers, according to their residuals to the hypothesis.
Finally, the above process is repeated and the best hypothesis is selected based on the highest inlier ratio. RANSAC

9891

