This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Single Image Defocus Deblurring via Implicit Neural Inverse Kernels
Yuhui Quan1,2
1

Xin Yao1,2

Hui Ji3

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510335, China
3
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, 119076, Singapore
csyhquan@scut.edu.cn, csxinyaoscut@gmail.com, matjh@nus.edu.sg *

Abstract
Single image defocus deblurring (SIDD) is a challenging task due to the spatially-varying nature of defocus blur,
characterized by per-pixel point spread functions (PSFs).
Existing deep-learning-based methods for SIDD are limited
by either over-fitting due to the lack of model constraints
or under-parametrization that restricts their applicability
to real-world images. To address the limitations, this paper proposes an interpretable approach that explicitly predicts inverse kernels with structural regularization. Motivated by the observation that defocus PSFs within an image often have similar shapes but different sizes, we represent the inverse kernels linearly over a multi-scale dictionary parameterized by implicit neural representations. We
predict the corresponding representation coefficients via a
duplex scale-recurrent neural network that jointly performs
fine-to-coarse and coarse-to-fine estimations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves excellent
performance using a lightweight model.

1. Introduction
When a camera captures an image, objects outside of
the focal plane appear blurry. This effect is known as
defocus blur and usually occurs when using a large camera aperture or capturing scenes with significantly varying
depths. Removing defocus blur from a single image, known
as SIDD, is desired for many practical applications; see
e.g. [27, 14, 33, 60]. In general, defocus blur varies spatially. Each defocused pixel is a weighted average of its
neighboring pixels in the latent all-in-focus image, with the
weights determined by a spatially-varying unknown PSF.
SIDD is closely related to defocus map estimation
(DME) [3, 44, 7, 5, 51, 32, 17]. Existing DME methods
typically model defocus PSFs using a Gaussian function
* This work is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (Grant No. 2022A1515011755 and 2023A1515012841),
and Singapore MOE AcRF Tier 1 Grant (WBS No. A-8000981-00-00).

parameterized by its variance or a disc function parameterized by its radius. The resulting defocus map indicates the
per-pixel blur amount in terms of the values of such model
parameters, which can then be utilized for SIDD by applying a non-blind image deblurring (NID) algorithm using the
corresponding PSFs; see e.g. [18]. However, DME remains
a challenging task, and the estimated parameters of PSFs
can be erroneous for many pixels. Moreover, Gaussian or
disc-indicator functions are overly simplistic for real-world
defocus PSFs. All these errors will be magnified in the NID
process, resulting in noticeable artifacts.
Recently, many deep-learning-based methods have been
proposed for SIDD; see e.g. [41, 25, 21, 47, 36, 40, 1, 56,
58, 23, 31]. Most train an end-to-end neural network (NN)
that directly maps blurry images to their sharp correspondences. Although these methods provide better results than
the DME-based two-step methods, their performance still
has much room for improvement due to significant variations in the spatial distributions of defocus PSFs among
different images. Many existing works (e.g. [21, 40, 56])
explicitly introduce spatially-varying processing blocks to
better handle the spatial variance of defocus PSFs. However, those blocks lack constraints and may cause overfitting. A few studies (e.g. [36, 37]) represent defocus PSFs by
some specific basis for geometric regularization and employ
deep unrolling for an NN-based inversion process. Nevertheless, there is still room for improvement.
This paper presents an end-to-end deep NN with high interpretability for SIDD, which explicitly predicts spatiallyvarying inverse kernels of defocus PSFs and performs deblurring using the predicted inverse kernels. The possible
overfitting issue is tackled by providing a more accurate
model with structural constraints/regularization for the inverse kernels. Specifically, the inverse kernels are modeled
by a linear representation under a dictionary. To achieve
a compact yet sufficiently general representation, we construct the dictionary with a multi-scale structure. This is
motivated by the empirical observation (as seen in [47]) that
defocus PSFs within an image tend to have the same shape

12600

