This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S URFS U P: Learning Fluid Simulation for Novel Surfaces
1

Arjun Mani*1 , Ishaan Preetam Chandratreya* , Elliot Creager2 3 , Carl Vondrick1 , Richard Zemel1
1
Columbia University 2 University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute
surfsup.cs.columbia.edu
Input Scene and Initial Conditions

Our Predicted Rollout

a)

b)

Time

Figure 1: We introduce S URFS U P, which learns to predict how fluid particles interact with novel, complex 3D surfaces.

Abstract
Modeling the mechanics of fluid in complex scenes is
vital to applications in design, graphics, and robotics.
Learning-based methods provide fast and differentiable
fluid simulators, however most prior work is unable to accurately model how fluids interact with genuinely novel surfaces not seen during training. We introduce S URFS U P, a
framework that represents objects implicitly using signed
distance functions (SDFs), rather than an explicit representation of meshes or particles. This continuous representation of geometry enables more accurate simulation of fluidobject interactions over long time periods while simultaneously making computation more efficient. Moreover, S URF S U P trained on simple shape primitives generalizes considerably out-of-distribution, even to complex real-world
scenes and objects. Finally, we show we can invert our
model to design simple objects to manipulate fluid flow.
∗ Authors contributed equally.

1. Introduction
Across engineering and science, the simulation of fluid
dynamics has become an invaluable tool, and it will be
a crucial component for building visual systems that are
capable of understanding and interacting with real-world
environments. Recently, a new class of simulators has
emerged that learn the dynamics of physical systems from
data [13, 32, 25]. These simulators offer several advantages
over classical simulators by increasing speed, reducing reliance on hand-crafted dynamics models, and providing differentiable rollouts for solving inverse problems. Recent
approaches based on graph neural networks (GNNs) have
in particular shown impressive accuracy and generalization
on a wide range of fluids represented as particle or meshbased systems [25, 23].
In a wide variety of applications areas, fluid simulation must properly handle interaction with solid structures
to attain practical relevance. Many problems involving

14225

