This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VADER: Video Alignment Differencing and Retrieval
Alexander Black1 Simon Jenni2 Tu Bui1 Md. Mehrab Tanjim2 Stefano Petrangeli2
Ritwik Sinha2 Viswanathan Swaminathan2 John Collomosse1,2
1
CVSSP, University of Surrey 2 Adobe Research
{alex.black,t.v.bui}@surrey.ac.uk

{jenni,tanjim,petrange,risinha,vishy,collomos}@adobe.com

Abstract
We propose VADER, a spatio- temporal matching, alignment, and change summarization method to help fight misinformation spread via manipulated videos. VADER matches
and coarsely aligns partial video fragments to candidate
videos using a robust visual descriptor and scalable search
over adaptively chunked video content. A transformer- based
alignment module then refines the temporal localization of
the query fragment within the matched video. A space- time
comparator module identifies regions of manipulation between aligned content, invariant to any changes due to any
residual temporal misalignments or artifacts arising from
non- editorial changes of the content. Robustly matching
video to a trusted source enables conclusions to be drawn
on video provenance, enabling informed trust decisions
on content encountered. Code and data are available at
https://github.com/AlexBlck/vader

1. Introduction
Fake news and misinformation are major societal problems, much of it caused by manipulated videos shared to
misrepresent events. Detecting manipulation presents only
a partial solution; most edited content is not misinformation [22]. Many emerging solutions, therefore, focus on
provenance - determining the origins of content, what was
changed, and by whom [43, 6]. Securely embedding such an
audit trail inside video metadata can help consumers make
better trust decisions on content, and is the basis of recent

open standards (e.g. C2PA) [11, 1]. However, such metadata
can be trivially stripped or replaced.
We propose VADER; a robust technique matching video
fragments to a trusted database of original videos (such as
those maintained by journalism or publishing organizations,
per C2PA). Once matched and temporally aligned, differences between the query-result pair are visualized to highlight any manipulation of the video (ignoring artifacts due to
benign, i.e., non-editorial transformation due to renditions).
Any provenance metadata associated with the original may
also be displayed. Our technical contributions are:
1. Scalable video fragment (R)etrieval. We learn a robust self-supervised video clip descriptor invariant to various
transformations of visual content. Video content is adaptively chunked and represented via these descriptors, which
are aggregated and ranked to match and coarsely localize
short video fragments within a large corpus of videos.
2. Fine-grained temporal query (A)lignment. We propose
a Transformer based alignment method that performs finegrained (i.e., frame level) localization of the matched video
with the query fragment.
3. Space-time (D)ifferencing to visualize manipulation.
We learn a spatio-temporal model that ‘compares’ the aligned
query and matched video in order to identify regions of manipulation. The resulting heatmap ignores any discrepancies
introduced due to residual frame misalignments or visual
artifacts introduced by non-editorial changes such as quality,
resolution, or format changes.
4. Video manipulation dataset. We contribute a dataset of
1042 professionally mANipulated videos and mAsK annotatIoNs (ANAKIN) to train and evaluate VADER.

22357

