This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vox-E: Text-guided Voxel Editing of 3D Objects
Etai Sella1

Gal Fiebelman1
1

Original

Peter Hedman2

Tel Aviv University

2

“A ⟨object⟩ with a birthday hat”

Hadar Averbuch-Elor1

Google Research

“A yarn doll of a ⟨object⟩”

Figure 1. Given multiview images of an object (left), our technique generates volumetric edits from target text prompts, allowing for
significant geometric and appearance changes, while faithfully preserving the input object. The objects can be edited either locally (center)
or globally (right), depending on the nature of the user-provided text prompt.

Abstract
Large scale text-guided diffusion models have garnered
significant attention due to their ability to synthesize diverse
images that convey complex visual concepts. This generative power has more recently been leveraged to perform
text-to-3D synthesis. In this work, we present a technique
that harnesses the power of latent diffusion models for editing existing 3D objects. Our method takes oriented 2D images of a 3D object as input and learns a grid-based volumetric representation of it. To guide the volumetric representation to conform to a target text prompt, we follow unconditional text-to-3D methods and optimize a Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss. However, we observe that
combining this diffusion-guided loss with an image-based
regularization loss that encourages the representation not
to deviate too strongly from the input object is challenging, as it requires achieving two conflicting goals while
viewing only structure-and-appearance coupled 2D projections. Thus, we introduce a novel volumetric regularization
loss that operates directly in 3D space, utilizing the explicit

nature of our 3D representation to enforce correlation between the global structure of the original and edited object.
Furthermore, we present a technique that optimizes crossattention volumetric grids to refine the spatial extent of the
edits. Extensive experiments and comparisons demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in creating a myriad of
edits which cannot be achieved by prior works1 .

1. Introduction
Creating and editing 3D models is a cumbersome task.
While template models are readily available from online
databases, tailoring one to a specific artistic vision often requires extensive knowledge of specialized 3D editing software. In recent years, neural field-based representations
(e.g., NeRF [29]) demonstrated expressive power in faithfully capturing fine details, while offering effective optimization schemes through differentiable rendering. Their
1 Our code can be reached through our project page at http://
vox-e.github.io/

430

