This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Positive Segments for Weakly-Supervised Audio-Visual Video Parsing
Kranthi Kumar Rachavarapu
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India

Rajagopalan A. N.
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India

kranthi.rachavarapu@gmail.com

raju@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of weakly supervised Audio-Visual Video Parsing (AVVP), where the goal
is to temporally localize events that are audible or visible
and simultaneously classify them into known event categories. This is a challenging task, as we only have access
to the video-level event labels during training but need to
predict event labels at the segment level during evaluation.
Existing multiple-instance learning (MIL) based methods
use a form of attentive pooling over segment-level predictions. These methods only optimize for a subset of most
discriminative segments that satisfy the weak-supervision
constraints, which miss identifying positive segments. To
address this, we focus on improving the proportion of positive segments detected in a video. To this end, we model
the number of positive segments in a video as a latent variable and show that it can be modeled as Poisson binomial
distribution over segment-level predictions, which can be
computed exactly. Given the absence of fine-grained supervision, we propose an Expectation-Maximization approach
to learn the model parameters by maximizing the evidence
lower bound (ELBO). We iteratively estimate the minimum
positive segments in a video and refine them to capture more
positive segments. We conducted extensive experiments on
AVVP tasks to evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed approach, and the results clearly demonstrate that it increases
the number of positive segments captured compared to existing methods. Additionally, our experiments on Temporal
Action Localization (TAL) demonstrate the potential of our
method for generalization to similar MIL tasks.

1. Introduction
Event detection and localization in videos is an important task for video understanding. Event localization using
visual frames has attracted a lot of attention [49, 50, 36,
35, 22, 18, 4, 41, 28, 33, 23, 13]. These methods rely only
on visual cues and ignore a crucial modality - audio, which
plays an integral part in human perception. To address this,
there has been increased attention on audio-visual event de-

tection [39, 43], where an event could occur in either of the
modalities. Furthermore, audio and visual modalities could
aid each other in better event localization.
In this paper, we explore the problem of weaklysupervised Audio-Visual Video Parsing (AVVP) task,
where the goal is to detect and localize events using only
video-level event labels. Such a formulation is attractive as
it forgoes the need for expensive and tedious fine-grained
labeling. However, this is a challenging problem due to the
absence of segment-level labels during training and the requirement to process multi-modal (audio-visual) data in unconstrained videos with varying scene content.
Most previous works [38, 43, 15, 20, 26, 3] use instancelevel MIL technique [12] with attentive pooling to model
the video-level labels from the segment-level predictions.
Such models are then trained to optimize for the video-level
labels. These models are then used to identify the positive segments from segment-level predictions. While recent models have shown promising results, they often fail
to identify all positive segments of an event due to the MILbased objective as it implicitly prioritizes the most discriminative segments that satisfy weak supervision constraints.
Consequently, the model selects only a subset of the most
discriminative incomplete set of positive segments, which
are sufficient for correctly classifying the video.
Recent work by Wu et.al [43] focuses on reducing the
uncertainty due to the absence of the modality labels by estimating them from a model trained with video-level weak
labels. Inspired by this, we focus on improving temporal
localization by capturing all of the positive segments. To
achieve this, we explicitly model the number of positive
segments in a video (z) and optimize this along with the
MIL objective. We show that the number of positive segments in a video follows the Poisson binomial distribution
over segment-level event probabilities, which can be computed exactly. We can use the weak-supervision constraint
that a positive video must contain at least one positive segment (z ≥ 1) to provide supervision for z and train the
model. However, this approach also faces issues similar to
that of other MIL-based techniques in accurately localizing
events temporally. To overcome the challenge of weak la-

10192

