This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CL-MVSNet: Unsupervised Multi-view Stereo with
Dual-level Contrastive Learning
Kaiqiang Xiong 1 Rui Peng 1 Zhe Zhang 1 Tianxing Feng 1
Jianbo Jiao 4 Feng Gao 5 Ronggang Wang ,1,2,3
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 Migu Culture Technology Co., Ltd
4
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham 5 School of Arts, Peking University
xiongkaiqiang@stu.pku.edu.cn

rgwang@pkusz.edu.cn

https://KaiqiangXiong.github.io/CL-MVSNet/

Unsupervised Multi-View Stereo (MVS) methods have
achieved promising progress recently. However, previous
methods primarily depend on the photometric consistency
assumption, which may suffer from two limitations: indistinguishable regions and view-dependent effects, e.g., lowtextured areas and reflections. To address these issues, in
this paper, we propose a new dual-level contrastive learning approach, named CL-MVSNet. Specifically, our model
integrates two contrastive branches into an unsupervised
MVS framework to construct additional supervisory signals. On the one hand, we present an image-level contrastive branch to guide the model to acquire more context awareness, thus leading to more complete depth estimation in indistinguishable regions. On the other hand, we
exploit a scene-level contrastive branch to boost the representation ability, improving robustness to view-dependent
effects. Moreover, to recover more accurate 3D geometry,
we introduce an L0.5 photometric consistency loss, which
encourages the model to focus more on accurate points
while mitigating the gradient penalty of undesirable ones.
Extensive experiments on DTU and Tanks&Temples benchmarks demonstrate that our approach achieves state-of-theart performance among all end-to-end unsupervised MVS
frameworks and outperforms its supervised counterpart by
a considerable margin without fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Multi-View Stereo (MVS) is a critical task in various
applications, including robotics, self-driving, and VR/AR.
The goal of MVS is to estimate a dense 3D reconstruction
from multiple images captured from different views. Traditionally, it has been approached by computing dense corre-

Scan 29

Abstract

RC-MVSNet

CL-MVSNet(Ours)

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of reconstruction quality
with the SOTA method [5] on scan29 of DTU [1]. Our method
performs better on repetitive patterns.

spondences between images, often based on hand-crafted
similarity metrics and engineered regularizations [4, 33].
Recently, a surge of learning-based methods [7, 49–51]
have been developed to advance the effectiveness of MVS,
showing promising results in MVS benchmarks [1, 19].
However, most of them are supervised methods [3, 9, 27].
These methods heavily rely on large-scale ground-truth 3D
training data, which are expensive to acquire.
To tackle this problem, unsupervised MVS methods
[5, 17, 41] have attempted to train MVS networks without
annotations. Existing methods mainly depend on the hypothesis of photometric consistency, which states that the
appearance of a point in 3D space is invariant across different views. However, this hypothesis may be ineffective
owing to indistinguishable regions and view-dependent effects, e.g., low texture, repetitive patterns, and reflections.
Recently, the state-of-the-art (SOTA) method RC-MVSNet
[5] adopts a rendering consistency network to address the
ambiguity caused by view-dependent photometric effects
and occlusions. While achieving promising results, this ap-

3769

