This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VeRi3D: Generative Vertex-based Radiance Fields for
3D Controllable Human Image Synthesis
Xinya Chen1 , Jiaxin Huang1 , Yanrui Bin2 , Lu Yu1 , Yiyi Liao1 *
1

Zhejiang University 2 Huazhong University of Science and Technology

{hust.xinyachen, jaceyh919, binyanrui}@gmail.com, {yul, yiyi.liao}@zju.edu.cn

Figure 1: 3D Controllable Human Image Synthesis. Our VeRi3D enables control over shape, pose, and appearance in the
first row and part-level editing of the lower body, upper body, and head in the second row. The bottom right illustrates the
vertices used to control the image synthesis, where colored vertices indicate the edited part.

Abstract
Unsupervised learning of 3D-aware generative adversarial networks has lately made much progress. Some recent work demonstrates promising results of learning human generative models using neural articulated radiance
fields, yet their generalization ability and controllability lag
behind parametric human models, i.e., they do not perform
well when generalizing to novel pose/shape and are not part
controllable. To solve these problems, we propose VeRi3D,
a generative human vertex-based radiance field parameterized by vertices of the parametric human template, SMPL.
* Corresponding authors.

We map each 3D point to the local coordinate system defined on its neighboring vertices, and use the corresponding
vertex feature and local coordinates for mapping it to color
and density values. We demonstrate that our simple approach allows for generating photorealistic human images
with free control over camera pose, human pose, shape, as
well as enabling part-level editing.

1. Introduction
Generating diverse photorealistic renderings of clothed
humans has a wide range of applications including visual
effects, virtual try-on, VR/AR, and creative image editing.

8986

