This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pre-training-free Image Manipulation Localization through Non-Mutually
Exclusive Contrastive Learning
Jizhe Zhou1,4 , Xiaochen Ma1,4 , Xia Du2,4 , Ahmed Y.Alhammadi3,4 , Wentao Feng1,4 *
1

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
School of Computer and Information Engineering, Xiamen University of Technology
3
Strategy Affairs Office, Mohamed Bin Zayed University for Humanities
4
Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence, Ministry of Education of China
2

Abstract
Deep Image Manipulation Localization (IML) models
suffer from training data insufficiency and thus heavily rely
on pre-training. We argue that contrastive learning is more
suitable to tackle the data insufficiency problem for IML.
Crafting mutually exclusive positives and negatives is the
prerequisite for contrastive learning. However, when adopting contrastive learning in IML, we encounter three categories of image patches: tampered, authentic, and contour
patches. Tampered and authentic patches are naturally mutually exclusive, but contour patches containing both tampered and authentic pixels are non-mutually exclusive to
them. Simply abnegating these contour patches results in
a drastic performance loss since contour patches are decisive to the learning outcomes. Hence, we propose the Nonmutually exclusive Contrastive Learning (NCL) framework
to rescue conventional contrastive learning from the above
dilemma. In NCL, to cope with the non-mutually exclusivity, we first establish a pivot structure with dual branches
to constantly switch the role of contour patches between
positives and negatives while training. Then, we devise a
pivot-consistent loss to avoid spatial corruption caused by
the role-switching process. In this manner, NCL both inherits the self-supervised merits to address the data insufficiency and retains a high manipulation localization accuracy. Extensive experiments verify that our NCL achieves
state-of-the-art performance on all five benchmarks without any pre-training and is more robust on unseen real-life
samples. https://github.com/Knightzjz/NCL-IML.

1. Introduction
Thrilling advances in media techniques grant us easier
and easier access to manipulate images. Image Manipula* Wentao Feng is the corresponding author, contact through mail address: Wtfeng2021@scu.edu.cn

Figure 1. Three categories of patches in a manipulated image and
the non-mutually exclusive relations among them. There are three
categories of patches in a manipulated image: tampered, authentic, and contour patches. In the middle picture, we depict them
accordingly with red, blue, and purple squares. Only tampered
and authentic patches are mutually exclusive. When the decisive
contour patches are involved, non-mutually exclusivity occurs in
contrastive learning. Best viewed in color.

tion Localization (IML) is then indispensable for defensive
information forensics and is heavily invested by the information security industry. Today, data insufficiency is the
most prominent issue in building deep IML models. As
dense annotations and expertise for tamper identification are
exorbitant, public datasets for IML are all tiny-sized (with a
few hundred to a few thousand images) and severely insufficient for training deep CNNs. Consequently, major deep
IML methods carry out pre-training on additional largescale datasets.
In general, pre-training of IML models relies on synthesized datasets. On the one hand, synthesized datasets
vanish the high labeling costs and pre-training on synthesized datasets refrains from overfitting. On the other hand,
employing synthesized datasets to conduct pre-training impedes fair comparisons among models and even jeopardizes
the model generalizability. Pre-training is crucial to the
model performance, and for fair comparisons, models of
the same task commonly practice their pre-training on the
same dataset. However, synthesized pre-training datasets
for IML models are strikingly different in annotation quantity and quality. For instance, ManTra-Net [34] grounds
on a self-collected, pixel-wise labeled dataset of 102,028

22346

