This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ChildPlay: A New Benchmark for Understanding Children’s Gaze Behaviour
Samy Tafasca*
Anshul Gupta*
Jean-Marc Odobez
Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
{stafasca, agupta, odobez}@idiap.ch

Abstract
Gaze behaviors such as eye-contact or shared attention
are important markers for diagnosing developmental disorders in children. While previous studies have looked at
some of these elements, the analysis is usually performed on
private datasets and is restricted to lab settings. Furthermore, all publicly available gaze target prediction benchmarks mostly contain instances of adults, which makes models trained on them less applicable to scenarios with young
children. In this paper, we propose the first study for predicting the gaze target of children and interacting adults. To
this end, we introduce the ChildPlay dataset: a curated collection of short video clips featuring children playing and
interacting with adults in uncontrolled environments (e.g.
kindergarten, therapy centers, preschools etc.), which we
annotate with rich gaze information. We further propose a
new model for gaze target prediction that is geometrically
grounded by explicitly identifying the scene parts in the 3D
field of view (3DFoV) of the person, leveraging recent geometry preserving depth inference methods. Our model
achieves state of the art results on benchmark datasets
and ChildPlay. Furthermore, results show that looking at
faces prediction performance on children is much worse
than on adults, and can be significantly improved by finetuning models using child gaze annotations. Our dataset
is available at https://www.idiap.ch/en/dataset/
childplay-gaze. Code will be made available soon.

1. Introduction
Gaze is a non-verbal cue that provides rich information
about people. In particular, it plays fundamental roles in social interactions and human communication, like initiating
interaction, showing attention, monitoring the floor, or regulating intimacy, and as such finds many applications in human interaction analysis. Hence, gaze extraction and analysis finds applications in human-human or human-robot interaction [54, 40], including psychological studies [38] and
medical diagnoses.
* indicates equal contribution

Figure 1. Sample images from the ChildPlay dataset with head
bounding box and gaze point annotations. Such scenes strongly
depart from existing gaze benchmarks (e.g. standing adults).

Figure 2. Qualitative results of our geometrically grounded model
on ChildPlay. Our 3D Field of View (3DFoV) highlights potential
gaze targets, excluding objects where the depth does not match.
Gaze target predictions are given in green and GT ones in red.

In this regard, acquiring appropriate social gaze behavior
skills is important in the cognitive development of children.
For instance, gaze following has been shown to help children with language acquisition [5, 6], while gaze aversion
can help children perform better in cognitively demanding
tasks [42]. Furthermore, abnormal gaze patterns are known
to correlate with several neuro-developmental disorders like
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) [53, 37]. This has led to
the development of specific gold standard markers for the
screening of these impairments, e.g. by measuring deficits
in the initiation of joint attention or shared attention [12].
ChildPlay dataset. Due to this importance, several methods have been proposed to analyze children’s gaze, especially in the context of autism [48, 7, 22, 50, 1, 55, 56, 8,
31]. However, they are all tested on private datasets [11]
due to the sensitive nature of the data, hindering proper
comparison across algorithms. Some of them may be accessible in anonymized formats (e.g. pose skeletons), but
this makes them difficult to use for the study of gaze behavior. While other datasets have gaze related labels involving

20935

