This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BiFF: Bi-level Future Fusion with Polyline-based Coordinate
for Interactive Trajectory Prediction
Yiyao Zhu Di Luan Shaojie Shen
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{yzhucp, dluan}@connect.ust.hk, eeshaojie@ust.hk

Abstract
Predicting future trajectories of surrounding agents is
essential for safety-critical autonomous driving. Most existing work focuses on predicting marginal trajectories for
each agent independently. However, it has rarely been explored in predicting joint trajectories for interactive agents.
In this work, we propose Bi-level Future Fusion (BiFF)
to explicitly capture future interactions between interactive agents. Concretely, BiFF fuses the high-level future
intentions followed by low-level future behaviors. Then
the polyline-based coordinate is speciﬁcally designed for
multi-agent prediction to ensure data efﬁciency, frame robustness, and prediction accuracy. Experiments show that
BiFF achieves state-of-the-art performance on the interactive prediction benchmark of Waymo Open Motion Dataset.

1. Introduction
Motion prediction is crucial for intelligent driving systems as it plays a vital role in enabling autonomous vehicles
to comprehend driving scenes and make safe plans in interactive environments. Predicting the future behaviors of dynamic agents is challenging due to the inherent multi-modal
behavior of trafﬁc participants and complex scene environments. Learning-based approaches [1, 3, 4, 7, 8, 12, 50, 9]
have recently made notable strides in this area. By utilizing large-scale real-world driving datasets [2, 11], learningbased frameworks can effectively model complex interactions among agents and considerably enhance the accuracy
of motion prediction.
Most existing studies on trajectory prediction [4, 12, 17,
22, 25] tend to focus on generating marginal prediction
samples of future trajectories for each agent, without considering their future interactions. Thus, such marginal prediction models may generate trajectories with a high overlap rate [41], then the unreliable results are provided for
the downstream planning module. To overcome this limitation, recent works [14, 16, 31] propose joint motion pre-

Figure 1. A motivating example of BiFF. Left: Marginal heatmaps
of two interactive agents conﬂict with each other. Middle: For
each scene modality, assignment scores generated by the prediction header become decoupled by fusing high-level future intentions across agents. Right: For each scene modality, the predicted
trajectories are more scene-consistent by fusing low-level future
behaviors across agents.

diction models that generate scene-compliant trajectories.
However, previous models focus on capturing interaction
across agents in the tracking history, explicitly modeling future interaction remains an open problem. The preliminary
research regarding future interaction is conducted in the recent two works. M2I [41] classiﬁes interactive agents as
inﬂuencer and reactor. Conditioning on the inﬂuencer, the
reactor beneﬁt from future information, but the inﬂuencer
is not optimized. MTR [38] predicts future trajectories for
all the surrounding agents, but the future information is not
reliable enough since trajectories are directly regressed using polyline features without any iterative reﬁnement. To
model the future interactions, we propose Bi-level Future
Fusion (BiFF), and the motivating example is presented in
Fig. 1, in which the unrealistic conﬂicting prediction between the marginal heatmaps is mitigated by the proposed
High-level Future Intentions Fusion (HFIF) and Low-level
Future Behaviors Fusion (LFBF).
Moreover, regarding these models [14, 16, 31], all target

8260

