This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MEGA: Multimodal Alignment Aggregation and Distillation
For Cinematic Video Segmentation
Najmeh Sadoughi1 , Xinyu Li1 , Avijit Vajpayee1 , David Fan1 , Bing Shuai2 ,
Hector Santos-Villalobos1 , Vimal Bhat1 , Rohith MV1
1
Amazon Prime Video, 2 AWS AI Labs
{nnnourab,xxnl,avivaj,fandavi,bshuai,hsantosv,vimalb,kurohith}@amazon.com

1. Introduction
In the world of video production, movies are composed
of smaller units called shots, scenes, and acts. Shots are
a continuous set of frames, a scene is a sequence of shots
that tell a story, and an act is a thematic section of a narrative [14]. While computer vision has made significant strides
in shot detection [39], scene and act segmentation remain a
challenge, despite their potential for smart video navigation,
advertisement insertion, and movie summarization. Cinematic content comprises of different data sources, including
audio, visual, and text data, as well as derivative data sources
from the narrative, including location, appearance, tone, or
acoustic events. In this work, we will refer to all of these

Average presession

Previous research has studied the task of segmenting cinematic videos into scenes and into narrative acts. However,
these studies have overlooked the essential task of multimodal alignment and fusion for effectively and efficiently
processing long-form videos (> 60min). In this paper, we introduce Multimodal alignmEnt aGgregation and distillAtion
(MEGA) for cinematic long-video segmentation. MEGA tackles the challenge by leveraging multiple media modalities.
The method coarsely aligns inputs of variable lengths and
different modalities with alignment positional encoding. To
maintain temporal synchronization while reducing computation, we further introduce an enhanced bottleneck fusion
layer which uses temporal alignment. Additionally, MEGA
employs a novel contrastive loss to synchronize and transfer
labels across modalities, enabling act segmentation from
labeled synopsis sentences on video shots. Our experimental
results show that MEGA outperforms state-of-the-art methods on MovieNet dataset for scene segmentation (with an
Average Precision improvement of +1.19%) and on TRIPOD dataset for act segmentation (with a Total Agreement
improvement of +5.51%).

60

Scene Seg. on MovieNet

59
58

Act Seg. on TRIPOD

MEGA
+1.2

+5.5

56

12
10

SCRL
GRAPHTP

54
ShotCoL

53
52
51
50

14

+7.1

55

Input Modality

MEGA

MEGA

BaSSL

57

16

MEGA

Total agreement

Abstract

GRAPHTP

SCENESUM
TAM
TAM
SCENESUM TEXTRANK
TEXTRANK

V

T*

V

T*+V+A T+V T+V+A

8
6
4

Figure 1: MEGA works well on both scene segmentation
and act segmentation tasks, outperforming previous work
with significant margin. V,T*,T,A denotes video, screenplay,
subtitle and audio respectively.
input components as “modalities” of cinematic content. Previous work has not fully explored how to align and aggregate
these modalities which have different granularities.
We propose to address scene and act segmentation tasks
with an unified multimodal Transformer. However, this
approach presents two main challenges. Firstly, there is
the issue of cross modality information synchronization
and fusion at the shot level. Previous studies which use
multimodal fusion for scene and act segmentation perform
early [8, 32] or late fusion of features [35], and have not
explored fusion strategies which utilize multimodal temporal alignment. Additionally, the fusion strategies that utilize
temporal alignment such as merged attention or cross modality attention [9, 21] are computationally expensive and not
generalizable to a large number of modalities. Secondly, due
to the challenges associated with labeling a long video on act
segmentation, the labels for act segmentation are provided
on synopsis sentences [30] which do not provide timestamps.
To avoid the more challenging task of cross-modal synchronization, previous studies on act segmentation [30, 32] rely

23331

