This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CGBA: Curvature-aware Geometric Black-box Attack
Md Farhamdur Reza, Ali Rahmati, Tianfu Wu, and Huaiyu Dai
Department of ECE, North Carolina State University
mreza2@ncsu.edu, arahmat@alumni.ncsu.edu, tianfu wu@ncsu.edu , hdai@ncsu.edu

Abstract
Decision-based black-box attacks often necessitate a
large number of queries to craft an adversarial example. Moreover, decision-based attacks based on querying
boundary points in the estimated normal vector direction
often suffer from inefficiency and convergence issues. In
this paper, we propose a novel query-efficient curvature¯ (CGBA)
aware geometric decision-based black-box attack
¯
¯
¯
that conducts boundary search along a semicircular path
on a restricted 2D plane to ensure finding a boundary point
successfully irrespective of the boundary curvature. While
the proposed CGBA attack can work effectively for an arbitrary decision boundary, it is particularly efficient in exploiting the low curvature to craft high-quality adversarial examples, which is widely seen and experimentally verified in commonly used classifiers under non-targeted attacks. In contrast, the decision boundaries often exhibit
higher curvature under targeted attacks. Thus, we develop
a new query-efficient variant, CGBA-H, that is adapted for
the targeted attack. In addition, we further design an algorithm to obtain a better initial boundary point at the expense
of some extra queries, which considerably enhances the
performance of the targeted attack. Extensive experiments
are conducted to evaluate the performance of our proposed
methods against some well-known classifiers on the ImageNet and CIFAR10 datasets, demonstrating the superiority
of CGBA and CGBA-H over state-of-the-art non-targeted
and targeted attacks, respectively. The source code is available at https://github.com/Farhamdur/CGBA.

1. Introduction
Adversarial attacks are broadly classified into two types:
white-box and black-box attacks. In the white-box attack
setting [12, 23, 3], the adversary possesses the full knowledge of the target classifier and its weights. However, it
is often impractical to avail information about the target
classifier in real-world scenarios. Therefore, the blackbox setting—transfer-based, score-based, and decision-

based—is the practical setting for adversarial attacks with
limited knowledge of the classifier. The transfer-based adversarial attacks [25, 29] use a surrogate model to generate
adversarial examples though it does not guarantee a high
attack success rate. Score-based attacks [6, 15] query the
target classifier for the prediction probabilities of all the
classes in order to estimate the gradient in each step and
lessen perturbation. However, this attacking strategy may
not be feasible because, in many real-world applications,
classifiers only return the top-1 classification label in response to a query. Thus, the decision-based adversarial attack is the most practical adversarial attack as it allows the
adversary to craft an adversarial example by only querying
the top-1 classification label from the target classifier.
Most state-of-the-art decision-based attacks, such as
HSJA [5], qFool [19], GeoDA [26], QEBA [17] and
TA [20], are based on finding the normal vector at a point
on the decision boundary and iteratively search for new
boundary points with reduced perturbation. Among these
attacks, HSJA [5], qFool (targeted) [19], QEBA [17], and
TA [20] employ the estimated normal vector direction to
obtain a point inside the adversarial region, and then apply
binary search between the obtained adversarial point and
the source to get a new boundary point. The aforementioned
approaches, however, do not explicitly take into account the
geometry of the boundary when coining adversarial examples. qFool (non-targeted) [19] and GeoDA [26], on the
other hand, approximate the boundary as a hyperplane and
find a new boundary point by conducting a binary search
¯ (BSNV).
¯
along the direction of the estimated normal vector
¯
¯
As further discussed below, while BSNV is effective for
low-curvature boundaries where the linear approximation
is sufficiently accurate, its effectiveness deteriorates as curvature and nonlinearity increase. For a boundary with high
curvature, BSNV may not even hit the boundary due to the
narrow adversarial region. SurFree [22] also considers a
hyperplane boundary and conducts boundary search along
a semicircular path, but it does not utilize the information of
the normal vector and instead estimates the attack direction
through random trials.

124

