This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Low-Light Image Enhancement with Multi-stage Residue Quantization and
Brightness-aware Attention
Yunlong Liu1, *

Tao Huang1, * Weisheng Dong1,† Fangfang Wu1 Xin Li2
1
Xidian University 2 University at Albany

liuyunlong@stu.xidian.edu.cn

thuang 666@stu.xidian.edu.cn

wufangfang@xidian.edu.cn

xli48@albany.edu

Guangming Shi1

wsdong@mail.xidian.edu.cn

gmshi xidian@163.com

Figure 1: Qualitative and quantitative (i.e., PSNR / SSIM / parameters) comparisons of multiple state-of-the-art low-light
image enhancement methods, including MIR-Net [45], DCC-Net [47], SNR [41], and our proposed method. Apparently, our
proposed method has better brightness and fewer parameters than other competing methods.

Abstract
Low-light image enhancement (LLIE) aims to recover illumination and improve the visibility of low-light images.
Conventional LLIE methods often produce poor results because they neglect the effect of noise interference. Deep
learning-based LLIE methods focus on learning a mapping function between low-light images and normal-light
images that outperforms conventional LLIE methods. However, most deep learning-based LLIE methods cannot yet
fully exploit the guidance of auxiliary priors provided by
normal-light images in the training dataset. In this paper,
we propose a brightness-aware network with normal-light
* Equal Contribution, † Corresponding Author

priors based on brightness-aware attention and residualquantized codebook. To achieve a more natural and realistic enhancement, we design a query module to obtain
more reliable normal-light features and fuse them with lowlight features by a fusion branch. In addition, we propose
a brightness-aware attention module to further improve the
robustness of the network to the brightness. Extensive experimental results on both real-captured and synthetic data
show that our method outperforms existing state-of-the-art
methods.

1. Introduction
Low-light images suffer from extremely limited visibility and noise interference, which often have serious effects
on the performance of many downstream tasks [6, 8, 29,

12140

