This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Single Path Integrated Gradients
for Reliable Input Attribution via Randomized Path Sampling
Giyoung Jeon*
LG AI Research

Haedong Jeong
UNIST, KAIST

Jaesik Choi†
KAIST, INEEJI

giyoung.jeon@lgresearch.ai

haedong@unist.ac.kr

jaesik.choi@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Input attribution is a widely used explanation method for
deep neural networks, especially in visual tasks. Among
various attribution methods, Integrated Gradients (IG) [28]
is frequently used because of its model-agnostic applicability and desirable axioms. However, previous work [24, 8, 9]
has shown that such method often produces noisy and unreliable attributions during the integration of the gradients
over the path defined in the input space. In this paper, we
tackle this issue by estimating the distribution of the possible attributions according to the integrating path selection.
We show that such noisy attribution can be reduced by aggregating attributions from the multiple paths instead of using a single path. Inspired by Stick-Breaking Process [20],
we suggest a random process to generate rich and various
sampling of the gradient integrating path. Using multiple
input attributions obtained from randomized path, we propose a novel attribution measure using the distribution of
attributions at each input features. We identify proposed
method qualitatively show less-noisy and object-aligned attribution and its feasibility through the quantitative evaluations.

1. Introduction

Among various approaches to compute the input attributions, Integrated Gradient (IG), one of widely used methods,
and its variants [28, 15, 9] are of particular interest in our
work. These methods explore the input space along the predefined path and integrate the gradients to provide the reliable attributions. The integration path of such methods consists of a baseline which represents the missingness of features and a connecting line between the input and the baseline. With different desired properties, various paths can
be used to compute the attribution. For example, Guided
IG [9] proposes the adaptive path to alleviate the high and
noisy gradients unrelated to the prediction. The selection of
baseline can also affect to the attribution results [27].
While the above methods address the importance of selecting appropriate integration path, in this paper, we claim
that the single path is not reliable enough to interpret the
decision of neural networks. We provide a simple example
that the attribution computed by a single path provides high
variance according to different path selection. For better reliability, we propose a novel attribution method to take the
expectation of the path-integrated attribution over the distribution of possible paths. To sample from the distribution
over the vast variety of possible paths, we adopt the notion of Stick-Breaking Process, which is one sort of stochastic processes that samples the probability distribution. The
main contributions of our work are summarized as,
• Address the inconsistency of attribution according to
the selection of the integration path, and propose a
novel attribution method that takes the expectation
over the distribution of random paths to retain the reliability of attribution.

Along with the steep improvement and the real world
application of the deep learning models [4, 31], discovering the evidence of the black-box model decision is considered to be important for debugging the malfunction [12] and
promise the safety and the fairness [5] of the models. Within
the vast literature of explaining the decision of the deep
models, input attribution [22, 2, 21, 28] is one of widely
used methods to quantify the relative contribution of each
features to the model output. Input attribution provides the
explanation in the form of heatmaps, which is useful to indicate the spatial existence of evidences, especially in visual
tasks.
* work done while in UNIST

• Propose a sampling method to generate a random integration path inspired by the Stick-Breaking Process.
From the proposed method, we can generate the vast
integration paths efficiently.
• Evaluate the attribution in qualitative and quantitative measure to validate the reliability of the proposed
method on various of architecture of the networks.

† corresponding author

2052

