This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zolly: Zoom Focal Length Correctly for Perspective-Distorted
Human Mesh Reconstruction
Wenjia Wang1,4
Yongtao Ge2
Haiyi Mei3
Zhongang Cai3,4
3
3
5
Qingping Sun
Yanjun Wang
Chunhua Shen
Lei Yang3,4,†
Taku Komura1
1

The University of Hong Kong 2 The University of Adelaide 3 SenseTime Research
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory 5 Zhejiang University

FoV = 79°
z = 0.94m

(b) SPEC

(a) Input image

FoV = 50°
z = 1.28m

(c) Our results

(d) Input image

(e) SPEC

(f) Our results

Figure 1: Close-up photography can make it difficult to discern 3D human pose in perspective-distorted images, while stateof-the-art methods often struggle with weak-perspective camera models or inaccurate focal length estimates. Our method
overcomes these challenges, accurately recovering 3D human mesh from an approximate distance for fine-grained reconstruction. We could thus get focal length by our proposed approach.

Abstract
As it is hard to calibrate single-view RGB images in
the wild, existing 3D human mesh reconstruction (3DHMR)
methods either use a constant large focal length or estimate
one based on the background environment context, which
can not tackle the problem of the torso, limb, hand or face
distortion caused by perspective camera projection when
the camera is close to the human body. The naive focal
length assumptions can harm this task with the incorrectly
formulated projection matrices. To solve this, we propose
Zolly, the first 3DHMR method focusing on perspectivedistorted images. Our approach begins with analysing the
reason for perspective distortion, which we find is mainly
caused by the relative location of the human body to the
camera center. We propose a new camera model and a
novel 2D representation, termed distortion image, which
describes the 2D dense distortion scale of the human body.
We then estimate the distance from distortion scale features
rather than environment context features. Afterwards, We
integrate the distortion feature with image features to reconstruct the body mesh. To formulate the correct projec* LY† is the corresponding author.

tion matrix and locate the human body position, we simultaneously use perspective and weak-perspective projection
loss. Since existing datasets could not handle this task, we
propose the first synthetic dataset PDHuman and extend
two real-world datasets tailored for this task, all containing perspective-distorted human images. Extensive experiments show that Zolly outperforms existing state-of-theart methods on both perspective-distorted datasets and the
standard benchmark (3DPW). Code and dataset will be released at https://wenjiawang0312.github.io/
projects/zolly/.

1. Introduction
Human pose and shape estimation from single-view
RGB images is a long-standing research area of computer vision, as the reconstructed motion and mesh could
empower various human-centered downstream applications
like 3D animations, robotics, or AR/VR development. Previous works [19, 26, 23, 24, 41, 23, 27, 20, 55] formulate the
problem under the assumption that the reconstructed people
are far away from the camera, thus the torso and limb distortion caused by the perspective projection can be neglected.

3925

