This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SSF: Accelerating Training of Spiking Neural Networks with
Stabilized Spiking Flow
Jingtao Wang1,4,5 , Zengjie Song2 , Yuxi Wang3 ,
Jun Xiao1∗ , Yuran Yang6 , Shuqi Mei6 , Zhaoxiang Zhang1,3,4,5∗
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI-CAS
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems 6 Tencent
{wangjingtao2021, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn, zjsong@hotmail.com, xiaojun@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Surrogate gradient (SG) is one of the most effective
approaches for training spiking neural networks (SNNs).
While assisting SNNs to achieve classification performance
comparable to artificial neural networks, SG suffers from
the problem of time-consuming training, preventing it from
efficient learning. In this paper, we formally analyze the
backward process of classic SG and find that the membrane
accumulation through time leads to exponential growth of
training time. With this discovery, we propose Stabilized
Spiking Flow (SSF), a simple yet effective approach to accelerate training of SG-based SNNs. For each spiking neuron, SSF averages its input and output activations over time
to yield stabilized input and output, respectively. Then, instead of back propagating all errors that are related to current neuron and inherently entangled in time domain, the
auxiliary gradient is directly propagated from the stabilized
output to input through a devised relationship mapping. Additionally, SSF method is suitable to different neuron models. Extensive experiments on both static and neuromorphic
datasets demonstrate that SNNs trained with SSF approach
can achieve performance comparable to the original counterparts, while reducing the training time significantly. In
particular, SSF speeds up the training process of state-ofthe-art SNN models up to 10× when time steps equal to 80.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from huge amount of data and advances
in computing hardwares, deep artificial neural networks
(ANNs) have achieved rapid development in past decades
∗ Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Training time and backward time cost in one epoch with
different time steps. Classic SG method [7] experiences an exponential growth of training time when number of time steps increases. By contrast, SSF method significantly decreases training
time cost, especially when training SNNs with long time steps.

and even outperform human beings in areas like image
classification [14], semantic segmentation [38] and object
detection [25]. However, the promising performance of
ANNs builds on the expense of substantial computational
resources and power consumption during both training and
inference, limiting its application in edge devices.
Known as the third generation of neural networks, Spiking Neural Network (SNN) simulates biological neuron’s
action potential process which accumulates inputs as membrane potential and generates a binary spike when exceeding threshold. This simulation brings SNN with special
neural dynamics, strong biological plausibility, and promising high energy efficiency on neuromorphic hardwares [26].
These advantages make SNN potential in solving many
problems ANN encountered, including limited energy supplies in edge devices mentioned before. Hence, SNN has
drawn a lot of attention of researchers in recent years.
Yet still training SNN is a big challenge since the discrete nature of binary spikes hampers the effective usage of
gradient-based backpropagation (BP) methods on the training of SNN [31]. Among all the studies, one effective idea

5982

