This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inspecting the Geographical Representativeness
of Images from Text-to-Image Models
Abhipsa Basu
abhipsabasu@iisc.ac.in
Vision and AI Lab
IISc Bangalore

R. Venkatesh Babu
venky@iisc.ac.in
Vision and AI Lab
IISc Bangalore

Danish Pruthi
danishp@iisc.ac.in
FLAIR Lab
IISc Bangalore

Abstract
Recent progress in generative models has resulted in
models that produce both realistic as well as relevant images for most textual inputs. These models are being used
to generate millions of images everyday, and hold the potential to drastically impact areas such as generative art,
digital marketing and data augmentation. Given their outsized impact, it is important to ensure that the generated
content reflects the artifacts and surroundings across the
globe, rather than over-representing certain parts of the
world. In this paper, we measure the geographical representativeness of common nouns (e.g., a house) generated
through DALL·E 2 and Stable Diffusion models using a
crowdsourced study comprising 540 participants across 27
countries. For deliberately underspecified inputs without
country names, the generated images most reflect the surroundings of the United States followed by India, and the
top generations rarely reflect surroundings from all other
countries (average score less than 3 out of 5). Specifying the
country names in the input increases the representativeness
by 1.44 points on average on a 5 − point Likert scale for
DALL·E 2 and 0.75 for Stable Diffusion, however, the overall scores for many countries still remain low, highlighting
the need for future models to be more geographically inclusive. Lastly, we examine the feasibility of quantifying the
geographical representativeness of generated images without conducting user studies.1

1. Introduction
Over the last year, the quality of text-to-image generation systems has remarkably improved [32, 61, 35, 37]. The
generated images are more realistic and relevant to the textual input. This progress in text-to-image synthesis is partly
fueled by the sheer scale of models and datasets used to train
1 The generated images and human ratings for each country are
available at https://github.com/val-iisc/Geographical_
Representativeness.

Figure 1. An illustrative question from our study, where a participant (in this case, from India) is presented with an image of a
common noun (a wedding), generated from the Stable Diffusion
model. The participant is asked to rate the generated image on
how well it reflects the weddings in their surroundings.

them, and partly by the architectural advancements including Transformers [54] and Diffusion models [20]. Given
the impressive generation capabilities that these models display, such models have captured the interest of researchers
and general public alike. For instance, DALL·E 2 is being
used by over 1.5 million users to generate more than 2 million images per day for applications including art creation,
image editing, digital marketing and data augmentation [1].
Despite the broad appeal of text-to-image models, there
are looming concerns about how these models may exhibit
and amplify existing societal biases. These concerns stem

5136

