This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LivelySpeaker: Towards Semantic-Aware Co-Speech Gesture Generation
Yihao Zhi1, * Xiaodong Cun2, * Xuelin Chen2 Xi Shen3
Wen Guo4 Shaoli Huang2 Shenghua Gao1,5,6,†
1

ShanghaiTech University 2 Tencent AI Lab 3 Intellindust 4 INRIA
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
6
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Energy Efficient and Custom AI IC
5

https://github.com/zyhbili/LivelySpeaker

from left to right

SAG

text script

from left to right
with high both hands

SAG

text script + prompt

SAG

speech audio

RAG

RAG

Figure 1. We propose LivelySpeaker, a novel system that decouples the co-speech gesture generation into two stages, namely semantic-aware
generator (SAG) and rhythm-aware generator (RAG), respectively. Powered by the proposed two-stage framework, our method can generate
semantic-aware gestures (top three rows) other than purely audio-driven results (bottom row). We can also add additional prompts to the text
script to specify the gestures (second line). Last, when we integrate the proposed components altogether, our method can still retain the
semantic gestures and also appropriate rhythm for a lively speaker (third row).

Abstract
Gestures are non-verbal but important behaviors accompanying people’s speech. While previous methods are able to
generate speech rhythm-synchronized gestures, the semantic
context of the speech is generally lacking in the gesticulations. Although semantic gestures do not occur very regularly
in human speech, they are indeed the key for the audience
to understand the speech context in a more immersive environment. Hence, we introduce LivelySpeaker, a framework
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

that realizes semantics-aware co-speech gesture generation
and offers several control handles. In particular, our method
decouples the task into two stages: script-based gesture generation and audio-guided rhythm refinement. Specifically, the
script-based gesture generation leverages the pre-trained
CLIP text embeddings as the guidance for generating gestures that are highly semantically aligned with the script.
Then, we devise a simple but effective diffusion-based gesture generation backbone simply using pure MLPs, that is
conditioned on only audio signals and learns to gesticulate with realistic motions. We utilize such powerful prior to
rhyme the script-guided gestures with the audio signals, no-

20807

