This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Region-Aware Neural Radiance Fields for High-Fidelity
Talking Portrait Synthesis

1

Jiahe Li1 , Jiawei Zhang1 , Xiao Bai1 *, Jun Zhou2 , Lin Gu3,4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Software Development
Environment, Jiangxi Research Institute, Beihang University
2
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University
3
RIKEN AIP 4 The University of Tokyo

Abstract
This paper presents ER-NeRF, a novel conditional Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) based architecture for talking
portrait synthesis that can concurrently achieve fast convergence, real-time rendering, and state-of-the-art performance with small model size. Our idea is to explicitly exploit the unequal contribution of spatial regions to guide
talking portrait modeling. Specifically, to improve the accuracy of dynamic head reconstruction, a compact and expressive NeRF-based Tri-Plane Hash Representation is introduced by pruning empty spatial regions with three planar hash encoders. For speech audio, we propose a Region Attention Module to generate region-aware condition
feature via an attention mechanism. Different from existing methods that utilize an MLP-based encoder to learn
the cross-modal relation implicitly, the attention mechanism builds an explicit connection between audio features
and spatial regions to capture the priors of local motions.
Moreover, a direct and fast Adaptive Pose Encoding is introduced to optimize the head-torso separation problem by
mapping the complex transformation of the head pose into
spatial coordinates. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our method renders better high-fidelity and audio-lips
synchronized talking portrait videos, with realistic details
and high efficiency compared to previous methods. Code is
available at https://github.com/Fictionarry/
ER-NeRF.

1. Introduction
Audio-driven talking portrait synthesis is an important
and challenging issue with several applications such as digital humans, virtual avatars, film-making, and video conferencing. Over the past few years, many researchers have
tackled the task with deep generative models [10, 28, 36, 52,
* Corresponding author: Xiao Bai (baixiao@buaa.edu.cn).

Figure 1. Instead of learning the implicit audiovisual relation by
an MLP-based encoder, we explicitly attend to the cross-modal interaction between speech audio and spatial regions. Region awareness enables ER-NeRF to render more accurate facial motions.

51, 25, 45]. Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [26]
is introduced into audio-driven talking portrait synthesis. It
provides a new way to learn a direct mapping from the audio
feature to the corresponding visual appearance by a deep
multi-layer perceptron (MLP). Since then, several studies
condition NeRF on audio signals in an end-to-end way
[19, 24, 29, 42] or by some intermediate representations
[43, 7] to reconstruct a specific talking portrait. Though
these vanilla NeRF-based methods have shown great success in the synthesis quality, the inference speed is far from
meeting real-time requirements, which seriously limits their
practical applications.
Several recent works on efficient neural representation
have demonstrated tremendous speedups over vanilla NeRF
by replacing part of the MLP network with sparse feature
grids [33, 27, 6, 8, 15, 5, 16]. Instant-NGP [27] introduces
a hash-encoded voxel grid for static scene modeling, allowing fast speed and high-quality rendering with a compact model. RAD-NeRF [35] first applies this technique to
talking portrait synthesis and builds a real-time framework
with state-of-the-art performance. However, this approach
requires a complex MLP-based grid encoder to learn the
regional audio-motion mapping implicitly, which limits its
convergence and reconstruction quality.

7568

