This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Distill Global Representation for Sparse-View CT
Zilong Li1
Chenglong Ma2
Jie Chen1
Junping Zhang1
Hongming Shan2,3∗
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
2
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-inspired Intelligence and MOE Frontiers Center
for Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
3
Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-inspired Technology, Shanghai 200031, China
{zilongli21, clma22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {chenj19, jpzhang, hmshan}@fudan.edu.cn

Reconstruction Quality

Abstract
Sparse-view computed tomography (CT)—using a small
number of projections for tomographic reconstruction—
enables much lower radiation dose to patients and accelerated data acquisition. The reconstructed images, however, suffer from strong artifacts, greatly limiting their diagnostic value. Current trends for sparse-view CT turn
to the raw data for better information recovery. The resultant dual-domain methods, nonetheless, suffer from secondary artifacts, especially in ultra-sparse view scenarios, and their generalization to other scanners/protocols is
greatly limited. A crucial question arises: have the image
post-processing methods reached the limit? Our answer is
not yet. In this paper, we stick to image post-processing
methods due to great flexibility and propose global representation(GloRe) distillation framework for sparse-view
CT, termed GloReDi. First, we propose to learn GloRe
with Fourier convolution, so each element in GloRe has
an image-wide receptive field. Second, unlike methods that
only use the full-view images for supervision, we propose to
distill GloRe from intermediate-view reconstructed images
that are readily available but not explored in previous literature. The success of GloRe distillation is attributed to
two key components: representation directional distillation
to align the GloRe directions, and band-pass-specific contrastive distillation to gain clinically important details. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of the proposed GloReDi over the state-of-the-art methods, including
dual-domain ones. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/longzilicart/GloReDi.

1. Introduction
X-ray CT is one of the major modalities widely used
in clinical screening and diagnosis. Despite the benefits,

X-ray source
(view 1)

Nd (#detectors)

projection
Object
Sinogram

Nv = 720
back projection

Nv = 144

ିଵ

Reconstructed
CT Image

Nv = 72

Detectors

Nv = 18

Nv (#projection views)

(view 2)

Nv = 36

#Projection Views / Radiation Dose

Figure 1. Sparse-view CT only uses a few projection views for
tomographic reconstruction, thus providing fast and low-dose CT
scanning. However, the reconstruction results of the conventional
method suffer from severe global streak artifacts.

there have been growing concerns that X-ray radiation exposure could increase the risk of cancer induction [47]. Following the “As Low As Reasonably Achievable” principle
in the medical community [36], efforts have been made to
lower the radiation dose while maintaining imaging quality [20]. Sparse-view CT is one of the effective solutions
which reduces the radiation by sampling part of the projection data, a.k.a sinogram, for image reconstruction, as
shown in Fig. 1. However, analytical reconstruction algorithms such as filtered back projection (FBP) produce inferior image quality with globally severe streak artifacts, significantly compromising its diagnosis value. How to effectively reconstruct the sparse-view CT remains challenging
and, hence, is gaining increasing attention in the computer
vision and medical imaging communities.
Image-domain methods regard sparse-view CT reconstruction as an image post-processing task on the FBPreconstructed images and have achieved exciting performance on streak artifacts removal and structure preserva-

21196

