This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MHCN: A Hyperbolic Neural Network Model
for Multi-view Hierarchical Clustering

1

Fangfei Lin1,3 *, Bing Bai3†, Yiwen Guo6†, Hao Chen4 , Yazhou Ren1 , Zenglin Xu2,5†
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China 2 Peng Cheng Lab, China
3
Tencent Security Big Data Lab, China 4 University of California, Davis, USA
5
Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, China 6 Independent Researcher
{phoebe.lin1108,guoyiwen89,zenglin}@gmail.com,icebai@tencent.com
chen@ucdavis.edu,yazhou.ren@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

(a) MHC

Cosine
Distance
+

Multi-view hierarchical clustering (MCHC) plays a pivotal role in comprehending the structures within multi-view
data, which hinges on the skillful interaction between hierarchical feature learning and comprehensive representation
learning across multiple views. However, existing methods
often overlook this interplay due to the simple heuristic agglomerative strategies or the decoupling of multi-view representation learning and hierarchical modeling, thus leading to insufficient representation learning. To address these
issues, this paper proposes a novel Multi-view Hierarchical Clustering Network (MHCN) model by performing simultaneous multi-view learning and hierarchy modeling.
Specifically, to uncover efficient tree-like structures among
all views, we derive multiple hyperbolic autoencoders with
latent space mapped onto the Poincaré ball. Then, the corresponding hyperbolic embeddings are further regularized
to achieve the multi-view representation learning principles
for both view-common and view-private information, and
to ensure hyperbolic uniformity with a well-balanced hierarchy for better interpretability. Extensive experiments on
real-world and synthetic multi-view datasets have demonstrated that our method can achieve state-of-the-art hierarchical clustering performance, and empower the clustering
results with good interpretability.

1. Introduction
Clustering is one of the fundamental research topics in
data analysis [28, 44, 51]. With the advances in data acquisition, lots of real-world data could be presented by multiple views, e.g., different visual descriptors like GIST [48]
+ Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) [13] + other
* This work was done when Fangfei Lin was an intern at Tencent.
† Corresponding authors.

Cosine
Distance

Data object from view 1

1
×
2
Similarity Matrix
Integration

View 1
Stage1:
Multi-view
Representation
Learning
Feature Alignment

(b) CMHHC
Stage2:
Hyperbolic
Hierarchical
Clustering

Data object from view 2
Aligned common representation
Class
Sub-class
Sub-sub-class

Less similar
Common
(c) Our MHCN

from view 1

More similar

View 2

from view 2

Hierarchy
Alignment

Multi-view
Hierarchical Clustering Tree

Figure 1: Comparison between prior MVHC methods,
i.e., MHC and CMHHC, versus our proposed MHCN. (a)
MHC calculates the average cosine distance matrix of all
views and agglomerates the nearest neighbors according
to the simply-aligned similarity matrix. (b) CMHHC performs multi-view alignment and similarity learning in the
Euclidean space, and hierarchical clustering in hyperbolic
space, separately. (c) Our MHCN, a one-stage pipeline,
directly aligns the latent hierarchies on different Poincaré
balls, leading to more effective MVHC trees.

deep features [53] for an image. Multiple views contain
both congruent and incongruent information, which can be
leveraged to explore potential consistency and complementarity across views and provide more comprehensive latent representations to facilitate downstream tasks, especially for unsupervised learning. This leads to the prevalence of multi-view clustering including multi-view partitional clustering [29, 35, 39, 49, 59] and multi-view hierarchical clustering [37, 68]. Aiming for high interpretability,
multi-view hierarchical clustering is particularly appealing
in the analysis of multi-view data at various levels of gran-

16525

