This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Q-Diffusion: Quantizing Diffusion Models
Xiuyu Li1
1

Yijiang Liu2 Long Lian1 Huanrui Yang1 Zhen Dong1
Daniel Kang3 Shanghang Zhang4 Kurt Keutzer1

UC Berkeley 2 Nanjing University 3 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 4 Peking University

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved great success in image
synthesis through iterative noise estimation using deep neural networks. However, the slow inference, high memory
consumption, and computation intensity of the noise estimation model hinder the efficient adoption of diffusion models.
Although post-training quantization (PTQ) is considered a
go-to compression method for other tasks, it does not work
out-of-the-box on diffusion models. We propose a novel
PTQ method specifically tailored towards the unique multitimestep pipeline and model architecture of the diffusion
models, which compresses the noise estimation network to
accelerate the generation process. We identify the key difficulty of diffusion model quantization as the changing output
distributions of noise estimation networks over multiple time
steps and the bimodal activation distribution of the shortcut
layers within the noise estimation network. We tackle these
challenges with timestep-aware calibration and split shortcut quantization in this work. Experimental results show
that our proposed method is able to quantize full-precision
unconditional diffusion models into 4-bit while maintaining
comparable performance (small FID change of at most 2.34
compared to >100 for traditional PTQ) in a training-free
manner. Our approach can also be applied to text-guided
image generation, where we can run stable diffusion in 4-bit
weights with high generation quality for the first time.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have shown great success in generating images with both high diversity and high fidelity
[43, 13, 44, 42, 6, 33, 36, 34]. Recent work [16, 15]
has demonstrated superior performance than state-of-theart GAN models, which suffer from unstable training. As a
class of flexible generative models, diffusion models demonstrate their power in various applications such as image
super-resolution [37, 18], inpainting [44], shape generation
[3], graph generation [31], image-to-image translation [40],
and molecular conformation generation [47].
However, the generation process for diffusion models can
be slow due to the need for an iterative noise estimation of 50

to 1,000 time steps [13, 42] using complex neural networks.
While previous state-of-the-art approaches (e.g., GANs) are
able to generate multiple images in under 1 second, it normally takes several seconds for a diffusion model to sample
a single image. Consequently, speeding up the image generation process becomes an important step toward broadening
the applications of diffusion models. Previous work has
been solving this problem by finding shorter, more effective
sampling trajectories [42, 30, 39, 22, 1, 24], which reduces
the number of steps in the denoising process. However, they
have largely ignored another important factor: the noise estimation model used in each iteration itself is compute- and
memory-intensive. This is an orthogonal factor to the repetitive sampling, which not only slows down the inference
speed of diffusion models, but also poses crucial challenges
in terms of high memory footprints.
This work explores the quantization [50, 8, 49, 7, 29] of
the noise estimation model used in the diffusion model to
accelerate the denoising of all time steps. Specifically, we
propose exploring post-training quantization (PTQ) on the
diffusion model. PTQ has already been well studied in other
learning domains like classification and object detection [4,
2, 20, 11, 23], and has been considered a go-to compression
method given its minimal requirement for training data and
the straightforward deployment on real hardware devices.
However, the iterative computation process of the diffusion
model and the model architecture of the noise estimation
network brings unique challenges to the PTQ of diffusion
models. PTQ4DM [41] presents an inaugural application
of PTQ to compress diffusion models down to 8-bit, but it
primarily focuses on smaller datasets and lower resolutions.
Our work, evolving concurrently with [41], offers a comprehensive analysis of the novel challenges of performing
PTQ on diffusion models. Specifically, as visualized in Figure 1(a), we discover that the output distribution of the noise
estimation network at each time step can be largely different,
and naively applying previous PTQ calibration methods with
an arbitrary time step leads to poor performance. Furthermore, as illustrated in Figure 1(b), the iterative inference of
the noise estimation network leads to an accumulation of
quantization error, which poses higher demands on design-

17535

