This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Controllable Person Image Synthesis with Pose-Constrained Latent Diffusion
Xiao Han1,2 Xiatian Zhu1,4 Jiankang Deng3 Yi-Zhe Song1,2 Tao Xiang1,2
1
CVSSP, University of Surrey 2 iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on AI
3
4
Imperial College London
Surrey Institute for People-Centred AI
{xiao.han, xiatian.zhu, y.song, t.xiang}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract

1. Introduction
The task of Controllable Person Image Synthesis (CPIS)
is to modify a source image according to the user-specified
changes in body pose or appearance [2, 23, 30]. Underpinning a wide variety of applications in virtual and augmented
reality, gaming, and fashion [11,12], there has been increasing attention in the computer vision community. In particular, modeling the large pose deformations in the 2D appearance caused by 3D pose changes is one of the biggest
changes in CPIS [18]. This is further compounded by the
inevitable complex self-occlusion of the human body, causing further uncertainties in predicting unobserved appearance for the target pose. Consequently, having the generative CPIS model understand the whole image contextually
is indispensable in order to achieve plausible synthesis.
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [9, 26] have
been the major architecture used in CPIS [25, 30, 31, 35].

Target Image

Source Image

Source Pose

Sparse Attn.

Sparse Attn.

Latent Noise

Sparse Attn.

Target Pose

Controllable person image synthesis aims at rendering a
source image based on user-specified changes in body pose
or appearance. Prior art approaches leverage pixel-level
denoising diffusion models conditioned on the coarse skeleton via cross-attention. This leads to two limitations: low
efficiency and inaccurate condition information. To address
both issues, a novel Pose-Constrained Latent Diffusion
model (PoCoLD) is introduced. Rather than using the skeleton as a sparse pose representation, we exploit DensePose
which offers much richer body structure information. To effectively capitalize DensePose at a low cost, we propose an
efficient pose-constrained attention module that is capable
of modeling the complex interplay between appearance and
pose. Extensive experiments show that our PoCoLD outperforms the state-of-the-art competitors in image synthesis fidelity. Critically, it runs 2× faster and consumes 3.6×
smaller memory than the latest diffusion-model-based alternative during inference. Our code and models are available
at https://github.com/BrandonHanx/PoCoLD.

j.deng16@imperial.ac.uk

Training &
Inference
Training
Only
Pose Cons.

Pose Cons.

Pose Cons.

Constraint
Operation

Figure 1. Our PoCoLD is a latent diffusion model that can handle
person image synthesis with pose or appearance control. It is conditioned on the target DensePose map and the appearance of the
source image. An efficient pose-constrained attention is proposed
to explicitly regularize the denoising learning process.

However, these existing models are challenged by the need
of preserving a consistent body structure and garment texture in a single forward pass. Recently, Diffusion Models (DM) [14, 36] have emerged as a favorable alternative
to GAN, additionally with more stable optimization and
simpler loss function design. Inspired by the massive advance of image generation and editing [6, 29, 32, 33], diffusion models have been recently exploited for CPIS with
the best-ever results achieved [2]. However, this diffusionbased method comes with a couple of drawbacks: (1) Mismatch between the sparse pose condition (i.e., body skeleton) and the source image with dense details: When modeling their interaction, such information intensity mismatch
might lead to ill association, finally hurting the final synthesis. (2) Slow inference as the denoising diffusion takes
place in the high-resolution pixel space iteratively. For instance, prior diffusion-based art [2] needs approximately 10
seconds for one 256 × 176 image generation on a machine
with one V100 GPU.
To address the aforementioned limitations, a novel PoseConstrained Latent Diffusion (PoCoLD) method is pro-

22768

