This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic Attention Flow Fields for Monocular Dynamic Scene Decomposition
Yiqing Liang

Eliot Laidlaw

Alexander Meyerowitz
Brown University

Srinath Sridhar

James Tompkin

Novel View

Abstract
( , c, f, s, a)

From video, we reconstruct a neural volume that captures time-varying color, density, scene flow, semantics, and
attention information. The semantics and attention let us
identify salient foreground objects separately from the background across spacetime. To mitigate low resolution semantic and attention features, we compute pyramids that trade
detail with whole-image context. After optimization, we perform a saliency-aware clustering to decompose the scene. To
evaluate real-world scenes, we annotate object masks in the
NVIDIA Dynamic Scene and DyCheck datasets. We demonstrate that this method can decompose dynamic scenes in an
unsupervised way with competitive performance to a supervised method, and that it improves foreground/background
segmentation over recent static/dynamic split methods.
Project webpage: https://visual.cs.brown.edu/saff

1. Introduction
Given a casually-captured monocular RGB video of a
dynamic scene, decomposing it into foreground objects and
background is an important task in computer vision, with
downstream applications in segmentation and video editing.
An ideal method would also reconstruct the geometry and
appearance over time including frame correspondences.
Previous methods have made great progress but there
are many limitations. Some works assume that there is no
object motion in the scene [32, 46, 31, 16, 4], take input
from multi-view cameras [16, 46], or do not explicitly
reconstruct the underlying 3D structure of the scene [4, 7].
For objects, some works rely on masks or user input to
aid segmentation [42, 15, 7], or use task-specific training
datasets [7]. Sometimes, works assume the number of
foreground objects [4, 20]. Given the challenges, many
works train and test on synthetic data [14, 38].
We present Semantic Attention Flow Fields (SAFF): A
method to overcome these limitations by integrating low-level
reconstruction cues with high-level pretrained information—
both bottom-up and top-down—into a neural volume. With
this, we demonstrate that embedded semantic and saliency
(attention) information is useful for unsupervised dynamic
scene decomposition. SAFF builds upon neural scene flow
fields [18], an approach that reconstructs appearance, geometry, and motion. This uses frame interpolation rather than
explicit canonicalization [35] or a latent hyperspace [26],

Input Video

SAFF Reconstruction

Fix View,
Vary Time

Time = 0
Extracted 3D samples (left to right):
Density , Saliency a, Semantics s, Color c

Novel view renderings with effects (depth of field, color adjustment)

Figure 1: We decompose a dynamic 3D scene from monocular
input into time-varying color, density, scene flow, semantics,
and attention information. This could be used to provide
precise editing of objects or effects focused around objects.
which lets it more easily apply to casual videos. For optimization, we supervise two network heads with pretrained
DINO-ViT [6] semantic features and attention. Naively supervising high-resolution SAFF with low-resolution DINO-ViT
output reduces reconstruction quality. To mitigate the mismatch, we build a semantic attention pyramid that trades detail
with whole-image context. Having optimized a SAFF representation for a dynamic scene, we perform a saliency-aware
clustering both in 3D and on rendered feature images to describe objects and their background. Given the volume reconstruction, the clustering generalizes to novel spacetime views.
To evaluate SAFF’s dynamic scene decomposition
capacity, we expand the NVIDIA Dynamic Scene [45]
and DyCheck [10] datasets by manually annotating object
masks across input and hold-out views. We demonstrate
that SAFF outperforms 2D DINO-ViT baselines and is
comparable to a state-of-the-art video segmentation method
ProposeReduce[19] on our data. Existing monocular video
dynamic volume reconstruction methods typically separate
static and dynamic parts, but these often do not represent
meaningful foreground. We show improved foreground
segmentation over NSFF and the current D2 NeRF [40]
method for downstream tasks like editing.
1
21797

