This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Disentangle then Parse:
Night-time Semantic Segmentation with Illumination Disentanglement
Zhixiang Wei1 * Lin Chen1,2∗ Tao Tu1 Pengyang Ling1 Huaian Chen1† Yi Jin1†
1

University of Science and Technology of China

2

Shanghai AI Laboratory

{zhixiangwei,chlin,tutao9036,lpyang27,anchen}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jinyi08@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Most existing semantic segmentation methods [27, 12,
45, 55, 19, 53, 13, 40, 49, 37, 7] are developed for daytime scenes, which have sufficient and uniform lighting.
* indicates equal contributions.
† Corresponding authors.

(a) Directly Parse
Light-specific

Disentangle

Most prior semantic segmentation methods have been
developed for day-time scenes, while typically underperforming in night-time scenes due to insufficient and complicated lighting conditions. In this work, we tackle this
challenge by proposing a novel night-time semantic segmentation paradigm, i.e., disentangle then parse (DTP).
DTP explicitly disentangles night-time images into lightinvariant reflectance and light-specific illumination components and then recognizes semantics based on their adaptive
fusion. Concretely, the proposed DTP comprises two key
components: 1) Instead of processing lighting-entangled
features as in prior works, our Semantic-Oriented Disentanglement (SOD) framework enables the extraction of reflectance component without being impeded by lighting, allowing the network to consistently recognize the semantics under cover of varying and complicated lighting conditions. 2) Based on the observation that the illumination
component can serve as a cue for some semantically confused regions, we further introduce an Illumination-Aware
Parser (IAParser) to explicitly learn the correlation between semantics and lighting, and aggregate the illumination features to yield more precise predictions. Extensive experiments on the night-time segmentation task with
various settings demonstrate that DTP significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, with negligible additional parameters, DTP can be directly used to benefit existing day-time methods for night-time segmentation.
Code and dataset are available at https://github.
com/w1oves/DTP.git.

Light-invariant

(b) Disentangle then Parse

(c) t-SNE visualization

Figure 1: Illustration of the main idea. (a) In the night-time
scenes, the entanglement of content and complicated lighting lead to confused semantics. (b) The proposed DTP first
disentangles the image and then parses based on the lightinvariant and light-specific components. The blue map in
the top left corner is a heatmap indicating the lighting intensity. (c) Feature space of road (green) and sidewalk (blue)
on the validation set visualized by t-SNE [44] demonstrates
that the light-invariant component leads to more discriminative representations.

However, in practical application, visual systems are often
required to work under insufficient and complicated lighting conditions nearly half the time (i.e., working under
the night-time condition), where existing day-time methods
may encounter performance drops due to the discrepancy
in lighting. Therefore, developing a night-time segmentation method, which accounts for the unique characteristics
of night-time scenes, is crucial in training a network with
stable performance for full-time segmentation.
To achieve similar performance for night-time scenes as
for day-time scenes, previous methods [42, 36, 16, 24, 8]
have adopted unsupervised domain adaptation techniques to
transfer knowledge from labeled day-time domain to unlabeled night-time domain. However, this approach is challenging due to the lack of corresponding labels at night,
resulting in limited improvement of segmentation performance. To address this issue, Tan et al. recently propose

21593

