This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scanning Only Once: An End-to-end Framework for Fast
Temporal Grounding in Long Videos
Yulin Pan1 Xiangteng He2,4∗ Biao Gong1 Yiliang Lv1
Yujun Shen3 Yuxin Peng2,4 Deli Zhao1 *
1

3

Alibaba Group 2 Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
Ant Group 4 National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University

Abstract
Video temporal grounding aims to pinpoint a video segment that matches the query description. Despite the recent
advance in short-form videos (e.g., in minutes), temporal
grounding in long videos (e.g., in hours) is still at its early
stage. To address this challenge, a common practice is to
employ a sliding window, yet can be inefficient and inflexible due to the limited number of frames within the window.
In this work, we propose an end-to-end framework for
fast temporal grounding, which is able to model an hourslong video with one-time network execution. Our pipeline
is formulated in a coarse-to-fine manner, where we first
extract context knowledge from non-overlapped video clips
(i.e., anchors), and then supplement the anchors that highly
response to the query with detailed content knowledge.
Besides the remarkably high pipeline efficiency, another
advantage of our approach is the capability of capturing
long-range temporal correlation, thanks to modeling the
entire video as a whole, and hence facilitates more accurate
grounding. Experimental results suggest that, on the longform video datasets MAD and Ego4d, our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-arts, and achieves 14.6× /
102.8× higher efficiency respectively. Project can be found
at https://github.com/afcedf/SOONet.git.

1. Introduction
Video temporal grounding [5, 6, 13, 18, 19, 29, 31, 32],
which aims to localize a specific moment in the video
corresponding to a natural language description, has found
its applications in many real-world scenarios, such as video
retrieval [11, 22], video highlight detection [23, 24], and
video question answering [9, 26].
Despite the rapid advance in recent years, existing
methods for temporal grounding usually target short-form
* Corresponding authors.

Query: Mum hangs up the laundry
outside the farmhouse.

Pre-ranking

Re-ranking Regression

Figure 1. Pipeline comparison between sliding window-based
methods (top) [19, 29, 31, 32] and our SOONet (bottom). It
is noteworthy that the sliding window pipeline requires repeated
inference on overlapped clips and the final result aggregation,
while ours can deliver the result with one-time network execution.
Detailed discussion can be found in Sec. 4.5.

videos (e.g., in minutes) and characterize the input video
with a small number of frames (e.g., 128) [19, 27, 29, 30,
31, 32]. When it comes to the case of long-form video
temporal grounding (LVTG) [6, 18], however, temporally
downsampling a video (e.g., in hours) to so few frames
could cause severe information loss and further result in
drastic performance degradation [6].
A straightforward solution is to reorganize a long video
to a sequence of short videos using a sliding window and
perform temporal grounding within each window [6, 8, 18].
However, such a solution as shown in the top half of
Fig. 1 has three main drawbacks. (1) Inference inefficiency:
The overlap between adjacent windows brings redundant
computations. Besides, the large amounts of highly
overlapped predictions cause post-processing (e.g., nonmaximum suppression) time-consuming. It is noteworthy
by saying efficiency, we mean pipeline efficiency instead of

13767

