This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-similarity Driven Scale-invariant Learning for
Weakly Supervised Person Search
Benzhi Wang1,2 *, Yang Yang1 *, Jinlin Wu1,3 , Guo-jun Qi4 , Zhen Lei1,2,3†
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
OPPO Research
wangbenzhi2021@ia.ac.cn, {yang.yang, jinlin.wu, zlei}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, guojunq@gmail.com

Abstract
Weakly supervised person search aims to jointly detect and match persons with only bounding box annotations. Existing approaches typically focus on improving
the features by exploring the relations of persons. However, scale variation problem is a more severe obstacle
and under-studied that a person often owns images with
different scales (resolutions). For one thing, small-scale
images contain less information of a person, thus affecting the accuracy of the generated pseudo labels. For another, different similarities between cross-scale images of
a person increase the difficulty of matching. In this paper, we address it by proposing a novel one-step framework, named Self-similarity driven Scale-invariant Learning (SSL). Scale invariance can be explored based on the
self-similarity prior that it shows the same statistical properties of an image at different scales. To this end, we introduce a Multi-scale Exemplar Branch to guide the network
in concentrating on the foreground and learning scaleinvariant features by hard exemplars mining. To enhance
the discriminative power of the learned features, we further introduce a dynamic pseudo label prediction that progressively seeks true labels for training. Experimental results on two standard benchmarks, i.e., PRW and CUHKSYSU datasets, demonstrate that the proposed method can
solve scale variation problem effectively and perform favorably against state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/Wangbenzhi/SSL.git.

* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. The scale variation of the same person on PRW and
CUHK-SYSU datasets.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the remarkable success of
person search which is to match persons existed in realworld scene images. It is often taken as a joint task consisting of person detection [26, 29, 46] and re-identification
(re-id) [32, 43, 36]. To achieve high performance, existing
methods are commonly trained in a fully supervised setting
[4, 1, 41, 45, 13, 20, 23, 5] where the bounding boxes and
identity labels are required. However, it is time-consuming
and labor-intensive to annotate both of them in a large-scale
dataset, which encourages some researchers to embark on
reducing the supervision.
Considering that it is much easier to annotate bounding boxes than person identities, we dedicate this paper to
weakly supervised person search which only needs bounding box annotations. Intuitively, we can address it with a supervised detection model and an unsupervised re-id model
[37, 44, 11, 12, 6] independently. To be specific, we first
train a detector to crop person images and then apply an unsupervised re-id model for matching, which is regarded as a
two-step person search model. Nevertheless, one of the major drawbacks of such two-step methods is low efficiency,

1813

