This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Foreground and Text-lines Aware Document Image Rectification
Heng Li1
1

Xiangping Wu1, 3 *

Qingcai Chen1, 2 *

Qianjin Xiang1

Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, China, 2 PengCheng Laboratory, Shenzhen China
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom Kowloon, Hong Kong

hengli.lh@outlook.com, wxpleduole@gmail.com, qingcai.chen@hit.edu.cn, randy19991009@outlook.com

Abstract
This paper aims at the distorted document image rectification problem, the objective to eliminate the geometric
distortion in the document images and realize document
intelligence. Improving the readability of distorted documents is crucial to effectively extract information from deformed images. According to our observations, the foreground and text-line of the original warped image can represent the deformation tendency. However, previous distorted image rectification methods pay little attention to
the readability of the warped paper. In this paper, we focus on the foreground and text-line regions of distorted
paper and proposes a global and local fusion method to
improve the rectification effect of distorted images and
enhance the readability of document images. We introduce cross attention to capture the features of the foreground and text-lines in the warped document and effectively fuse them. The proposed method is evaluated quantitatively and qualitatively on the public DocUNet benchmark and DIR300 Dataset, which achieve state-of-the-art
performances. Experimental analysis shows the proposed
method can well perform overall geometric rectification of
distorted images and effectively improve document readability (using the metrics of Character Error Rate and Edit
Distance). The code is available at https://github.
com/xiaomore/Document-Image-Dewarping.

1. Introduction
In our daily life, there are various documents, such as papers, posters, receipts and so on. These documents contain
a wealth of information. At present, document intelligence
can automatically extract the information in the document,
and then obtain structured data (text content, key field extraction, table structure, document layout analysis), which
greatly facilitates people’s lives. However, with the popu* Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Compared with the text results using Tesseract [32] as
OCR engine. Row 1: distorted images. Row 2: rectified by our
method. We use color to highlight the detected text boxes.

larization of mobile electronic devices, it is more and more
convenient for people to take pictures with smart phones or
portable cameras to capture electronic documents. When
taking pictures, due to the different positions, illumination
conditions of these devices, the angle of paper placement,
deformation and other problems, the images taken are distorted or deformed to varying degrees, and it is difficult to
extract useful information from these distorted pictures, as
shown in Figure 1. Even wrong information is extracted,
which brings great challenges to obtaining key information
of documents and realizing document intelligence.
As early as many years ago, the problem of document
image distortion rectification has been paid attention to. In
the traditional rectification method before deep learning was
widely used, several previous methods [3, 36, 17] according to the deformation characteristics of the image, relying
on multi-view, get the best boundary through the regression
method, and use the boundary segmentation method to dewarped the segmentation graphics. Tian and Narasimhan

19574

