This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Effectiveness of Spectral Discriminators for
Perceptual Quality Improvement
Xin Luo Yunan Zhu Shunxin Xu Dong Liu
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
{xinluo, zhuyn, sxu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn
https://github.com/Luciennnnnnn/DualFormer

109

Abstract

DIV2K
Real-ESRNet

Several recent studies advocate the use of spectral discriminators, which evaluate the Fourier spectra of images
for generative modeling. However, the effectiveness of the
spectral discriminators is not well interpreted yet. We tackle
this issue by examining the spectral discriminators in the
context of perceptual image super-resolution (i.e., GANbased SR), as SR image quality is susceptible to spectral
changes. Our analyses reveal that the spectral discriminator indeed performs better than the ordinary (a.k.a. spatial) discriminator in identifying the differences in the highfrequency range; however, the spatial discriminator holds
an advantage in the low-frequency range. Thus, we suggest
that the spectral and spatial discriminators shall be used simultaneously. Moreover, we improve the spectral discriminators by first calculating the patch-wise Fourier spectrum
and then aggregating the spectra by Transformer. We verify
the effectiveness of the proposed method twofold. On the
one hand, thanks to the additional spectral discriminator,
our obtained SR images have their spectra better aligned to
those of the real images, which leads to a better PD tradeoff. On the other hand, our ensembled discriminator predicts the perceptual quality more accurately, as evidenced
in the no-reference image quality assessment task.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [19] have
gained widespread adoption in low-level vision tasks, e.g.,
image super-resolution (SR) [31], which improves the perceptual quality of reconstructed images considerably. From
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grants 62022075 and 62036005, and by the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities under Grant WK3490000006. This
work was also supported by the advanced computing resources provided
by the Supercomputing Center of USTC. (Corresponding author: Dong
Liu.)

Spectral density

107

Real-ESRGAN

105

Low

Middle

High

103
101

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Normalized Frequency

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

(a) Spectra Statistics

0.77

0.92

0.16

(b) Ground Truth

(c) Low-Quality

(d) Super-Resolved

Figure 1: Denote the reduced spectrum S̃ (r) as the azimuthal average over the spectrum in normalized polar coordinates r ∈ [0, 1].
(a) shows spectra statistics E[S̃ (r)] of Real-ESRNet [56] and
Real-ESRGAN [56] on the DIV2K [1] dataset. It illustrates that
Real-ESRGAN improves perceptual quality by producing more
high-frequency information. (b), (c) and (d) present the average
scores of Real-ESRGAN’s discriminator w.r.t. three types of images. Given second-order degradation model [56] to generate lowresolution input, (c) are bicubic upsampled from low-resolution
input, and (d) are generated by the generator, which takes lowresolution images as input. The extremely high score on (c)
indicates that spatial discriminators may excessively favor highfrequency information, even if it is noise or artifacts.

the perspective of PD tradeoff [2], GANs improve perceptual quality by measuring the difference between image distributions (perception) rather than signal differences (distortion). In addition, Zhu et al. [73] found that trained discriminators can perform no-reference image quality assessment (NR-IQA). Therefore, the key to improving the perceptual quality in GAN-based SR is to enhance the discriminator’s ability to measure the differences in image distribu-

13243

