This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Emotional Adaptation for Audio-Driven Talking-Head Generation
Yuan Gan1,2 ,

Zongxin Yang1,2 , Xihang Yue1,2 , Lingyun Sun2 , Yi Yang1,2 *
1
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
Emotional Talking-head

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been increasing attention on synthesizing realistic talking heads due to their wide-ranging
applications in industry, such as digital human animation [16, 18, 47], visual dubbing [36], and video content
creation [43]. Audio-driven talking-head generation aims
to produce realistic talking-head videos synchronized with
speech. However, unlike speech, humans convey intentions
through emotional expressions. Therefore, generating emotional talking heads is important to improve the fidelity of
talking heads for real-world applications. To address this
open problem, various forms of knowledge (such as human
head models, emotions, audio, and vision) must be consid* Corresponding author.

Emotional Talking-head

Updated

…

…

Decoder

Decoder

Encoder

A2ET

EDN

...

Audio-driven talking-head synthesis is a popular research topic for virtual human-related applications. However, the inflexibility and inefficiency of existing methods,
which necessitate expensive end-to-end training to transfer
emotions from guidance videos to talking-head predictions,
are significant limitations. In this work, we propose the
Emotional Adaptation for Audio-driven Talking-head (EAT)
method, which transforms emotion-agnostic talking-head
models into emotion-controllable ones in a cost-effective
and efficient manner through parameter-efficient adaptations. Our approach utilizes a pretrained emotion-agnostic
talking-head transformer and introduces three lightweight
adaptations (the Deep Emotional Prompts, Emotional Deformation Network, and Emotional Adaptation Module)
from different perspectives to enable precise and realistic
emotion controls. Our experiments demonstrate that our
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on widelyused benchmarks, including LRW and MEAD. Additionally, our parameter-efficient adaptations exhibit remarkable
generalization ability, even in scenarios where emotional
training videos are scarce or nonexistent. Project website:
https://yuangan.github.io/eat/

Frozen

or
Text+CLIP
Source
Image

Source
Audio

Emotional
Video

(a) Previous work

Source
Image

Source
Audio

Learnable
Guidance

(b) EAT (Ours)

Figure 1. Efficient emotional talking-head generation. (a)
Previous work trains or finetunes the whole network with augmented emotional driving videos. (b) Our EAT transforms
emotion-agnostic talking-head models into emotion-controllable
ones through flexible guidance, including emotional prompts or
text-guided CLIP [38] supervision, by lightweight adaptations.

ered in constructing multi-knowledge representations [49].
Previous one-shot talking-head generation methods [57,
36, 47] focus on achieving audio-visual synchronization for
emotion-agnostic talking-heads, which is a special case of
realistic talking-heads. More recent works [19, 18, 28] pay
attention to generating emotion-aware talking-heads. GCAVT [28] and EAMM [18] are two methods that generate
emotional videos using driven emotional videos and poseguiding videos. GC-AVT [28] achieves explicit control over
the expression, speech content, and pose of talking heads
through granular pre-processing design. EAMM [18] synthesizes one-shot emotional talking-heads by adding augmented emotional source videos. Since the driven videos
can introduce semantic ambiguity to mouth shapes, GCAVT replaces the mouth part with the neighbor frame, while
EAMM ignores the mouth part of driven emotional videos
by using data augmentation. Additionally, these methods
require training or finetuning the entire network at high
costs for emotional talking-heads generation.

22634

