This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Class-Aware Patch Embedding Adaptation for Few-Shot Image Classification
Fusheng Hao1,2
1

Fengxiang He3

Liu Liu4

Fuxiang Wu1,2

Dacheng Tao4

Jun Cheng1,2 *

Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory of Human-Machine Intelligence-Synergy Systems,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
3
4

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China

AIAI, School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom

School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia

Abstract
“A picture is worth a thousand words”, significantly beyond mere a categorization. Accompanied by that, many
patches of the image could have completely irrelevant
meanings with the categorization if they were independently observed. This could significantly reduce the efficiency of a large family of few-shot learning algorithms,
which have limited data and highly rely on the comparison of image patches. To address this issue, we propose a
Class-aware Patch Embedding Adaptation (CPEA) method
to learn “class-aware embeddings” of the image patches.
The key idea of CPEA is to integrate patch embeddings with
class-aware embeddings to make them class-relevant. Furthermore, we define a dense score matrix between classrelevant patch embeddings across images, based on which
the degree of similarity between paired images is quantified.
Visualization results show that CPEA concentrates patch
embeddings by class, thus making them class-relevant.
Extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets, miniImageNet, tieredImageNet, CIFAR-FS, and FC-100, indicate that our CPEA significantly outperforms the existing
state-of-the-art methods. The source code is available at
https://github.com/FushengHao/CPEA.

1. Introduction
Real-world images are usually composed of many different entities, e.g., two oxen grazing surrounded by a barn,
a fence and trees as shown in Figure 1. Assigning a single annotation to each image that corresponds to only one
type of entity is a common practice to construct computer
vision datasets, e.g., CIFAR [33] and ImageNet [54]. Such
an annotation can only describe part of an image’ contents.
This is acceptable in many classification scenarios, because
the interference caused by other image contents can be mit* Corresponding author (email: jun.cheng@siat.ac.cn).

Figure 1. Illustration of multiple entities from different classes simultaneously existing in a real-world image. Despite being annotated as “ox”, the image contains entities of other classes, such as
“fence”, “barn”, “tree”, etc. The core idea of CPEA is to learn
“class-aware embeddings” of the image patches.

igated by the use of a large number of labeled images.
Specifically, since each class contains a sufficient number
of labeled images that vary greatly within the class and the
corresponding entities always appear in these images, deep
models trained on such data tend to pay attention to the frequently occurring class-relevant entities (e.g., “ox” in Figure 1) while ignoring other irrelevant ones, especially those
that frequently appear across classes [26].
Big challenges, however, arise in the context of few-shot
image classification, in which approaches are expected to
correctly identify new classes that are disjoint with the training classes during the test phase, given only a few (e.g., one
or five) labeled images for each of these new classes. The
challenges are as follows: 1) Due to the scarcity of labeled
images of new classes and the extremely limited number
of class-relevant entities, it is very difficult for a model to
identify which entity determines the class of an image. 2)
Entities contained in the training images but not covered by
the training classes may happen to be the ones expected to
be covered by the new classes at test time, which would introduce ambiguity. 3) Specific patterns learned during the
training phase may be overemphasized, but they may not

18905

