This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Supervised Referring Image Segmentation with Intra-Chunk and
Inter-Chunk Consistency
Jungbeom Lee1 Sungjin Lee1 Jinseok Nam1 Seunghak Yu2 Jaeyoung Do1 Tara Taghavi1
1
2
Amazon
NAVER Search US
jbeom.lee93@gmail.com, {sungjinl, jinseo}@amazon.com, seunghak.yu@navercorp.com,
{domjae, taghavit}@amazon.com

1. Introduction
Referring image segmentation aims to obtain a pixel-level
segmentation mask of the object in an image referred by a
natural language expression. It has a wide range of practical
applications in the real world such as human-robot interaction [38, 46] and visual navigation [37]. To learn referring
image segmentation, a neural network should not only comprehend the semantics of image and text respectively, but
also be able to capture the semantic alignment between the
two modalities. A general approach to achieving this objective is to leverage the dataset with fully supervised labels.
It necessitates numerous pairs of images and texts, together
with a pixel-level segmentation mask of the referred object.

Grad-CAM for
Grad-CAM for (b) Final map for
‘gray shirt woman’ ‘gray shirt woman’ ‘gray shirt woman’ ‘gray shirt woman’

Baseline

Referring image segmentation aims to localize the object in an image referred by a natural language expression.
Most previous studies learn referring image segmentation
with a large-scale dataset containing segmentation labels,
but they are costly. We present a weakly supervised learning method for referring image segmentation that only uses
readily available image-text pairs. We first train a visuallinguistic model for image-text matching and extract a visual
saliency map through Grad-CAM to identify the image regions corresponding to each word. However, we found two
major problems with Grad-CAM. First, it lacks consideration of critical semantic relationships between words. We
tackle this problem by modeling the relationship between
words through intra-chunk and inter-chunk consistency. Second, Grad-CAM identifies only small regions of the referred
object, leading to low recall. Therefore, we refine the localization maps with self-attention in Transformer and unsupervised object shape prior. On three popular benchmarks
(RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, G-Ref), our method significantly
outperforms recent comparable techniques. We also show
that our method is applicable to various levels of supervision
and obtains better performance than recent methods.

(a) Grad-CAM for

Ours

Abstract

(c)

Inter-chunk

A man wearing white shirt
Intra-chunk

Figure 1: (a) Examples of Grad-CAMs of each word corresponding to red word given “gray shirt woman”. (b) Final
resulting maps of baseline and ours for “gray shirt woman”.
(c) Illustration of intra-chunk and inter-chunk relationship.
By using these explicit connections between image and text,
recent studies [19, 47, 50] have successfully performed referring image segmentation.
However, constructing a dataset equipped with pixel-level
segmentation labels is extremely laborious and expensive.
For instance, annotating a segmentation label for a single image featuring a complex scene (e.g., CityScapes [8]) requires
more than 90 minutes. As such, our objective is to mitigate
this quandary with weakly supervised learning, which trains
a neural network by using only readily available image-text
pairs, without expensive segmentation labels.
There have been some weakly supervised approaches [10,
35, 43] to localize the object referred by the given text, in
the form of a bounding box instead of a segmentation mask.
Nevertheless, these approaches are hindered by two key
drawbacks: 1) they do not provide pixel-level localization of
the referred object, and 2) most of them heavily depend on
pre-trained object detector, which actually requires explicit
object localization labels (i.e., box [21]). To the best of our
knowledge, there is only one recent work [42] that learns
referring image segmentation using only image-text pairs,

21870

