This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LERF: Language Embedded Radiance Fields

Justin Kerr*, Chung Min Kim*, Ken Goldberg, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Matthew Tancik
UC Berkeley

Figure 1: Language Embedded Radiance Fields (LERF). LERF grounds CLIP representations in a dense, multi-scale 3D field. A
LERF can be reconstructed from a hand-held phone capture within 45 minutes, then can render dense relevancy maps given textual
queries interactively in real-time. LERF enables a broad range of concepts to be queried via natural language, from abstract queries like
“Electricity”, visual properties like “Yellow”, long-tail objects such as “Waldo”, and even reading text like “Boops” on the mug. For each
prompt, an RGB image and relevancy map are rendered focusing on the location with maximum relevancy activation.

Abstract
Humans describe the physical world using natural language to refer to specific 3D locations based on a vast range
of properties: visual appearance, semantics, abstract associations, or actionable affordances. In this work we propose
Language Embedded Radiance Fields (LERFs), a method
for grounding language embeddings from off-the-shelf models like CLIP into NeRF, which enable these types of open* Equal contribution, corresponding authors.

ended language queries in 3D. LERF learns a dense, multiscale language field inside NeRF by volume rendering CLIP
embeddings along training rays, supervising these embeddings across training views to provide multi-view consistency and smooth the underlying language field. After optimization, LERF can extract 3D relevancy maps for a broad
range of language prompts interactively in real-time, which
has potential use cases in robotics, understanding visionlanguage models, and interacting with 3D scenes. LERF
enables pixel-aligned, zero-shot queries on the distilled 3D
19729

