This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geometry-guided Feature Learning and Fusion for Indoor Scene Reconstruction
Ruihong Yin1 , Sezer Karaoglu1,2 , Theo Gevers1,2
1
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2
3DUniversum, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
r.yin@uva.nl, s.karaoglu@3duniversum.com, Th.Gevers@uva.nl

Abstract
In addition to color and textural information, geometry
provides important cues for 3D scene reconstruction. However, current reconstruction methods only include geometry
at the feature level thus not fully exploiting the geometric
information.
In contrast, this paper proposes a novel geometry integration mechanism for 3D scene reconstruction. Our
approach incorporates 3D geometry at three levels, i.e.
feature learning, feature fusion, and network supervision.
First, geometry-guided feature learning encodes geometric priors to contain view-dependent information. Second,
a geometry-guided adaptive feature fusion is introduced
which utilizes the geometric priors as a guidance to adaptively generate weights for multiple views. Third, at the supervision level, taking the consistency between 2D and 3D
normals into account, a consistent 3D normal loss is designed to add local constraints.
Large-scale experiments are conducted on the ScanNet dataset, showing that volumetric methods with our geometry integration mechanism outperform state-of-the-art
methods quantitatively as well as qualitatively. Volumetric
methods with ours also show good generalization on the 7Scenes and TUM RGB-D datasets.

1. Introduction
3D scene reconstruction is an important topic in
3D computer vision, with many applications such as
mixed/augmented reality, autonomous navigation, and
robotics. It is also considered one of the fundamental
tasks in 3D scene understanding including 3D segmentation [22, 33, 36] and object detection [37, 40]. Although
nowadays cameras equipped with depth sensors (e.g. Lidar
and Kinect) can reconstruct scenes using perspective projection and depth fusion [18], these RGB-D cameras are
still expensive, and not yet widely used in consumer cameras. Therefore, they are limited in their applicability. In
contrast, scene reconstruction from RGB images (multi-

Figure 1. Pipeline of existing volumetric methods compared to
our proposed geometry-guided feature learning and fusion for
3D scene reconstruction. Our approach (green parts) integrates
view-dependent and local geometry into (1) feature learning, (2)
multi-view feature fusion, and (3) network supervision.

view or video) is much more accessible.
A standard approach to 3D scene reconstruction is to
compute the Truncated Signed Distance Function (TSDF)
volume and then apply the marching cubes algorithm [15]
to capture the surface. To generate the TSDF volume, traditional reconstruction methods [11, 42, 43, 23, 38, 44] first
generate depth maps for each RGB image and then apply
depth fusion [5]. Due to pixel-level prediction, depth-based
methods can generate dense 3D points but may suffer from
scale ambiguity and depth inconsistency between overlapping regions in different views. Recently, volumetric (direct) methods [17, 13, 2, 28] are proposed to predict the
TSDF directly, without reliance on depth estimation. 3D
scenes are modeled using volumetric methods that employ
3D CNNs, allowing for the filling of unobserved gaps and
resulting in enhanced predictions. However, both depthbased and volumetric methods still capture texture and color
features based on RGB information.
For multi-view tasks, geometric information (e.g. surface normal and viewing direction) provides rich viewdependent cues of 3D scenes. For example, the best view-

3652

