This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Relightify: Relightable 3D Faces from a Single Image via Diffusion Models
Foivos Paraperas Papantoniou1,2 Alexandros Lattas1,2 Stylianos Moschoglou1,2 Stefanos Zafeiriou1,2
1
Imperial College London 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{f.paraperas,a.lattas,s.moschoglou,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Input

Sampling

Rendered Samples

Completed Texture

Diffuse Albedo

Normals

Specular Albedo

3D Reconstruction

Rendered Reconstruction

Figure 1. Left: We train an unconditional diffusion model on a high-quality dataset of UV textures and their accompanying facial reflectance
maps. Right: Using this model, we perform both texture completion as well as accurate reflectance prediction from monocular images by
inpainting in UV space. Our 3D facial reconstruction requires only a single image and allows the realistic rendering of the 3D avatar.

Abstract
Following the remarkable success of diffusion models
on image generation, recent works have also demonstrated
their impressive ability to address a number of inverse problems in an unsupervised way, by properly constraining the
sampling process based on a conditioning input. Motivated
by this, in this paper, we present the first approach to use
diffusion models as a prior for highly accurate 3D facial
BRDF reconstruction from a single image. We start by
leveraging a high-quality UV dataset of facial reflectance
(diffuse and specular albedo and normals), which we render
under varying illumination settings to simulate natural RGB
textures and, then, train an unconditional diffusion model
on concatenated pairs of rendered textures and reflectance
components. At test time, we fit a 3D morphable model to
the given image and unwrap the face in a partial UV texture.
By sampling from the diffusion model, while retaining the
observed texture part intact, the model inpaints not only the
self-occluded areas but also the unknown reflectance components, in a single sequence of denoising steps. In contrast to existing methods, we directly acquire the observed
texture from the input image, thus, resulting in more faithful
and consistent reflectance estimation. Through a series of
qualitative and quantitative comparisons, we demonstrate
superior performance in both texture completion as well as
reflectance reconstruction tasks.

1. Introduction
Creating digital avatars of real people is of paramount
importance for a range of applications, including VR, AR
or the film industry. Human faces have been studied extensively over the years, attracting attention at the intersection
of Computer Vision, Graphics and Machine Learning research. Although vast literature exists around the estimation of the 3D shape and reflectance of a face from unconstrained inputs such as “in-the-wild” RGB images, it
still remains a challenging problem in the field. In particular, the recent breakthrough in image synthesis using diffusion generative models creates a new perspective towards
photo-realistic 3D face reconstruction, which has not been
explored so far and stems from the state-of-the-art performance of these models in solving inverse problems without
supervised training.
Facial reflectance capture typically requires a controllable illumination system equipped with multiple cameras,
first introduced as a Light Stage [12]. Polarized illumination
and gradient patterns can be employed for diffuse-specular
separation [48, 26], using which, spatially varying facial
reflectance maps can be acquired, that describe BRDF parameters, including the diffuse and specular albedo and normals. Although recent works attempt to simplify the capturing apparatus and process using inverse rendering [28, 55]
or commodity devices [38], such methods still require a laborious capturing process and expensive equipment.

8806

