This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modality Unifying Network for Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification
Hao Yu1 , Xu Cheng1 ,* Wei Peng2 , Weihao Liu3 , Guoying Zhao4
1
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China
2
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, USA
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, China
4
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Finland
{yuhao,xcheng}@nuist.edu.cn, wepeng@stanford.edu, whliu@stu.suda.edu.cn, guoying.zhao@oulu.fi

Abstract
Visible-infrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) is a
challenging task due to large cross-modality discrepancies
and intra-class variations. Existing methods mainly focus
on learning modality-shared representations by embedding
different modalities into the same feature space. As a result,
the learned feature emphasizes the common patterns across
modalities while suppressing modality-specific and identityaware information that is valuable for Re-ID. To address
these issues, we propose a novel Modality Unifying Network (MUN) to explore a robust auxiliary modality for VIReID. First, the auxiliary modality is generated by combining the proposed cross-modality learner and intra-modality
learner, which can dynamically model the modality-specific
and modality-shared representations to alleviate both crossmodality and intra-modality variations. Second, by aligning identity centres across the three modalities, an identity
alignment loss function is proposed to discover the discriminative feature representations. Third, a modality alignment loss is introduced to consistently reduce the distribution distance of visible and infrared images by modality prototype modeling. Extensive experiments on multiple public
datasets demonstrate that the proposed method surpasses
the current state-of-the-art methods by a significant margin.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) [8, 33] aims at matching
pedestrian images captured from multiple non-overlapping
cameras. Over the past few years, it has received increased
attention due to its huge practical value in modern surveillance systems. Previous studies [10, 16, 19, 30, 40] mainly
focus on matching pedestrian images captured from visible
cameras and formulate the Re-ID task as a single-modality
* Corresponding Author (Email: xcheng@nuist.edu.cn)

matching issue. Nevertheless, visible cameras may not provide accurate appearance information about persons in scenarios with poor illumination. To address this limitation,
modern surveillance systems also employ infrared cameras,
which can capture clear images in low-light conditions at
night. As a result, visible-infrared person re-identification
(VI-ReID) [1, 28, 29] has become a topic of growing interest in recent times, which seeks to match infrared images of
the same identity when given a visible query across multiple
camera views and vice versa.
VI-ReID is challenging due to the huge cross-modality
discrepancy between visible and infrared images, as well
as the intra-modality variation in person bodies such as
pose variation and dress change. Existing methods [1,
20, 29, 31, 36, 37] primarily focus on relieving the crossmodality discrepancy by extracting modality-shared features to perform the feature-level alignment. Some studies [1,20,28,31,34] employ two-stream networks for crossmodality feature embedding, while others [3, 24, 25, 36]
utilize Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) to generate shared representations from visible and infrared images.
However, these methods discard modality-specific features
(such as colour and texture) that contain useful identityaware patterns against intra-modality variations. Consequently, the learned features may not fully capture the variation of human bodies and thus lack discriminability. To address this limitation, the modality-unifying methods, e.g.,
X-modality [9], DFM [7], SMCL [27], have been proposed to acquire the auxiliary modality by fusing visible and
infrared modalities, encoding both modality-specific and
modality-shared patterns to jointly relieve cross- and intramodality discrepancies. In the SMCL [27], the authors proposed a syncretic modality generated by fusing visible and
infrared pixels, which can bridge the gap between visible
and infrared modalities while maintaining discriminability
as the modality-specific information is preserved.
However, the existing modality-unifying works still have
three weaknesses. (1) Pixel fusion. Previous works gener-

11185

