This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uni-3D: A Universal Model for Panoptic 3D Scene Reconstruction
Xiang Zhang* 1 Zeyuan Chen* 1 Fangyin Wei 2 Zhuowen Tu 1
1
UC San Diego 2 Princeton University
{xiz102, zec016}@ucsd.edu, fwei@princeton.edu, ztu@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Performing holistic 3D scene understanding from a
single-view observation, involving generating instance
shapes and 3D scene segmentation, is a long-standing challenge. Prevailing works either focus only on geometry or
segmentation, or model the task in two folds by separate
modules, whose results are merged later to form the final
prediction. Inspired by recent advances in 2D vision that
unify image segmentation and detection by Transformerbased models, we present Uni-3D, a holistic 3D scene parsing/reconstruction system for a single RGB image. Uni3D features a universal model with query-based representations for predicting segments of both object instances and
scene layout. In Uni-3D, we also introduce a single Transformer for 2D depth-aware panoptic segmentation, which
offers queries that serve as strong shape priors in 3D. Uni3D seamlessly integrates 2D and 3D in its architecture and
it outperforms previous methods significantly.

1. Introduction
Humans have a remarkable ability to infer 3D shapes and
scene layouts accurately from limited or single-view observations, which is attributed to the efficient representations
that encode the 3D world for 2D projection. In computer
vision and graphics, understanding the 3D world from a
single-view 2D observation is a longstanding task, which
plays an essential role in multiple downstream applications
such as autonomous driving, augmented reality, and robotic
systems.
Notable breakthroughs have been made recently in addressing this challenge, thanks to the advancements in neural networks and the rapid growth of data quantity. 3D shape
reconstruction methods [45, 48, 24, 17] aim to predict 3D
models of instances in images and have exhibited impressive reconstruction quality. Another category of methods,
including [41, 10], performs scene reconstruction by directly recovering the geometric structure of the 3D scene
* indicates equal contribution.

Code: https://github.com/mlpc-ucsd/Uni-3D.

Previous
Work

Geometry

3D Instance
Segmentation

3D Semantic
Segmentation

Instance Segmentation

Merging

Single RGB Image
Panoptic 3D
Reconstruction

(a)
Input

Depth Estimation

2D

3D
3D Segment Queries

Uni-3D
(Ours)

2D Depth/Segment Queries
Geometry-aware Feature

Chair

Chair

Table

Wall

Chair

Floor

Other

Unified 3D Segments

Single RGB Image

(b)
Input

Depth-aware
Panoptic Segmentation

2D

3D

Panoptic 3D
Reconstruction

Figure 1. Pipeline comparison between (a) previous work (e.g. [8])
and (b) our proposed universal 3D reconstruction framework (Uni3D). Uni-3D integrates panoptic segmentation and depth estimation in 2D for shared knowledge and unifies thing and stuff instances in 3D, which is a universal pipeline for panoptic 3D scene
reconstruction.

captured by 2D images. The aforementioned approaches
demonstrate the capability of deep neural networks to learn
shape priors from training data and recover the 3D world
from 2D observations during inference. However, they focus solely on 3D shapes and silhouettes of instances or entire scenes and do not extract 3D semantic information necessary for scene understanding.
Factored3D [42] is a pioneering work that not only recovers 3D shapes but also performs scene understanding
by predicting the layout of instances in scenes. Huang et
al. [21] propose a holistic scene understanding system that
unifies the estimation of 3D object poses, camera pose, and
scene layout, providing a comprehensive understanding of
the input scene. Total3D [37] further incorporates mesh reconstruction into the 3D scene understanding system. In
summary, these models have approached 3D scene under-

9256

