This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hiding Visual Information via Obfuscating Adversarial Perturbations
Decheng Liu1,†
Dawei Zhou1, * Nannan Wang1,†
Zhen Wang2
Xinbo Gao3
1
Xidian University, 2 Zhejiang Lab
3
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications

Zhigang Su1,∗

{zgsu, dwzhou}.xidian@gmail.com, {nnwang, dchliu}@xidian.edu.cn
wangzhen@zhejianglab.com, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract

Local Server
Original

Growing leakage and misuse of visual information raise
security and privacy concerns, which promotes the development of information protection. Existing adversarial perturbations-based methods mainly focus on the deidentification against deep learning models. However, the
inherent visual information of the data has not been well
protected. In this work, inspired by the Type-I adversarial attack, we propose an Adversarial Visual Information
Hiding (AVIH) method to protect the visual privacy of data.
Specifically, the method generates obfuscating adversarial perturbations to obscure the visual information of the
data. Meanwhile, it maintains the hidden objectives to
be correctly predicted by models. In addition, our method
does not modify the parameters of the applied model, which
makes it flexible for different scenarios. Experimental results on the recognition and classification tasks demonstrate
that the proposed method can effectively hide visual information and hardly affect the performances of models. The
code is available at https://github.com/suzhigangssz/AVIH.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely applied
in the computer vision [26, 10, 18]. However, the increasing leakage and misuse of visual information has raised serious concerns [45, 20], especially in fields such as face
[27, 28, 51] and medicine [5, 1, 12]. A representative case
is the security issue of data stored in the cloud environment
[19, 4, 35]. Due to potential vulnerabilities in cyberspace
[3], uploaded private images can be easily stolen and used
maliciously [38]. Therefore, it is meaningful and urgent to
explore effective strategies to protect visual information.
A classic strategy is visual information hiding, which
* Equal contributions.

† Corresponding author.

Key
Hide

Recovery

Cloud Server

Client 1

Client n

Service Model

Input

Input

Key
Recover

Output
Protected Data

DiCaprio

⋯ Output
Gates

Figure 1. Illustration of visual information hiding for face recognition systems in cloud environments. The gallery set is protected
and provided to the DNN in the cloud. Protected image has quite
different visual information from the original image, but it is still
correctly identified. The protected gallery set can be recovered by
a key model by the owner.

mainly consists of two types [40]: Homomorphic Encryption (HE)-based methods [2, 46, 32], Perceptual Encryption
(PE)-based methods [42, 40, 39, 8, 16] and steganography
method [24, 50]. Affected by the nonlinear activation functions in DNNs, HE-based methods are difficult to perform
well on advanced DNNs [40]. Although PE-based methods
apply to DNNs, existing methods typically require retraining with data in the encrypted domain to guarantee accuracy
on encrypted data [42, 40]. This affect the performance of
service model on raw data and cause additional resource
consumption (especially for large models). The steganography method can hide the visual information of sensitive
data into another image, but it does not guarantee that the
service model can correctly recognize the protected image.
To alleviate these negative effects, we expect to hide the
visual information without making any modifications to service model. Namely, we hide sensitive visual information
only by varying the input image. Previous researches have
made some explorations in this regard. The transformation
network-based methods [16], which try to protect the original image via a transformation function parameterized by

4356

