This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lighting Every Darkness in Two Pairs:
A Calibration-Free Pipeline for RAW Denoising
Xin Jin1 * Jia-Wen Xiao1 * Ling-Hao Han1 Chunle Guo1†
Ruixun Zhang2 Xialei Liu1 Chongyi Li1,3
1

VCIP, CS, Nankai University

2

Peking University

3

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

{xjin, xiaojw, lhhan}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, zhangruixun@pku.edu.cn,
{guochunle, xialei, lichongyi}@nankai.edu.cn
https://srameo.github.io/projects/led-iccv23

Abstract
1 / Iteration

Calibration-based methods have dominated RAW image
denoising under extremely low-light environments. However, these methods suffer from several main deficiencies: 1)
the calibration procedure is laborious and time-consuming,
2) denoisers for different cameras are difficult to transfer,
and 3) the discrepancy between synthetic noise and real
noise is enlarged by high digital gain. To overcome the
above shortcomings, we propose a calibration-free pipeline
for Lighting Every Drakness (LED), regardless of the digital gain or camera sensor. Instead of calibrating the
noise parameters and training repeatedly, our method could
adapt to a target camera only with few-shot paired data and
fine-tuning. In addition, well-designed structural modification during both stages alleviates the domain gap between
synthetic and real noise without any extra computational
cost. With 2 pairs for each additional digital gain (in total
6 pairs) and 0.5% iterations, our method achieves superior
performance over other calibration-based methods.

1. Introduction
Noise, an unescapable topic for image capturing, has
been systematically investigated in recent years [5, 66,
51, 41, 2, 8, 57]. Compared with standard RGB images [56, 21, 54, 34, 33, 32], RAW images enjoys two great
potentials for image denoising: tractable, primitive noise
distribution [57] and higher bit depth for differentiating signal from noise. Learning-based methods have achieved significant progress on RAW image denoising with paired real
datasets [67, 22, 64, 32, 33]. However, it is unfeasible to
collect a large-scale real RAW image dataset for each single camera model. Therefore, increasing attention has been
drawn from deploying learning-based methods on synthetic
dataset [1, 61, 31, 57, 68, 44, 40].
* Equal contribution.
† C. L. Guo is the corresponding author.

1 / Extra-Data

SID, ×100

ELD, ×200

SID, ×250

ELD, ×100

SID, ×300

ELD, ×10

LED (Ours)
ELD [57]
Calibrated P-G
AINDNet [37]

Figure 1. LED achieves state-of-the-art performance in every
darkness situation (different digital gain and camera sensor) compared with calibration-based or transfer learning-based methods.
Also, a minimum cost is required for applying to a new camera
model by the proposed pipeline. Details can be found in Sec. 4.

Calibration-based noise synthesis with physics-based
models has proved its effectiveness in fitting real noise [53,
57, 68, 45, 69, 17]. In general, these methods conduct
the following steps. First, they build a well-designed noise
model depending on the electronic imaging pipeline. Then,
they select a specific target camera and carefully calibrate
the parameters of the predefined noise model. Finally, they
generate synthetic paired data for training a denoising network. Additionally, some methods resort to Deep Neural
Network (DNN)-based generative models for noise parameter calibration [45, 69].
Though great performance has been achieved, these
methods are limited by three main deficiencies, as shown
in Fig. 2 (a). 1) The calibration-specialized data collection requires a stable illumination environment and elaborated post-processing, leading to a time-consuming and
labor-intensive procedure. 2) denoising network trained for
the specific camera is difficult to transfer to another camera. This leads to a strong connection between the network
and the camera, resulting in repeated calibration and training for different target cameras. 3) Certain noise distributions might not be included in the noise model, denoted as

13275

