This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Delving into Motion-Aware Matching for Monocular 3D Object Tracking
Kuan-Chih Huang1
1

Ming-Hsuan Yang1,2,3

University of California, Merced

2

Google

Yi-Hsuan Tsai2
3

Yonsei University

Abstract
(a) Prior work [24]

3D Multi-Object Tracking (3D MOT) is a crucial problem for various applications like autonomous driving. Numerous LiDAR-based methods [49, 50] have achieved remarkable results thanks to powerful 3D object detectors
[13, 23, 38, 39]. Due to the lower cost of camera sensors, some image-based 3D object detection approaches
[4, 16, 20, 26, 32, 35] receive much attention and achieve
promising performance, and thus enable 3D object tracking
based on merely the camera.
One straightforward approach to deal with monocular
3D object tracking is to match object features in adjacent
frames [24, 61] (see Figure 1(a)). Although significant
progress has been made, these methods may still fail to capture multi-frame motion information of objects. To tackle
the long-range dependency, another line of work [6, 15]

pred
state

curr
state

feat
space

state
space

t-1
Data
Association

t

(b) Prior work [15, 6]
t-n

t-2 t-1 Predict

t

t

Data
Association

(c) Ours
t-n

t-2 t-1

...

1. Introduction

curr
feat

...

Recent advances of monocular 3D object detection facilitate the 3D multi-object tracking task based on lowcost camera sensors. In this paper, we find that the motion cue of objects along different time frames is critical
in 3D multi-object tracking, which is less explored in existing monocular-based approaches. To this end, we propose MoMA-M3T, a framework that mainly consists of three
motion-aware components. First, we represent the possible movement of an object related to all object tracklets in
the feature space as its motion features. Then, we further
model the historical object tracklet along the time frame in
a spatial-temporal perspective via a motion transformer. Finally, we propose a motion-aware matching module to associate historical object tracklets and current observations
as final tracking results. We conduct extensive experiments
on the nuScenes and KITTI datasets to demonstrate that
our MoMA-M3T achieves competitive performance against
state-of-the-art methods. Moreover, the proposed tracker
is flexible and can be easily plugged into existing imagebased 3D object detectors without re-training. Code and
models are available at https:// github.com/ kuanchihhuang/
MoMA-M3T.

prev
feat

t

Data
Association

Figure 1. Comparisons of different association methods in
monocular 3D object tracking.
(a) Time3D [24] learns to
match 3D object features in adjacent frames. (b) QD-3DT [15]
and DEFT [6] utilize the object’s previous features to predict their
current states, and match with the observations in the output space.
(c) Our approach directly aggregates the object’s previous features
and matches them with current observations in the feature space.

predicts the object states from the historical observations,
in which the predicted and observed states in the current
frame are in the output space that explicitly contains the object information, e.g., location and pose of the object (see
Figure 1(b)). However, these approaches may suffer from
noisy observations of object states predicted by the inaccurate monocular 3D object detector.
For the above-mentioned methods, one critical step is
data association, in which the goal is to match observations
across historical time frames and produce final tracking results. Therefore, in monocular 3D MOT, two main challenges are 1) how to obtain the long-range observations that
can provide richer information for data association? 2) what

6909

