This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Controllable Guide-Space for Generalizable Face Forgery Detection
Ying Guo * , Cheng Zhen * , Pengfei Yan †
Vision AI Department, Meituan
{guoying16, zhencheng02, yanpengfei03}@meituan.com

Abstract
Recent studies on face forgery detection have shown
satisfactory performance for methods involved in training
datasets, but are not ideal enough for unknown domains.
This motivates many works to improve the generalization, but
forgery-irrelevant information, such as image background
and identity, still exists in different domain features and
causes unexpected clustering, limiting the generalization.
In this paper, we propose a controllable guide-space (GS)
method to enhance the discrimination of different forgery
domains, so as to increase the forgery relevance of features
and thereby improve the generalization. The well-designed
guide-space can simultaneously achieve both the proper
separation of forgery domains and the large distance between real-forgery domains in an explicit and controllable
manner. Moreover, for better discrimination, we use a decoupling module to weaken the interference of forgery-irrelevant
correlations between domains. Furthermore, we make adjustments to the decision boundary manifold according to
the clustering degree of the same domain features within
the neighborhood. Extensive experiments in multiple indomain and cross-domain settings confirm that our method
can achieve state-of-the-art generalization.

1. Introduction
Face forgery technology [1, 2, 13] has made vigorous
development in recent years. However, these realistic forgery
faces are sometimes abused to maliciously disguise identities,
especially celebrities and politicians, causing serious social
problems. Therefore, how to reduce this risk has attracted
widespread attention from researchers.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown excellent performance in face forgery detection [10, 49, 32, 12].
According to forgery or not, this task is often formalized as
a binary classification problem, and some suitable classification networks [32, 30] are introduced to this task. Although
they perform well in the training domain, the learned features
may be method-specific for the forgery methods within the
* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Limitations of existing methods: features from different
domains are still clustered by forgery-irrelevant similarities (image
background, hair color, identity, etc.), proving that features still
contain forgery-irrelevant information, limiting the generalization.

training set [5], and cannot show satisfactory generalization
in unknown forgery methods.
Forgery data generated from various methods corresponds
to different forgery domains. To improve the generalization
in unknown domains, some works [22, 34, 6] study the common artifacts of various forgeries and use data augmentation
to synthesize more training data. Several other works are devoted to mining better discriminative features, and attention
mechanisms [47], local relation [7], and frequency information [21, 31] are also introduced to capture better forgery
traces. SRM [26] suppresses the acquisition of color and texture via high-frequency noise, thereby solving the overfitting
to the training data. In addition, RECCE [5] copes with the
complexity of various forgery domains by learning compact
real representations based on the reconstruction. Compared
with previous methods, the exploration of common characteristics and discriminative information allows the model to
learn relatively more generalized features.
Nevertheless, during training, the model tries to increase
the discrimination between real and fake features, but treats
different forgery domains (i.e. different forgery methods) as
the unified “fake” category without distinction. In common
training sets [33, 23], there are some similarities between
massive data in forgery-irrelevant information, such as hair
color, image background, and identity. Due to the uniform

20818

