This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scratch Each Other’s Back: Incomplete Multi-modal Brain Tumor
Segmentation Via Category Aware Group Self-Support Learning
Yansheng Qiu1,2† Delin Chen1,2†

Hongdou Yao1,2

Yongchao Xu1,2

Zheng Wang1,2‡

1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, School of
Computer Science, Wuhan University 2 Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering
{qiuyansheng, wangzwhu}@whu.edu.cn

80

Although Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is very
helpful for brain tumor segmentation and discovery, it often lacks some modalities in clinical practice. As a result, degradation of prediction performance is inevitable.
According to current implementations, different modalities
are considered to be independent and non-interfering with
each other during the training process of modal feature extraction, however they are complementary. In this paper,
considering the sensitivity of different modalities to diverse
tumor regions, we propose a Category Aware Group SelfSupport Learning framework, called GSS, to make up for
the information deﬁcit among the modalities in the individual modal feature extraction phase. Precisely, within
each prediction category, predictions of all modalities form
a group, where the prediction with the most extraordinary sensitivity is selected as the group leader. Collaborative efforts between group leaders and members identify the communal learning target with high consistency
and certainty. As our minor contribution, we introduce a
random mask to reduce the possible biases. GSS adopts
the standard training strategy without speciﬁc architectural
choices and thus can be easily plugged into existing incomplete multi-modal brain tumor segmentation. Remarkably, extensive experiments on BraTS2020, BraTS2018,
and BraTS2015 datasets demonstrate that GSS can improve the performance of existing SOTA algorithms by
1.27-3.20% in Dice on average. The code is released at
https://github.com/qysgithubopen/GSS.

1. Introduction
Magnetic resonance image (MRI) segmentation of brain
tumors is becoming increasingly important in clinical evaluation and diagnosis. MRI is designed for different tissues
of brain structures and brain tumors with multiple imag† Equal Contribution

‡ Corresponding Author

21317

Dice similarity coefficient (%漐

Abstract

78
76
74

Ours

Ours

+2.36

+2.17

mmFormer
[40]

Ours

RFNet
[7]

Ours

Ours

+3.20

+1.27

mmFormer

+1.28

RFNet
mmFormer

72
70

RobustSeg
[2]

68

Ours
+2.16

RFNet

RobustSeg
RobustSeg
U-HVED

66

U-HVED[8]
64

BraTs2020

U-HVED
BraTs2018

BraTs2015

Figure 1. Average accuracy on BraTS2020, BraTS2018, and
BraTS2015 datasets. Our GSS enables consistent performance improvements over state-of-the-arts, i.e. mmFormer [40], RFNet [7],
without bringing any change to base networks during inference.

ing modalities, such as Fluid Attenuation Inversion Recovery (FLAIR), contrast enhanced T1-weighted (T1c), T1weighted (T1) and T2-weighted (T2). Combining multimodal images for brain tumor segmentation can signiﬁcantly improve segmentation accuracy. Most existing methods stitch multi-modal images on channels and input them
into the network [18, 46, 27, 30, 10]. However, in clinical
practice, the problem of lost modalities is pervasive due to
data corruption, various scanning protocols, and unsuitable
conditions of the patient [34, 22, 31, 47]. Therefore, there is
a great need for a robust multi-modal approach for ﬂexible
and practical clinical applications to address the problem of
missing one or more modalities.
The current main direction for incomplete medical image segmentation tasks involves multiple stages network to
deal with all incomplete modalities cases [11, 8, 7, 2, 40].
This approach considers improving the network’s ability to
extract features of interest for individual modalities, which
plays a pivotal role in the subsequent fusion phase. However, these efforts only focus on learning invariant features and lack inter-modal interactions. It is worth noting

