This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Preparing the Future for Continual Semantic Segmentation
Zihan Lin1 Zilei Wang* 1 Yixin Zhang1,2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
myustc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zlwang, zhyx12}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this study, we focus on Continual Semantic Segmentation (CSS) and present a novel approach to tackle the issue
of existing methods struggling to learn new classes. The
primary challenge of CSS is to learn new knowledge while
retaining old knowledge, which is commonly known as the
rigidity-plasticity dilemma. Existing approaches strive to
address this by carefully balancing the learning of new and
old classes during training on new data. Differently, this
work aims to avoid this dilemma fundamentally rather than
handling the difficulties involved in it. Specifically, we reveal that this dilemma mainly arises from the greater fluctuation of knowledge for new classes because they have
never been learned before the current step. Additionally, the
data available in incremental steps are usually inadequate,
which can impede the model’s ability to learn discriminative features for both new and old classes. To address these
challenges, we introduce a novel concept of pre-learning for
future knowledge. Our approach entails optimizing the feature space and output space for unlabeled data, which thus
enables the model to acquire knowledge for future classes.
With this approach, updating the model for new classes becomes as smooth as for old classes, effectively avoiding the
rigidity-plasticity dilemma. We conducted extensive experiments and the results demonstrate a significant improvement in the learning of new classes compared to previous
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated their superiority in many computer vision tasks [26, 31, 14]. Conventionally, they are trained in an offline manner with all
data collected beforehand. When novel classes need to
be handled, the networks need to be re-trained using either updated training set with both new and previous data,
or directly finetuned on new data. The former has higher
costs and is even impracticable sometimes like, when privacy raises concerns. The latter is prone to forget previ-

Figure 1. On VOC2012 benchmark, our method boosts the performance of new classes by a significant margin, while also achieving
promising performance for old classes, compared to recent stateof-the-art methods.

ously learned knowledge, which is called catastrophic forgetting (CF) [25]. To better fit neural networks into realworld scenarios, we want them to have the ability to learn
new concepts while preserving the old knowledge (or even
improve it using new knowledge). This is known as the
continual learning (CL) problem and receives increasing attention recently. It has been explored first in the field of
image classification [28, 42, 17, 11, 57, 44, 43], and some
methods are proposed recently targeting semantic segmentation [5, 10, 6, 54, 51, 37]. Generally, it is often achieved
by applying forgetting-preventing constraints between current and previous networks to prevent CF, which raises the
rigidity (i.e., the ability to preserve old states) but harms the
plasticity (i.e., the ability to learn new knowledge). It is
known as the rigidity-plasticity (R-P) dilemma. A key aspect in designing constraints is to balance between rigidity
and plasticity, which is what most works focus on.
Despite that several new constraints have been proposed
for CSS to better tackle the dilemma, existing works still
struggle to learn new classes. Taking the VOC2012 benchmark as an example, most methods can only achieve a performance around 70% of that of the upperbound for 15-5
setup and around 50% for 19-1 setup, which is even worse

11910

