This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ablating Concepts in Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Nupur Kumari1
Eli Shechtman3
1

Carnegie Mellon University

Bingliang Zhang2
Richard Zhang3
2

Sheng-Yu Wang1
Jun-Yan Zhu1

Tsinghua University

3

Adobe Research

Remove
Van Gogh

Remove
Monet

Remove
Grumpy
Cat

Remove
R2D2

Remove
Memorized
Image

Remove
Memorized
Image

Figure 1: Our method can ablate copyrighted materials and memorized images from pretrained text-to-image diffusion models. Our method
learns to change the image distribution of a target concept to match an anchor concept, e.g., Van Gogh painting → paintings (first
row), or Grumpy cat → Cat (second row). Furthermore, we extend our method to prevent the generation of memorized images (third row).

Abstract
Large-scale text-to-image diffusion models can generate high-fidelity images with powerful compositional ability.
However, these models are typically trained on an enormous
amount of Internet data, often containing copyrighted material, licensed images, and personal photos. Furthermore,
they have been found to replicate the style of various living
artists or memorize exact training samples. How can we
remove such copyrighted concepts or images without retraining the model from scratch? To achieve this goal, we propose
an efficient method of ablating concepts in the pretrained
model, i.e., preventing the generation of a target concept.
Our algorithm learns to match the image distribution for a
target style, instance, or text prompt we wish to ablate to
the distribution corresponding to an anchor concept. This
prevents the model from generating target concepts given its
text condition. Extensive experiments show that our method
can successfully prevent the generation of the ablated concept while preserving closely related concepts in the model.

1. Introduction
Large-scale text-to-image models have demonstrated remarkable ability in synthesizing photorealistic images [51,
43, 56, 54, 76, 14]. In addition to algorithms and compute
resources, this technological advancement is powered by
the use of massive datasets scraped from web [59]. Unfortunately, the datasets often consist of copyrighted materials, the
artistic oeuvre of creators, and personal photos [64, 10, 61].
We believe that every creator should have the right to
opt out from large-scale models at any time for any image
they have created. However, fulfilling such requests poses
new computational challenges, as re-training a model from
scratch for every user request can be computationally intensive. Here, we ask – How can we prevent the model from
generating such content? How can we achieve it efficiently
without re-training the model from scratch? How can we
make sure that the model still preserves related concepts?

22691

