This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Non-Local Spatial-Angular Correlation for Light Field
Image Super-Resolution
Zhengyu Liang1 , Yingqian Wang1 , Longguang Wang2 , Jungang Yang1B , Shilin Zhou1 , Yulan Guo1
1
National University of Defense Technology, 2 Aviation University of Air Force
{zyliang, yangjungang}@nudt.edu.cn

LF-ATO

Abstract
Exploiting spatial-angular correlation is crucial to light
field (LF) image super-resolution (SR), but is highly challenging due to its non-local property caused by the disparities among LF images. Although many deep neural
networks (DNNs) have been developed for LF image SR
and achieved continuously improved performance, existing methods cannot well leverage the long-range spatialangular correlation and thus suffer a significant performance drop when handling scenes with large disparity variations. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective
method to learn the non-local spatial-angular correlation
for LF image SR. In our method, we adopt the epipolar
plane image (EPI) representation to project the 4D spatialangular correlation onto multiple 2D EPI planes, and then
develop a Transformer network with repetitive self-attention
operations to learn the spatial-angular correlation by modeling the dependencies between each pair of EPI pixels.
Our method can fully incorporate the information from all
angular views while achieving a global receptive field along
the epipolar line. We conduct extensive experiments with
insightful visualizations to validate the effectiveness of our
method. Comparative results on five public datasets show
that our method not only achieves state-of-the-art SR performance but also performs robust to disparity variations.
Code is publicly available at https://github.com/
ZhengyuLiang24/EPIT.

1. Introduction
Light field (LF) cameras record both intensity and directions of light rays, and enable various applications such as
depth perception [25, 29, 32], view rendering [3, 52, 66],
virtual reality [11, 74], and 3D reconstruction [6, 77]. However, due to the inherent spatial-angular trade-off [82], an
LF camera can either provide dense angular samplings with
low-resolution (LR) sub-aperture images (SAIs), or capture
high-resolution (HR) SAIs with sparse angular sampling.

MEG-Net

LFT

DistgSSR

HR

(a) SR Results (Sheared Value=4)

LR

(b) Attribution Maps on LR Center View

Ours

Sheared=0
Sheared=1
Sheared=2
Sheared=3
Sheared=4

(c) LF-LAM Attribution on Sheard EPI
(c) Attribution Maps on Sheared EPIs

Figure 1. Visualization of 4× SR results and the corresponding attribution maps [18] of our method and four state-of-the-art methods [26, 36, 60, 78] under different manually sheared disparity
values. Here, the patch marked by the green box in the HR image
is selected as the target region, and the regions that contribute to
the final SR results are highlighted in red. Our method can well
exploit the non-local spatial-angular correlation and achieve superior SR performance. More examples are provided in Fig. 8.

To handle this problem, many methods have been proposed
to enhance the angular resolution via novel view synthesis
[28, 43, 67], or enhance the spatial resolution by performing
LF image super-resolution (SR) [10, 20]. In this paper, we
focus on the latter task, i.e., generating HR LF images from
their LR counterparts.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
been widely applied to LF image SR and demonstrated superior performance over traditional paradigms [1, 34, 44,
49, 64]. To incorporate the complementary information
(i.e., angular information) from different views, existing
CNNs adopted various mechanisms such as adjacent-view
combination [73], view-stack integration [26, 78, 79], bidirectional recurrent fusion [59], spatial-angular disentanglement [36, 60, 61, 72, 9], and 4D convolutions [42, 43].
However, as illustrated in both Fig. 1 and Sec. 4.3, existing
methods achieve promising results on LFs with small baselines, but suffer a notable performance drop when handling
scenes with large disparity variations.

12376

