This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Coarse-to-Fine: Learning Compact Discriminative Representation for
Single-Stage Image Retrieval
Yunquan Zhu*, Xinkai Gao∗ , Bo Ke, Ruizhi Qiao, Xing Sun
YouTu Lab, Tencent, China
{yunquanzhu, kayxgao, boke, ruizhiqiao, winfredsun}@tencent.com

Abstract

Data points
for ArcFace

Matching
Adaptive
Margin

Image retrieval targets to find images from a database
that are visually similar to the query image. Twostage methods following retrieve-and-rerank paradigm
have achieved excellent performance, but their separate local and global modules are inefficient to real-world applications. To better trade-off retrieval efficiency and accuracy, some approaches fuse global and local feature into a
joint representation to perform single-stage image retrieval.
However, they are still challenging due to various situations
to tackle, e.g., background, occlusion and viewpoint. In
this work, we design a Coarse-to-Fine framework to learn
Compact Discriminative representation (CFCD) for endto-end single-stage image retrieval-requiring only imagelevel labels. Specifically, we first design a novel adaptive
softmax-based loss which dynamically tunes its scale and
margin within each mini-batch and increases them progressively to strengthen supervision during training and intraclass compactness. Furthermore, we propose a mechanism
which attentively selects prominent local descriptors and
infuse fine-grained semantic relations into the global representation by a hard negative sampling strategy to optimize inter-class distinctiveness at a global scale. Extensive experimental results have demonstrated the effectiveness of our method, which achieves state-of-the-art singlestage image retrieval performance on benchmarks such as
Revisited Oxford and Revisited Paris. Code is available at
https://github.com/bassyess/CFCD.

1. Introduction
Image retrieval is a fundamental task in computer vision,
which aims to efficiently retrieve images similar to a given
query from a large-scale database. With the development of
deep learning, image retrieval has made great progress [24,
33, 41, 9, 5]. The state-of-the-art methods generally work in
a two-stage paradigm [4, 21], where they first obtain coarse
* Equal contribution.

Data points
for MadaCos
Data points
for Matching
Class Center

𝑤!

𝑤"
ArcFace
Margin

Move trajectory
for MadaCos
Move trajectory
for Matching
Image Display

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Distribution of [cos(θyi +m)−argmax(cosθj̸=yi )]
after training with ArcFace, where yi is target label. In the red box,
due to large variations in background, occlusion and viewpoint,
these images in Google Landmarks Dataset V2 are far away from
their class centers and misclassified. (b) Geometrical interpretation of our methods from the feature perspective. By designing
an adaptive margin penalty strategy, we can introduce appropriate
supervision intensity for different batch during training. As for
the outliers with partial match, we design a mechanism to select
prominent local descriptors and minimize their pairwise distances,
which makes the unified representation more discriminative.

candidates via global features, and then re-rank them with
local features to achieve better performance. However, twostage methods are required to rank images twice and use
the expensive RANSAC [12] or AMSK [35] for geometric
verification, leading to high memory usage and increased
latency.
To alleviate the efficiency issues, many studies [13, 23,
20, 11] recently attempt to explore a unified single-stage
image retrieval solution. They design complicated attention modules to fuse global and local features, and adopt
the ArcFace [8] loss to train the model in an end-to-end
fashion. They have shown excellent performance on singlestage image retrieval benchmarks. In spite of their successes, extracting multi-scale local features is still an extremely expensive process. More importantly, these studies do not consider the challenges of large-scale landmark
dataset from the perspective of data distribution, which have
large variations in background, occlusion and viewpoint.
Fig1(a) displays the cosine logits distribution of landmark samples after convergence, where more than 20% of
the samples are far away from their class centers as their

11260

