This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Knowledge-Aware Prompt Tuning for Generalizable Vision-Language Models
Baoshuo Kan1∗ , Teng Wang2,3∗ , Wenpeng Lu1† , Xiantong Zhen4 , Weili Guan5 , Feng Zheng2†
1
Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences)
2
Southern University of Science and Technology 3 The University of Hong Kong
4
United Imaging Healthcare 5 Monash Univerisity
10431200583@stu.qlu.edu.cn
zhenxt@gmail.com

tengwang@connect.hku.hk
weili.guan@monash.edu

Abstract
Pre-trained vision-language models, e.g., CLIP, working with manually designed prompts have demonstrated
great capacity of transfer learning. Recently, learnable
prompts achieve state-of-the-art performance, which however are prone to overfit to seen classes, failing to generalize to unseen classes. In this paper, we propose a
Knowledge-Aware Prompt Tuning (KAPT) framework for
vision-language models. Our approach takes the inspiration from human intelligence in which external knowledge
is usually incorporated into recognizing novel categories of
objects. Specifically, we design two complementary types
of knowledge-aware prompts for the text encoder to leverage the distinctive characteristics of category-related external knowledge. The discrete prompt extracts the key information from descriptions of an object category, and the
learned continuous prompt captures overall contexts. We
further design an adaptation head for the visual encoder
to aggregate salient attentive visual cues, which establishes
discriminative and task-aware visual representations. We
conduct extensive experiments on 11 widely-used benchmark datasets and the results verify the effectiveness in fewshot image classification, especially in generalizing to unseen categories. Compared with the state-of-the-art CoCoOp method, KAPT exhibits favorable performance and
achieves an absolute gain of 3.22% on new classes and
2.57% in terms of harmonic mean.

1. Introduction
Recently, large-scale pre-trained vision-language models, e.g., CLIP [29], ALIGN [15], and FLIP [44], have
demonstrated remarkable performance in zero/few-shot
learning tasks. Unlike traditional vision-only frameworks
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. Work done when
Baoshuo Kan visited to Feng Zheng Lab in SUSTech.

wenpeng.lu@qlu.edu.cn

f.zheng@ieee.org

What's the Gentiana
Acaulis?

Gentiana Acaulis
.. leaves are evergreen in a
basal rosette, forming clumps. The flowers are blue
with olivegreen spotted...

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: A motivating example. The textual description
of the “Gentiana Acaulis” conduces to the recognition of
the corresponding image (b) of Gentiana Acaulis.
that are trained mainly by a closed set of single-modal
data, vision-language models train two uni-modal encoders
on massive amounts of image-text pairs to exploit crossmodal alignments in the semantic space. By leveraging
large-scale web-scale image-text data, pre-trained visionlanguage models are endowed with the ability to solve
zero/few-shot downstream tasks and even recognize openset visual concepts [29, 15, 44]. Expressly, when a new
classification task arrives, the CLIP text-encoder encodes
manually designed textual prompt (e.g., “a photo of a [label].”), and then cosine similarity between textual features
and image features is computed. However, identifying appropriate manually designed prompts is an art that requires
both domain expertise and laborious prompt engineering.
To avoid the manual prompt design, some recent research (e.g., CoOp [49]) on visual representations are
mainly inspired by prompt tuning approaches [47, 18,
21] in Natural Language Processing (NLP), like learnable prompts. By optimizing their models with learnable
prompts in closed datasets, these methods achieve outstanding performance in seen classes. However, the learned
prompts are usually prone to overfit to the seen classes

15670

