This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pixel-Aligned Recurrent Queries for Multi-View 3D Object Detection
Yiming Xie1
1
Northeastern University

Huaizu Jiang1 Georgia Gkioxari∗,2 Julian Straub∗,3
2
California Institute of Technology 3 Meta Reality Labs Research

Abstract
We present PARQ – a multi-view 3D object detector with
transformer and pixel-aligned recurrent queries. Unlike
previous works that use learnable features or only encode
3D point positions as queries in the decoder, PARQ leverages appearance-enhanced queries initialized from reference points in 3D space and updates their 3D location
with recurrent cross-attention operations. Incorporating
pixel-aligned features and cross attention enables the model
to encode the necessary 3D-to-2D correspondences and
capture global contextual information of the input images.
PARQ outperforms prior best methods on the ScanNet and
ARKitScenes datasets, learns and detects faster, is more robust to distribution shifts in reference points, can leverage
additional input views without retraining, and can adapt inference compute by changing the number of recurrent iterations. Code is available at https://ymingxie.github.io/parq.

1. Introduction
The world is composed of objects positioned in 3D
space. Humans have an innate ability to perceive 3D scenes
which allows them to interact with their surroundings. For
machines, understanding all objects in 3D space from one
or few images enables new applications of embodied intelligence such as in robotics and assistive technology. The
problem is defined by the task of 3D object detection: given
a few images of a scene, detect all objects in 3D.
3D object detection unites two distinct problems of computer vision, 2D recognition, and 3D reconstruction. Similar to 2D recognition, appearance cues in the input views
drive categorical predictions. Similar to 3D reconstruction,
the model needs to reason about the 3D position of objects from only 2D views. Modern learning-based methods build on the traditional multi-view stereopsis [45] and
Structure from Motion (SfM) [14, 39] and lift objects to
3D via optimization [24, 23, 22, 31] or volumetric representations [40, 41]. To do so, they require tens or hun∗ Equal advising.

Geometry

Appearance
+

Recurrent

Offset, Size,
Rot., and Class

PARQ
Layer

Figure 1. PARQ leverages appearance-enhanced queries initialized from 3D points and updates their 3D locations to the 3D object center with a recurrent PARQ layer in the decoder. The PARQ
layer chains a transformer decoder layer and a detection head.

dreds of views observing the whole scene. However, in
many real-world applications, like robotics, models are required to make predictions online and often in real-time
from just a short video snippet. In this work, we tackle online 3D object detection from just a few (e.g., 3) consecutive
views with known camera poses extracted by visual-inertial
SLAM systems [5, 35, 1].
Learning 3D object detectors is challenging as the 3D
prediction space is extensive while objects occupy only a
small portion. Geometry is important. An object visible in
the different input views occupies the same 3D world location and vice versa, a 3D object connects to 2D locations
on the input images consistent with its camera projections.
This observation prunes the vast prediction space. In addition, object appearance changes with viewpoint changes.
For instance, the appearance of the chair in Fig. 1 changes
as the camera moves. This suggests that appearance and geometry are critical. Motivated by this insight, we design a
model that captures geometric and appearance interactions
between the 2D input views and the 3D prediction space.
We build on the powerful transformer architecture [42],
and specifically DETR [6], a popular 2D object detection
system. DETR encodes input images into feature maps and
predicts 2D bounding boxes via cross-attention with learnable queries. We enhance DETR in three ways. First, we
make the input feature maps 3D-aware by adding 3D posi-

18370

