This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Disposable Transfer Learning for Selective Source Task Unlearning
Seunghee Koh1 Hyounguk Shon1 Janghyeon Lee2 Hyeong Gwon Hong1 Junmo Kim1
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, South Korea
2
LG AI Research, South Korea
{seunghee1215, hyounguk.shon, honggudrnjs, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr
janghyeon.lee@lgresearch.ai

Transfer Learning

1. Introduction
Transfer learning [26] (TL) is one of the bedrocks in the
success of deep neural networks (DNNs). The core idea of
TL is to build a strong generic model that can adapt to a
broad range of downstream tasks with much less amount
of data. The scale of data collection for pre-training becomes the key objective to build a model with competitive
performance on their target tasks [14]. Nowadays, a lot of
organizations are interested in collecting an internal dataset
to build their own generic model.
For example, JFT-300M [6, 24, 25], a large-scale pri-

: Target dataset
: Source dataset
: Piggybacking dataset

Disposable Transfer Learning
Transfer Learning

Knowledge Disposal

Piggyback Learning

Proposed

Transfer learning is widely used for training deep neural networks (DNN) for building a powerful representation.
Even after the pre-trained model is adapted for the target
task, the representation performance of the feature extractor is retained to some extent. As the performance of the
pre-trained model can be considered the private property of
the owner, it is natural to seek the exclusive right of the generalized performance of the pre-trained weight. To address
this issue, we suggest a new paradigm of transfer learning
called disposable transfer learning (DTL), which disposes
of only the source task without degrading the performance
of the target task. To achieve knowledge disposal, we propose a novel loss named Gradient Collision loss (GC loss).
GC loss selectively unlearns the source knowledge by leading the gradient vectors of mini-batches in different directions. Whether the model successfully unlearns the source
task is measured by piggyback learning accuracy (PL accuracy). PL accuracy estimates the vulnerability of knowledge leakage by retraining the scrubbed model on a subset
of source data or new downstream data. We demonstrate
that GC loss is an effective approach to the DTL problem
by showing that the model trained with GC loss retains the
performance on the target task with a significantly reduced
PL accuracy.

Piggyback Learning

Existing

Abstract

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed Disposable Transfer Learning (DTL) framework. DTL extends the existing
Transfer Learning (TL) paradigm with an additional knowledge disposal stage that scrubs off the prior knowledge irrelevant to the target task. The goal of DTL is to prevent Piggyback Learning (PL) which maliciously exploits the representation performance of a pre-trained model for a piggyback task by simply performing an extra fine-tuning step on
top of the published transfer-learned model.

vate dataset exclusively available to Google, is used for pretraining to reach the state-of-the-art performance of downstream target tasks [12, 27] with relatively small target
datasets. IG-3.5B-17k [18], an internal Facebook AI Research dataset, is also used to train a weakly supervised
model. Such datasets and trained models have a high economic value in that collecting data and training a model is
time-consuming and costly, and a proficient model is readily adaptable to various commercial services.
However, those private properties are exposed to unauthorized customizing when released. Specifically, we denote piggyback learning (PL) (Figure 1) as a kind of extra fine-tuning on other downstream tasks for leveraging the
benefits of the transfer-learned model with much less effort.
As shown in Figure 2, the performance of TL (blue) and
PL (green) on the downstream tasks is comparable, and is

11752

