This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FineDance: A Fine-grained Choreography Dataset
for 3D Full Body Dance Generation
Ronghui Li1∗ , Junfan Zhao1∗ ,Yachao Zhang1 ,
Mingyang Su1 , Zeping Ren1 ,Han Zhang2 ,Yansong Tang1 , Xiu Li1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Northwestern Polytechnical University
{lrh22, yf-zhao21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {yachaozhang, tang.yansong, li.xiu}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Figure 1. A conceptual overview. We release a large-scale professional 3D motion capture dance dataset FineDance, and propose a
choreography network FineNet. Training with FineDance, FineNet can generate multi-genre dances with expressive hand movements.

Abstract
Generating full-body and multi-genre dance sequences
from given music is a challenging task, due to the limitations of existing datasets and the inherent complexity of the
fine-grained hand motion and dance genres. To address
these problems, we propose FineDance, which contains
14.6 hours of music-dance paired data, with fine-grained
hand motions, fine-grained genres (22 dance genres), and
accurate posture. To the best of our knowledge, FineDance
is the largest music-dance paired dataset with the most
dance genres. Additionally, to address monotonous and
unnatural hand movements existing in previous methods,
we propose a full-body dance generation network, which
utilizes the diverse generation capabilities of the diffusion
model to solve monotonous problems, and use expert nets
to solve unreal problems. To further enhance the genrematching and long-term stability of generated dances, we
∗ equal contribution, † corresponding author

propose a Genre&Coherent aware Retrieval Module. Besides, we propose a novel metric named Genre Matching Score to evaluate the genre-matching degree between
dance and music. Quantitative and qualitative experiments
demonstrate the quality of FineDance, and the state-of-theart performance of FineNet. The FineDance Dataset and
more qualitative samples can be found at website.

1. Introduction
Music and dance are two enduring art forms that can express a wide range of human emotions, and they have become essential elements in modern entertainment industries
such as concerts, movies, and games[11]. However, creating high-quality 3D dance animations can be a costly and
complex process that often involves skilled dancers, engineers, and expensive motion-capture equipment[5]. As a result, there is growing interest in using artificial intelligence
(AI) to generate 3D dance animations from music, which
10234

