This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NSF: Neural Surface Fields for Human Modeling from Monocular Depth
Yuxuan Xue1,2,* , Bharat Lal Bhatnagar1,2,3,4,* , Riccardo Marin1,2 , Nikolaos Sarafianos4 , Yuanlu Xu4 ,
Gerard Pons-Moll1,2,3,† , Tony Tung4 ,
1
Tübingen AI Center 2 University of Tübingen
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics 4 Meta Reality Labs Research
†
Project Lead
{yuxuan.xue, riccardo.marin, gerard.pons-moll}@uni-tuebingen.de
{bharatbhatnagar, nsarafianos, yuanluxu, tony.tung}@meta.com

polo

gy

Neural Implicit Surface

y Re

solu

tion

& To

Re-animation

itrar
Arb

Neural Fields on Surface

Reconstruction

Texture Transfer

w/o remeshing
Partial Shapes from
Monocular Depth Frame

Input

Coherent Mesh Surface over different frames

NSF: Neural Surface Fields

Mesh reconstruction with arbitrary resolution

Applications

Figure 1. Given a sequence of monocular depth frames of a person, NSF learns a detailed clothed body model of the person. The clothed body model is
controllable and can be used for reconstruction and re-animation at arbitrary mesh resolution while maintaining the coherency whithout retraining.

Abstract
Obtaining personalized 3D animatable avatars from a
monocular camera has several real world applications in
gaming, virtual try-on, animation, and VR/XR, etc. However, it is very challenging to model dynamic and finegrained clothing deformations from such sparse data. Existing methods for modeling 3D humans from depth data
have limitations in terms of computational efficiency, mesh
coherency, and flexibility in resolution and topology. For instance, reconstructing shapes using implicit functions and
extracting explicit meshes per frame is computationally expensive and cannot ensure coherent meshes across frames.
Moreover, predicting per-vertex deformations on a predesigned human template with a discrete surface lacks flexibility in resolution and topology. To overcome these limi-

tations, we propose a novel method ‘NSF : Neural Surface
Fields’ for modeling 3D clothed humans from monocular
depth. NSF defines a neural field solely on the base surface which models a continuous and flexible displacement
field. NSF can be adapted to the base surface with different resolution and topology without retraining at inference time. Compared to existing approaches, our method
eliminates the expensive per-frame surface extraction while
maintaining mesh coherency, and is capable of reconstructing meshes with arbitrary resolution without retraining. To
foster research in this direction, we release our code in
project page at: https://yuxuan-xue.com/nsf.

* denotes equal contribution

15049

