This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Convex Decomposition of Indoor Scenes
Vaibhav Vavilala
UIUC

David Forsyth
UIUC

Abstract
We describe a method to parse a complex, cluttered indoor scene into primitives which offer a parsimonious abstraction of scene structure. Our primitives are simple convexes. Our method uses a learned regression procedure to
parse a scene into a fixed number of convexes from RGBD
input, and can optionally accept segmentations to improve
the decomposition. The result is then polished with a descent method which adjusts the convexes to produce a very
good fit, and greedily removes superfluous primitives. Because the entire scene is parsed, we can evaluate using
traditional depth, normal, and segmentation error metrics.
Our evaluation procedure demonstrates that the error from
our primitive representation is comparable to that of predicting depth from a single image.

1. Introduction
Primitive based abstractions of geometry offer simpler
reasoning – it is easier, for example, to deal with a fridge
as a cuboid than attend to the detailed curves around a corner. But obtaining primitive representations that abstract
usefully and accurately has been hard. Parsing isolated objects into parts has seen considerable recent progress, but
parsing indoor scenes into collections of primitives has remained difficult. We describe a method to decompose indoor scenes into convex primitives which largely describe
the scene. Our method is trained on labeled RGBD + semantic segmentation maps, and the predicted decomposition can be refined on depth + segmentation maps that are
predicted from a suitable pretrained network.
Our method draws on a long history of fitting primitives
to objects with two main methods (review Sec. 2). A descent method chooses primitives for a given geometry by
minimizing a cost function. These methods are plagued by
local minima and robustness issues. A regression method
uses a learned predictor to map geometry to primitives and
their parameters. These methods can pool examples to
avoid local minima, but may not get the best prediction for a
given input. Our method uses regression to predict an initial

Figure 1. Our method decomposes complex cluttered indoor
scenes into simple geometric shapes. The segmentation itself is supervised from known labels, and the losses attempt to capture the
geometric information in the depth map input with a pre-defined
number of convexes. A convex decomposition predicted by a neural network is the input to a refinement process that removes excess
parts while improving the fit. Top row: Test RGB image, depth
map input, ground truth normals. Bottom row: predicted segmentation, predicted depth map, predicted normals. Notice how
strongly the predicted depth and normals match the ground truth.
Different from previous work, our method generally captures the
whole input, allowing traditional depth and normal error metrics.

decomposition, then applies descent to polish the primitives
for each particular test geometry. We show that both steps
are critical to achieving a good fit.
It can be hard to tell if a primitive based representation
captures the abstraction one wants. But for a representation
to be useful, it must have three necessary properties:
1. Accuracy: The primitives should represent the original geometry. As Section 4 demonstrates, we do
not need to create metrics specifically for scene parsing and instead existing evaluation procedures from
depth/segmentation prediction literature are sufficient.
2. Segmentation: Generally, the decomposition should
“make sense.” For isolated objects, this means that
each primitive should correspond to an object part
(which is difficult to evaluate). For scenes, this means
that each primitive should span no more than one object. An object might be explained by multiple primitives, but a primitive should not explain multiple ob-

9176

