This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deformable Neural Radiance Fields using RGB and Event Cameras
Qi Ma1 Danda Pani Paudel1,3 Ajad Chhatkuli1 Luc Van Gool1,2,3
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich 2 VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven 3 INSAIT, Sofia University

Abstract
Modeling Neural Radiance Fields for fast-moving deformable objects from visual data alone is a challenging
problem. A major issue arises due to the high deformation and low acquisition rates. To address this problem,
we propose to use event cameras that offer very fast acquisition of visual change in an asynchronous manner. In
this work, we develop a novel method to model the deformable neural radiance fields using RGB and event cameras. The proposed method uses the asynchronous stream
of events and calibrated sparse RGB frames. In our setup,
the camera pose at the individual events –required to integrate them into the radiance fields– remains unknown.
Our method jointly optimizes these poses and the radiance
field. This happens efficiently by leveraging the collection
of events at once and actively sampling the events during
learning. Experiments conducted on both realistically rendered graphics and real-world datasets demonstrate a significant benefit of the proposed method over the state-ofthe-art and the compared baseline. This shows a promising
direction for modeling deformable neural radiance fields
in real-world dynamic scenes. We release our code at:
https://qimaqi.github.io/DE-NeRF.github.io/

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have shown great success in synthesizing photorealistic images by implicitly representing rigid 3D scenes. Modeling non-rigid scenes in
such manner is a much more difficult task. Recently, several methods have been proposed to model dynamic neural
radiance fields. They aim to model rather slowly deforming
radiance fields [5, 15, 16, 6, 30]. The slow deformation assumption is insufficient in scenarios involving fast-moving
objects or, equivalently, low frame- rate cameras. In other
words, the existing methods cannot capture fast-deforming
radiance fields due to the limited frame rate of RGB cameras. To address this problem, we propose to add an event
camera that provides information about the radiance change
asynchronously.
Event cameras capture radiance changes, also in the

Time

Figure 1. Our framework takes the aligned frames and events captured by a dual RGB-Event camera setup as input. Our method
captures fast-moving objects and is capable of rendering a freeviewpoint representation at given timestamps. The figures show
the flames’ reconstruction with high quality and correct geometry.

presence of fast motions. However, harnessing this benefit comes with its own challenges, mainly due to (i) the unknown absolute radiance at the event location and (ii) the
unknown pose of the camera at the time of the event. The
former challenge can be addressed by using a hybrid system
of RGB and event cameras. We address the latter challenge
of pose determination with a novel method.
Previous methods to deal with the pose of event cameras
either do not treat the events to be asynchronous [10, 9]
or assume that the event camera’s pose is known at all
times [21]. We advocate that the event streams must be
treated asynchronously to maximally utilize their temporal
precision, in keeping with earlier work [23]. On the other
hand, we argue that the assumption of known poses for all
asynchronous events is simply impractical. Instead, we assume that only the poses of subsequent RGB frames are
known. The poses of the events are derived from their associated time stamps, by learning to map time to the evolving camera poses. During this process, the known poses of
the RGB frames and the non-rigid deformation prior of the

3590

