This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReNeRF: Relightable Neural Radiance Fields with Nearfield Lighting
Yingyan Xu1,2
Gaspard Zoss2
Prashanth Chandran2
Markus Gross1,2
Derek Bradley2
Paulo Gotardo2 *
1
2
ETH Zürich
DisneyResearch|Studios
{yingyan.xu,grossm}@inf.ethz.ch, gotardop@gmail.com
{gaspard.zoss,prashanth.chandran,derek.bradley}@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
Recent work on radiance fields and volumetric inverse
rendering (e.g., NeRFs) has provided excellent results in
building data-driven models of real scenes for novel view
synthesis with high photorealism. While full control over
viewpoint is achieved, scene lighting is typically “baked”
into the model and cannot be changed; other methods only
capture limited variation in lighting or make restrictive assumptions about the captured scene. These limitations prevent the application on arbitrary materials and novel 3D
environments with complex, distinct lighting. In this paper, we target the application scenario of capturing highfidelity assets for neural relighting in controlled studio conditions, but without requiring a dense light stage. Instead,
we leverage a small number of area lights commonly used
in photogrammetry. We propose ReNeRF, a relightable radiance field model based on the intuitive and powerful approach of image-based relighting, which implicitly captures
global light transport (for arbitrary objects) without complex, error-prone simulations. Thus, our new method is
simple and provides full control over viewpoint and lighting, without simplistic assumptions about how light interacts with the scene. In addition, ReNeRF does not rely on
the usual assumption of distant lighting – during training,
we explicitly account for the distance between 3D points in
the volume and point samples on the light sources. Thus, at
test time, we achieve better generalization to novel, continuous lighting directions, including nearfield lighting effects.

1. Introduction
Neural 3D scene representations such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) and volumetric neural rendering [28,
29] have recently demonstrated the ability to model the real
3D world with impressive ease and photorealism, making
this task as easy as capturing a short video using a smart
* Now at Google

Figure 1. We propose ReNeRF, a relightable neural radiance field
trained on multi-view imagery captured under simple OLAT area
lights (left). Once trained, our method allows re-rendering under
novel viewpoints and illumination conditions, including both environment maps and nearfield light sources (right).

phone. NeRFs can synthesize novel images from controlled
and arbitrary viewpoints, thus enabling virtual fly-throughs
within captured scenes [24, 46, 47]. In addition, these techniques are highly valuable in many applications (e.g., feature films, games, VR, AR, telepresence), whose virtual environments can be populated with photoreal 3D assets simply by photographing the real world. In this paper, we target
the application scenario of capturing such high-fidelity rendering assets within controlled studio conditions, leveraging
existing photogrammetry hardware.
NeRFs represent 3D objects and scenes using neural networks (multilayer perceptrons, or MLPs) to model a continuous look-up function that encodes the density and color at
any 3D point within the observed volume of space. As a key
limitation, the scene lighting is typically fixed (“baked”)
into the model’s colors and cannot be altered. As such,
a model captured within a particular lighting environment
(e.g., in studio) cannot be rendered photorealistically within
another environment that has its own, distinct lighting conditions (e.g., in a feature film). Therefore, we require the
ability to photorealistically relight these neural field mod-

22581

