This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Once Detected, Never Lost:
Surpassing Human Performance in Offline LiDAR based 3D Object Detection
Lue Fan1,2,3

Yuxue Yang1,2
Yiming Mao4
Feng Wang6
Yuntao Chen5
6
1,2,5,7
Naiyan Wang
Zhaoxiang Zhang
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS) 3 School of Future Technology, UCAS
4
Hunan University 5 Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics (HKISI CAS)
6
TuSimple 7 State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems
{fanlue2019, yangyuxue2023, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn mym0729@hnu.edu.cn
{feng.wff, chenyuntao08, winsty}@gmail.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
As a fundamental task in autonomous driving, 3D object
detection has made great progress in recent years, in both
LiDAR-based detectors [44, 17, 49, 31] and image-based
detectors [40, 15, 20, 21]. Such success is primarily attributed to the data-driven paradigm, which requires a massive amount of labeled data. As a result, there is growing
interest in developing a high-performance offline detector
for auto-labeling.
To achieve a high-performance offline detector, we first

Normalized Vehicle AP

This paper aims for high-performance offline LiDARbased 3D object detection. We first observe that experienced human annotators annotate objects from a trackcentric perspective. They first label objects in a track with
clear shapes, and then leverage the temporal coherence to
infer the annotations of obscure objects. Drawing inspiration from this, we propose a high-performance offline detector in a track-centric perspective instead of the conventional object-centric perspective. Our method features a
bidirectional tracking module and a track-centric learning
module. Such design allows our detector to infer and refine a complete track once the object is detected at a certain moment. We refer this characteristic to “onCe detecTed, neveR Lost” and name the proposed system CTRL.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the remarkable performance of our method, surpassing the human-level annotating accuracy and previous state-of-the-art methods in the
highly competitive Waymo Open Dataset leaderboard without model ensemble. The code is available at https:
//github.com/tusen-ai/SST.

Human

Ours

110
105

100
95

90

Figure 1: Our method consistently outperforms human performance in Waymo Open Dataset. Human performance is
reported by 3DAL [30]. We normalize the AP of human
performance to 100 for better visualization.

analyze the behavior of human annotators in a standard sequence labeling process. We find that humans annotate objects from a track-centric perspective, meaning that they utilize the temporal motion cues of objects to achieve precise
labeling. In particular, annotators first label easy samples in
a sequence, and then use temporal cues to propagate these
high-confidence labels to other time steps, when the objects may contain very few points and are hard to be accurately labeled individually. In this process, once an object is detected in a certain moment, human annotators continuously track that object and predict its movements over
time, even if there are some periods when the object is temporarily invisible. An important fact is exploited here: a
detected object will not disappear unless it moves outside
the perception range. Inspired by human labeling behav-

19820

