This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ATT3D: Amortized Text-to-3D Object Synthesis
Jonathan Lorraine Kevin Xie Xiaohui Zeng Chen-Hsuan Lin
Nicholas Sharp Tsung-Yi Lin Ming-Yu Liu Sanja Fidler
NVIDIA Corporation

Existing
Methods
Existing
Methods
“A pig riding a
motorbike wearing a
backpack .. top hat”
“A monkey sitting

ATT3D:
Amortized
Text-to-3D
ATT3D: Amortized
Text-to-3D
“A pig riding a
motorbike wearing a
backpack .. top hat”

NeRF
expensive per-prompt
optimization

“A monkey sitting

in a chair wearing
a suit .. party hat”

in a chair wearing
a suit .. party hat”

...

...etc...

Towaki Takikawa
James Lucas

...etc...

NeRF
text
NeRF
mapping
network
trained offline

...

Requires
1 hour
Requires
1sec <
per1 sec
prompt
1hr per
prompt
Figure 1: Our method initially trains one network to output 3D objects consistent with various text prompts. After, when
we receive an unseen prompt, we produce an accurate object in < 1 second, with 1 GPU. Existing methods re-train the
entire network for every prompt, requiring a long delay for the optimization to complete. Further, we can interpolate between
prompts for user-guided asset generation (Fig. 3). We include a project webpage with an overview and videos.

Abstract
Text-to-3D modelling has seen exciting progress by combining generative text-to-image models with image-to-3D
methods like Neural Radiance Fields. DreamFusion recently achieved high-quality results but requires a lengthy,
per-prompt optimization to create 3D objects. To address
this, we amortize optimization over text prompts by training
on many prompts simultaneously with a unified model, instead of separately. With this, we share computation across
a prompt set, training in less time than per-prompt optimization. Our framework – Amortized Text-to-3D (ATT3D) –
enables knowledge sharing between prompts to generalize
to unseen setups and smooth interpolations between text for
novel assets and simple animations.

1. Introduction
3D content creation is important because it allows for
more immersive and engaging experiences in industries
such as entertainment, education, and marketing. However,
3D design is challenging due to technical complexity of
the 3D modeling software, and the artistic skills required
to create high-quality models and animations. Text-to-3D
(TT3D) generative tools have the potential to democratize
3D content creation by relieving these limitations. To make
this technology successful, we desire tools that provide fast
responses to users while being inexpensive for the operator.

Recent TT3D methods [1, 2] allow users to generate
high-quality 3D models from text-prompts but use a lengthy
(⇠ 15 minute to > 1 hour [1, 2]) per-prompt optimization.
Having users wait between each iteration of prompt engineering results in a sporadic and time-consuming design
process. Further, generation for a new prompt requires multiple GPUs and uses large text-to-image models [3–5], creating a prohibitive cost for the pipeline operator.
We split the TT3D process into two stages. First, we optimize one model offline to generate 3D objects for many
different text prompts simultaneously. This amortizes optimization over the prompts, by sharing work between similar
instances. The second, user-facing stage uses our amortized
model in a simple feed-forward pass to quickly generate an
object given text, with no further optimization required.
Our method, Amortized text-to-3D (ATT3D), produces a
model which can generate an accurate 3D object in < 1 second, with only 1 consumer-grade GPU. This TT3D pipeline
can be deployed more cheaply, with a real-time user experience. Our offline stage trains the ATT3D model significantly faster than optimizing prompts individually while
retaining or even surpassing quality, by leveraging compositionality in the parts underlying each 3D object. We also
gain a new user-interaction ability to interpolate between
prompts for novel asset generation and animations.
1
17946

