This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scene-Aware Label Graph Learning for Multi-Label Image Classification
Xuelin Zhu1 Jian Liu3 Weijia Liu1 Jiawei Ge1 Bo Liu2,4 Jiuxin Cao1,4 *
1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
3
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China 4 Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing, China
{zhuxuelin,weijia-liu,jiawei ge,bliu,jx.cao}@seu.edu.cn, rex.lj@antgroup.com

Abstract

Scene-Aware Label Graph Learning
Semantic attention module

Multi-label image classification refers to assigning a set
of labels for an image. One of the main challenges of this
task is how to effectively capture the correlation among labels. Existing studies on this issue mostly rely on the statistical label co-occurrence or semantic similarity of labels. However, an important fact is ignored that the cooccurrence of labels is closely related with image scenes
(indoor, outdoor, etc.), which is a vital characteristic in
multi-label image classification. In this paper, a novel
scene-aware label graph learning framework is proposed,
which is capable of learning visual representations for labels while fully perceiving their co-occurrence relationships
under variable scenes. Specifically, our framework is able
to detect scene categories of images without relying on
manual annotations, and keeps track of the co-occurring
labels by maintaining a global co-occurrence matrix for
each scene category throughout the whole training phase.
These scene-independent co-occurrence matrices are further employed to guide the interactions among label representations in a graph propagation manner towards accurate
label prediction. Extensive experiments on public benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our framework.

1. Introduction
Multi-label image classification is a fundamental task in
computer vision, which requires to recognize multiple labels for an image. A main issue for this task is how to fully
mine the correlation among these labels. Implicit methods [23, 5] resort to sequential models or graph models to
exploit the latent co-occurrence relationship among labels.
Instead, explicit methods directly model a co-occurrence
probability matrix among labels from data, such as datasetlevel label co-occurrence [3] and instance-level label cooccurrence [31]. However, the former is obtained statisti* Corresponding author.

person

Label embedding
person

bert

chair

bert

vase

bert

tv

bert

chair

Label co-occurrence
scene detection

vase

tv

Semantic interaction
chair

person

vase

tv

scene 0 scene 1

Figure 1. A brief illustration of the proposed scene-aware label
graph learning framework. The semantic attention module maps
the label embeddings into visual representations, and the label cooccurrence module detects the scene category of the input image
and updates the co-occurrence frequency matrix accordingly. The
semantic interaction module constructs a label graph for the interaction of label representations under the guidance of the sceneaware co-occurrence matrix for final prediction.

cally on the entire data, which is coarse and may lead to
wrong interactions between labels. As for the latter, it is
difficult to learn an accurate co-occurrence matrix for each
image, which limits its utility in guiding label interactions.
In this work, we consider an important fact that the label co-occurrence heavily relies on the scene categories
of images. For example, we expect chairs or tables cooccurring with persons in an indoor scene, while cars or
buildings instead in an outdoor scene. Therefore, a natural idea is to divide the training images into several independent groups according to their scene categories and
count the label co-occurrence matrix for each group separately. Then the images in each group share the same cooccurrence matrix for subsequent feature interactions. Obviously, the obtained group-level label co-occurrence can
provide more accurate guidance for feature interaction between labels than the dataset-level one [3] and the instance-

1473

