This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scalable Video Object Segmentation with Simplified Framework
Antoni B. Chan1
Qiangqiang Wu1
Tianyu Yang2 * Wei Wu1
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
International Digital Economy Academy
{qiangqwu2-c, weiwu56-c-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, tianyu-yang@outlook.com
abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
The current popular methods for video object segmentation (VOS) implement feature matching through several
hand-crafted modules that separately perform feature extraction and matching. However, the above hand-crafted
designs empirically cause insufficient target interaction,
thus limiting the dynamic target-aware feature learning
in VOS. To tackle these limitations, this paper presents a
scalable Simplified VOS (SimVOS) framework to perform
joint feature extraction and matching by leveraging a single transformer backbone. Specifically, SimVOS employs a
scalable ViT backbone for simultaneous feature extraction
and matching between query and reference features. This
design enables SimVOS to learn better target-ware features
for accurate mask prediction. More importantly, SimVOS
could directly apply well-pretrained ViT backbones (e.g.,
MAE [21]) for VOS, which bridges the gap between VOS
and large-scale self-supervised pre-training. To achieve
a better performance-speed trade-off, we further explore
within-frame attention and propose a new token refinement
module to improve the running speed and save computational cost. Experimentally, our SimVOS achieves stateof-the-art results on popular video object segmentation
benchmarks, i.e., DAVIS-2017 (88.0% J &F), DAVIS-2016
(92.9% J &F) and YouTube-VOS 2019 (84.2% J &F),
without applying any synthetic video or BL30K pre-training
used in previous VOS approaches. Our code and models
are available at https://github.com/jimmy-dq/
SimVOS.git.

1. Introduction
Video Object Segmentation (VOS) is an essential and
fundamental computer vision tasks in video analysis [30,
47, 48, 57, 49, 51] and scene understanding [28, 12, 46, 22,
15, 45]. In this paper, we focus on the semi-supervised VOS
* Corresponding Author

task, which aims to segment and track the objects of interest
in each frame of a video, using only the mask annotation of
the target in the first frame as given. The key challenges in
VOS mainly lie in two aspects: 1) how to effectively distinguish the target from the background distractors; 2) how to
accurately match the target across various frames in a video.
In the past few years, modern matching-based VOS approaches have gained much attention due to their promising
performance on popular VOS benchmarks [54, 32, 33]. The
typical method STM [30] and its following works [8, 57, 7]
mainly use several customized modules to perform semisupervised VOS, including feature extraction, target matching and mask prediction modules. The whole mask prediction process in these approaches can be divided into
two sequential steps: 1) feature extraction on the previous
frames (i.e., memory frames) and the new incoming frame
(i.e., search frame); and 2) target matching in the search
frame, which is commonly achieved by calculating perpixel matching between the memory frames’ embeddings
and the search frame embedding.
Despite the favorable performance achieved by the above
matching-based approaches, the separated feature extraction and matching modules used in these methods still have
several limitations. Firstly, the separate schema is unable
to extract dynamic target-aware features, since there is no
interaction between the memory and search frame embeddings during the feature extraction. In this way, the feature
extraction module is treated as the fixed feature extractor
after offline training and thus cannot handle objects with
large appearance variations in different frames of a video.
Secondly, the matching module built upon the extracted
features needs to be carefully designed to perform sufficient interaction between query and memory features. Recent works (e.g., FEELVOS [42] and CFBI [56]) explore to
use local and global matching mechanisms. However, their
performance is still degraded due to the limited expressive
power of the extracted fixed features.
To solve the aforementioned problems, this paper
presents a Simplified VOS framework (SimVOS) for joint

13879

