This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Benchmarking Low-Shot Robustness to Natural Distribution Shifts
Aaditya Singh∗,⋆,†

Kartik Sarangmath∗
Prithvijit Chattopadhyay
Georgia Institute of Technology

Judy Hoffman

{singaadi, kartiksarangmath, prithvijit3, judy}@gatech.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
In the past decade, Computer Vision has made significant
progress due to advanced architectures like Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) and Vision Transformers (ViTs),
large datasets, and sophisticated training strategies [1, 2,
3, 4]. However, early learning techniques heavily focused
their evaluation on ImageNet [5] performance, which raised
concerns about their ability to generalize to distribution
shifts [6, 7]. To address this, researchers have proposed a
wide-range of evaluation datasets [8, 9, 10, 11, 12] that can
be used to measure out-of-distribution (OOD) performance
of models trained and validated with in-domain (ID) data.
Recent methods [13, 14, 15, 16, 17] use self-supervised
or large-scale vision-language pre-trained models (such as
CLIP [4]) and fine-tune them on fully labelled ID data to
achieve impressive performance on such datasets. Unfortunately, fine-tuning requires large amounts of data and compute that may not be accessible to most practitioners. More∗ Equal contribution; ⋆ Project lead; † Currently affiliated with AWS AI
Labs, work done prior to joining.

Classifier

Robustness to natural distribution shifts has seen remarkable progress thanks to recent pre-training strategies
combined with better fine-tuning methods. However, such
fine-tuning assumes access to large amounts of labelled
data, and the extent to which the observations hold when
the amount of training data is not as high remains unknown.
We address this gap by performing the first in-depth study
of robustness to various natural distribution shifts in different low-shot regimes: spanning datasets, architectures,
pre-trained initializations, and state-of-the-art robustness
interventions. Most importantly, we find that there is no
single model of choice that is often more robust than others,
and existing interventions can fail to improve robustness on
some datasets even if they do so in the full-shot regime. We
hope that our work will motivate the community to focus on
this problem of practical importance. Our code and lowshot subsets are publicly available at this url.

(b) Out-of-domain Evaluation

In-domain data
(few images)

Pre-trained
Model
(a) Low-Shot Finetuning

Out-of-domain
test data

Figure 1: Low-Shot Robustness Setting. (a) We assume access
to a pre-trained model trained on large-scale datasets such as ImageNet [5] and limited in-domain images (in the order of thousands)
for training. We use different kinds of fine-tuning methods that
have been shown to improve robustness when there is typically order of magnitudes higher training data. (b) We then evaluate the
(low-shot) fine-tuned model on out-of-domain (OOD) data.

over, it can be difficult and expensive to collect and consistently annotate such data, especially in settings like camera
traps where images can vary significantly in quality, lighting, and pose (e.g iWildCam [18]). Such challenges are
also echoed by prior work [19] and compounded by the fact
that many images may belong to rare or endangered species,
making annotations even more difficult to obtain. Therefore, it is important to study which models and fine-tuning
methods provide strong OOD robustness performance when
trained with few ID images. We refer to this setting of finetuning a pre-trained model on low-shot ID images followed
by evaluation on OOD images as the “low-shot robustness”
setting (see Fig. 1).
From works that demonstrate robustness in the fullshot regime, we seem to arrive at the following conclusions for robustness to natural distribution shifts in the fullshot regime: (1) Amongst ImageNet pre-trained initializations, SSL ViTs are more robust than their supervised and
CNN counterparts, with the more recent ones being better
[13, 14]. (2) Even without additional robustness interventions (i.e. methods to improve robustness), pre-trained models on large external datasets such as CLIP [4] provide superior robustness [16]. (3) Such models when combined with
16232

