This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ShiftNAS: Improving One-shot NAS via Probability Shift
Mingyang Zhang, Xinyi Yu,* Haodong Zhao, Linlin Ou∗
Zhejiang University of Technology
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
yuxy@zjut.edu.cn, linlinou@zjut.edu.cn

Abstract
One-shot Neural architecture search (One-shot NAS) has
been proposed as a time-efficient approach to obtain optimal subnet architectures and weights under different complexity cases by training only once. However, the subnet
performance obtained by weight sharing is often inferior
to the performance achieved by retraining. In this paper,
we investigate the performance gap and attribute it to the
use of uniform sampling, which is a common approach in
supernet training. Uniform sampling concentrates training
resources on subnets with intermediate computational resources, which are sampled with high probability. However,
subnets with different complexity regions require different
optimal training strategies for optimal performance.
To address the problem of uniform sampling, we propose
ShiftNAS, a method that can adjust the sampling probability based on the complexity of subnets. We achieve this
by evaluating the performance variation of subnets with
different complexity and designing an architecture generator that can accurately and efficiently provide subnets with
the desired complexity. Both the sampling probability and
the architecture generator can be trained end-to-end in a
gradient-based manner. With ShiftNAS, we can directly obtain the optimal model architecture and parameters for a
given computational complexity. We evaluate our approach
on multiple visual network models, including convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) and vision transformers (ViTs),
and demonstrate that ShiftNAS is model-agnostic. Experimental results on ImageNet show that ShiftNAS can improve
the performance of one-shot NAS without additional consumption. Source codes are available at GitHub.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely applied to the field of computer vision with remarkable success [6, 8]. However, the deployment of these vision net* Xinyi Yu and Linlin Ou are corresponding authors.

Figure 1: A conceptual overview of our ShiftNAS. Focusing on the computational resource (e.g. FLOPs), ShiftNAS split a search space into several parts where subnets
have close computational complexity. In stochastic supernet training, ShiftNAS first samples computational complexity according to probability, then an architecture generator samples the subnet with desired computational complexity. The probability distribution is dynamically updated
with stochastic training by estimating the performance variation of each sub-space.

works on edge devices still has some limitations, such as the
massive model sizes and excessive computation overhead
[9, 10, 20, 24]. In addition, designing architectures artificially in a trial-and-error manner is a resource-consuming
task that requires not only architectural skills but also domain expertise. Consequently, how to acquire optimal architectures that balance latency and accuracy efficiently is
of paramount importance.
Recent advancements in neural architecture search
(NAS) methods, such as [22, 7, 30, 35], have led to significant improvements in the performance of practical applications by automatically searching for optimal architectures
within a defined search space. However, traditional NAS
methods typically require a substantial computation budget
[23, 35]. In order to speed up training and reduce the resource consumption of the training process, one-shot NAS
15919

