This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fast Neural Scene Flow
Xueqian Li∗1 Jianqiao Zheng1 Francesco Ferroni∗2 Jhony Kaesemodel Pontes∗3 Simon Lucey∗1
1
2
3
The University of Adelaide
NVIDIA
Latitude AI

Figure 1. Scene flow is an important problem as it provides low-level motion cues for many downstream tasks. State-of-the-art learning
methods are usually fast and can achieve impressive performance on in-domain data, but usually fail to generalize to out-of-the-distribution
(OOD) data or handle dense point clouds. In this paper, we focus on a runtime optimization-based neural scene flow pipeline. In (a) one can
see its application in the densification of lidar. However, in (c) one sees that the major drawback is the extensive computation time. We
identify that the common speedup strategy in network architectures for coordinate networks has little effect on scene flow acceleration [see
green (b)] unlike image reconstruction [see pink (b)]. With the dominant computational burden stemming instead from the Chamfer loss
function, we propose to use a distance transform-based loss function to accelerate [see purple (b)], which achieves up to 30× speedup and
on-par estimation performance compared to NSFP [see (c)]. When tested on 8k points, it is as efficient [see (c)] as leading learning methods,
achieving real-time performance.

Abstract
Neural Scene Flow Prior (NSFP) is of significant interest
to the vision community due to its inherent robustness to
out-of-distribution (OOD) effects and its ability to deal with
dense lidar points. The approach utilizes a coordinate neural
network to estimate scene flow at runtime, without any
training. However, it is up to 100 times slower than current
state-of-the-art learning methods. In other applications
such as image, video, and radiance function reconstruction
innovations in speeding up the runtime performance of
coordinate networks have centered upon architectural
changes. In this paper, we demonstrate that scene flow
is different—with the dominant computational bottleneck
stemming from the loss function itself (i.e., Chamfer
distance). Further, we rediscover the distance transform
(DT) as an efficient, correspondence-free loss function that
dramatically speeds up the runtime optimization. Our fast
neural scene flow (FNSF) approach reports for the first
time real-time performance comparable to learning methods,
* Part of the work was done while at Argo AI. Corresponding e-mail:
xueqian.li@adelaide.edu.au. Code available at https://github.com/LilacLee/FastNSF.git

without any training or OOD bias on two of the largest open
autonomous driving (AV) lidar datasets Waymo Open [62]
and Argoverse [8].

1. Introduction
Neural Scene Flow Prior (NSFP) [37] is considered the
dominant method in open-world perception [47] and scene
densification [37, 69] using lidar (see Fig. 1 (a)). NSFP
achieves state-of-the-art scene flow estimates from dense
lidar point clouds (up to 150k+ points) and works on a
variety of sensor setups with little to no refinement or
adaptation. Unlike supervised or unsupervised learningbased methods, NSFP does not require learning from large
offline datasets and has no limits on point density (<8k for
most learning methods). Instead, it leverages the architecture
of a neural network to implicitly regularize the flow estimate
and employs a runtime optimization that can easily scale to
large out-of-distribution (OOD) scenes, which is a challenge
for current learning-based methods [15, 31, 37, 47, 51].
A fundamental drawback, however, to NSFP is the speed
of its runtime optimization which is in some instances of
orders of magnitude slower than its learning counterparts

9878

