This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COOP: Decoupling and Coupling of Whole-Body Grasping Pose Generation
Yanzhao Zheng

Yunzhou Shi

Yuhao Cui Zhongzhou Zhao
Alibaba DAMO Academy

Zhiling Luo† Wei Zhou

{zhengyanzhao.zyz,yunzhou.syz,cyh262498,zhongzhou.zhaozz,godot.lzl,fayi.zw}@alibaba-inc.com

Figure 1. COOP can consistently generate realistic whole-body grasping poses as the position of the object changes. The figure shows
generated poses for 10 people grasping novel objects in the vicinity of them.

Abstract
Generating life-like whole-body human grasping has
garnered significant attention in the field of computer
graphics. Existing works have demonstrated the effectiveness of keyframe-guided motion generation framework,
witch focus on modeling the grasping motions of humans
in temporal sequence when the target objects are placed in
front of them. However, the generated grasping poses of the
human body in the key-frames are limited, failing to capture
the full range of grasping poses that humans are capable of.
To address this issue, we propose a novel framework
called COOP (DeCOupling and COupling of Whole-Body
GrasPing Pose Generation) to synthesize life-like wholebody poses that cover the widest range of human grasping
capabilities. In this framework, we first decouple the wholebody pose into body pose and hand pose and model them
separately, which allows us to pre-train the body model with
out-of-domain data easily. Then, we couple these two gen† Corresponding author.

erated body parts through a unified optimization algorithm.
Furthermore, we design a simple evaluation method
to evaluate the generalization ability of models in generating grasping poses for objects placed at different positions. The experimental results demonstrate the efficacy and superiority of our method. And COOP holds
great potential as a plug-and-play component for other
domains in whole-body pose generation. Our models
and code are available at https://github.com/
zhengyanzhao1997/COOP.

1. Introduction
Grasping is a common activity in human daily life. To
make virtual humans act realistically in a 3D scene, an
avatar needs to be able to perform diverse grasping poses,
similar to those of real humans, adapting to the targets from
different positions.
In this paper, we focus on the task of synthesizing lifelike whole-body grasping poses with objects located at var-

2163

