This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiLo: Exploiting High Low Frequency Relations for
Unbiased Panoptic Scene Graph Generation
Zijian Zhou

Miaojing ShiB

Holger Caesar

Department of Informatics

College of Electronic and Information Engineering

Intelligent Vehicles Lab

King’s College London

Tongji University

Delft University of Technology

zijian.zhou@kcl.ac.uk

mshi@tongji.edu.cn

h.caesar@tudelft.nl

Abstract

pla
yin

beside

person

b
loo eside
pla king
yin
g

g

person person

e
sid at
be ing
k
g
loo ayin g
pl asin
ch

be
sid
e

beside

person person
ng
asi
ch

B Corresponding author.

beside

t
ga

Scene Graph Generation (SGG) [49] is a crucial task
in image scene understanding that extracts triplets in the
form of subjects, objects and their relations to build a scene
graph. Subjects and objects are represented with bounding boxes. Since this task links vision and text, it holds
great potential for a variety of applications, including visual
question answering [27], image captioning [21, 8], image
retrieval [32, 53, 51] and visual reasoning [1, 55].
Recently a novel variant of SGG was proposed, which
is Panoptic Scene Graph generation (PSG) [62]. Subjects

person

kin

1. Introduction

(a)
loo

Panoptic Scene Graph generation (PSG) is a recently
proposed task in image scene understanding that aims to
segment the image and extract triplets of subjects, objects
and their relations to build a scene graph. This task is
particularly challenging for two reasons. First, it suffers
from a long-tail problem in its relation categories, making
naive biased methods more inclined to high-frequency relations. Existing unbiased methods tackle the long-tail problem by data/loss rebalancing to favor low-frequency relations. Second, a subject-object pair can have two or more
semantically overlapping relations. While existing methods favor one over the other, our proposed HiLo framework
lets different network branches specialize on low and high
frequency relations, enforce their consistency and fuse the
results. To the best of our knowledge we are the first to
propose an explicitly unbiased PSG method. In extensive
experiments we show that our HiLo framework achieves
state-of-the-art results on the PSG task. We also apply our
method to the Scene Graph Generation task that predicts
boxes instead of masks and see improvements over all baseline methods. Code is available at https://github.
com/franciszzj/HiLo.

sports ball

sports ball

sports ball

Biased method

Unbiased method

Our method

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. An example of the PSG task. We compare the predicted object relations of different approaches. a) An image and
its panoptic segmentation. Two persons and a sports ball are shown
in different colors. b) A biased method predicts mostly high frequency relations. c) An unbiased method predicts mostly low frequency relations. d) Our method predicts both low and high frequency relations, as well as more relations in total.

and objects are represented with panoptic segmentation [35]
masks. Unless stated otherwise, in this work we focus on
PSG, since it is pixel-level accurate and also covers background classes and their relations with foreground objects.
The performance of the PSG model is affected by a longtail problem in its relation categories. For instance, relations
such as over, in front of and holding occur tens of thousands
of times in the PSG dataset [62], while others like swinging and kissing occur only a few dozen times. This severe
class imbalance in the relation categories can lead to model
predictions that are more inclined to high-frequency relations, which poses significant challenges to the application
of panoptic scene graphs in real-world scenarios.
Previous methods [12, 18, 39, 17] have often treated the
long-tail problem of the PSG task as equivalent to the longtail problem in object-centric tasks such as classification
[15, 5, 29] or semantic segmentation [14, 2]. Consequently,

21637

