This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CORE: Co-planarity Regularized Monocular Geometry Estimation
with Weak Supervision
Yuguang Li1 ,

Kai Wang1 , Hui Li1 , Seon-Min Rhee2 , Seungju Han2 , Jihye Kim2 ,
Min Yang1 , Ran Yang1 , Feng Zhu1
1
Samsung R&D Institute China Xi’an (SRCX)
2
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), South Korea
yg.li, k001.wang, hui01.li, s.rhee, sj75.han, jihye32.kim,
min16.yang, ran01.yang, f15.zhu@samsung.com

Abstract
The ill-posed nature of monocular 3D geometry (depth
map and surface normals) estimation makes it rely mostly
on data-driven approaches such as Deep Neural Networks
(DNN). However, data acquisition of surface normals, especially the reliable normals, is acknowledged difficult.
Commonly, reconstruction of surface normals with high
quality is heuristic and time-consuming. Such fact urges
methodologies to minimize dependency on ground-truth
normals when predicting 3D geometry. In this work, we devise CO-planarity REgularized (CORE) loss functions and
Structure-Aware Normal Estimator (SANE). Without involving any knowledge of ground-truth normals, these two designs enable pixel-wise 3D geometry estimation weakly supervised by only ground-truth depth map. For CORE loss
functions, the key idea is to exploit locally linear depthnormal orthogonality under spherical coordinates as pixellevel constraints, and utilize our designed Adaptive Polar
Regularization (APR) to resolve underlying numerical degeneracies. Meanwhile, SANE easily establishes multi-task
learning with CORE loss functions on both depth and surface normal estimation, leading to the whole performance
leap. Extensive experiments present the effectiveness of
our method on various DNN architectures and data benchmarks. The experimental results demonstrate that our depth
estimation achieves the state-of-the-art performance across
all metrics on indoor scenes and comparable performance
on outdoor scenes. In addition, our surface normal estimation is overall superior.

1. Introduction
Depth and surface normals are essential elements of 3D
geometry. With the assistance of surface normals, depth
map is able to faithfully describe the characteristics of the
3D scenes [4], which benefits various 3D applications, e.g.,

Figure 1: Our weakly supervised monocular 3D geometry
estimation. CORE loss functions distinguish our method
from others. Instead of proposing surface normal candidates in local or global depth regions, we properly regularize and utilize the pixel-level depth-normal constraints for
pixel-wise loss functions, which enable the efficient end-toend training with only ground-truth depth map.
3D reconstruction [33, 4], augmented reality [18] and autonomous driving [16]. To recover 3D geometry, monocular depth and surface normal estimation provide the most
convenient solutions, and meanwhile define the challenging
ill-posed problems.
Recent approaches mostly tackle these two ill-posed
problems as genuine data-driven tasks by DNN regression
or classification. However, it is widely acknowledged that
data acquisition of surface normals is not a straightforward
task [22, 8, 41, 3]. Particularly, the reliable surface normals
are much more difficult to be obtained [22, 8, 3]. There
are various commercial sensors such as LiDAR and ToF
to acquire depth map directly, but no alternative available
for surface normals. To acquire surface normals, the common practice is to involve least-square plane fitting from
the depth maps [41]. Unfortunately, these depth maps cap-

8796

