This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Theoretical and Numerical Analysis of 3D Reconstruction Using Point and Line
Incidences
Felix Rydell
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Lindstedtsvägen 25, Stockholm, Sweden
felixry@kth.se

Elima Shehu
University of Osnabrück and MPI MiS
Albrechtstrasse 28a, Osnabrück, Germany
Inselstrasse 22, Leipzig, Germany
elima.shehu@mis.mpg.de

Angélica Torres
Centre de Recerca Matemàtica
Edifici C, Campus UAB, Bellaterra, Spain
atorres@crm.cat

Abstract
We study the joint image of lines incident to points,
meaning the set of image tuples obtained from fixed cameras observing a varying 3D point-line incidence. We prove
a formula for the number of complex critical points of the
triangulation problem that aims to compute a 3D point-line
incidence from noisy images. Our formula works for an
arbitrary number of images and measures the intrinsic difficulty of this triangulation. Additionally, we conduct numerical experiments using homotopy continuation methods,
comparing different approaches of triangulation of such incidences. In our setup, exploiting the incidence relations
gives a notably faster point reconstruction with comparable
accuracy.

Introduction
The Structure-from-Motion pipeline aims to estimate the
camera positions and the relative position of the objects
present in a given set of images. The process starts by identifying point and line features in one image that are recognizable as the same points or lines in another. These
matched features, that we call correspondences, are used
to estimate the camera position and orientation, which then
allow for the triangulation step where the position of the
points and lines is estimated.
In this work, we study the triangulation of points and
lines satisfying a certain incidence relation. Specifically,
we focus on the triangulation of points contained in a single
line; see Figure 1. We note that our methods can also be
used when multiple lines going through a fixed point. We

Figure 1: The illustration of two different types of incidence relations:
(L1) represents the scenario where multiple points are incident to a line,
while (P1) represents the scenario where multiple lines are incident to a
point.

develop the theory for the triangulation of these problems
for an arbitrary number of pinhole cameras assuming complete visibility.
The triangulation of points is well understood and, in
practice, it is efficiently implemented. However, to the
best of our knowledge, incidence relations are not considered in these implementations. The inclusion of line features and incidence relations in the triangulation process
could give a more accurate estimation of scenes as lines are
more robust to noise than points, and incidence relations
appear frequently in interior scenes and man-made scenarios; see [34], [24], [30]. Additionally, in some real data
sets standard feature detection algorithms fail due to a lack
of point correspondences but succeed when line correspondences are taken into account [15].
The main tools in our work are (algebraic) varieties, that
is, the vanishing sets of systems of polynomial equations.
Algebraic varieties have been used extensively to study triangulation of point correspondences [1, 17, 31], line correspondences [7, 16, 29] and minimal problems [12, 13] to

3748

