This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EmoTalk: Speech-Driven Emotional Disentanglement for 3D Face Animation
Ziqiao Peng1

Haoyu Wu1 Zhenbo Song2 Hao Xu3,6 Xiangyu Zhu4
Jun He1 Hongyan Liu5∗ Zhaoxin Fan1,6 *
1
Renmin University of China 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 4 Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Tsinghua University 6 Psyche AI Inc.
{pengziqiao, wuhaoyu556, hejun, fanzhaoxin}@ruc.edu.cn
xiangyu.zhu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Speech-driven 3D face animation aims to generate realistic facial expressions that match the speech content and
emotion. However, existing methods often neglect emotional facial expressions or fail to disentangle them from
speech content. To address this issue, this paper proposes
an end-to-end neural network to disentangle different emotions in speech so as to generate rich 3D facial expressions.
Specifically, we introduce the emotion disentangling encoder (EDE) to disentangle the emotion and content in the
speech by cross-reconstructed speech signals with different
emotion labels. Then an emotion-guided feature fusion decoder is employed to generate a 3D talking face with enhanced emotion. The decoder is driven by the disentangled
identity, emotional, and content embeddings so as to generate controllable personal and emotional styles. Finally,
considering the scarcity of the 3D emotional talking face
data, we resort to the supervision of facial blendshapes,
which enables the reconstruction of plausible 3D faces from
2D emotional data, and contribute a large-scale 3D emotional talking face dataset (3D-ETF) to train the network.
Our experiments and user studies demonstrate that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods and exhibits
more diverse facial movements. We recommend watching the supplementary video: https://ziqiaopeng.
github.io/emotalk

1. Introduction
Dynamic and realistic speech-driven facial animation
has garnered growing interest in virtual reality [50, 11, 12],
computer gaming [36, 10, 2], and film production [26, 51,
7]. For current commercial products, 3D face blendshape
is handcrafted by animators, whereas manual scripts drive
* corresponding authors

“Kids are talking by the door”

Abstract

songzb@njust.edu.cn

liuhy@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn

Happy

Angry

Fear

EmoTalk

hxubl@connect.ust.hk

Disgust

Figure 1. Results of EmoTalk. Given audio input expressing different emotions, EmoTalk produces realistic 3D facial animation
sequences with corresponding emotional expressions as outputs.

facial expressions. Such a process demands substantial expenses and considerable time and labor. As deep learning
techniques are utilized in various scenarios [37], deep endto-end speech-driven facial animation [20, 8, 39, 9, 6] has
been widely studied in industry and academia. Presently,
learning-based 3D facial animations can not only produce
high-quality animation effects but also facilitate cost reduction during production.
However, current methods mainly focus on improving the synchronization between lip movements and
speech [42], neglecting the emotional variation of facial expressions. We argue that emotions are an essential aspect
of human communication and expression, and emotion absence in 3D facial animations may cause the uncanny valley
effect. It is a crucial issue to recover emotional expressions

20687

