This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Point-based Active Learning for Semi-supervised Point Cloud
Semantic Segmentation
Zongyi Xu1† Bo Yuan1† Shanshan Zhao2† Qianni Zhang3 Xinbo Gao1 *
1
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
JD Explore Academy, China 3 Queen Mary University of London, UK
{xuzy, gaoxb}@cqupt.edu.cn
sshan.zhao00@gmail.com

Abstract
Impressive performance on point cloud semantic segmentation has been achieved by fully-supervised methods
with large amounts of labelled data. As it is labourintensive to acquire large-scale point cloud data with pointwise labels, many attempts have been made to explore
learning 3D point cloud segmentation with limited annotations. Active learning is one of the effective strategies
to achieve this purpose but is still under-explored. The
most recent methods of this kind measure the uncertainty of
each pre-divided region for manual labelling but they suffer
from redundant information and require additional efforts
for region division. This paper aims at addressing this issue by developing a hierarchical point-based active learning strategy. Specifically, we measure the uncertainty for
each point by a hierarchical minimum margin uncertainty
module which considers the contextual information at multiple levels. Then, a feature-distance suppression strategy is
designed to select important and representative points for
manual labelling. Besides, to better exploit the unlabelled
data, we build a semi-supervised segmentation framework
based on our active strategy. Extensive experiments on the
S3DIS and ScanNetV2 datasets demonstrate that the proposed framework achieves 96.5% and 100% performance of
fully-supervised baseline with only 0.07% and 0.1% training data, respectively, outperforming the state-of-the-art
weakly-supervised and active learning methods. The code
will be available at https://github.com/SmiletoE/HPAL.

1. Introduction
Point cloud semantic segmentation aims to assign a category label for each 3D point, which can be applied to various scenarios, such as robotics [34], autonomous driving
[1], and augmented reality [20]. Recently, deep learning
* Corresponding author. †Equal contribution.

s210201127@stu.cqupt.edu.cn
qianni.zhang@qmul.ac.uk

based methods [38, 52] have achieved impressive performance. These high-performing methods usually rely on
large amounts of data with point-wise labels. However, acquiring such dense labels for 3D point clouds is extremely
tedious and costly.
To relieve the labour and cost of annotation, many recent
methods explore semi-supervised learning to learn 3D segmentation models with limited labelled points that are usually sampled randomly. These methods attempt to employ
effective strategies to propagate the label information to the
unlabelled points [5, 17, 10, 13]. Although these semisupervised methods can greatly decrease labelling costs,
their performance might be limited due to various factors.
Among them, the most important reason is that some of the
randomly selected points are in fact redundant while some
really important points might be omitted.
As an alternative learning strategy, active learning recently is studied to alleviate such limitations for 3D segmentation. Lin et al. [24] divide the whole point clouds
into segments and each segment is utilised as the basic
query unit for sample selection. ReDAL [41] proposes to
select those informative and diverse sub-scene regions for
label acquisition. The entropy, colour discontinuity, and
structural complexity are used to measure the information
of sub-scene regions. Following it, SSDR-AL [29] groups
the original point clouds into superpoints and incrementally
selects the most informative regions for annotation. However, these methods usually rely on pre-dividing the point
cloud into multiple regions, and the region division strategy might negatively impact the performance. Moreover, as
point clouds present strong semantic similarity in local areas, selecting all the points in the local region results in a
redundant labelling budget.
Motivated by the above analysis, this research aims at enhancing the 3D segmentation performance with limited labelled data in the active learning framework. Specifically, in
comparison with previous region-based methods, we mea-

18098

