This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Set-level Guidance Attack: Boosting Adversarial Transferability of
Vision-Language Pre-training Models
Dong Lu1 *, Zhiqiang Wang1 *, Teng Wang1,2 , Weili Guan3 , Hongchang Gao4 , Feng Zheng1,5†
1

Southern University of Science and Technology 2 The University of Hong Kong
3

Monash University 4 Temple University 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory

sammylu @outlook.com wangzq 2021@outlook.com tengwang@connect.hku.hk
honeyguan@gmail.com hongchang.gao@temple.edu f.zheng@ieee.org

Abstract

No Interaction
Single-pair Interaction

Vision-language pre-training (VLP) models have shown
vulnerability to adversarial examples in multimodal tasks.
Furthermore, malicious adversaries can be deliberately
transferred to attack other black-box models. However, existing work has mainly focused on investigating white-box
attacks. In this paper, we present the first study to investigate
the adversarial transferability of recent VLP models. We observe that existing methods exhibit much lower transferability, compared to the strong attack performance in white-box
settings. The transferability degradation is partly caused by
the under-utilization of cross-modal interactions. Particularly, unlike unimodal learning, VLP models rely heavily on
cross-modal interactions and the multimodal alignments are
many-to-many, e.g., an image can be described in various
natural languages. To this end, we propose a highly transferable Set-level Guidance Attack (SGA) that thoroughly
leverages modality interactions and incorporates alignmentpreserving augmentation with cross-modal guidance. Experimental results demonstrate that SGA could generate
adversarial examples that can strongly transfer across different VLP models on multiple downstream vision-language
tasks. On image-text retrieval, SGA significantly enhances
the attack success rate for transfer attacks from ALBEF to
TCL by a large margin (at least 9.78% and up to 30.21%),
compared to the state-of-the-art. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Zoky-2020/SGA.

1. Introduction
Recent work has shown that vision-language pre-training
(VLP) models are still vulnerable to adversarial examples
[41], even though they have achieved remarkable performance on a wide range of multimodal tasks [30, 15, 16].
Existing work mainly focuses on white-box attacks, where
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Set-level Interaction

PGD

BA

SA

CA

SGA

PGD

BA

SA

CA

SGA

PGD

BA

SA

CA

SGA

PGD

BA

SA

CA

SGA

(a) ALBEF to ALBEF

(c) ALBEF to CLIPViT

(b) ALBEF to TCL

(d) ALBEF to CLIPCNN

Figure 1: Comparison of attack success rates (ASR) using
five different attacks on image-text retrieval. Adversarial examples are crafted on the source model (ALBEF) to
attack the target white-box model or black-box models. The
first three columns refer to the image-only PGD attack [24],
text-only BERT-Attack [19] (BA), and the combined separate unimodal attack (SA), which all belong to the methods
without cross-modal interactions. The fourth column is the
state-of-the-art multimodal Co-Attack [41] (CA) that employs single-pair cross-modal interactions. The last column
is the proposed Set-level Guidance Attack (SGA), which
leverages multiple set-level cross-modal interactions, successfully attacking the white-box model and transferring to
attack all black-box models with the highest ASR. More
discussions are in Section 3.
information about the victim model is accessible. However, the transferability of adversarial examples across VLP
models has not been investigated, which is a more practical
setting. It is still unknown whether the adversarial data generated on the source model can successfully attack another
model, which poses a serious security risk to the deployment
of VLP models in real-world applications.
This paper makes the first step to investigate the trans-

102

