This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Online Class Incremental Learning on Stochastic Blurry Task Boundary
via Mask and Visual Prompt Tuning
Jun-Yeong Moon*∗

Keon-Hee Park∗

Jung Uk Kim†

Gyeong-Moon Park†

Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Republic of Korea
{moonjunyyy, pgh2874, ju.kim, gmpark}@khu.ac.kr

Abstract
Continual learning aims to learn a model from a continuous stream of data, but it mainly assumes a fixed number of
data and tasks with clear task boundaries. However, in realworld scenarios, the number of input data and tasks is constantly changing in a statistical way, not a static way. Although recently introduced incremental learning scenarios
having blurry task boundaries somewhat address the above
issues, they still do not fully reflect the statistical properties of real-world situations because of the fixed ratio of
disjoint and blurry samples. In this paper, we propose a
new Stochastic incremental Blurry task boundary scenario,
called Si-Blurry, which reflects the stochastic properties of
the real-world. We find that there are two major challenges
in the Si-Blurry scenario: (1) intra- and inter-task forgettings and (2) class imbalance problem. To alleviate them,
we introduce Mask and Visual Prompt tuning (MVP). In
MVP, to address the intra- and inter-task forgetting issues,
we propose a novel instance-wise logit masking and contrastive visual prompt tuning loss. Both of them help our
model discern the classes to be learned in the current batch.
It results in consolidating the previous knowledge. In addition, to alleviate the class imbalance problem, we introduce a new gradient similarity-based focal loss and adaptive feature scaling to ease overfitting to the major classes
and underfitting to the minor classes. Extensive experiments show that our proposed MVP significantly outperforms the existing state-of-the-art methods in our challenging Si-Blurry scenario. The code is available at https:
//github.com/moonjunyyy/Si-Blurry

1. Introduction
Continual learning involves constantly learning from a
stream of data while having limited access to previously
* Equally contributed
† Corresponding author

seen information. In this scenario, unlike humans who can
retain and apply their prior knowledge to new situations,
modern deep neural networks face a challenge of catastrophic forgetting [30, 11]. To overcome this challenge,
various approaches are being explored [32, 31, 13, 21, 8].
However, these traditional continual learning scenarios have
clear task boundaries, where one can distinguish tasks with
input data, unlike in the real-world. In real-world applications, clear task boundaries are often absent and access to
data is limited to small portions at a time. This is referred
to as online learning with blurry task boundaries [3].
There are many cases of class emerging or disappearing
like the stock market or e-commerce. To address this, the
i-Blurry scenario [18] has been recently proposed, which
combines disjoint continual learning and blurry task-free
continual learning. Although i-Blurry somewhat alleviates
the above issue, it does not fully capture the complexity of
real-world data, because i-Blurry has the fixed number of
classes between tasks. Figure 1(a) shows the i-Blurry scenario that contains the static number of classes in each task.
In the real-world scenarios, the number of classes and tasks
vary dynamically as illustrated in Figure 1(c) and 1(d). That
is, as samples of a specific class continuously disappear or
appear in the data stream, distribution of the data is dynamically changing.
To reflect the dynamic distribution of the real-world
data, we propose a novel Stochastic incremental Blurry (SiBlurry) scenario. We adopt a stochastic approach to imitate
the chaotic nature of the real-world. As shown in Figure
1(b), our Si-Blurry scenario is capable of effectively simulating not only newly emerging or disappearing data but
also irregularly changing data distribution. In the Si-Blurry
scenario, we find that there are two main reasons for performance degradation: (1) intra- and inter-task forgettings, and
(2) class imbalance problem. First, the continuous change
of classes between batches causes intra- and inter-task forgettings, which make the model difficult to retain previously
learned knowledge. Second, ignorance of minor classes
11731

