This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling DETR with Visual-Linguistic Knowledge for Open-Vocabulary
Object Detection
Liangqi Li1 , Jiaxu Miao2 , Dahu Shi1,2,3 *, Wenming Tan1 , Ye Ren1 , Yi Yang2 , Shiliang Pu1
1
Hikvision Research Institute 2 Zhejiang University
3
Key Laboratory of Peace-building Big Data of Zhejiang Province
{liliangqi,shidahu,tanwenming,renye,pushiliang}@hikvision.com
{jiaxumiao,yangyics}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Current methods for open-vocabulary object detection (OVOD) rely on a pre-trained vision-language model
(VLM) to acquire the recognition ability. In this paper,
we propose a simple yet effective framework to Distill the
Knowledge from the VLM to a DETR-like detector, termed
DK-DETR. Specifically, we present two ingenious distillation schemes named semantic knowledge distillation (SKD)
and relational knowledge distillation (RKD). To utilize the
rich knowledge from the VLM systematically, SKD transfers the semantic knowledge explicitly, while RKD exploits
implicit relationship information between objects. Furthermore, a distillation branch including a group of auxiliary
queries is added to the detector to mitigate the negative effect on base categories. Equipped with SKD and RKD on
the distillation branch, DK-DETR improves the detection
performance of novel categories significantly and avoids
disturbing the detection of base categories. Extensive experiments on LVIS and COCO datasets show that DKDETR surpasses existing OVOD methods under the setting
that the base-category supervision is solely available. The
code and models are available at https://github.
com/hikvision-research/opera.

1. Introduction
Object detection has witnessed rapid progress [10, 9, 28,
13, 20, 2, 45, 33, 32, 35] for years, which aims to localize
and categorize objects in an image. However, the object detection model can only perform well on a closed and small
set of categories, while cannot detect novel ones which
are not trained. Recently, visual-language models [24, 15]
(VLM), consisting of an image encoder and a text encoder,
have shown impressive zero-shot classification ability after being trained on large-scale loosely aligned image-text
* Corresponding author.

VKD

SKD

Decoder

Decoder

Decoder

(a)

(b)

(c)

SKD & RKD

RKD

Object Query
VLM Visual Feature

Decoder
Auxiliary Query

(d)

Figure 1. Comparison of different distillation implementations.
VKD in (a) denotes vanilla knowledge distillation that forces
source features to align with target features in a one-to-one manner. SKD in (b) and RKD in (c) are newly proposed for OVOD in
this paper. (d) indicates that we implement distillation on auxiliary
queries to avoid original detection branch being disturbed.

pairs. This motivates the community to implement an openvocabulary object detector [11, 5, 7, 39, 43, 42, 44, 23]
which is expected to recognize arbitrary categories.
Distilling the knowledge of novel-category objects from
the VLM to the detector is a typical practice [11, 36, 22] to
solve the open-vocabulary object detection (OVOD) problem. ViLD [11] is a representative distillation-based approach. Category text embeddings, extracted by the VLM
text encoder, serve as the classifier to perform OVOD
(known as ViLD-text). A knowledge distillation (KD) module is further introduced to align the object features to visual embeddings extracted by the VLM image encoder. By
adopting the vanilla KD as depicted in Figure 1, ViLD evidently improves the performance of novel categories. Besides, ZSD-YOLO[36] and HierKD [22] also adopt knowl-

6501

