This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-body Depth and Camera Pose Estimation from Multiple Views
Andrea Porfiri Dal Cin
Politecnico di Milano

Giacomo Boracchi
Politecnico di Milano

Luca Magri
Politecnico di Milano

andrea.porfiridalcin@polimi.it

giacomo.boracchi@polimi.it

luca.magri@polimi.it

Two frames of a dynamic scene with a moving object

Abstract
Traditional and deep Structure-from-Motion (SfM) methods typically operate under the assumption that the scene
is rigid, i.e., the environment is static or consists of a single moving object. Few multi-body SfM approaches address the reconstruction of multiple rigid bodies in a scene
but suffer from the inherent scale ambiguity of SfM, such
that objects are reconstructed at inconsistent scales. We
propose a depth and camera pose estimation framework to
resolve the scale ambiguity in multi-body scenes. Specifically, starting from disorganized images, we present a novel
multi-view scale estimator that resolves the camera pose
ambiguity and a multi-body plane sweep network that generalizes depth estimation to dynamic scenes. Experiments
demonstrate the advantages of our method over state-ofthe-art SfM frameworks in multi-body scenes and show that
it achieves comparable results in static scenes. The code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
andreadalcin/MultiBodySfM .

1. Introduction
Real-world environments often contain independently
moving objects, and their reconstruction is fundamental for
safe robot navigation and augmented reality in complex dynamic environments. Unfortunately, traditional and deep
learning Structure-from-Motion (SfM) algorithms assume
that the scene is static and treat moving objects as outliers,
missing important information and producing suboptimal
results when the scene is dynamic. In Fig. 1-left, the depth
reconstructed by the state-of-the-art DeepSfM [36] shows
artifacts in the image region of a moving object (in red).
In this work, we go one step further and enable consistent 3D reconstruction (Fig. 1-right) of a scene with multiple rigidly moving objects. This task, also known as MultiBody Structure-from-Motion (MBSfM), is still open and
far from being solved in practice. Traditional MBSfM attempts [1, 26] segment rigid motions to obtain partial reconstructions of individually moving objects in the scene.
However, these methods are hampered by the relative scale
problem, namely that the 3D structure of each indepen-

Reconstructed Depth Maps of the second frame

DeepSFM

Ours

Figure 1: Two-views of a multi-body scene (top-row). Depth estimation networks (e.g. [36]) yield inconsistent depths (bottom-left)
for moving objects. Our method explicitly accounts for moving
objects to produce geometrically consistent depths (bottom-right).

dently moving object is estimated up to a similarity, so
that each object is reconstructed in its own scale. Therefore, a unified reconstruction of all objects up to a common
global scale factor is impossible without additional information. Similarly, deep methods for SfM that leverage explicit multi-view constraints [34, 36, 13, 29, 4] are affected
by the relative scale problem and cannot regress a unified
depth map of a multi-body scene since their underlying architecture cannot handle multiple motions.
Recent monocular depth estimators [9, 2] use learned
priors to regress dense depth maps from images without
exploiting multi-view constraints. Thus, monocular methods implicitly avoid the relative scale problem by regressing consistent depth maps across the entire image. However, monocular depth estimation is inherently ill-posed and
these models do not provide the same generalization capabilities of multi-view methods when scenes are static. Fur-

17804

