This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inducing Neural Collapse to a Fixed Hierarchy-Aware Frame
for Reducing Mistake Severity
Tong Liang, Jim Davis
Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio 43210
{liang.693, davis.1719}@osu.edu

Abstract
There is a recently discovered and intriguing phenomenon called Neural Collapse: at the terminal phase
of training a deep neural network for classification, the
within-class penultimate feature means and the associated
classifier vectors of all flat classes collapse to the vertices
of a simplex Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF). Recent work
has tried to exploit this phenomenon by fixing the related
classifier weights to a pre-computed ETF to induce neural
collapse and maximize the separation of the learned features when training with imbalanced data. In this work,
we propose to fix the linear classifier of a deep neural network to a Hierarchy-Aware Frame (HAFrame), instead of
an ETF, and use a cosine similarity-based auxiliary loss
to learn hierarchy-aware penultimate features that collapse
to the HAFrame. We demonstrate that our approach reduces the mistake severity of the model’s predictions while
maintaining its top-1 accuracy on several datasets of varying scales with hierarchies of heights ranging from 3 to 12.
Code: https://github.com/ltong1130ztr/HAFrame.

1. Introduction
A recent study [32] has unveiled a phenomenon termed
neural collapse. It empirically revealed that the penultimate
features of the same class tend to collapse to their withinclass mean. The within-class means of all classes and their
respective classifier weights tend to collapse to the vertices
of a simplex Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF). A simplex
ETF is a geometric structure that maximally separates the
pair-wise angles of the K vectors in Rd , d ≥ K, and the
respective maximal pair-wise cosine similarity of these K
−1
. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), when K = 4, the
vectors is K−1
simplex ETF reduces to a tetrahedron, and we can visualize
this tetrahedron in 3D space via PCA projection since its
geometry is 3D. One can view such ETF as an embedding
of a hierarchy of four classes sharing the same root node

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Illustration of a hierarchy-agnostic ETF (a) and a
hierarchy-aware HAFrame (b) of four leaf classes and their hierarchies (c) and (d), respectively. All leaf classes in ETF have the
same hierarchical distance.

as their parent. This hierarchy is visualized in Fig. 1(c),
where the four classes are equally separated regarding their
hierarchical distance from each other.
Intuitively, the neural collapse phenomenon makes sense
considering an ETF separates all classes equally and maximally from each other. However, such a structure may not
emerge when trained with imbalanced data. Features of minor classes may collapse to the same vector (minority collapse) [13]. Therefore, some studies encourage the features
to form an ETF structure by fixing the classifier weights
at a pre-computed ETF [42] or employing additional regularizers to induce neural collapse [45, 29]. In the context
of reducing mistake severity, this raises another concern:
when the ETF classifier makes a mistake, it is mainly random due to its equiangular nature. Similarly, conventional
neural networks are trained mainly with cross-entropy and
one-hot labels, ignoring any underlying hierarchical label
relationships. The associated performance evaluations also

1443

