This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

INT2: Interactive Trajectory Prediction at Intersections
Zhijie Yan1,3∗ , Pengfei Li1 , Zheng Fu1,4 , Shaocong Xu1,5 , Yongliang Shi1 , Xiaoxue Chen1 ,
Yuhang Zheng1,3 , Yang Li1 , Tianyu Liu1,6 , Chuxuan Li1 , Nairui Luo2 , Xu Gao2 ,
Yilun Chen1 , Zuoxu Wang3 , Yifeng Shi2 , Pengfei Huang1 , Zhengxiao Han1,7 , Jirui Yuan1 ,
Jiangtao Gong1 , Guyue Zhou1 , Hang Zhao8 , Hao Zhao1†
1
AIR, THU, 2 Baidu Inc., 3 SMEA, BUAA
4
SVM, THU, 5 XMU, 6 ECE, HKUST, 7 BUCT, 8 IIIS, THU
yanzhijie@buaa.edu.cn, zhaohao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. A comparison between rush-hour (a, b, c) and non-rush-hour (d, e, f) traffic at the same intersection in our INT2 dataset. They
are naturally treated as two different trajectory prediction domains.

Abstract
Motion forecasting is an important component in autonomous driving systems. One of the most challenging
problems in motion forecasting is interactive trajectory prediction, whose goal is to jointly forecasts the future trajectories of interacting agents. To this end, we present a largescale interactive trajectory prediction dataset named INT2
for INTeractive trajectory prediction at INTersections.
INT2 includes 612,000 scenes, each lasting 1 minute, containing up to 10,200 hours of data. The agent trajectories
∗ Work done while at AIR, THU.
† Corresponding author.
Sponsored by Baidu Inc. through Apollo-AIR Joint Research Center.

are auto-labeled by a high-performance offline temporal detection and fusion algorithm, whose quality is further inspected by human judges. Vectorized semantic maps and
traffic light information are also included in INT2. Additionally, the dataset poses an interesting domain mismatch
challenge. For each intersection, we treat rush-hour and
non-rush-hour segments as different domains. We benchmark the best open-sourced interactive trajectory prediction method on INT2 and Waymo Open Motion, under indomain and cross-domain settings. The dataset, code and
models are publicly available at https://github.com/AIRDISCOVER/INT2.

8536

