This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVDFormer: Complementing Point Cloud via Self-view Augmentation and
Self-structure Dual-generator
Zhe Zhu1 , Honghua Chen1 , Xing He1 , Weiming Wang2† , Jing Qin3 , Mingqiang Wei1†
1
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
Hong Kong Metropolitan University
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
zhuzhe0619@nuaa.edu.com; chenhonghuacn@gmail.com; hexing@nuaa.edu.cn;
wmwang@hkmu.edu.hk; harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk; mqwei@nuaa.edu.cn

(a)

(c)

Multi-View Fusion
(b) Potential Similar
Structures

Inferring from
Learned Priors
PoinTr
PMP-Net++
SeedFormer
Ours
Figure 1. The characteristics of our method and visual comparison of point cloud completion results. (a) SVDFormer understands incomplete shapes from self-projected multiple views. (b) SVDFormer collaborates both geometric similarities (red boxes) and shape priors (yellow boxes) for shape refinement. (c) Qualitative comparison of our SVDFormer with PoinTr [39], PMP-Net++ [29], and SeedFormer [46].

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel network, SVDFormer,
to tackle two specific challenges in point cloud completion:
understanding faithful global shapes from incomplete point
clouds and generating high-accuracy local structures. Current methods either perceive shape patterns using only 3D
coordinates or import extra images with well-calibrated intrinsic parameters to guide the geometry estimation of the
missing parts. However, these approaches do not always
fully leverage the cross-modal self-structures available for
accurate and high-quality point cloud completion. To this
end, we first design a Self-view Fusion Network that leverages multiple-view depth image information to observe incomplete self-shape and generate a compact global shape.

To reveal highly detailed structures, we then introduce a refinement module, called Self-structure Dual-generator, in
which we incorporate learned shape priors and geometric self-similarities for producing new points. By perceiving the incompleteness of each point, the dual-path design disentangles refinement strategies conditioned on the
structural type of each point. SVDFormer absorbs the wisdom of self-structures, avoiding any additional paired information such as color images with precisely calibrated
camera intrinsic parameters. Comprehensive experiments
indicate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on widely-used benchmarks. Code is available at
https://github.com/czvvd/SVDFormer.

†Co-corresponding authors

14508

