This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Consistent Depth Prediction for Transparent Object Reconstruction from RGB-D
Camera
Yuxiang Cai

Yifan Zhu
Haiwei Zhang
Nankai University

Bo Ren *

{caiyuxiang, zhuyifan}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, {zhhaiwei, rb}@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Transparent objects are commonly seen in indoor scenes but
are hard to estimate. Currently, commercial depth cameras
face difficulties in estimating the depth of transparent objects
due to the light reflection and refraction on their surface. As
a result, they tend to make a noisy and incorrect depth value
for transparent objects. These incorrect depth data make the
traditional RGB-D SLAM method fails in reconstructing the
scenes that contain transparent objects. An exact depth value
of the transparent object is required to restore in advance
and it is essential that the depth value of the transparent
object must keep consistent in different views, or the reconstruction result will be distorted. Previous depth prediction
methods of transparent objects can restore these missing
depth values but none of them can provide a good result in
reconstruction due to the inconsistency prediction. In this
work, we propose a real-time reconstruction method using a
novel stereo-based depth prediction network to keep the consistency of depth prediction in a sequence of images. Because
there is no video dataset about transparent objects currently
to train our model, we construct a synthetic RGB-D video
dataset with different transparent objects. Moreover, to test
generalization capability, we capture video from real scenes
using the RealSense D435i RGB-D camera. We compare
the metrics on our dataset and SLAM reconstruction results
in both synthetic scenes and real scenes with the previous
methods. Experiments show our significant improvement in
accuracy on depth prediction and scene reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Transparent objects frequently appear in our daily life, including glasses, goblets, plastic objects, vases, etc. Because
of the nature of transparent materials, the light will reflect
and refract on the surface of transparent objects, which will
cause errors for the commonly used depth camera. Fig. 2
show this ambiguity: the depth captured by the camera is the
* Bo Ren is the corresponding author

(a) RGB

(b) ClearGrasp + ElasticFusion

(c) TransCG + ElasticFusion

(d) Ours

Figure 1. RGB-D reconstruction result comparison in the real
scene. Subfigures (b) and (c) show the reconstruction result using
ElasticFusion [38] with predicted depth data from the state-of-theart transparent object depth prediction method: ClearGrasp [31]
and TransCG [8]. Subfigure (d) shows our reconstruction result. In
(b) and (c), the transparent object can not be well reconstructed.
Compared with them, our model performs well in reconstruction.

distorted result of the object behind.
SLAM(Simultaneous localization and mapping) is a popular
topic in computer vision and robotic fields. There are lots of
SLAM methods [7, 25, 38] that take RGB-D as their input to
reconstruct the scene and recover the motion of the camera.
The RealSense [19] and Kinect [12] are often used to capture
the RGB-D data and are common input devices for RGB-D
SLAM. However, due to the reason we state above, these
cameras can not estimate the depth of transparent objects. So,
restoring the correct depth of transparent objects is critical
in reconstruction.
Many depth completion methods for indoor scenes train and
test in the TUM dataset [34], which do not contain transparent objects. Also, there are many attempts [8, 31, 44] to try to
predict the depth of transparent objects using different deep
neural network models. However, these monocular-based
methods perform poorly when using their predicted depth in

3459

