This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EverLight: Indoor-Outdoor Editable HDR Lighting Estimation
Mohammad Reza Karimi Dastjerdi1 ,* Jonathan Eisenmann2 , Yannick Hold-Geoffroy2 ,
Jean-François Lalonde1
1
Université Laval, 2 Adobe
https://lvsn.github.io/everlight/

Figure 1. We present a method that produces an HDR 360◦ environment map (top right insets) from regular images (background) captured
indoors (left) or outdoors (right) with any camera. Our method increases the realism of reflections in specular materials such as metals and
plastics. Our approach simultaneously estimates the light sources in the environment beyond the camera frame and models them as HDR
spherical gaussians, ready for use as HDRI in a renderer. This increases realism without user interaction when inserting virtual objects
(left: vase, glasses, spheres, handbag, hand sanitizer, right table; right: spheres, sofa). Our parametric lighting representation makes it easy
for users to add, remove, and edit lights in the environment, which will plausibly react to those edits.

Abstract
Because of the diversity in lighting environments, existing illumination estimation techniques have been designed explicitly on indoor or outdoor environments. Methods have focused specifically on capturing accurate energy
(e.g., through parametric lighting models), which emphasizes shading and strong cast shadows; or producing plausible texture (e.g., with GANs), which prioritizes plausible
reflections. Approaches which provide editable lighting capabilities have been proposed, but these tend to be with
simplified lighting models, offering limited realism. In this
work, we propose to bridge the gap between these recent
trends in the literature, and propose a method which combines a parametric light model with 360◦ panoramas, ready

to use as HDRI in rendering engines. We leverage recent
advances in GAN-based LDR panorama extrapolation from
a regular image, which we extend to HDR using parametric
spherical gaussians. To achieve this, we introduce a novel
lighting co-modulation method that injects lighting-related
features throughout the generator, tightly coupling the original or edited scene illumination within the panorama generation process. In our representation, users can easily
edit light direction, intensity, number, etc. to impact shading while providing rich, complex reflections while seamlessly blending with the edits. Furthermore, our method encompasses indoor and outdoor environments, demonstrating state-of-the-art results even when compared to domainspecific methods.

* Research partly done when Mohammad Reza was an intern at Adobe.

7420

