This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spurious Features Everywhere - Large-Scale Detection of Harmful Spurious
Features in ImageNet
Yannic Neuhaus

Maximilian Augustin
Valentyn Boreiko
Tübingen AI Center – University of Tübingen

Abstract
Benchmark performance of deep learning classifiers
alone is not a reliable predictor for the performance of a
deployed model. In particular, if the image classifier has
picked up spurious features in the training data, its predictions can fail in unexpected ways. In this paper, we develop a framework that allows us to systematically identify spurious features in large datasets like ImageNet. It is
based on our neural PCA components and their visualization. Previous work on spurious features often operates in
toy settings or requires costly pixel-wise annotations. In
contrast, we work with ImageNet and validate our results
by showing that presence of the harmful spurious feature of
a class alone is sufficient to trigger the prediction of that
class. We introduce the novel dataset “Spurious ImageNet”
which allows to measure the reliance of any ImageNet classifier on harmful spurious features. Moreover, we introduce
SpuFix as a simple mitigation method to reduce the dependence of any ImageNet classifier on previously identified
harmful spurious features without requiring additional labels or retraining of the model. We provide code and data
at https:// github.com/ YanNeu/ spurious imagenet.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has led to tremendous progress in image
classification [37, 50] and natural language processing [14].
Over the years, however, it has become apparent, that evaluating predictive performance on a fixed test set is not necessarily indicative of the performance when image classifiers
are deployed in the wild. Several potential failure cases
have been discovered. This starts with a lack of robustness due to image corruptions [31], adversarial perturbations [68], and arbitrary predictions on out-of-distribution
inputs [45, 32, 30]. In this paper, we consider the problem
of identifying and debugging image classifiers from spurious features [2]. Spurious features in image classification
are features that co-occur with the actual class object and
are picked up by the classifier. In the worst case, they lead
to shortcut learning [25], where only the spurious but not the

Matthias Hein

Spurious Features in Training Data
bird feeder
graffiti
eucalyptus
label

Hummingbird Freight Car

Koala

Hard Disc

Images from the web with spurious feature
but no class features classified as class below

Hummingbird Freight Car

Koala

Hard Disc

Figure 1: Top: Examples of spurious features found via
our neural PCA components but not in previous study [61].
Bottom: We validate our spurious features by mining images from the web showing only the spurious feature but
not the class. They are classified by four ImageNet models
as the corresponding class. Some of them even contain ImageNet classes (bees on feeder, grasshopper in leaves).
correct feature is associated with the class, e.g., [86] found
that a pneumonia detector’s bad generalization across hospitals was caused by the neural network learning to identify the hospital where the training data originated from. A
weaker form of spurious feature (at least from a learning
perspective) is the case when the classifier picks up the correct class features, e.g., of a hummingbird, but additionally
associates a spurious feature, e.g., a bird feeder, with the
class as they appear together on a subset of the training set.
This becomes a harmful spurious feature if only the spurious feature without the class feature is sufficient to trigger
the classification of that class, see Fig. 1 for an illustration of

20235

