This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Omnidirectional Information Gathering for
Knowledge Transfer-based Audio-Visual Navigation
Jinyu Chen1 , Wenguan Wang2⇤ , Si Liu1 *, Hongsheng Li3 , Yi Yang2
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University 2 ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
https://github.com/chenjinyubuaa/ORAN

Abstract
Cross-task Wayfinding Knowledge Transfer

Audio-visual navigation is an audio-targeted wayfinding task where a robot agent is entailed to travel a neverbefore-seen 3D environment towards the sounding source.
In this article, we present ORAN, an omnidirectional audiovisual navigator based on cross-task navigation skill transfer. In particular, ORAN sharpens its two basic abilities
for a such challenging task, namely wayfinding and audiovisual information gathering. First, ORAN is trained with
a confidence-aware cross-task policy distillation (CCPD)
strategy. CCPD transfers the fundamental, point-to-point
wayfinding skill that is well trained on the large-scale PointGoal task to ORAN, so as to help ORAN to better master
audio-visual navigation with far fewer training samples.
To improve the efficiency of knowledge transfer and address the domain gap, CCPD is made to be adaptive to the
decision confidence of the teacher policy. Second, ORAN
is equipped with an omnidirectional information gathering
(OIG) mechanism, i.e., gleaning visual-acoustic observations from different directions before decision-making. As a
result, ORAN yields more robust navigation behaviour. Taking CCPD and OIG together, ORAN significantly outperforms previous competitors. After the model ensemble, we
got 1st in Soundspaces Challenge 2022, improving SPL and
SR by 53% and 35% relatively.

1. Introduction
Developing intelligent autonomous wayfinding agents
that can robustly navigate in unexplored environments to
reach target locations is one of the most classic and fundamental tasks in robotics and is widely viewed as a critical
building block of embodied AI. To simulate different realworld application scenarios of wayfinding agents, various
navigation tasks are proposed, where the target goal is appointed by, for example, GPS coordinate [42, 27, 26], semantic tag [57, 8, 9, 40], visual language instruction [23,
* Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang, Si Liu.

CCP D

PointGoal Navigation

Audio-Visual Navigation

Omnidirectional Visual-Acoustic Information Gathering

OIG

Forward-only Perception

Omnidirectional Perception

Figure 1: Top: Based on CCPD, our ORAN transfers
wayfinding knowledge well-trained on PointGoal task to
audio-visual navigation. Bottom: Based on OIG, ORAN
collects visual and acoustic information from different directions for robust decision-making.
36, 4, 25, 3, 38, 30, 56, 37, 2, 55, 47, 49, 48, 15], image
photo [10, 1, 34, 29]. Among these navigation tasks, in this
article, we are particularly interested in audio-visual navigation (also named as AudioGoal) [12, 19], in which the
navigation agent is entailed to find sound-emitting objects
in visually-and-acoustically rich 3D environments. Audio
plays an irreplaceable role here – it reveals not only the

10993

