This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Invariant Feature Regularization for Fair Face Recognition
Jiali Ma1 Zhongqi Yue2 Kagaya Tomoyuki3 Suzuki Tomoki3
Karlekar Jayashree1 Sugiri Pranata1 Hanwang Zhang2
1

Panasonic R&D Center Singapore

jiali.ma@sg.panasonic.com

2

Nanyang Technological University
yuez0003@ntu.edu.sg

suzuki.tomoki@jp.panasonic.com

3

Panasonic Connect Co., Ltd. R&D Division

kagaya.tomoyuki@jp.panasonic.com

karlekar.jayashree@sg.panasonic.com

sugiri.pranata@sg.panasonic.com

hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

1. Introduction
Face recognition is essentially an out-of-distribution
generalization problem, where the goal is to learn feature
that generalizes to unseen faces in deployment [32]. In particular, due to its wide application in sensitive areas such
as crime prevention [41], fair face recognition becomes a
pressing need [10, 14, 35]. This means that the model must
perform equally well on all demographic groups, i.e., it
learns the causal feature (e.g., face identity) invariant to the
demographic attributes (e.g., race or gender).
However, demographic attributes are naturally imbalanced in data at scale, e.g., as shown in Figure 1 first row, in
the prevailing MS-Celeb-1M dataset [12], “non-Caucasian”
and “female” are the minority racial and gender groups, re-

B

B

Figure 1: Biased model trained on the dataset with imbalanced demographic attributes. (a) and (b) show the attribute
proportions and verification accuracy on race and gender,
respectively. (c) Grad-CAM [31] attention maps of face images from two racial groups. (d) Misidentified cases.
B

Fair face recognition is all about learning invariant feature that generalizes to unseen faces in any demographic
group. Unfortunately, face datasets inevitably capture the
imbalanced demographic attributes that are ubiquitous in
real-world observations, and the model learns biased feature that generalizes poorly in the minority group. We point
out that the bias arises due to the confounding demographic
attributes, which mislead the model to capture the spurious
demographic-specific feature. The confounding effect can
only be removed by causal intervention, which requires the
confounder annotations. However, such annotations can
be prohibitively expensive due to the diversity of the demographic attributes. To tackle this, we propose to generate diverse data partitions iteratively in an unsupervised fashion.
Each data partition acts as a self-annotated confounder, enabling our Invariant Feature Regularization (I NV-R EG) to
deconfound. I NV-R EG is orthogonal to existing methods,
and combining I NV-R EG with two strong baselines (Arcface
and CIFP) leads to new state-of-the-art that improves face
recognition on a variety of demographic groups. Code is
available at https://github.com/milliema/InvReg.

spectively. Furthermore, a model naively trained on this
imbalanced dataset underperforms on the minority groups
in deployment, e.g., more than 10% accuracy decrease on
“non-Caucasian”, and 5% decrease on “female”. In particular, by analyzing the attention maps across the two racial
groups in Figure 1c, we observe that besides the causal feature (e.g., facial attributes like eyes and nose), the model
additionally focuses on the spurious demographic-specific
feature (e.g., hairstyle) on the minority group. This is because the less diverse face images in each non-Caucasian
identity tend to share the hairstyle, making it a valid context
to distinguish identities. Yet this demographic-specific context generalizes poorly to unseen faces, e.g., misidentifying
the same identity with different hairstyles as in Figure 1d.
From a causal point of view, the bias stems from the
confounding effect [26, 27, 11]. In face recognition, when
trained to predict the identity label Y given the face image

20861

