This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Small Object Detection via Coarse-to-fine Proposal Generation
and Imitation Learning
Xiang Yuan Gong Cheng * Kebing Yan Qinghua Zeng Junwei Han
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
{shaunyuan, kebingyan, zengqinghua}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {gcheng, jhan}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
The past few years have witnessed the immense success
of object detection, while current excellent detectors struggle on tackling size-limited instances. Concretely, the wellknown challenge of low overlaps between the priors and
object regions leads to a constrained sample pool for optimization, and the paucity of discriminative information further aggravates the recognition. To alleviate the aforementioned issues, we propose CFINet, a two-stage framework
tailored for small object detection based on the Coarseto-fine pipeline and Feature Imitation learning. Firstly,
we introduce Coarse-to-fine RPN (CRPN) to ensure sufficient and high-quality proposals for small objects through
the dynamic anchor selection strategy and cascade regression. Then, we equip the conventional detection head
with a Feature Imitation (FI) branch to facilitate the region representations of size-limited instances that perplex
the model in an imitation manner. Moreover, an auxiliary imitation loss following supervised contrastive learning paradigm is devised to optimize this branch. When
integrated with Faster RCNN, CFINet achieves state-ofthe-art performance on the large-scale small object detection benchmarks, SODA-D and SODA-A, underscoring its
superiority over baseline detector and other mainstream
detection approaches. Code is available at https://
github.com/shaunyuan22/CFINet.

1. Introduction
Small object detection (SOD) 1 aims to classify and localize the instances with limited regions, which plays an important role in a wide range of scenarios, such as pedestrian
detection, autonomous driving, and intelligent surveillance
understanding, to name a few [42, 28, 22, 19, 36, 2, 20].
Compared to the generic object detection which has been
* Corresponding author: gcheng@nwpu.edu.cn
1 This paper focuses on the detection of ”pure” small objects, where

the scales of all the objects are distributed within a relatively tight range
[45, 34, 9], which is distinct from the known small objects in multi-scale
object detection [24].

Figure 1. Distribution of maximum IoU of anchors matched to
each ground-truth instance in SODA-D [9] train-set, where
extremely Small (eS), relatively Small (rS), and generally Small
(gS) correspond to three area subsets in SODA [9] with the ranges
(0, 144], (144, 400] and (400, 1024]. The smaller the objects are,
the lower IoU the matched anchors have, hence the commonly
used positive IoU threshold (0.7) is too rigorous for small objects.

extensively studied, SOD task receives relatively little attention and good solutions are still scarce so far. Moreover,
generic detectors [29, 6, 25, 31, 7, 3, 26, 5] usually struggle
on handling small objects due to two inherent challenges:
the insufficient and low-quality samples for training and
the uncertain prediction of RoIs (Region of Interests).
First, current prevailing detectors exploit either overlapbased [29, 26] or distance-based [31] strategies to select
the positive priors of objects for training. However, small
instances usually occupy an extremely limited area, therefore the region overlaps between densely arranged anchors
and ground truth boxes are significantly small and far from
the commonly used positive IoU (Intersection-over-Union)
threshold, as in Figure 1. In other words, the existing positive sample criterion is overly stringent when applied to
small/tiny objects, resulting in a restricted number of samples available for optimization. An intuitive approach involves reducing the threshold for defining a positive sample [47]. However, while this can lead to an increase in
the number of positive samples, it often at the expense of
overall sample quality, in which low-quality samples disrupt
optimization and incur a trivial regression solution. Worse
still, this is actually contradictory to the purpose of proposal

6317

