This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Human-centric Scene Understanding for 3D Large-scale Scenarios
Yiteng Xu1, *, Peishan Cong1, *, Yichen Yao1, *,
Runnan Chen2 , Yuenan Hou3 , Xinge Zhu4 , Xuming He1 , Jingyi Yu1 , Yuexin Ma1,†
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{xuyt1,congpsh,yaoych,mayuexin}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Figure 1. The left shows several scenes captured in HuCenLife, which covers diverse human-centric daily-life scenarios.
The right demonstrates rich annotations of HuCenLife, which can benefit many tasks for 3D scene understanding .

Abstract
Human-centric scene understanding is significant for
real-world applications, but it is extremely challenging
due to the existence of diverse human poses and actions, complex human-environment interactions, severe occlusions in crowds, etc. In this paper, we present a largescale multi-modal dataset for human-centric scene understanding, dubbed HuCenLife, which is collected in diverse
daily-life scenarios with rich and fine-grained annotations.
Our HuCenLife can benefit many 3D perception tasks,
such as segmentation, detection, action recognition, etc.,
and we also provide benchmarks for these tasks to facilitate related research. In addition, we design novel modules for LiDAR-based segmentation and action recognition,
which are more applicable for large-scale human-centric
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. This work was supported by NSFC (No.62206173), Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (No.22dz1201900), MoE Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception
and Human-Machine Collaboration (ShanghaiTech University), Shanghai Frontiers Science Center of Human-centered Artificial Intelligence
(ShangHAI), Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision
and Imaging.

scenarios and achieve state-of-the-art performance. The
dataset and code can be found at https://github.
com/4DVLab/HuCenLife.git.

1. Introduction
Human-centric scene understanding in 3D large-scale
scenarios is attracting increasing attention [13, 11, 42, 31],
which plays an indispensable role in human-centric applications, including assistive robotics, autonomous driving, surveillance, human-robot cooperation, etc. It is often
confronted with substantial difficulties since these humancentric scenarios usually have the attributes of various subjects with different poses, fine-grained human-object interactions, and challenging localization and recognition with
occlusions. Moreover, current state-of-the-art perception
methods heavily rely on large-scale datasets to achieve good
performance. Therefore, to promote the research of humancentric scene understanding, the collection of large-scale
datasets with rich and fine-grained annotations is required
urgently, which is difficult but of great significance.
In previous work, many studies target on the scene un-

20349

