This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProtoTransfer: Cross-Modal Prototype Transfer for Point Cloud Segmentation
Pin Tang1 Hai-Ming Xu2 Chao Ma1 *
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
{pin.tang,chaoma}@sjtu.edu.cn, hai-ming.xu@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation on point cloud [6, 15, 37, 40]
has attracted increasing attention from the computer vision
community for its crucial role in scene understanding of
3D space. Although LiDAR point cloud can provide accurate location and depth information of interested scenes,
the sparse and textureless shortages inevitably restrict its semantic segmentation performance. On the other hand, 2D
images consist of dense pixels with rich color and subtle
* Corresponding author.

Point-pixel
Matching
Image
Features

Matched
Point Features
Multi-modal
Fusion
Matched
Image Features

Point-pixel
Fusion Features

(a) Point-pixel matching and feature fusion
Point-pixel
Fusion Features

Fusion
Prediction

Point-pixel
Fusion Features

Prototype
Bank

Update
Update

Knowledge transfer from multi-modal, i.e., LiDAR points
and images, to a single LiDAR modal can take advantage of
complimentary information from modal-fusion but keep a
single modal inference speed, showing a promising direction for point cloud semantic segmentation in autonomous
driving. Recent advances in point cloud segmentation distill
knowledge from strictly aligned point-pixel fusion features
while leaving a large number of unmatched image pixels
unexplored and unmatched LiDAR points under-benefited.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach, named ProtoTransfer, which not only fully exploits image representations but also transfers the learned multi-modal knowledge
to all point cloud features. Specifically, based on the basic multi-modal learning framework, we build up a classwise prototype bank from the strictly-aligned fusion features and encourage all the point cloud features to learn
from the prototypes during model training. Moreover, to
exploit the massive unmatched point and pixel features, we
use a pseudo-labeling scheme and further accumulate these
features into the class-wise prototype bank with a carefully
designed fusion strategy. Without bells and whistles, our
approach demonstrates superior performance over the published state-of-the-arts on two large-scale benchmarks, i.e.,
nuScenes and SemanticKITTI, and ranks 2nd on the competitive nuScenes Lidarseg challenge leaderboard.

Point
Features

Matched
Point Features

Matched
Point Prediction

(b) Distillation-based methods

All
Point Features

Unmatched
Image Features

(c) Our ProtoTransfer

Figure 1. (a) Point-pixel matching and feature fusion: only
features of strictly matched point-pixel pairs can be fused. (b)
Distillation-based methods are only performed between fusion
prediction and the corresponding matched point prediction while
other unmatched points have no chance to mimic the fusion prediction. (c) Our ProtoTransfer performs knowledge transfer from
prototype bank to all point features directly without being restricted by matching requirements. The prototype bank is updated
using fusion, point, and unmatched image features.

textures [34]. Therefore, incorporating these two complementary modals altogether can be a more plausible solution.
Recently, there are mainly two stream approaches of utilizing multi-modal data, i.e., fusion-based methods [10, 50]
and distillation-based methods [42]. The former methods
project point clouds to the camera coordinate to obtain
a point-to-pixel mapping, based on which point features
are fused with corresponding image features to produce
the final point-wise segmentation during both the training
and evaluation phases. Although robust and accurate segments are achieved by fusing different sensors, the fusionbased methods may suffer from heavy memory and time
consumption for processing these two modal data simul-

3337

