This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FeatEnHancer: Enhancing Hierarchical Features for Object Detection and
Beyond Under Low-Light Vision
Khurram Azeem Hashmi1,2 , Goutham Kallempudi2 , Didier Stricker1,2 and Muhammamd Zeshan Afzal1,2
1

DFKI - German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, 2 RPTU Kaiserslautern,

{khurram azeem.hashmi, didier.stricker, muhammad zeshan.afzal}@dfki.de, kallempu@rptu.de

Figure 1: Learned hierarchical representation and enhanced image from our FeatEnHancer. We train our FeatEnHancer
on a downstream object detection task and visualize these images from the validation set. These maps and enhanced images
show that despite producing less visually appealing images, our model enhances task-related features. Best viewed on the
screen.

Abstract
Extracting useful visual cues for the downstream tasks is
especially challenging under low-light vision. Prior works
create enhanced representations by either correlating visual
quality with machine perception or designing illuminationdegrading transformation methods that require pre-training
on synthetic datasets. We argue that optimizing enhanced image representation pertaining to the loss of the downstream
task can result in more expressive representations. Therefore,
in this work, we propose a novel module, FeatEnHancer,
that hierarchically combines multiscale features using multiheaded attention guided by task-related loss function to create suitable representations. Furthermore, our intra-scale
enhancement improves the quality of features extracted at
each scale or level, as well as combines features from different scales in a way that reflects their relative importance for
the task at hand. FeatEnHancer is a general-purpose plugand-play module and can be incorporated into any low-light
vision pipeline. We show with extensive experimentation that
the enhanced representation produced with FeatEnHancer
significantly and consistently improves results in several low-

light vision tasks, including dark object detection (+5.7 mAP
on ExDark), face detection (+1.5 mAP on DARK FACE),
nighttime semantic segmentation (+5.1 mIoU on ACDC),
and video object detection (+1.8 mAP on DarkVision), highlighting the effectiveness of enhancing hierarchical features
under low-light vision.

1. Introduction
Recent remarkable advancements in high-level vision
tasks have shown that given a high-quality image, current
vision backbone networks [20, 15, 12, 32, 31], object detectors [42, 28, 43, 19, 2, 3, 49, 4, 71, 64, 65] and semantic segmentation models [34, 48, 57, 7, 58] can effectively learn desired features to perform vision tasks. Similarly, modern low-light image enhancement (LLIE) methods [44, 67, 14, 21, 17, 25] are capable of transforming a
low-light image into a visual-friendly representation. However, a naive combination of the two brings sub-optimal
gains when it comes to high-level vision tasks under lowlight vision.

6725

