This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoUDF: Surface Reconstruction from 3D Point Clouds via Geometry-guided
Distance Representation
Junhui Hou1 * Xiaodong Chen2 Ying He3 Wenping Wang4
City University of Hong Kong 2 Tianjin University
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 Texas A&M University

Siyu Ren1,2

1

siyuren2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk, xdchen@tju.edu.cn,
yhe@ntu.edu.sg, wenping@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
We present a learning-based method, namely GeoUDF,
to tackle the long-standing and challenging problem of reconstructing a discrete surface from a sparse point cloud.
To be specific, we propose a geometry-guided learning
method for UDF and its gradient estimation that explicitly formulates the unsigned distance of a query point as
the learnable affine averaging of its distances to the tangent planes of neighboring points on the surface. Besides,
we model the local geometric structure of the input point
clouds by explicitly learning a quadratic polynomial for
each point. This not only facilitates upsampling the input sparse point cloud but also naturally induces unoriented normal, which further augments UDF estimation. Finally, to extract triangle meshes from the predicted UDF
we propose a customized edge-based marching cube module. We conduct extensive experiments and ablation studies to demonstrate the significant advantages of our method
over state-of-the-art methods in terms of reconstruction accuracy, efficiency, and generality. The source code is publicly available at https://github.com/rsy6318/GeoUDF.

1. Introduction
Surface reconstruction from point clouds is a fundamental and challenging problem in 3D vision, graphics
and robotics [17, 27, 9]. Traditional approaches, such as
Poisson surface reconstruction [18], compute an occupancy
or signed distance field (SDF) by solving Poisson’s equation, resulting in a sparse line system. Then they utilize
the Marching Cubes (MC) [23] algorithm to extract isosurfaces as the reconstructed meshes. These methods are
computationally efficient, scalable, resilient to noise and
* Corresponding author. This work was supported by the Hong Kong
Research Grants Council under Grant 11202320, Grant 11219422, and
Grant 11218121.

tolerant to registration artifacts. However, they work only
for oriented point samples. Recent developments in deep
learning have demonstrated that implicit fields, such as binary occupancy fields (BOFs) and signed distance fields
(SDFs), can be learned directly from raw point clouds, making them a promising tool for reconstructing surfaces from
unoriented point samples.
Although BOFs and SDFS are effective at reconstructing watertight and manifold surfaces, they have limitations
when it comes to representing more general types of surfaces, such as those with open boundaries or interior structures. In contrast, the unsigned distance field (UDF) is more
powerful in terms of representation ability, and can overcome the above-mentioned limitations of BOFs and SDFs.
The existing deep UDF-based methods, such as [11, 39, 16],
employ neural networks to regress UDFs from input point
clouds. Due to their reliance on the training data, these
methods have limited generalizability and cannot deal with
unseen objects well. Another technical challenge diminishing UDFs’ practical usage is that one cannot use the conventional MC to extract iso-surfaces directly because UDFs do
not have zero-crossings and thus do not provide the required
sign-change information of inside or outside. Some methods [16, 41] locally convert a UDF to an SDF in a cubic cell
and then apply MC to extract the surface. However, they
often fail at corners or edges. Recently, GIFS [39] modifies
MC by predicting whether the surface interacts with each
cube edge via a neural network.
In this paper, we propose GeoUDF, a new learningbased framework reconstructing the underlying surface of
a sparse point cloud. We particularly aim at addressing two
fundamental issues of UDFs, namely, (1) how to predict an
accurate UDF and its gradients for arbitrary 3D inputs? and
(2) how to extract triangle meshes, given a UDF? More importantly, the constructed methods should be well generalized to unseen data. To solve the first issue, we propose a
geometry-guided learning module, adaptively approximating the UDF and its gradient of a point cloud by leveraging

14214

