This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Time-to-Contact Map by Joint Estimation of Up-to-Scale Inverse Depth and
Global Motion using a Single Event Camera
Urbano Miguel Nunes1 , Laurent Udo Perrinet2 and Sio-Hoi Ieng1
1

Sorbonne University, 2 Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, INT, Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone

urbano.goncalves-nunes@inserm.fr, laurent.perrinet@univ-amu.fr, sio-hoi.ieng@upmc.fr

Abstract

CPU

GPU

60

1. Introduction
Event cameras differ from standard frame-based cameras, which capture visual data at a fixed rate and independently of the observing scene. Instead, event cameras
respond asynchronously to pixel-wise brightness changes
by generating events [6, 25]. Event cameras are thus datadriven sensors that offer several advantages, including high
temporal resolution in the order of microseconds, low latency, low power consumption, and high dynamic range.
These properties place event cameras as suitable candidates
to address vision-based problems that involve (high-speed)
motion, e.g., optical flow estimation [4, 27, 51], ego-motion
estimation [15, 21, 22, 34], motion segmentation [33, 44],
and obstacle avoidance [10, 12]. Due to the distinct visual
sensing paradigm, however, new methods are necessary to
fully exploit the potential of event cameras [13, 23].

CT [43]
AREE (%)

Event cameras asynchronously report brightness
changes with a temporal resolution in the order of microseconds, which makes them inherently suitable to address
problems that involve rapid motion perception. In this
paper, we address the problem of time-to-contact (TTC)
estimation using a single event camera. This problem
is typically addressed by estimating a single global TTC
measure, which explicitly assumes that the surface/obstacle
is planar and fronto-parallel. We relax this assumption by
proposing an incremental event-based method to estimate
the TTC that jointly estimates the (up-to scale) inverse
depth and global motion using a single event camera. The
proposed method is reliable and fast while asynchronously
maintaining a TTC map (TTCM), which provides perpixel TTC estimates. As a side product, the proposed
method can also estimate per-event optical flow. We
achieve state-of-the-art performances on TTC estimation in
terms of accuracy and runtime per event while achieving
competitive performance on optical flow estimation.

40

E-RAFT [17]
PF [36]
SOFAS [45]

20
ECMD [28]
Proposed
0
100

101

102

103

Runtime per event (microsec)

Figure 1. Runtime vs. accuracy comparison for TTC estimation
methods. Average results on the Ventral Landing benchmark [28].

Event cameras have been used to address the problem of
fast TTC estimation, which comes up often in the visionbased obstacle avoidance [10, 12, 29, 39] and ventral landing [28, 36] literature. The TTC is the time that would
elapse before a camera reaches an obstacle/surface, assuming the current relative motion between them remains constant [10]. Previous methods that use a single event camera
have focused on estimating a single global TTC measure,
which assumes that the surface is planar and fronto-parallel.
To overcome this limitation, other methods use additional
sensing, e.g., depth frames, to build a dense TTCM [20, 47].
We instead propose to extend the Dispersion Minimization (DMin) framework [34] to estimate the TTC for each
incoming event using a single event camera. The proposed method jointly estimates the relative global motion
and per-event (up-to scale) inverse depth. We can then asynchronously maintain a semi-dense TTCM which provides
per-pixel TTC estimates or compute a global TTC measure with greater accuracy by averaging over the TTC estimates. Since there is at least one scaling degree of freedom (DOF), we also propose an effective strategy to mitigate event collapse [40, 41]. The proposed method is also
computationally fast, reaching ∼1 microsecond processing
time per event on a standard laptop. Fig. 1 compares the

23653

