This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Identity Representation Conditioned Memory Compensation Network
for Talking Head Video Generation

(a) Source

Fa-Ting Hong
CSE, HKUST

Dan Xu*
CSE, HKUST

fhongac@connect.ust.hk

danxu@cse.ust.hk

(b) Driving

(c) Motion

(d) Warped Image

(e) Memory

(f) MCNet (Ours)

Figure 1: The animation illustration of the proposed implicit identity representation conditioned memory compensation
network (MCNet). MCNet first learns the motion flow (c) between the source and driving images; (d) shows possible
occlusion or deformation artifacts caused by large head motion. The warped images are produced by warping the source
image with the motion flow; (e) presents randomly sampled memory channels of our learned memory bank conditioned with
implicit-keypoint representations. Examples of generated results with our memory compensation network are shown in (f).

Abstract
Talking head video generation aims to animate a human
face in a still image with dynamic poses and expressions using motion information derived from a target-driving video,
while maintaining the person’s identity in the source image. However, dramatic and complex motions in the driving video cause ambiguous generation, because the still
source image cannot provide sufficient appearance information for occluded regions or delicate expression variations, which produces severe artifacts and significantly
degrades the generation quality. To tackle this problem,
we propose to learn a global facial representation space,
and design a novel implicit identity representation conditioned memory compensation network, coined as MCNet,
for high-fidelity talking head generation. Specifically, we
devise a network module to learn a unified spatial facial
meta-memory bank from all training samples, which can
provide rich facial structure and appearance priors to compensate warped source facial features for the generation.

Furthermore, we propose an effective query mechanism
based on implicit identity representations learned from the
discrete keypoints of the source image. It can greatly facilitate the retrieval of more correlated information from the
memory bank for the compensation. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that MCNet can learn representative and complementary facial memory, and can clearly outperform previous state-of-the-art talking head generation methods on
VoxCeleb1 and CelebV datasets. Please check our Project.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we aim at addressing the problem of generating a realistic talking head video given one still source image and one dynamic driving video, which is widely known
as talking head video generation. A high-quality talking
head generation model needs to imitate vivid facial expressions and complex head movements, and should be applicable for different facial identities presented in the source

23062

