This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Benchmarking Algorithmic Bias in Face Recognition:
An Experimental Approach Using Synthetic Faces and Human Evaluation
Hao Liang
Rice University

Pietro Perona
California Institute of Technology and AWS

Guha Balakrishnan
Rice University

hl106@rice.edu

perona@caltech.edu, peronapp@amazon.com

guha@rice.edu

Abstract
We propose an experimental method for measuring bias
in face recognition systems. Existing methods to measure
bias depend on benchmark datasets that are collected in the
wild and annotated for protected (e.g., race, gender) and
unprotected (e.g., pose, lighting) attributes. Such observational datasets only permit correlational conclusions, e.g.,
“Algorithm A’s accuracy is different on female and male
faces in dataset X.”. By contrast, experimental methods
manipulate attributes individually and thus permit causal
conclusions, e.g., “Algorithm A’s accuracy is affected by
gender and skin color.”
Our method is based on generating synthetic faces using a neural face generator, where each attribute of interest
is modified independently while leaving all other attributes
constant. Human observers crucially provide the ground
truth on perceptual identity similarity between synthetic image pairs. We validate our method quantitatively by evaluating race and gender biases of three research-grade face
recognition models. Our synthetic pipeline reveals that for
these algorithms, accuracy is lower for Black and East
Asian population subgroups. Our method can also quantify how perceptual changes in attributes affect face identity distances reported by these models. Our large synthetic
dataset, consisting of 48,000 synthetic face image pairs
(10,200 unique synthetic faces) and 555,000 human annotations (individual attributes and pairwise identity comparisons) is available to researchers in this important area.

1. Introduction
Face recognition technology has applications in consumer media, information security, access control, law enforcement, and surveillance systems. The one-to-one task
is to determine whether a pair of faces share the same identity (“face verification”). The one-to-many task determines
whether a face image shares an identity with one or more
from a database of face images from known individuals

(“face identification”). Face recognition systems implemented with deep neural networks today achieve impressive
accuracies [54, 13, 33, 43] and outperform even expert face
analysts [38]. Nevertheless, it is important to detect and
measure possible algorithmic biases, i.e., systematic accuracy differences, especially across protected demographic
attributes like age, race and gender [10, 22, 20], in order
to maintain fair treatment in sensitive applications. For this
reason, the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) measures bias in commercial face recognition models [17], in particular by comparing their False Match Rate
(FMR) and False Non Match Rate (FNMR) values across
different demographic subgroups at a particular decision
threshold (sweeping this threshold yields FNMR vs. FMR
“curves”).
The first step in measuring bias of face recognition systems is, currently, to collect a large benchmarking dataset
containing a set of diverse faces, where each is photographed multiple times under different conditions. An
algorithm’s error rate across subgroups specified by different protected attribute combinations (e.g., different race and
gender groups) can then be measured.
Unfortunately, sampling a good test dataset is almost impossible. First, each protected intersectional group (a specific combination of attribute values) must contain a sufficiently large number of individuals, which is not easy when
sampling faces in the wild. Second, in order to estimate
the causal effect of these protected attributes on algorithm
bias, it is crucial to ensure that the joint distribution of unprotected attributes like age, lighting, pose, etc. is roughly
equal across protected attribute groups – otherwise biases
in the dataset will be misinterpreted as biases in the algorithm. It is practically impossible to do this with observational data, i.e., data that we have no power to construct or
intervene on ourselves, and all available datasets fall short
of this criterion. Third, privacy concerns with collecting human data, and the cost and accuracy of identity annotation,
make dataset construction for face recognition benchmarking very expensive.
We address this challenge by developing an approach to

4977

