This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Object-Centric Temporal Modeling for Efficient Multi-View 3D
Object Detection
Shihao Wang1† Yingfei Liu2 Tiancai Wang2‡ Ying Li1‡ Xiangyu Zhang2
1
2
Beijing Institute of Technology
MEGVII Technology
{wangshihao, ying.li}@bit.edu.cn {liuyingfei, wangtiancai, zhangxiangyu}@megvii.com

𝐼𝑡

𝐼𝑡

𝐼𝑡
Local RF

Wrap

Global RF

Spatial Attention

Propagation

𝐼𝑡−1

𝐼𝑡−1

𝐼𝑡−1

Spatial Attention

Dense BEV

(a) Dense BEV Method

Propagation

𝐼0

𝐼0

𝐼0

…

Wrap

…

…

Global RF
Local RF

Sparse Queries

(b) Perspective Method

Sparse Queries

(c) Object-Centric Method

Figure 1. Different temporal fusion methods from bird-eye-view (BEV) space, perspective view, and our proposed object-centric. RF
indicates receptive field. The solid lines and dotted lines represent spatial and temporal operations respectively.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a long-sequence modeling
framework, named StreamPETR, for multi-view 3D object
detection. Built upon the sparse query design in the PETR
series, we systematically develop an object-centric temporal mechanism. The model is performed in an online manner and the long-term historical information is propagated
through object queries frame by frame. Besides, we introduce a motion-aware layer normalization to model the
movement of the objects. StreamPETR achieves significant
performance improvements only with negligible computation cost, compared to the single-frame baseline. On the
standard nuScenes benchmark, it is the first online multiview method that achieves comparable performance (67.6%
NDS & 65.3% AMOTA) with lidar-based methods. The
lightweight version realizes 45.0% mAP and 31.7 FPS, outperforming the state-of-the-art method (SOLOFusion) by
2.3% mAP and 1.8× faster FPS. Code has been available
at https://github.com/exiawsh/StreamPETR.git.

1. Introduction
Camera-only 3D detection is crucial for autonomous
driving because of the low deployment cost and ease of detecting road elements. Recently, multi-view object detec† Work done during the internship at MEGVII Technology. ‡ Corresponding author.

tion has made remarkable progress by leveraging temporal
information [27, 16, 31, 25, 39, 29]. The historical features
facilitate the detection of occlusion objects and greatly improve the performance. According to the differences between temporal representations, existing methods can be
roughly divided into BEV temporal and perspective temporal methods.
BEV temporal methods [27, 16, 25, 39] explicitly warp
BEV features from historical to current frame, as illustrated
in Fig. 1 (a), where BEV features serve as an efficient intermediate representation for temporal modeling. However,
the highly structured BEV features limit the modeling of
moving objects. This paradigm requires a large receptive
field to alleviate this problem [16, 39, 27].
Different from these approaches, perspective temporal
methods [31, 29] are mainly based on DETR [4, 61]. The
sparse query design facilitates the modeling of moving objects [29]. However, the sparse object queries need to interact with multi-frame image features for long-term temporal
dependence (see Fig. 1 (b)), leading to multiple computations. Thus, existing works are either stuck in solving the
moving objects or introducing multiple computation costs.
Based on the above analysis, we suppose it is possible
to employ sparse queries as the hidden states of temporal
propagation. In this way, we can utilize object queries to
model moving objects while keeping high efficiency. Therefore, we introduce a new paradigm: object-centric tempo13621

