This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Preface: A Data-driven Volumetric Prior
for Few-shot Ultra High-resolution Face Synthesis
Marcel C. Bühler1,2 Kripasindhu Sarkar2 Tanmay Shah2 Gengyan Li1,2 Daoye Wang2
Leonhard Helminger2 Sergio Orts-Escolano2 Dmitry Lagun2
Otmar Hilliges1 Thabo Beeler2 Abhimitra Meka2
1
ETH Zurich 2 Google

Figure 1. We propose a method for synthesising novel views of faces at ultra high-resolution from very sparse inputs. This figure shows
novel view renderings at 4K resolution reconstructed from only three views of the target identity.

Abstract
NeRFs have enabled highly realistic synthesis of human
faces including complex appearance and reflectance effects
of hair and skin. These methods typically require a large
number of multi-view input images, making the process
hardware intensive and cumbersome, limiting applicability
to unconstrained settings. We propose a novel volumetric
human face prior that enables the synthesis of ultra highresolution novel views of subjects that are not part of the
prior’s training distribution. This prior model consists of
an identity-conditioned NeRF, trained on a dataset of lowresolution multi-view images of diverse humans with known
camera calibration. A simple sparse landmark-based 3D
alignment of the training dataset allows our model to learn
a smooth latent space of geometry and appearance despite
a limited number of training identities. A high-quality volumetric representation of a novel subject can be obtained
by model fitting to 2 or 3 camera views of arbitrary resolution. Importantly, our method requires as few as two views
of casually captured images as input at inference time.

1. Introduction
Reconstruction and novel view synthesis of faces are
challenging problems in 3D computer vision. Achieving
high-quality photorealistic synthesis is difficult due to the
underlying complex geometry and light transport effects exhibited by organic surfaces. Traditional techniques use explicit geometry and appearance representations for modeling individual face parts such as hair [14], skin [17], eyes
[4], teeth [59] and lips [16]. Such methods often require
specialised expertise and hardware and limit the applications to professional use cases.
Recent advances in volumetric modelling [3, 26, 31, 48]
have enabled learned, photorealistic view synthesis of both
general scenes and specific object categories such as faces
from 2D images alone. Such approaches are particularly
well-suited to model challenging effects such as hair strands
and skin reflectance. The higher dimensionality of the volumetric reconstruction problem is inherently more ambiguous than surface-based methods. Thus, initial developments
in neural volumetric rendering methods [3, 31] relied on an
order-of-magnitude higher number of input images (> 100)
13402

