This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StableVideo: Text-driven Consistency-aware Diffusion Video Editing
Wenhao Chai1 * Xun Guo2B
1

Zhejiang University

2

Gaoang Wang1

Yan Lu2

Microsoft Research Asia

{wenhaochai.19, gaoangwang}@intl.zju.edu.cn, {xunguo, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Figure 1: Editing results of StableVideo. The input video (top row) contains long range motion and viewpoint changing.
Our approach performs stable editing according to the prompt of “Orange SUV in sunny snow winter” on foreground and
background. In the edited video (bottom row), the “orange SUV” maintains high geometric and temporal consistency,
although the viewpoints keep changing.

Abstract
Diffusion-based methods can generate realistic images
and videos, but they struggle to edit existing objects in a
video while preserving their appearance over time. This
prevents diffusion models from being applied to natural
video editing in practical scenarios. In this paper, we tackle
this problem by introducing temporal dependency to existing text-driven diffusion models, which allows them to generate consistent appearance for the edited objects. Specifically, we develop a novel inter-frame propagation mechanism for diffusion video editing, which leverages the concept of layered representations to propagate the appearance
information from one frame to the next. We then build up a
text-driven video editing framework based on this mechanism, namely StableVideo, which can achieve consistencyaware video editing. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
strong editing capability of our approach. Compared with
state-of-the-art video editing methods, our approach shows
superior qualitative and quantitative results. Our code is
available at this https URL.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant progress in extensive computer vision tasks taken by deep learning. Nev* The work was done when the author was with MSRA as an intern.

ertheless, natural video editing, which aims at manipulating the appearance of target objects and scenes, still faces
two essential challenges that are deterministic to the editing
quality: the generator equipped with rich prior knowledge
that consistently produces high-fidelity edited contents adhering faithfully to the original geometry of the target objects, and the propagator that disseminates the edited contents throughout the entire video while keeping highly temporal consistency.
The flourish of text-driven generative diffusion models
pre-trained on large-scale image and language data [34, 14,
53, 16, 41, 5] provides impressive generation quality. Several diffusion-based methods achieve good performance in
image editing [2, 31], but few methods have tried to apply
diffusion models in video editing, since it is challenging to
modify existing objects while preserving their appearance
over the entire video [49, 12, 26]. Dreamix [27] proposes a
solution to generate consistent video according to input image/video and prompts. However, it focuses more on generating smooth motions, e.g., pose and camera movements,
rather than maintaining geometric consistency of the objects across time. Moreover, such video diffusion models
often suffer from huge computing complexity which is not
friendly for practical applications.
Neural layered atlas (NLA) [24, 23] tries to tackle the
temporal continuity problem by decomposing the video into
a set of atlas layers, each of which describes one target object to be edited. For each atlas layer, the positions of the
1
23040

