This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

H OLO F USION: Towards Photo-realistic 3D Generative Modeling
Animesh Karnewar
UCL

Niloy J. Mitra
UCL

Andrea Vedaldi
Meta AI

David Novotny
Meta AI

a.karnewar@ucl.ac.uk

n.mitra@ucl.ac.uk

vedaldi@meta.com

dnovotny@meta.com

HoloDiffusion samples

Distillation

HoloFusion high quality samples

High-quality 3D shape

EA
de

n
Re

Distillation loss

g

ri n

Figure 1: We propose H OLO F USION to generate photo-realistic 3D radiance fields by extending the HoloDiffusion method
with a jointly trained 2D ‘super resolution’ network. The independently super-resolved images are fused back into the 3D
representation to improve the fidelity of the 3D model via distillation, while preserving the consistency across view changes.

Abstract
Diffusion-based image generators can now produce
high-quality and diverse samples, but their success has yet
to fully translate to 3D generation: existing diffusion methods can either generate low-resolution but 3D consistent
outputs, or detailed 2D views of 3D objects but with potential structural defects and lacking view consistency or realism. We present H OLO F USION, a method that combines the
best of these approaches to produce high-fidelity, plausible,
and diverse 3D samples while learning from a collection
of multi-view 2D images only. The method first generates
coarse 3D samples using a variant of the recently proposed
HoloDiffusion generator. Then, it independently renders
and upsamples a large number of views of the coarse 3D
model, super-resolves them to add detail, and distills those
into a single, high-fidelity implicit 3D representation, which
also ensures view-consistency of the final renders. The
super-resolution network is trained as an integral part of
H OLO F USION, end-to-end, and the final distillation uses a

new sampling scheme to capture the space of super-resolved
signals. We compare our method against existing baselines,
including DreamFusion, Get3D, EG3D, and HoloDiffusion,
and achieve, to the best of our knowledge, the most realistic
results on the challenging CO3Dv2 dataset.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [32, 7, 31] are at the basis of state-ofthe-art 2D image generators which can now produce very
high-quality and diverse outputs. However, their success
has yet to be translated to 3D and there is no generator that
can produce 3D assets of a comparable quality.
Recent attempts at extending diffusion to 3D generation
have reported mixed success. Some authors have attempted
to apply diffusion directly in 3D [18], or still in 2D but using a 3D-aware neural network [42, 1]. This requires solving two problems: first, finding a suitable 3D representation (e.g., triplane features [4], mesh [19], voxels [18]) that
scales well with resolution and is amenable to diffusion;

22976

