This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Linear Spaces of Meanings:
Compositional Structures in Vision-Language Models
Matthew Trager

Pramuditha Perera

Luca Zancato

Parminder Bhatia

Alessandro Achille

Stefano Soatto

AWS AI Labs
{mttrager,pramudi,aachille,parmib,soattos}@amazon.com
zancato@amazon.it
Abstract
We investigate compositional structures in data embeddings from pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs).
Traditionally, compositionality has been associated with algebraic operations on embeddings of words from a preexisting vocabulary. In contrast, we seek to approximate representations from an encoder as combinations of
a smaller set of vectors in the embedding space. These
vectors can be seen as “ideal words” for generating concepts directly within embedding space of the model. We
first present a framework for understanding compositional
structures from a geometric perspective. We then explain
what these compositional structures entail probabilistically
in the case of VLM embeddings, providing intuitions for why
they arise in practice. Finally, we empirically explore these
structures in CLIP’s embeddings and we evaluate their usefulness for solving different vision-language tasks such as
classification, debiasing, and retrieval. Our results show
that simple linear algebraic operations on embedding vectors can be used as compositional and interpretable methods for regulating the behavior of VLMs.

1. Introduction
In natural language, few primitive concepts or words can
be used compositionally to generate a large number of complex meanings. For example, Figure 1 shows a simple example of composed phrases {rainy, sunny} ⇥ {morning,
evening}, to which one could add more factors in the form
of adjectives or attributes. The hidden representations provided by a neural model, on the other hand, a priori do not
have a similar compositional structure. In contextual text
embeddings, in particular, the representation of a string of

Figure 1: Words and concepts in natural language can be composed to generate complex meanings efficiently. Embeddings
from transformer-based models a priori do not have a similar structure. In this paper, we argue that representations of composite
concepts admit a linear decomposition based on embedding vectors that can be viewed as “ideal words.”

text is jointly affected by all of its tokens simultaneously,
which means that there is no simple relationship between
the representations of the entire text and the words that appear in it.
In this paper, we investigate the existence of latent compositional structures in the embedding space. That is, we
aim to decompose composite concepts as linear combinations of embedding vectors associated with different factors,
as illustrated in Figure 1. If such vectors exist, they can
be treated as ideal words for composing new concepts directly within the representation space of the model. The first

15395

