This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniTR: A Unified and Efficient Multi-Modal Transformer for
Bird’s-Eye-View Representation
Haiyang Wang1 * Hao Tang1,4 * Shaoshuai Shi2† Aoxue Li3
Zhenguo Li3 Bernt Schiele2 Liwei Wang1†
1

Peking University

2

3

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Huawei, China

4

Pazhou Laboratory

{wanghaiyang@stu, tanghao@stu, wanglw@cis}.pku.edu.cn
{sshi, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de {liaoxue2, Li.Zhenguo}@huawei.com

Abstract

74

UniTR w/LSS-RT

UniTR w/LSS

73

1. Introduction
Perceiving the physical world in 3D space is critical for reliable autonomous driving systems [2, 54]. As
self-driving sensors become more advanced, integrating
the complementary signals captured from different sensors
(e.g., Cameras, LiDAR, and Radar) in a unified manner is
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

UniTR

Performance(NDS)

Jointly processing information from multiple sensors is
crucial to achieving accurate and robust perception for reliable autonomous driving systems. However, current 3D
perception research follows a modality-specific paradigm,
leading to additional computation overheads and inefficient collaboration between different sensor data. In this
paper, we present an efficient multi-modal backbone for
outdoor 3D perception named UniTR, which processes a
variety of modalities with unified modeling and shared
parameters. Unlike previous works, UniTR introduces
a modality-agnostic transformer encoder to handle these
view-discrepant sensor data for parallel modal-wise representation learning and automatic cross-modal interaction
without additional fusion steps. More importantly, to make
full use of these complementary sensor types, we present
a novel multi-modal integration strategy by both considering semantic-abundant 2D perspective and geometry-aware
3D sparse neighborhood relations. UniTR is also a fundamentally task-agnostic backbone that naturally supports
different 3D perception tasks. It sets a new state-of-theart performance on the nuScenes benchmark, achieving
+1.1 NDS higher for 3D object detection and +12.0 higher
mIoU for BEV map segmentation with lower inference latency. Code will be available at https://github.
com/Haiyang-W/UniTR.

UniTR-RT

72 DeepInteraction

BEVFusion
71
70

Transfusion
BEVFusion
MVP
PointPainting

69
68

FUTR3D
0

5

10

15

20

25

Scenes per second (Hz)

Figure 1. 3D object detection performance (NDS) vs speed (Hz)
on nuScenes [3] validation set. Latency is measured on an A100
GPU with AMD EPYC 7513 CPU. Blue and green lines are the
operating frequency of the camera and LiDAR in nuScenes.

essential. To achieve this goal, we propose UniTR, a unified yet efficient multi-modal transformer backbone that can
process both 3D sparse point clouds and 2D multi-view
dense images in parallel to learn the unified bird’s-eye-view
(BEV) representations for boosting 3D outdoor perception.
Data obtained from multi-sensory systems are represented in fundamentally different modalities: e.g., cameras
capture visually rich perspective images, while LiDARs acquire geometry-sensitive point clouds in 3D space. Integrating these complementary sensors is an ideal solution for
achieving robust 3D perception. However, due to the view
discrepancy in raw data representations, developing an effective fusion approach is non-trivial. Previous works can
be broadly classified into point-based, proposal-based, and
BEV-based fusion methods. Point-based [51, 52, 22, 70, 53]
and proposal-based approaches [4, 72, 1, 30, 5, 66, 28] enrich the LiDAR points and object proposals with semantic features from 2D images separately. BEV-based methods [36, 32] unify the representations of camera and lidar
into a shared BEV space and fuse them with subsequent

6792

