This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Deep Space Filling Curve
Wanli Chen, Xufeng Yao, Xinyun Zhang, Bei Yu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{wlchen,xfyao,xyzhang21,byu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Space-filling curves (SFCs) act as a linearization approach to map data in higher dimensional space to lower
dimensional space, which is used comprehensively in computer vision, such as image/point cloud compression, hashing and etc. Currently, researchers formulate the problem
of searching for an optimal SFC to the problem of finding a single Hamiltonian circuit on the image grid graph.
Existing methods adopt graph neural networks (GNN) for
SFC search. By modeling the pixel grid as a graph, they
first adopt GNN to predict the edge weights and then generate a minimum spanning tree (MST) based on the predictions, which is further used to construct the SFC. However,
GNN-based methods suffer from high computational costs
and memory footprint usage. Besides, MST generation is
un-differentiable, which is infeasible to optimize via gradient descent. To remedy these issues, we propose a GNNbased SFC-search framework with a tailored algorithm that
largely reduces computational cost of GNN. Additionally,
we propose a siamese network learning scheme to optimize
DNN-based models in an end-to-end fashion. Extensive
experiments show that our proposed method outperforms
both DNN-based methods and traditional SFCs, e.g. Hilbert
curve, by a large margin on various benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Space-filling curves (SFCs) are performed as the data
linearization method which transforms data in n-D to 1D
sequence. It has various applications in computer vision
tasks, such as image/point cloud compression [22, 40], image transmission [25], data clustering [27], and geography
hashing [1]. Currently, SFCs are widely used in deep learning tasks like point cloud analysis [4] and knowledge distillation [?]. Traditional SFCs are in fractal structures with many
useful properties that can benefit many downstream applications. For example, Hilbert curve [12], with a localitypreserving structure, is widely used in data compression
tasks. Z-curve [28] significantly accelerate the hashing problem thanks to its jump-connected structure.

Original

Hilbert

Ours

Figure 1: Comparison between our method and Hilbert
curve. It can be found that the SFC generated by our model
is determined by the image context while Hilbert curve has
a fixed structure.
However, with a fixed structure, traditional SFCs lack
flexibility when facing different data and tasks, which limits the broader application of SFCs.
To further improve the performance of SFCs, dataadaptive space-filling curves are proposed. (see Figure 1)
Previous works [44, 29, 6] mainly focus on the context of
image, such as pixel difference and image gradient during
SFC generation. Then it can reach better locality-preserving
properties compared with Hilbert curve. In these works,
the generation of SFCs is transformed into the problem of
finding a Hamiltonian path in a grid graph as shown in Figure 2. Currently, following the same SFC modeling scheme,
researchers attempt to generate high-quality SFCs via deep
learning-based approach [39]. Specifically, they first generate multiple small circuits based on a graph G and predict the edge weights WG′ in dual graph G′ through graph
neural networks (GNN) [17, 38]. Then, they search for a
Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) on G′ , and finally, a single
Hamiltonian circuit is formed according to the MST. Powered by deep neural networks, the learning-based methods
outperform traditional data-adaptive SFCs by a large margin.
However, the application of such methods is limited by the
high computational cost since GNN is very GPU-consuming
when dealing with grid graphs (e.g. the adjacency matrix of
17525

