This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LIMITR: Leveraging Local Information for Medical Image-Text Representation
Gefen Dawidowicz 1
Elad Hirsch 1
Ayellet Tal 1,2
1
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology 2 Cornell Tech
{gefen, eladhirsch}@campus.technion.ac.il, ayellet@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Medical imaging analysis plays a critical role in the diagnosis and treatment of various medical conditions. This
paper focuses on chest X-ray images and their corresponding radiological reports. It presents a new model that
learns a joint X-ray image & report representation. The
model is based on a novel alignment scheme between the
visual data and the text, which takes into account both local and global information. Furthermore, the model integrates domain-specific information of two types—lateral
images and the consistent visual structure of chest images.
Our representation is shown to benefit three types of retrieval tasks: text-image retrieval, class-based retrieval,
and phrase-grounding. Our code is publicly available 1 .

1. Introduction
X-ray imaging is one of the most common medical examinations performed, where in the U.S. alone 70 million
scans are performed every year [20]. During a post-scan
routine, a medical report is written by a radiologist. This
is a challenging task even for trained personnel, since the
pathologies, which typically occupy a small portion of the
image, might be characterized by subtle (sometimes distributed) anatomical changes. Automating the analysis has
the potential to aid experts and to speed-up the process.
The task of producing a joint representation of medical image-report data inherently differs from that of natural image-text, which has been extensively explored recently [6]. The available data is orders of magnitude smaller
than that of natural images. Furthermore, the data is highly
unbalanced, since most of the examples are normal. Even in
abnormal examples, most of the image (/report) is normal.
Due to the importance of the task, the available medical
data has been used for a variety of applications, including
class-based retrieval (retrieving data of the same diagnosis) [8, 27, 17, 25], pathology classification [23, 8, 3, 27,
1 https://github.com/gefend/LIMITR

Figure 1: Image-report retrieval. Given the visual data,
which contains both Lung Opacity & Lung Lesion diagnoses, our model retrieves the correct R1 report. Another
report, R2, which corresponds to another image, contains
the same pathologies. It differs in the subtle details: pathology description, localization, uncertainties, normalities and
additional unlabelled pathologies. In tasks such as classbased retrieval, R2 is considered a correct match. Our
model aims also at tasks, such as image-text retrieval, which
care about the subtleties.

17, 25], detection [8, 3, 23, 18], and phrase-grounding [3].
Often, these tasks do not require subtle details, such as the
severity of the pathology, its exact location, or findings that
are beyond the pre-defined pathologies.
We propose a novel model, which learns a joint X-ray
image-report representation that is attentive to subtle details, additional descriptions of the pathologies, uncertainties etc., as illustrated in Figure 1. It is based on three key
ideas. First, our method learns to utilize both global align-

21165

