This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ModelGiF: Gradient Fields for Model Functional Distance
Jie Song, Zhengqi Xu, Sai Wu, Gang Chen, and Mingli Song*
Zhejiang Univerisy
{sjie,xuzhengqi,wusai,cg,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
The last decade has witnessed the success of deep learning and the surge of publicly released trained models, which
necessitates the quantification of the model functional distance for various purposes. However, quantifying the model
functional distance is always challenging due to the opacity
in inner workings and the heterogeneity in architectures or
tasks. Inspired by the concept of “field” in physics, in this
work we introduce Model Gradient Field (abbr. ModelGiF)
to extract homogeneous representations from the heterogeneous pre-trained models. Our main assumption underlying
ModelGiF is that each pre-trained deep model uniquely determines a ModelGiF over the input space. The distance
between models can thus be measured by the similarity between their ModelGiFs. We validate the effectiveness of
the proposed ModelGiF with a suite of testbeds, including task relatedness estimation, intellectual property protection, and model unlearning verification. Experimental
results demonstrate the versatility of the proposed ModelGiF on these tasks, with significantly superiority performance to state-of-the-art competitors. Codes are available
at https://github.com/zju-vipa/modelgif.

1. Introduction
The last decade has witnessed the great progress of deep
learning in various fields, and a plethora of deep neural networks are developed and released publicly, with either their architectures and trained parameters (e.g., Tensorflow Hub1 , Pytorch Hub2 ) for research, or the prediction
API (e.g., BigML, Amazon Machine Learning) as ML-asa-Service (MLaaS) for commercial purposes. These offthe-shelf pre-trained models become extremely important
resources for not only practitioners to solve their own problems, but also researchers to explore and exploit the huge
potential underlying these pre-trained models.
* Corresponding author
1 https://www.tensorflow.org/hub
2 https://pytorch.org/hub/

Magnetic Field

forward

backward
Model Gradient Field
Figure 1. An illustrative diagram of the magnetic field and the proposed model gradient field (ModelGiF) defined on the input space.

With the surge of pre-trained models released, quantifying the model relationship emerges as an important question. The large-scale open-sourced deep models, heterogeneous in architectures and tasks and trained isolatedly or
dependently, are related to each other in various manners.
For example, a student model trained by knowledge distillation [19] should behave more similarly with the teacher
than an independently trained identical model. Likewise, a
fine-tuned model should be more closely related to its pretrained model than the one trained from scratch. More generally, models trained in isolation on heterogeneous tasks
should inherit the intrinsic task relatedness [53] as taskspecific features are extracted by these models. Broadly
speaking, there exists a model metric space where models
with similar functional behaviors are clustered together and
dissimilar ones are far apart. The model functional distance
between models, if left unresolved, leaves existing model
repositories still simple unstructured collections of many
isolated open-sourced models, hindering the exploitation of
their great value as a whole.
Despite the ever-increasing number of publicly available
pre-trained models, the study on the model functional distance, i.e., structure of the model metric space, lags far behind. This phenomenon can be largely attributed to the great
challenge of computing the functional distance between any
deep models, where the barriers are three-folds: (1) Hetero-

6125

