This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

2D3D-MATR: 2D-3D Matching Transformer for Detection-free Registration
between Images and Point Clouds
Minhao Li1 * Zheng Qin2,1 * Zhirui Gao1 Renjiao Yi1 Chenyang Zhu1 Yulan Guo1,3 Kai Xu1†
1
National University of Defense Technology
2
Defense Innovation Institute, Academy of Military Sciences 3 Sun Yat-sen University

…

…

Baselines

Ours
#Corr: 672
IR: 80.1%

Single-Scale
#Corr: 303
IR: 66.0%

P2-Net
#Corr: 236
IR: 16.8%

Input Image and Point Cloud

Multi-scale Patch Matching

Dense Pixel-Point Matching

High-Quality 2D-3D Correspondences

Figure 1: We propose 2D3D-MATR, a novel detection-free method for accurate inter-modality matching between images
and point clouds. Our method adopts a coarse-to-fine pipeline where it first computes coarse correspondences between
downsampled image patches and point patches and then extends them to form dense pixel-point correspondences within
the patch region. A multi-scale sampling and matching scheme is devised to resolve the scale ambiguity in patch matching.
Compared to detection-based P2-Net (bottom-right) and single-scale patch matching (middle-right), 2D3D-MATR (top-right)
extracts significantly more accurate and dense 2D-3D correspondences. The inliers are in green and the outliers are in red.

Abstract
The commonly adopted detect-then-match approach to
registration finds difficulties in the cross-modality cases due
to the incompatible keypoint detection and inconsistent feature description. We propose, 2D3D-MATR, a detectionfree method for accurate and robust registration between
images and point clouds. Our method adopts a coarseto-fine pipeline where it first computes coarse correspondences between downsampled patches of the input image and the point cloud and then extends them to form
dense correspondences between pixels and points within
the patch region. The coarse-level patch matching is based
on transformer which jointly learns global contextual constraints with self-attention and cross-modality correlations
with cross-attention. To resolve the scale ambiguity in patch
matching, we construct a multi-scale pyramid for each im* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com.

age patch and learn to find for each point patch the best
matching image patch at a proper resolution level. Extensive experiments on two public benchmarks demonstrate
that 2D3D-MATR outperforms the previous state-of-theart P2-Net by around 20 percentage points on inlier ratio and over 10 points on registration recall. Our code
and models are available at https://github.com/
minhaolee/2D3DMATR.

1. Introduction
The inter-modality registration between images and
point clouds finds applications in many computer vision
tasks, e.g., 3D reconstruction, camera relocalization, SLAM
and AR. It aims at estimating a rigid transformation that
aligns a scene point cloud into the camera coordinates of an
image capturing the same scene. The typical pipeline of 2D3D registration is to first extract correspondences between

14128

