This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RealGraph: A Multiview Dataset for 4D Real-world Context Graph Generation
Haozhe Lin,* Zequn Chen,* Jinzhi Zhang,* Bing Bai, Yu Wang, Ruqi Huang, Lu Fang†
Tsinghua University
fanglu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Context Graph

Abstract

laptop_1

desk_1
on

Understanding 4D scene context in real world has become urgently critical for deploying sophisticated AI systems. In this paper, we propose a brand new scene understanding paradigm called “Context Graph Generation
(CGG)”, aiming at abstracting holistic semantic information in the complicated 4D world. The CGG task capitalizes
on the calibrated multiview videos of a dynamic scene, and
targets at recovering semantic information (coordination,
trajectories and relationships) of the presented objects in
the form of spatio-temporal context graph in 4D space. We
also present a benchmark 4D video dataset “RealGraph”,
the first dataset tailored for the proposed CGG task. The
raw data of RealGraph is composed of calibrated and synchronized multiview videos. We exclusively provide manual
annotations including object 2D&3D bounding boxes, category labels and semantic relationships. We also make sure
the annotated ID for every single object is temporally and
spatially consistent. We propose the first CGG baseline algorithm, Multiview-based Context Graph Generation Network (MCGNet), to empirically investigate the legitimacy
of CGG task on RealGraph dataset. We nevertheless reveal the great challenges behind this task and encourage
the community to explore beyond our solution. Our project
page is at https://github.com/THU-luvision/RealGraph .

person_2

ld
in
ho

person_1

g

cake_1
talking

talk

person_3
ing

holding

person_1

cake_1

person_1

VIEW 2

VIEW n

VIEW 1

VIEW 3

VIEW 5

VIEW 4

VIEW 1

VIEW 2

VIEW 3

VIEW 4

VIEW 5

VIEW n

RealGraph - café

1. Introduction
Understanding our natural world in 4D space-time is
the fundamental challenge in building sophisticated AI systems. Recently, significant progress has been made in this
area, including 3D object detection [12, 44] and 3D multiobject tracking [5, 30, 47]. In addition to detecting and
tracking 3D objects, understanding the interaction and relationships between humans and objects in dynamic environments are also essential to intellectual perception and
cognition science [59, 25]. Take for instance, deploying
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 Lu Fang is the corresponding author (www.luvision.net).

Figure 1. From multiview videos (bottom) to context graph (top).
The holistic understanding of 4D scenes empowers the noiserobust, context-aware, and scene-adaptive visual analysis.

embodied AI [24, 17] in a café, as shown in Fig. 1, requires scene understanding in complicated 4D space-time
in order to make prompt decisions: service robots need to
estimate objects’ 3D trajectories and to understand their semantic relationships (e.g. ⟨man − sit at − table⟩) to infer
human intention and to offer help. A legitimate solution to
approach 4D scene understanding is to interpret the scenes
in the form of a semantic graph, which encompasses 4D

3758

