This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Computation and Data Efficient Backdoor Attacks
Yutong Wu1 , Xingshuo Han1 , Han Qiu2,3, *, Tianwei Zhang1
1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Zhongguancun Laboratory
{yutong002, xingshuo001}@e.edu.ntu.sg, qiuhan@tsinghua.edu.cn, tianwei.zhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Backdoor attacks against deep neural network (DNN)
models have been widely studied. Various attack techniques
have been proposed for different domains and paradigms,
e.g., image, point cloud, natural language processing,
transfer learning, etc. The most widely-used way to embed a backdoor into a DNN model is to poison the training
data. They usually randomly select samples from the benign
training set for poisoning, without considering the distinct
contribution of each sample to the backdoor effectiveness,
making the attack less optimal.
A recent work [40] proposed to use the forgetting
score to measure the importance of each poisoned sample and then filter out redundant data for effective backdoor training. However, this method is empirically designed without theoretical proofing.
It is also very
time-consuming as it needs to go through several training stages for data selection. To address such limitations, we propose a novel confidence-based scoring
methodology, which can efficiently measure the contribution of each poisoning sample based on the distance
posteriors. We further introduce a greedy search algorithm to find the most informative samples for backdoor
injection more promptly. Experimental evaluations on
both 2D image and 3D point cloud classification tasks
show that our approach can achieve comparable performance or even surpass the forgetting score-based searching method while requiring only several extra epochs’ computation of a standard training process. Our code can
be found at https://github.com/WU-YU-TONG/
computational_efficient_backdoor

1. Introduction
The diversity of security threats [1, 23] to deep neural
networks (DNNs) hinder their commercialization processes
in many computer vision (CV) tasks. One of the most severe and wide-known threats is the backdoor attack [23].
* Corresponding Author

The adversary can inject a stealthy backdoor into the target model corresponding to a unique trigger during training [43, 28, 25, 17, 5, 10, 13]. During inference, the compromised model performs well on the benign samples but
can misbehave over the malicious samples with the trigger.
The most common approach to achieve backdoor attacks
is data poisoning, where the adversary compromises certain
training samples to embed the backdoor. A critical criterion
for a successful backdoor attack is the ratio of poisoning
samples. From the adversarial perspective, we hope to poison as few samples as possible while maintaining the same
attack success rate (ASR) for two reasons: (1) a smaller poisoning ratio can enhance the attack feasibility. The adversary only needs to compromise a small portion of training
data, so the attack requirement is relaxed. (2) The backdoor
attack with fewer poisoned samples will be more stealthy.
Numerous works proposed backdoor detection solutions via
investigating the training samples [7, 15, 29, 35, 38, 34, 18].
A smaller poisoning ratio will significantly increase the detection difficulty and reduce the defense effectiveness.
A majority of backdoor attacks randomly select a fixed
ratio of training samples for poisoning, and the ratio is
heuristically determined [12, 16, 21, 41, 24]. This strategy
is less optimal as it ignores the distinction of different samples in terms of contributions to the backdoor. To overcome
this limitation, a recent work [40] proposed a new method,
forgetting score, to optimize the process of poisoning sample selection. It uses the frequency of forgetting events per
sample during model training as the score to represent the
importance of each sample to the backdoor injection. Then,
samples with higher scores are filtered out via a filteringand-updating strategy (FUS) in N full training circles. Forgetting score can effectively reduce the poisoning ratio by
25-50% compared with the random selection strategy while
achieving a similar ASR. It also confirms the diverse impacts of different samples on the attack performance.
Forgetting score can achieve data efficiency but at the
cost of computation inefficiency. Specifically, it empirically
counts the number of times each sample is forgotten during
training to locate the critical samples that contribute more
to poisoning. Calculation of the forgetting scores requires

4805

