This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Backpropagation Path Search On Adversarial Transferability
Zhuoer Xu1 , Zhangxuan Gu1 , Jianping Zhang2 * , Shiwen Cui1 , Changhua Meng1 , Weiqiang Wang1 ,
1
Tiansuan Lab, Ant Group
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{xuzhuoer.xze,guzhangxuan.gzx,donn.csw,changhua.mch,weiqiang.wwq}@antgroup.com
jpzhang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples, dictating the imperativeness to test the model’s robustness before deployment. Transfer-based attackers craft
adversarial examples against surrogate models and transfer
them to victim models deployed in the black-box situation.
To enhance the adversarial transferability, structure-based
attackers adjust the backpropagation path to avoid the attack from overfitting the surrogate model. However, existing structure-based attackers fail to explore the convolution
module in CNNs and modify the backpropagation graph
heuristically, leading to limited effectiveness. In this paper, we propose backPropagation pAth Search (PAS), solving the aforementioned two problems. We first propose SkipConv to adjust the backpropagation path of convolution by
structural reparameterization. To overcome the drawback
of heuristically designed backpropagation paths, we further
construct a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) search space,
utilize one-step approximation for path evaluation and employ Bayesian Optimization to search for the optimal path.
We conduct comprehensive experiments in a wide range of
transfer settings, showing that PAS improves the attack success rate by a huge margin for both normally trained and
defense models.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial examples [32] despite their success in a wide variety
of applications [13, 11, 17, 10]. It is imperative to devise
effective attackers to identify the deficiencies of DNNs beforehand, which serves as the first step to improving the
model’s robustness. White-box attackers [26, 1, 2, 44] have
complete access to the structures and parameters of victim models and effectively mislead them. However, DNNs
are generally deployed in the black-box situation. To this
* Corresponding author.

Attack
Skip Conv

Skip Activation
!(#! $ , &)

ReLU

BN

Conv

ReLU

BN

Conv

∇" !

Skip Connection
Integrated Gradients

(a) Original Surrogate

(b) PAS Surrogate

Figure 1: Feature attribution with Integrated Gradients
for both the original surrogate and the surrogate with the
searched backpropagation path (i.e., PAS). PAS explicitly
enhances the object attribution for classification and reduces the overfitting of the surrogate model to the irrelevant background, which demonstrates the effectiveness and
interpretability of searched backpropagation path.
end, transfer-based attackers, as typical black-box attackers form without access to information about victim models, have drawn increasing attention in the research community [24, 37, 42].
It is widely known that adversarial examples, crafted following a white-box situation against a surrogate model, are
transferable to the black-box victim models due to the linear nature of DNNs [9]. To boost adversarial transferability,
various methods have been proposed on different aspects,

4663

