This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3DPPE: 3D Point Positional Encoding for Transformer-based
Multi-Camera 3D Object Detection

1

Changyong Shu1 * Jiajun Deng2 * Fisher Yu3 Yifan Liu4†
Houmo AI, 2 University of Sydney, 3 ETH Zürich, 4 University of Adelaide,
changyong.shu89@gmail.com, jiajun.deng@sydney.edu.au
fisheryu@ethz.ch, yifan.liu04@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Transformer-based methods have swept the benchmarks
on 2D and 3D detection on images. Because tokenization
before the attention mechanism drops the spatial information, positional encoding becomes critical for those methods. Recent works found that encodings based on samples
of the 3D viewing rays can significantly improve the quality of multi-camera 3D object detection. We hypothesize
that 3D point locations can provide more information than
rays. Therefore, we introduce 3D point positional encoding, 3DPPE, to the 3D detection Transformer decoder. Although 3D measurements are not available at the inference
time of monocular 3D object detection, 3DPPE uses predicted depth to approximate the real point positions. Our
hybrid-depth module combines direct and categorical depth
to estimate the refined depth of each pixel. Despite the approximation, 3DPPE achieves 46.0 mAP and 51.4 NDS on
the competitive nuScenes dataset, significantly outperforming encodings based on ray samples. The code is available
at https://github.com/drilistbox/3DPPE.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is a vital component of autonomous
driving perception systems. Particularly, image-based 3D
object detection has received increasing attention from both
academia and industry due to its lower cost compared
to LiDAR-dependent solutions. Despite the fact that autonomous driving vehicles are equipped with multiple cameras, early attempts at image-based 3D object detection, as
seen in previous works [17, 19], focus on monocular detection and combine the detection results from multiple cameras. This kind of solution is unable to make use of correspondence in the overlapping area of adjacent cameras,
and the paradigm to individually detect objects in each view
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

(a). 3D Camera-Ray PE

(b). 3D Point PE

Figure 1. An illustration of (a) 3D camera-ray positional encoding
(PE) and (b) our proposed 3D point PE. The 3D camera-ray PE
represents camera-ray information by determining the positions of
a set number of discrete points along the direction from the camera
optical center to the image plane pixel. This encoding approach
is coarse-grained. On the other hand, the 3D point PE provides
more precise position information by encoding the location of a
single point with an estimated depth. In the figure, four pixels are
randomly selected to demonstrate the methods.

involves a large computational overhead. Alternatively, a
group of recent studies [8, 7, 27, 29] follow the paradigm of
Lift-Splat-Shoot (LSS) [6] to first transform multi-camera
images to unified bird-eye-view (BEV) representation in
parallel and then perform object detection on the BEV representation. However, such ill-posed view transformation
inevitably causes error accumulation, which further affects
the accuracy of 3D object detection.
At the same time, the transformer-based (DETR-like) [1]
scheme has also been explored in this field. Typically, the
methods following this scheme [3, 25, 26, 28, 32] utilizes
a set of learnable 3D object query to iteratively interact

3580

