This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DDP: Diffusion Model for Dense Visual Prediction
Yuanfeng Ji1∗ , Zhe Chen3∗ , Enze Xie2† , Lanqing Hong2 , Xihui Liu1 ,
Zhaoqiang Liu2 , Tong Lu3 , Zhenguo Li2 , Ping Luo1,4
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Nanjing University 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
https://github.com/JiYuanFeng/DDP

Abstract

Forward Diffusion >
𝑥

We propose a simple, efficient, yet powerful framework
for dense visual predictions based on the conditional diffusion pipeline. Our approach follows a “noise-to-map”
generative paradigm for prediction by progressively removing noise from a random Gaussian distribution, guided by
the image. The method, called DDP, efficiently extends
the denoising diffusion process into the modern perception
pipeline. Without task-specific design and architecture customization, DDP is easy to generalize to most dense prediction tasks, e.g., semantic segmentation and depth estimation. In addition, DDP shows attractive properties such
as dynamic inference and uncertainty awareness, in contrast to previous single-step discriminative methods. We
show top results on three representative tasks with six diverse benchmarks, without tricks, DDP achieves state-ofthe-art or competitive performance on each task compared
to the specialist counterparts. For example, semantic segmentation (83.9 mIoU on Cityscapes), BEV map segmentation (70.6 mIoU on nuScenes), and depth estimation (0.05
REL on KITTI). We hope that our approach will serve as a
solid baseline and facilitate future research.

1. Introduction
Dense prediction tasks are the foundation of computer
vision research, including a wide range of perceptual tasks
such as semantic segmentation [19, 91], depth estimation
[28, 63, 67], and optical flow [26, 28]. These tasks require
correctly predicting the discrete labels or continuous values
for all pixels in the image, which provides detailed contextual understanding and enables various applications.
Numerous methods have rapidly improved the result of
perception tasks over a short period of time. In general
terms, these methods can be divided into two paradigms:
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

< Reverse Diffusion

𝑞 𝑦! ∣ 𝑦!"#
𝑦!

𝑦"#$

𝑦"

𝑦%

𝑝$ 𝑦!"# ∣ 𝑦! , 𝑥

Figure 1. Conditional diffusion pipeline for dense visual predictions. Specifically, a conditional diffusion model is employed,
where q is the forward diffusion process and pθ is the inverse process. The framework iteratively transforms the noise sample yT ,
drawn from a standard Gaussian distribution, into the desired target prediction y0 under the guidance of the input image x.

discriminative-based [27, 88, 78, 17] and generative-based
[77, 31, 35, 40, 81]. The former approach, which directly
learns the mapping between input-output pairs and predicts
in a single forward step, has become the current de-facto
choice due to its simplicity and efficiency. Whereas, generative models aim at modeling the underlying distribution
of the data, conceptually having a greater capacity to handle challenging tasks. However, they are often restricted by
complex architecture customization as well as various training difficulties [60, 37, 6].
These challenges have been largely addressed by the diffusion and score-based models [32, 64, 68]. The solutions,
based on denosing diffusion process, are conceptually simple: they apply a continuous diffusion process to transform
data into noise and generate new samples by simulating the
time-reversed diffusion process. These methods now enable easy training and achieve superior results on various
generative tasks [50, 58, 56, 53]. Witnessing these great
successes, there has been a recent surge of interest to introduce diffusion models to dense prediction tasks, including

21741

