This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Explanations via Iterated Integrated Attributions
Oren Barkan*1

Yehonatan Elisha∗1

Amit Eshel2
1

Yuval Asher2

Noam Koenigstein2
2

The Open University

Tel Aviv University

https://github.com/iia-iccv23/iia

Abstract
We introduce Iterated Integrated Attributions (IIA) - a
generic method for explaining the predictions of vision models. IIA employs iterative integration across the input image, the internal representations generated by the model,
and their gradients, yielding precise and focused explanation maps. We demonstrate the effectiveness of IIA through
comprehensive evaluations across various tasks, datasets,
and network architectures. Our results showcase that IIA
produces accurate explanation maps, outperforming other
state-of-the-art explanation techniques.

1. Introduction
The emergence of deep learning has ushered in signiﬁcant
breakthroughs within the realm of artiﬁcial intelligence, particularly in computer vision. Advanced deep Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) architectures [50, 30, 32, 41],
and recent Vision Transformer (ViT) models [20, 28] have
demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in image classiﬁcation [37, 50], object detection [29, 17, 10], and semantic
segmentation [17, 4] tasks. Yet, many deep learning models
lack interpretability, making it difﬁcult to explain the reasoning behind their predictions. As a result, Explainable
AI (XAI) has become a prominent research area in computer vision, and numerous methods have been proposed
for explaining and interpreting the internal workings of different neural network architectures in various application
domains [60, 49, 46, 15, 7, 44, 6, 8, 26].
Explanation methods attempt to produce an explanation
map in the form of a heatmap (also known as relevance
or saliency map) that attributes the prediction to the input
by highlighting speciﬁc regions in the input image. Early
gradient-based methods produced explanation maps based
on the gradient of the prediction w.r.t. the input image
[49, 50, 52]. Then, Grad-CAM [46] and the follow-up works
* Denotes equal contribution.

by [12, 33, 5] proposed to compute the explanation maps
based on the internal activation maps (also known as Class
Activation Maps (CAM)) and their corresponding gradients.
In parallel, path integration methods such as Integrated Gradients (IG) [54] proposed to produce an explanation map by
accumulating the gradients of the linear interpolations between the input and reference images. The aforementioned
techniques were formulated and evaluated on CNNs. Following the advent of Transformer-based architectures [55], a
variety of approaches has also been proposed for interpreting
Vision Transformer (ViT) models [15, 56, 14].
This paper presents Iterated Integrated Attributions (IIA)
- a universal technique for explaining vision models, applicable to both CNN and ViT architectures. IIA employs iterative
integration across the input image, the internal representations generated by the model, and their gradients. Thereby,
IIA leverages information from the activation (or attention)
maps created by all network layers, including those from the
input image. We present comprehensive objective and subjective evaluations that demonstrate the effectiveness of IIA
in generating faithful explanations for both CNN and ViT
models. Our results show that IIA outperforms current stateof-the-art methods on various explanation and segmentation
tests across all datasets, model architectures, and metrics.

2. Related Work
Explaining CNNs Explanation methods for CNNs have
been studied extensively. Saliency-based methods [16, 49,
43, 62, 60, 61] and activation-based methods [21] use the
feature-maps obtained by forward propagation in order to
interpret the output prediction. Perturbation-based methods [23, 24] measures the output’s sensitivity w.r.t. the input
using random perturbations applied in the input space. Gradient methods produce explanation maps based on the gradient
itself or via a function that combines the activation maps
with their gradients [48, 53]. A prominent example is the
Grad-CAM (GC) [46] method that uses the pooled gradients
and the activation maps to produce explanation maps. GC

2073

