This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Graphics2RAW: Mapping Computer Graphics Images to Sensor RAW Images
Donghwan Seo∗1

Abhijith Punnappurath∗2

Sai Kiran Tedla‡2,4
1

Samsung Electronics

2

Sanguk Park1

Luxi Zhao2
Jihwan Choe1
3

Samsung AI Center Toronto

Abstract
Computer graphics (CG) rendering platforms produce
imagery with ever-increasing photo realism. The narrowing domain gap between real and synthetic imagery makes
it possible to use CG images as training data for deep learning models targeting high-level computer vision tasks, such
as autonomous driving and semantic segmentation. CG images, however, are currently not suitable for low-level vision
tasks targeting RAW sensor images. This is because RAW
images are encoded in sensor-specific color spaces and incur pre-white-balance color casts caused by the sensor’s
response to scene illumination. CG images are rendered directly to a device-independent perceptual color space without needing white balancing. As a result, it is necessary
to apply a mapping procedure to close the domain gap between graphics and RAW images. To this end, we introduce a framework to process graphics images to mimic RAW
sensor images accurately. Our approach allows a one-tomany mapping, where a single graphics image can be transformed to match multiple sensors and multiple scene illuminations. In addition, our approach requires only a handful
of example RAW-DNG files from the target sensor as parameters for the mapping process. We compare our method to
alternative strategies and show that our approach produces
more realistic RAW images and provides better results on
three low-level vision tasks: RAW denoising, illumination
estimation, and neural rendering for night photography. Finally, as part of this work, we provide a dataset of 292 realistic CG images for training low-light imaging models.

1. Introduction
Access to large datasets of high-quality images remains
a critical factor for training deep learning models. For many
computer vision tasks, data acquisition is time-consuming,
expensive, and error prone. This is particularly true for
* Equal contribution.
† Work done while with the Samsung AI Center Toronto.
‡ Work done while an intern at the Samsung AI Center Toronto.

A

Abdelrahman Abdelhamed†3
Michael S. Brown2

Google Research

4

York University, Toronto

B

Figure 1. Images (A) and (B) started as RAW-DNG images, one
from a Nikon, the other from a Samsung camera. RAW images are
shown as insets. Both DNGs have been rendered by Adobe Photoshop to sRGB based on the DNG’s metadata. One is a computer
graphics image converted to a RAW-DNG using our method; the
other is a real sensor RAW image. Can you tell which is CG and
which is real? See Sec. 3.3.

camera engineers who often require sensor-specific training data. Any time a new sensor is introduced on a smartphone or other camera platform, training images specific
to the new sensor must be captured. Computer-generated
(CG) imagery has long been viewed as a promising solution to the data acquisition bottleneck. The main challenge
with graphics imagery is the domain gap between synthetic
and real data. Fortunately, the visual gap is rapidly closing
thanks to the improved realism of graphics engines.
CG imagery has been successfully used to augment or
even replace real training data for applications such as autonomous driving [46, 42], semantic segmentation [16, 44],
and facial landmark detection [51]. There are now companies dedicated to generating CG images for training computer vision AI models [2, 4, 7]. Graphics platforms, such
as Unreal [6], Unity [5], and Blender [1], typically render
images directly to a device-independent display-referred
color space—namely, standard RGB (sRGB). Moreover,
computer graphics are implicitly white-balanced during
rendering. Cameras also process RAW sensor images to
sRGB. However, unlike graphics, a RAW image represents
the sensor’s direct response to physical radiance from the
scene. RAW images are in a sensor-specific color space
defined by the spectral sensitivities of the sensor’s color filters. In addition, RAW images exhibit a strong color cast

12622

