This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporal Enhanced Training of Multi-view 3D Object Detector via Historical
Object Prediction
Zhuofan Zong1 * Dongzhi Jiang1,2 * Guanglu Song1 Zeyue Xue3
Jingyong Su4 Hongsheng Li2,5,6† Yu Liu1†
1
SenseTime Research 2 CUHK MMLAB 3 HKU 4 HITSZ
5
CPII 6 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{zongzhuofan,jdzcarr7,liuyuisanai}@gmail.com

hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new paradigm, named Historical Object Prediction (HoP) for multi-view 3D detection to leverage temporal information more effectively. The
HoP approach is straightforward: given the current timestamp t, we generate a pseudo Bird’s-Eye View (BEV) feature of timestamp t-k from its adjacent frames and utilize
this feature to predict the object set at timestamp t-k. Our
approach is motivated by the observation that enforcing
the detector to capture both the spatial location and temporal motion of objects occurring at historical timestamps
can lead to more accurate BEV feature learning. First,
we elaborately design short-term and long-term temporal
decoders, which can generate the pseudo BEV feature for
timestamp t-k without the involvement of its corresponding
camera images. Second, an additional object decoder is
flexibly attached to predict the object targets using the generated pseudo BEV feature. Note that we only perform HoP
during training, thus the proposed method does not introduce extra overheads during inference. As a plug-and-play
approach, HoP can be easily incorporated into state-ofthe-art BEV detection frameworks, including BEVFormer
and BEVDet series. Furthermore, the auxiliary HoP approach is complementary to prevalent temporal modeling
methods, leading to significant performance gains. Extensive experiments are conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed HoP on the nuScenes dataset. We
choose the representative methods, including BEVFormer
and BEVDet4D-Depth to evaluate our method. Surprisingly, HoP achieves 68.5% NDS and 62.4% mAP with ViT-L
on nuScenes test, outperforming all the 3D object detectors on the leaderboard. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/Sense-X/HoP.

* Equal contribution. Work done during internship at SenseTime Research. † Corresponding authors.

Image-view
Transform

Image
Backbone
Images at different timestamps

Temporal
Fusion
BEV features at different timestamps

Predict current
objects

HoP
Pseudo BEV Feature
Generation

Predict historical
objects

Figure 1: Incorporating HoP into 3D object detector
with other temporal fusion methods [8, 7, 32, 12, 24].
Our HoP is plug-and-play and complementary to them.

1. Introduction
Camera-only 3D detection from multi-view images is a
challenging task for autonomous driving and has received
increasing attention recently. Introducing the Bird’s-Eye
View (BEV) representation [25, 14, 8, 30, 18, 2] with
the temporal features aggregation has become the superior design manner for camera-only 3D perception with
multi-camera images. Based on this, a series of detectors [7, 15, 12, 24, 31, 19, 17] delve into the elaborated temporal information fusion methods and achieve significant
breakthroughs. They consider the regions in 3D space and
aggregate the image features corresponding to these hypothesis locations from multiple timestamps. These outstanding
advances reveal the great potential of temporal information
in camera-only 3D detection.
Beyond these temporal fusion mechanisms, in this paper, we propose a new paradigm for leveraging temporal
information to enhance the temporal modeling ability of

3781

