This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Object as Query: Lifting any 2D Object Detector to 3D Detection
Zitian Wang1

Zehao Huang2
1

Jiahui Fu1

Naiyan Wang2

Si Liu1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
2

TuSimple

{wangzt.kghl,zehaohuang18,winsty}@gmail.com

{jiahuifu,liusi}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
3D object detection from multi-view images has drawn
much attention over the past few years. Existing methods
mainly establish 3D representations from multi-view images and adopt a dense detection head for object detection, or employ object queries distributed in 3D space to
localize objects. In this paper, we design Multi-View 2D
Objects guided 3D Object Detector (MV2D), which can lift
any 2D object detector to multi-view 3D object detection.
Since 2D detections can provide valuable priors for object
existence, MV2D exploits 2D detectors to generate object
queries conditioned on the rich image semantics. These
dynamically generated queries help MV2D to recall objects in the field of view and show a strong capability of
localizing 3D objects. For the generated queries, we design a sparse cross attention module to force them to focus on the features of specific objects, which suppresses
interference from noises. The evaluation results on the
nuScenes dataset demonstrate the dynamic object queries
and sparse feature aggregation can promote 3D detection
capability. MV2D also exhibits a state-of-the-art performance among existing methods. We hope MV2D can serve
as a new baseline for future research. Code is available at
https://github.com/tusen-ai/MV2D.

1. Introduction
Camera-based 3D object detection in unconstrained realworld scenes has drawn much attention over the past few
years. Early monocular 3D object detection methods [30,
45, 1, 36, 18, 39, 40] typically build their framework following the 2D object detection pipeline. The 3D location
and attributes of objects are directly predicted from a single view image. Though these methods have achieved great
progress, they are incapable of utilizing the geometric configuration of surrounding cameras and multi-view image
correspondences, which are pivotal for the 3D position of
objects in the real world. Moreover, adapting these methods
to multi-view setting relies on sophisticated cross-camera

(a) original image

(b) fixed queries

(c) 2D detection

(d) generated queries from 2D detection

Figure 1. Motivation of MV2D. The 3D detector with fixed object
queries (fixed queries means the queries are invariant for different inputs) might mislocate or ignore some objects (b), which are
however successfully detected by a 2D detector (c). If generating
object queries based on 2D detector, a 3D detector can produce
more precise locations (d).

post-processing, which further causes degraded efficiency
and efficacy. To handle these problems, recent researchers
[41, 16, 23, 22, 26] propose to directly localize objects in
3D world space based on multi-view images, providing a
new paradigm for vision-based 3D object detection.
According to the representation of fused features, current
multi-view 3D object detection methods can be mainly divided into two streams: dense 3D methods and sparse query
methods. Concretely, dense 3D methods render multi-view
features into 3D space, such as Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) feature space [16, 22, 23, 5] or voxel feature space [35, 21].
However, since the computational costs are squarely proportional to the range of 3D space, they inevitably cannot
scale up to large-scale scenarios [9]. Alternatively, querybased methods [41, 26] adopt learnable object queries to aggregate features from multi-view images and predict object
bounding boxes based on query features. Although fixed
number of object queries avoid computational cost exploding with 3D space, the query number and position relied on
empirical prior may cause false positive or undetected objects in dynamic scenarios.

3791

