This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AutoAD II: The Sequel – Who, When, and What in Movie Audio Description
Tengda Han1
1

Max Bain1

Arsha Nagrani1†

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

2

Gül Varol1,2

Weidi Xie1,3

LIGM, École des Ponts ParisTech

3

Andrew Zisserman1

CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Audio Description (AD) is the task of generating descriptions of visual content, at suitable time intervals, for the
benefit of visually impaired audiences. For movies, this
presents notable challenges – AD must occur only during
existing pauses in dialogue, should refer to characters by
name, and ought to aid understanding of the storyline as a
whole.
To this end, we develop a new model for automatically
generating movie AD, given CLIP visual features of the
frames, the cast list, and the temporal locations of the
speech; addressing all three of the ‘who’, ‘when’, and
‘what’ questions: (i) who – we introduce a character bank
consisting of the character’s name, the actor that played
the part, and a CLIP feature of their face, for the principal cast of each movie, and demonstrate how this can be
used to improve naming in the generated AD; (ii) when –
we investigate several models for determining whether an
AD should be generated for a time interval or not, based
on the visual content of the interval and its neighbours; and
(iii) what – we implement a new vision-language model for
this task, that can ingest the proposals from the character
bank, whilst conditioning on the visual features using crossattention, and demonstrate how this improves over previous
architectures for AD text generation in an apples-to-apples
comparison.

1. Introduction
For in acts we must take note of who did it, by what aids or
instruments he did it (with), what he did, where he did it, why
he did it, how and when he did it.
Thomas Aquinas

Audio Description (AD) is the descriptive narration of
visual elements in a video, that are not represented in the
original audio track. While there has been a proliferation
of online content with closed captioning1 due to advancements in ASR, a vast majority of video online does not
have AD, mostly due to the prohibitive cost of generat†: also at Google Research

1 Transcription of the speech

video
audio
subtitle

what did you do?
1:18:56

Can I buy you a drink?
1:19:12
1:19:13

1:18:57

1:19:02

1:19:05

When to describe?
movie database

Who is in the scene?

What happened?

Possible characters: Jack Foley
played by George Clooney; Karen
Sisco played by Jennifer Lopez.

Target AD: As Karen stares gloomily out of the
window, Jack approaches toying with a lighter.

Figure 1. AutoAD II: We propose an automatic AD system that
addresses key challenges - when to generate AD, who is in the
scene and what is happening visually.

ing it ($30 per minute2 ). Generating AD automatically at
scale has multiple benefits; not only does it improve access
for the visually impaired – it may also enhance the visual
experience for sighted users (sight-free multitasking such
as driving, enhanced memory for visual details, language
learning, and also aiding those with other cognitive disabilities) [41]. Generating AD for movies is also an important
research area in computer vision as it requires a system to
perform multi-modal reasoning of long videos over time.
Despite these benefits, the progress in generating AD
is still at a very nascent stage, due to the following challenges: (a) An ideal AD generation system should perform
two tasks simultaneously – first, determine when to generate AD by proposing temporal segments; second, generate AD for the proposed segments. Previous works ignore
the when completely, operating on already trimmed video
segments [62]. (b) Secondly, given the strong relevance of
characters to stories [27, 53], AD typically includes references to a character’s name (who is in the scene), their emotion, and their actions. This is particularly challenging as
characters change from movie to movie. Due to anonymised
test sets (LSMDC [45]), the relevance of character names in
AD is often ignored [62]. (c) Finally, AD also differs significantly from image or video captioning [33, 35, 46] in
that it does not need to provide descriptions of events that
can be understood from the sound track alone (such as dia2 https://www.3playmedia.com/blog/select-audio-description-vendor/

13645

