This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PointMBF: A Multi-scale Bidirectional Fusion Network for Unsupervised
RGB-D Point Cloud Registration
†

*

Mingzhi Yuan1,2 , Kexue Fu3 , Zhihao Li1,2 , Yucong Meng1,2 and Manning Wang1,2
1
Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, China
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, China
3
Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan)
{mzyuan20,fukexue,mnwang}@fudan.edu.cn, {lizhihao21,ycmeng21}@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Point cloud registration is a task to estimate the rigid
transformation between two unaligned scans, which plays
an important role in many computer vision applications.
Previous learning-based works commonly focus on supervised registration, which have limitations in practice. Recently, with the advance of inexpensive RGB-D sensors, several learning-based works utilize RGB-D data to achieve
unsupervised registration. However, most of existing unsupervised methods follow a cascaded design or fuse RGBD data in a unidirectional manner, which do not fully exploit the complementary information in the RGB-D data. To
leverage the complementary information more effectively,
we propose a network implementing multi-scale bidirectional fusion between RGB images and point clouds generated from depth images. By bidirectionally fusing visual and geometric features in multi-scales, more distinctive deep features for correspondence estimation can be obtained, making our registration more accurate. Extensive
experiments on ScanNet and 3DMatch demonstrate that our
method achieves new state-of-the-art performance. Code
will be released at https://github.com/phdymz/
PointMBF.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration [28] aims at aligning partial
views of the same scene, which is a critical component of
many computer vision tasks. Commonly, point cloud registration starts from feature extraction [55, 10] and correspondence estimation [46, 43], followed by robust geometric fitting [16, 37, 3, 72]. Among them, feature extraction plays
a vital role in point cloud registration, as distinctive fea* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

tures can reduce the occurrence of outlier correspondences,
thereby saving time on robust geometric fitting.
Many traditional methods rely on hand-crafted features
[55, 34], but they commonly show limited performance.
Benefiting from the rapid progress of deep learning, many
learning-based features [10, 64, 25] have been proposed in
recent years. Compared to hand-crafted features, they are
distinctive enough to achieve robust performance in many
challenging conditions such as low overlap. However, most
deep learning-based features need supervision on poses or
correspondences, which limits their practical applications.
For unannotated datasets with different distributions from
the training set, they tend to suffer from performance degradation.
With the recent advance of inexpensive RGB-D sensors,
it has become easier to simultaneously acquire both depth
information and RGB images, which inspires unsupervised
point cloud registration using additional color information.
UR&R [14] proposed a framework for unsupervised RGBD point cloud registration. It utilizes a differentiable renderer to generate the projections of the transformed point
clouds and calculates geometric and photometric losses between the projections and the registration targets. Based on
these losses, UR&R can train its deep descriptor without annotations and achieve robust registration on RGB-D video.
Similar to UR&R, BYOC [15] proposed a teacher-student
framework for unsupervised point cloud registration for
RGB-D data, which also shows competitive performance.
However, all these RGB-D-based methods use RGB images
and depth information separately and do not further exploit
the complementary information within RGB-D data. Recently, LLT [67] first utilized a linear transformer [35, 59]
to fuse these complementary information and achieved new
state-of-the-art performance. However, LLT focuses on using depth information to guide RGB information and neglects the interaction between the two modalities, which
hinders better performance.

17694

