This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ToonTalker: Cross-Domain Face Reenactment
Yuan Gong1 Yong Zhang2 * Xiaodong Cun2 Fei Yin1
Yanbo Fan2 Xuan Wang3 Baoyuan Wu4 Yujiu Yang1 *
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 2 Tencent AI Lab
3
Ant Group 4 The School of Data Science, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen)

Abstract
We target cross-domain face reenactment in this paper,
i.e., driving a cartoon image with the video of a real person and vice versa. Recently, many works have focused
on one-shot talking face generation to drive a portrait with
a real video, i.e., within-domain reenactment. Straightforwardly applying those methods to cross-domain animation
will cause inaccurate expression transfer, blur effects, and
even apparent artifacts due to the domain shift between
cartoon and real faces. Only a few works attempt to settle cross-domain face reenactment. The most related work
AnimeCeleb [13] requires constructing a dataset with pose
vector and cartoon image pairs by animating 3D characters, which makes it inapplicable anymore if no paired data
is available. In this paper, we propose a novel method
for cross-domain reenactment without paired data. Specifically, we propose a transformer-based framework to align
the motions from different domains into a common latent
space where motion transfer is conducted via latent code
addition. Two domain-specific motion encoders and two
learnable motion base memories are used to capture domain properties. A source query transformer and a driving
one are exploited to project domain-specific motion to the
canonical space. The edited motion is projected back to the
domain of the source with a transformer. Moreover, since no
paired data is provided, we propose a novel cross-domain
training scheme using data from two domains with the designed analogy constraint. Besides, we contribute a cartoon
dataset in Disney style. Extensive evaluations demonstrate
the superiority of our method over competing methods.

1. Introduction
Online video conferences and live streaming are spreading rapidly since the population of smartphones and communication techniques. Speakers sometimes present them* Corresponding authors.

Driving
Image
Source
Image

Figure 1. Cross-domain reenactment examples of our method.
Given a cartoon face, we animate it by transferring the pose and
expression from a real face.

selves as cartoon characters for privacy and entertainment
consideration. However, conventional cartoon animation
depends on a complex pipeline of 3D modeling and retargeting based on a powerful render engine, which always
takes a long period [24]. This limitation makes it difficult to
drive a new model or directly drive a single comic picture.
There are many works [17, 19, 10, 23, 27] that focus on
one-shot talking face generation, i.e., driving a portrait with
a video of a real person, which belongs to within-domain
reenactment. Their models are trained with a large amount
of talking videos and perform well in the same-identity and
cross-identity driving tasks. However, when those models
are straightforwardly applied to cross-domain reenactment,
i.e., driving a cartoon face with a real video as in Fig. 1, they
persistently encounter the following issues, including inaccurate expression transfer, blur effects, and even apparent
artifacts around facial components and the background. The
reason is the distribution shift between different domains.
There is a large appearance and motion gap between the
cartoon and real datasets. Though fine-tuning a pre-trained
model on a cartoon dataset can improve the visual quality
to a certain extent, those issues still cannot be wiped out.
Only a few methods focus on visually-driven cross-

7690

