This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Householder Projector for Unsupervised Latent Semantics Discovery
Yue Song1 , Jichao Zhang1 , Nicu Sebe1 , and Wei Wang2
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Italy
2
Beijing Jiaotong University, China
yue.song@unitn.it

Abstract

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [15] and the
recent style-based generative models (StyleGANs) [27, 28,
The first two authors contribute equally; Wei Wang is the corresponding author.

Singular Value

Singular Vector Index

Non-orthogonal Projector

Singular Vector Index

Orthogonal Projector

Eye Size
Singular Value

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), especially the
recent style-based generators (StyleGANs), have versatile
semantics in the structured latent space. Latent semantics
discovery methods emerge to move around the latent code
such that only one factor varies during the traversal. Recently, an unsupervised method proposed a promising direction to directly use the eigenvectors of the projection matrix
that maps latent codes to features as the interpretable directions. However, one overlooked fact is that the projection
matrix is non-orthogonal and the number of eigenvectors is
too large. The non-orthogonality would entangle semantic
attributes in the top few eigenvectors, and the large dimensionality might result in meaningless variations among the
directions even if the matrix is orthogonal. To avoid these
issues, we propose Householder Projector, a flexible and
general low-rank orthogonal matrix representation based
on Householder transformations, to parameterize the projection matrix. The orthogonality guarantees that the eigenvectors correspond to disentangled interpretable semantics,
while the low-rank property encourages that each identified direction has meaningful variations. We integrate our
projector into pre-trained StyleGAN2/StyleGAN3 and evaluate the models on several benchmarks. Within only 1%
of the original training steps for fine-tuning, our projector
helps StyleGANs to discover more disentangled and precise semantic attributes without sacrificing image fidelity.
Code is publicly available via https://github.com/
KingJamesSong/HouseholderGAN .

No meaningful variations

Eye Size + Shape + Expression

Singular Value

1

Shape

Expression
Singular Vector Index

Our Low-rank Orthogonal Householder Projector

Figure 1: Motivation of our proposed Householder Projector. Here “Projector” denotes the projection matrix that
maps latent codes to features, i.e., the modulation weight
of StyleGANs. (Top Left) The singular value imbalance of
the non-orthogonal projector would entangle multiple semantics in the top interpretable directions. (Top Right) Due
to the large dimensionality of the projector, directly enforcing vanilla orthogonality would spread the data variations among all the eigenvectors, leading to imperceptible
and meaningless traversal. (Bottom) Our Householder Projector equips the projection matrix with low-rank orthogonal properties, which simultaneously disentangles semantics into multiple equally-important eigenvectors and guarantees that each direction could correspond to semanticallymeaningful variations.

26] in particular have become the leading paradigm of generative modeling in the vision domain. The latent spaces
of StyleGANs are known to embed rich and hierarchical
semantics [14, 21]; moving the latent code in certain directions could trigger meaningful variations in the output
images. Therefore, latent semantics discovery methods

7712

