This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Speech2Lip: High-fidelity Speech to Lip Generation by Learning from a Short
Video
Xiuzhe Wu1 , Pengfei Hu2 , Yang Wu3,4 , Xiaoyang Lyu1 , Yan-Pei Cao3 , Ying Shan3 , Wenming
Yang2 , Zhongqian Sun4 , Xiaojuan Qi1 ,
1

The University of Hong Kong, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG, 4 Tencent AI Lab

Abstract
e.g., pose
Speechinsensitive

+

Synthesizing realistic videos according to a given speech
is still an open challenge. Previous works have been
plagued by issues such as inaccurate lip shape generation
and poor image quality. The key reason is that only motions
and appearances on limited facial areas (e.g., lip area) are
mainly driven by the input speech. Therefore, directly learning a mapping function from speech to the entire head image
is prone to ambiguity, particularly when using a short video
for training. We thus propose a decomposition-synthesiscomposition framework named Speech to Lip (Speech2Lip)
that disentangles speech-sensitive and speech-insensitive
motion/appearance to facilitate effective learning from limited training data, resulting in the generation of naturallooking videos. First, given a fixed head pose (i.e., canonical space), we present a speech-driven implicit model for lip
image generation which concentrates on learning speechsensitive motion and appearance. Next, to model the major
speech-insensitive motion (i.e., head movement), we introduce a geometry-aware mutual explicit mapping (GAMEM)
module that establishes geometric mappings between different head poses. This allows us to paste generated lip
images at the canonical space onto head images with arbitrary poses and synthesize talking videos with natural head
movements. In addition, a Blend-Net and a contrastive
sync loss are introduced to enhance the overall synthesis
performance. Quantitative and qualitative results on three
benchmarks demonstrate that our model can be trained by
a video of just a few minutes in length and achieve stateof-the-art performance in both visual quality and speechvisual synchronization. Code: https://github.com/CVMILab/Speech2Lip.

+

Speechsensitive

New
pose

e.g., lip
Input
Decomposition and Synthesis

Output

Pose-Controllable

Composition

Figure 1. Given a speech as input, our model generates highquality talking-head videos and supports pose-controllable synthesis. The decomposition and synthesis modules make learning from
a short video more effective and the composition module enables
us to synthesize high-fidelity videos.

1. Introduction
Learning from a short video to generate personalized
audio-synchronized talking videos driven by a speech is
of great importance to various applications, for instance,
digital human animation, video dubbing, and UGC video
creation. However, synthesizing high-fidelity videos from
speech for a desired speaker remains a challenging task.
The first challenge arises from complicated motion patterns. Although speech majorly influences lip areas (i.e.,
speech-sensitive areas), lip movements are often accompanied by other motions, such as global head movements,
which greatly impact lip shapes and appearances. Thus, directly synthesizing a whole image from speech often leads
to inaccurate lip synthesis. Second, existing methods still
struggle to satisfy appearance fidelity requirements, which
include both identity preservation (speaker-specific) and
high-quality detail generation, such as clear details of teeth,
tongue, and eye-blinking [9, 42, 26, 44, 7]. Third, it’s difficult to acquire videos longer than 10 hours for a speaker
which is yet required by conventional methods [17, 31].

22168

