This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Score Priors Guided Deep Variational Inference
for Unsupervised Real-World Single Image Denoising
Jun Cheng, Tao Liu, Shan Tan*
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{jcheng24, hust liutao, shantan}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Real-world single image denoising is crucial and practical in computer vision. Bayesian inversions combined with
score priors now have proven effective for single image denoising but are limited to white Gaussian noise. Moreover,
applying existing score-based methods for real-world denoising requires not only the explicit train of score priors
on the target domain but also the careful design of sampling
procedures for posterior inference, which is complicated
and impractical. To address these limitations, we propose
a score priors-guided deep variational inference, namely
ScoreDVI, for practical real-world denoising. By considering the deep variational image posterior with a Gaussian
form, score priors are extracted based on easily accessible minimum MSE Non-i.i.d Gaussian denoisers and variational samples, which in turn facilitate optimizing the variational image posterior. Such a procedure adaptively applies
cheap score priors to denoising. Additionally, we exploit
a Non-i.i.d Gaussian mixture model and variational noise
posterior to model the real-world noise. This scheme also
enables the pixel-wise fusion of multiple image priors and
variational image posteriors. Besides, we develop a noiseaware prior assignment strategy that dynamically adjusts
the weight of image priors in the optimization. Our method
outperforms other single image-based real-world denoising
methods and achieves comparable performance to datasetbased unsupervised methods.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is a fundamental task in low-level computer vision. Different from the additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN) that has been widely studied, real-world
noise is typically signal-dependent and spatially correlated
(or structured) and is prevalent in various image processing applications, including photography with sRGB noise
[24, 29] and bioimaging with microscopy image noise [44].
* Corresponding author.

The removal of real-world structured noise is therefore critical for the subsequent image analysis and understanding.
While recent deep learning-based supervised methods
[62, 31, 60, 6] and unsupervised/self-supervised methods
[40, 29, 66, 24] have shown promising results on real-world
image denoising, they suffer from data collection difficulties and model generalization issues [65]. As an alternative,
single image-based real-world denoising methods that rely
on only a single image are gaining increasing attention as
a more practical and promising solution. However, existing
single image-based methods, e.g., [55, 4, 45, 67, 5, 65, 30],
show unsatisfactory performance in real-world structured
noise removal, which highlights the need for new and effective approaches.
Nowadays, deep generative models, represented by
score-based methods [52, 15], have enabled powerful image priors to be learned from large-scale clean datasets. The
learned score priors from score networks have demonstrated
remarkable capacity in image generation and various image
restorations [21, 52, 51, 47]. However, current score-based
methods related to denoising, e.g., [17, 23, 21, 22, 13, 9],
typically consider AWGN and cannot handle real-world
noise. Furthermore, applying current score-based methods for real-world denoising not only requires the explicit
train of score priors on the target domain but also has to
devise sampling procedures elaborately for posterior inference. The accurate noise distribution is also demanded in
the conditional sampling. Above restrictions makes them
cumbersome and impractical for real-world noise removal.
To address these limitations, we propose an effective
and practical score priors guided deep variational inference,
namely ScoreDVI, for unsupervised real-world single image denoising. Rather than explicitly training score priors
on the target domain, we relate the general score functions
to the easily available minimum MSE (MMSE) Non-i.i.d
Gaussian denoisers. We extract score priors by employing
well-trained Non-i.i.d Gaussian denoisers to denoise samples from the variational image posterior paramterized by
deep neural networks and then use the extracted scores to facilitate optimizing this variational image posterior, which in

12937

