This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Embarrassingly Simple Backdoor Attack on Self-supervised Learning
Changjiang Li∗ Ren Pang∗ Zhaohan Xi∗
∗
Pennsylvania State University

Tianyu Du∗ Shouling Ji† Yuan Yao‡ Ting Wang∗
†
Zhejiang University ‡ Nanjing University

meet.cjli@gmail.com, {rbp5354, zxx5113, tjd6042}@psu.edu, sji@zju.edu.cn, y.yao@nju.edu.cn
inbox.ting@gmail.com

Representation Space

Abstract
As a new paradigm in machine learning, self-supervised
learning (SSL) is capable of learning high-quality representations of complex data without relying on labels. In addition
to eliminating the need for labeled data, research has found
that SSL improves the adversarial robustness over supervised
learning since lacking labels makes it more challenging for
adversaries to manipulate model predictions. However, the
extent to which this robustness superiority generalizes to
other types of attacks remains an open question.
We explore this question in the context of backdoor attacks. Specifically, we design and evaluate C TRL, an embarrassingly simple yet highly effective self-supervised backdoor
attack. By only polluting a tiny fraction of training data (≤
1%) with indistinguishable poisoning samples, C TRL causes
any trigger-embedded input to be misclassified to the adversary’s designated class with a high probability (≥ 99%)
at inference time. Our findings suggest that SSL and supervised learning are comparably vulnerable to backdoor
attacks. More importantly, through the lens of C TRL, we
study the inherent vulnerability of SSL to backdoor attacks.
With both empirical and analytical evidence, we reveal that
the representation invariance property of SSL, which benefits
adversarial robustness, may also be the very reason making
SSL highly susceptible to backdoor attacks. Our findings also
imply that the existing defenses against supervised backdoor
attacks are not easily retrofitted to the unique vulnerability of
SSL. Code is available at: https://github.com/meet-cjli/CTRL

1. Introduction
As a new machine learning paradigm, self-supervised
learning (SSL) has gained tremendous advances recently [4,
12, 7]. Without requiring data labeling or human annotations, SSL is able to learn high-quality representations
of complex data and enable a range of downstream tasks.
In particular, contrastive learning, one dominant SSL approach [4, 12, 7, 5, 14], performs representation learning by

Label Space

Supervised Learning

Self-supervised Learning
Target Class

Non-Target Class

Poisoning Input

Augmented View

Figure 1: Comparison of supervised and self-supervised backdoor
attacks; self-supervised backdoor attacks influence the label space
only indirectly through the representations.

aligning the features1 of the same sample under varying data
augmentations (e.g., random cropping) while separating the
features of different samples. In many tasks, contrastive
learning has attained performance comparable to supervised
learning [12]. Meanwhile, besides obviating the reliance on
data labeling, SSL also benefits the robustness to adversarial perturbation, label corruption, and data distribution shift
by making it more challenging for the adversary to influence model predictions directly [17, 58]. However, whether
this robustness benefit generalizes to other malicious attacks
remains an open question.
In this work, we explore this question in the context
of backdoor attacks, in which the adversary plants “backdoors” functions into target models during training and activates such backdoors at inference. Recent work has explored new ways to inject backdoors into SSL-trained models [37, 28, 2, 21]; however, the existing attacks appear to be
significantly less effective than their supervised counterparts:
they either work for specific, pre-defined inputs only [21, 28]
or succeed with a low probability (e.g., ≤ 2% on ImageNet100 [37]). These observations raise a set of intriguing and
1 Below we use the terms “feature” and “representation” exchangeably.

4367

