This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Representation Disparity-aware Distillation for 3D Object Detection
Yanjing Li1† , Sheng Xu1† , Mingbao Lin3 , Jihao Yin1 , Baochang Zhang1,2,4 , Xianbin Cao1∗
1
Beihang University 2 Zhongguancun Laboratory 3 Tencent
4
Nanchang Institute of Technology

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on developing knowledge distillation (KD) for compact 3D detectors. We observe that
off-the-shelf KD methods manifest their efficacy only when
the teacher model and student counterpart share similar intermediate feature representations. This might explain why
they are less effective in building extreme-compact 3D detectors where significant representation disparity arises due
primarily to the intrinsic sparsity and irregularity in 3D
point clouds. This paper presents a novel representation
disparity-aware distillation (RDD) method to address the
representation disparity issue and reduce performance gap
between compact students and over-parameterized teachers. This is accomplished by building our RDD from an innovative perspective of information bottleneck (IB), which
can effectively minimize the disparity of proposal region
pairs from student and teacher in features and logits. Extensive experiments are performed to demonstrate the superiority of our RDD over existing KD methods. For example, our RDD increases mAP of CP-Voxel-S to 57.1%
on nuScenes dataset, which even surpasses teacher performance while taking up only 42% FLOPs.

(a) Teacher

(b) “F-P”

(c) Teacher

(d) “F-P”

(e) Student

(f) “F-P”

(g) Student

(h) “F-P”

(i) Student !

(j) “F-P”

(k) Student !

(l) “F-P”

Figure 1. Visualization of intermediate neck features from teacher
CP-Voxel [44] and student CP-Voxel-XXS [41]. Student† denotes
CP-Voxel-XXS distilled by [41]. “F-P” denotes false positive predictions from the detector. The second and fourth column images
show false positives on the original inputs where the red boxes
denote false positives from the detector. Off-the-shelf implementation fails to tackle false positives if significant disparity exists
between teacher (c) and student (g) feature maps.

1. Introduction
3D object detection in point clouds [25, 40, 29] is a fundamental perception task with broad applications on autonomous driving, robotics and smart city, etc. Beneficial from the large-scale 3D perception datasets [8, 2, 32]
as well as advanced point [25], pillar [18, 37] and voxel
based [9, 21] representations of sparse and irregular LiDAR
point cloud scenes, 3D detection has achieved remarkable
progress [28, 44]. Unfortunately, stronger performance is
often accompanied with heavier computation burden, therefore the adoption in real-world applications still remains a
challenging problem.
† Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding author: xbcao@buaa.edu.cn
1 Code: https://github.com/YanjingLi0202/RDD

Recent attempts to improve efficiency focus on developing specified architectures for point-based 3D object detectors [5, 46], not generalizable to a wide spectrum of
pillar/voxel-based methods [47, 18, 28, 44, 7, 40]. Here, we
aim at a model-agnostic framework for obtaining efficient
and accurate 3D object detectors with knowledge distillation (KD). Due to its effectiveness, generality and simplicity, KD has become a popular strategy to develop efficient
models in a variety of 2D tasks [12, 21, 6, 13], which improves the performance of a lightweight student model by
harvesting knowledge from an accurate yet computationally
heavy teacher model.
The recent art [41] employs pivotal position logit KD to
enhance the performance of compact 3D detectors. However, as we analyze in this paper, the intrinsic representation

6715

