This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ROME: Robustifying Memory-Efficient NAS via Topology Disentanglement and
Gradient Accumulation
Xiaoxing Wang* 1 , Xiangxiang Chu∗2 , Yuda Fan1 , Zhexi Zhang1 , Bo Zhang2 , Xiaokang Yang1 , and
Junchi Yan†1
1

Dep. of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Meituan

Abstract
Albeit being a prevalent architecture searching approach, differentiable architecture search (DARTS) is
largely hindered by its substantial memory cost since the
entire supernet resides in the memory. This is where the
single-path DARTS comes in, which only chooses a singlepath submodel at each step. While being memory-friendly,
it also comes with low computational costs. Nonetheless,
we discover a critical issue of single-path DARTS that has
not been primarily noticed. Namely, it also suffers from
severe performance collapse since too many parameterfree operations like skip connections are derived, just like
DARTS does. In this paper, we propose a new algorithm
called RObustifying Memory-Efficient NAS (ROME) to give
a cure. First, we disentangle the topology search from the
operation search to make searching and evaluation consistent. We then adopt Gumbel-Top2 reparameterization and
gradient accumulation to robustify the unwieldy bi-level optimization. We verify ROME extensively across 15 benchmarks to demonstrate its effectiveness and robustness.

1. Introduction
Despite the fast development of neural architecture
search (NAS) [52] to aid network design in vision tasks
like classification [32, 6, 41, 42], object detection [11, 36],
and segmentation [22], there has been an urging demand
for faster searching algorithms. Early methods based on
the evaluation of a huge number of candidate models
[52, 31, 16] require unaffordable costs (typically 2k GPU
days). In the light of weight-sharing mechanism introduced in SMASH [2], a variety of low-cost approaches have
emerged [1, 27, 24]. DARTS [24] has taken the dominance
with a myriad of follow-up works [38, 3, 39, 10, 5, 47]. In

this paper, we investigate a single-path based variation of
DARTS, typically GDAS [10], for its fast speed and low
GPU memory.
Unlike many DARTS variants that have to perform all
candidate operations, single-path methods [30, 10, 39], also
termed as memory-efficient NAS1 , are developed to sample
and activate only a subset of operations in the supernet. For
differentiable search, Gumbel-Softmax reparameterization
tricks [17, 25] are generally employed [38, 10, 39].
In this paper, we show that single-path methods also suffer from severe performance collapse where many parameterless operations accumulate, akin to that of DARTS as
broadly discussed in [48, 4, 39, 8, 20]. We propose a robust
algorithm called ROME to resolve this issue.
We observe that single-path methods usually intertwine
topology search with operation search, which creates inconsistency between searching and evaluation. We first disentangle the two from each other. Specifically, in addition
to the existing architectural parameters (α) that represent
the significance of each operation, we involve topology parameters (β) to denote the relative importance of edges. A
single-path architecture can then be induced by both α and
β. Moreover, to further robustify the searching process,
we propose a gradient accumulation strategy during the bilevel optimization. We sketch the framework of ROME in
Fig. 1. In a nutshell, our contributions are,
1) Revealing performance collapse in single-path differentiable NAS. Similar to the performance collapse problem in DARTS, the architectures searched by single-path
based methods can also be dominated by parameterless operations, especially skip connections. However, this issue
hasn’t been deeply explored, which motivates us to propose
a new robust, lower memory cost and search cost method.
2) Consistent search and evaluation by disentangling
topology search from operation selection. We introduce

* Equal contribution, † Correspondence author.

1 We interchangeably use the term ‘single-path’ and ‘memory-efficient’.

5939

