This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-based
Pose Editing

PoseFix: Correcting 3D Human Poses with Natural Language
Ginger Delmas1,2 , Philippe Weinzaepfel2PoseFix
, Francesc Moreno-Noguer1 , Grégory Rogez2
1

Raise your left arm out
in front of you.
Straighten your back.
Raise your right hand up
to be level with your
pelvis.

Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Barcelona, Spain
2
NAVER LABS Europe
1

{gdelmas, fmoreno}@iri.upc.edu, 2 {name.surname}@naverlabs.com

Abstract

Text-based
Pose Editing

PoseFix

Automatically producing instructions to modify one’s
posture could open the door to endless applications, such as
personalized coaching and in-home physical therapy. Tackling the reverse problemText-based
(i.e., refining a 3D pose based
Pose Editing
on some natural language
feedback) could help for assisted 3D character animation or robot teaching, for instance. Although a few recent works explore the connections between natural language and 3D human pose, none
focus on describing
body
posein front of
differences. In this paRaise 3D
your left
arm out
you.problem
Straighten of
your back.
Raise 3D human poses
per, we tackle the
correcting
your right hand up to be level with
with natural language.
To this end, we introduce the Poseyour pelvis.
Fix dataset, which consists of several thousand paired 3D
poses and their corresponding text feedback, that describe
Correctional
how the source pose needs
to be modified to obtain the tartext generation
get pose. We demonstrate the potential of this dataset on
two tasks: (1) text-based pose editing, that aims at generating corrected 3D body poses given a query pose and a
text modifier; and (2) correctional text generation, where
instructions are generated based on the differences between two body poses. The dataset and the code are available at https://europe.naverlabs.com/research/
computer-vision/posefix/.

1. Introduction
How many puzzles could you solve with two human
body poses and a description of their differences? Call this
description a feedback. It could be automatically generated
by a fitness application based on the comparison between
the gold standard fitness pose and the pose of John Doe,
exercising in front of their smartphone camera in their living room (“straighten your back”). In another context, the
feedback can be considered a modifying instruction, provided by a digital animation artist to automatically modify
the pose of a character, without having to redesign everything by hand. This feedback could be some kind of con-

Raise your left arm out in front of
you. Straighten your back. Raise
your right hand up to be level with
your pelvis.
Correctional
Text Generation

Figure 1: Illustration of the tasks addressed with the new
PoseFix dataset, which consists of textual descriptions of
the difference between two 3D body poses.
straint, to be applied to a whole sequence of poses (make
them run, but “with hands on the hips!”). It could also be a
hint, to guide pose estimation from images in failure cases:
start from an initial 3D body pose fit, and give step-by-step
instructions for the model to improve its pose estimation
(“the left elbow should be bent to the back”).
In this paper, we focus on free-form feedback describing
the change between two static 3D human poses (which can
be extracted from actual pose sequences). Why so static?
There exist many settings that require the semantic understanding of fine-grained changes of static body poses. For
instance, yoga poses are extremely challenging and specific
(with a lot of subtle variations), and they are static. Some
sport motions require almost-perfect postures at every moment: for better efficiency, to avoid any pain or injury, or
just for better rendering e.g. in classical dance, yoga, karate,
etc. What is more, the realization of complex motions sometimes calls for precise step-to-step instructions, in order to
assimilate the gesture or to perform it correctly.
Natural language can help in all these scenarios, in that it
is highly semantic and unconstrained, in addition of being a
very intuitive way to convey ideas. While 3D poses can be
manually edited within a design framework [38], language
is particularly efficient for non-experts or when direct manipulation is not possible. The pose semantic we propose

15018

