This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross Modal Transformer: Towards Fast and Robust 3D Object Detection

In this paper, we propose a robust 3D detector, named
Cross Modal Transformer (CMT), for end-to-end 3D multimodal detection. Without explicit view transformation,
CMT takes the image and point clouds tokens as inputs and
directly outputs accurate 3D bounding boxes. The spatial
alignment of multi-modal tokens is performed by encoding the 3D points into multi-modal features. The core design of CMT is quite simple while its performance is impressive. It achieves 74.1% NDS (state-of-the-art with single model) on nuScenes test set while maintaining faster
inference speed. Moreover, CMT has a strong robustness
even if the LiDAR is missing. Code is released at https:
//github.com/junjie18/CMT.

1. Introduction
Multi-sensor fusion has shown its great superiority in
autonomous driving system [31, 8, 22, 1, 27]. Different
sensors usually provide the complementary information for
each other. For instance, the camera captures information
in a perspective view and the image contains rich semantic
features while point clouds provide much more localization
and geometry information. Taking full advantage of different sensors helps reduce the uncertainty and makes accurate
and robust prediction.
Sensor data of different modalities usually has large discrepancy in distribution, making it hard to merge the multimodalities. State-of-the-art (SoTA) methods tend to fuse
the multi-modality by constructing unified bird’s-eye-view
(BEV) representation [31, 27, 22] or querying from tokens [1, 8]. For example, BEVFusion [31] explores a unified representation by BEV transformation for BEV feature
fusion (see Fig. 1(a)). TransFusion [1] follows a two-stage
pipeline and the camera images in second stage provide
supplementary information for prediction refinement (see
Fig. 1(b)). However, exploring a truly end-to-end pipeline
for multi-sensor fusion remains to be a question.

✉ Corresponding author.

(b) TransFusion

Abstract

(a) BEVFusion

Yingfei Liu ✉
Jianjian Sun
Fan Jia
Tiancai Wang
Xiangyu Zhang
MEGVII Technology

(c) CMT (Ours)

Junjie Yan

Shuailin Li

PC

BEV
Encoder
VT

image

Transformer

Transformer
step2

step1

quries

topk

image

PC

Transformer

PC

PE

image

quries

Figure 1: Comparison between BEVFusion, TransFusion,
and our proposed CMT. (a) In BEVFusion, the camera features are transformed into BEV space by view transform.
Two modality features are concatenated in BEV space and
the BEV encoder is adopted for fusion. (b) TransFusion first
generates the queries from the high response regions of LiDAR features. After that, object queries interact with point
cloud features and image features separately. (c) In CMT,
the object queries directly interact with multi modality features simultaneously. Position encoding (PE) is added to
the multi-modal features for alignment. ”VT” is the view
transformation from image to 3D space.

Recently, the effectiveness of end-to-end object detection with transformer (DETR) [3, 60] has been proved in
many perception tasks, such as instance segmentation [13,
15], multi-object tracking [55, 33] and visual 3D detection [47, 29, 30]. The DETR architecture is simple yet effective thanks to the object queries for representing different

18268

