This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parallax-Tolerant Unsupervised Deep Image Stitching
Lang Nie1,2 Chunyu Lin1,2 * Kang Liao1,2 Shuaicheng Liu3 Yao Zhao1,2
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network, Beijing, China
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
1

{nielang, cylin, kang liao, yzhao}@bjtu.edu.cn, liushuaicheng@uestc.edu.cn

Reference/
target image

LPC

Reference/
target image

LPC

UDIS

Ours

(a) A stitching case of large parallax from UDIS-D dataset.

UDIS

Ours

(b) A stitching case of low texture from UDIS-D dataset.

Figure 1. Limitations of existing methods. (a) UDIS [41] (the SoTA of deep methods) deals with large parallax by blurring parallax regions
(highlighted by the red arrow). (b) LPC [19] (the SoTA of traditional methods) fails in low-texture scenes without sufﬁcient geometric
features. Instead, our solution is free from these limitations, achieving promising results in both of the challenging circumstances.

Abstract

Subsequently, to improve the generalization capability, we
design a simple but effective iterative strategy to enhance
the warp adaption in cross-dataset and cross-resolution applications. Finally, to further eliminate the parallax artifacts, we propose to composite the stitched image seamlessly by unsupervised learning for seam-driven composition masks. Compared with existing methods, our solution
is parallax-tolerant and free from laborious designs of complicated geometric features for speciﬁc scenes. Extensive
experiments show our superiority over the SoTA methods,
both quantitatively and qualitatively. The code is available
at https://github.com/nie-lang/UDIS2.

Traditional image stitching approaches tend to leverage increasingly complex geometric features (e.g., point,
line, edge, etc.) for better performance. However, these
hand-crafted features are only suitable for speciﬁc natural scenes with adequate geometric structures. In contrast, deep stitching schemes overcome adverse conditions
by adaptively learning robust semantic features, but they
cannot handle large-parallax cases.
To solve these issues, we propose a parallax-tolerant unsupervised deep image stitching technique. First, we propose a robust and ﬂexible warp to model the image registration from global homography to local thin-plate spline
motion. It provides accurate alignment for overlapping regions and shape preservation for non-overlapping regions
by joint optimization concerning alignment and distortion.

1. Introduction
Image stitching is a practical technology that aims to
construct a scene with a wide ﬁeld-of-view (FoV) from different images with limited FoV. It is useful in a wide range

* Corresponding author.

7399

