This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Audio-Visual Deception Detection: DOLOS Dataset and Parameter-Efﬁcient
Crossmodal Learning
Xiaobao Guo12 *
1

Nithish Muthuchamy Selvaraj3 *
Zitong Yu3†
4
Bingquan Shen
Alex Kot3

Adams Wai-Kin Kong2

Rapid-Rich Object Search (ROSE) Lab, Interdisciplinary Graduate Programme, Nanyang Technological University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, NTU 3 School of Electrical & Electronic Engineering, NTU
4
DSO National Laboratories, Singapore
{xiaobao001, ms.nithish, zitong.yu, adamskong, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg sbingqua@dso.org.sg

Abstract
Deception detection in conversations is a challenging
yet important task, having pivotal applications in many
ﬁelds such as credibility assessment in business, multimedia anti-frauds, and custom security. Despite this, deception detection research is hindered by the lack of highquality deception datasets, as well as the difﬁculties of
learning multimodal features effectively. To address this
issue, we introduce DOLOS1 , the largest gameshow deception detection dataset with rich deceptive conversations.
DOLOS includes 1,675 video clips featuring 213 subjects,
and it has been labeled with audio-visual feature annotations. We provide train-test, duration, and gender protocols to investigate the impact of different factors. We
benchmark our dataset on previously proposed deception
detection approaches. To further improve the performance
by ﬁne-tuning fewer parameters, we propose ParameterEfﬁcient Crossmodal Learning (PECL), where a Uniform
Temporal Adapter (UT-Adapter) explores temporal attention in transformer-based architectures, and a crossmodal
fusion module, Plug-in Audio-Visual Fusion (PAVF), combines crossmodal information from audio-visual features.
Based on the rich ﬁne-grained audio-visual annotations on
DOLOS, we also exploit multi-task learning to enhance performance by concurrently predicting deception and audiovisual features. Experimental results demonstrate the desired quality of the DOLOS dataset and the effectiveness of
the PECL. The DOLOS dataset and the source codes are
available at here.

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author
1 The name “DOLOS” comes from Greek mythology.

1. Introduction
Deception is a pervasive and complex phenomenon that
occurs in all areas of life, and understanding its nature and
impact is crucial in preventing negative consequences. Effective deception detection has crucial implications in the
area of border security, anti-fraud, business negotiations and
etc. [14, 12, 1, 13, 9, 27, 44]. Deep learning algorithms have
achieved comparable or even better performance than human in many complex tasks [22, 41, 40, 7, 38]. One may
expect AI models can also bring signiﬁcant breakthroughs
in deception detection. Albeit the fruitful progress in computer vision [48, 10, 31, 46] and audio representation learning [5, 18, 28], it remains a signiﬁcant challenge to efﬁciently explore AI ability to process multimodal information in perceiving and predicting human deceptive behaviors.
The performance of AI models in deception detection
is heavily reliant on the availability of authentic and effective deception samples from the real world. The deceptive
subjects must be spontaneous and motivated [8, 49] such
that certain behavioral cues (e.g., vocal pitch and chin raise)
could be more pronounced. Public benchmark datasets collected from court trials [36], game shows [42], and labbased scenarios [15], have contributed to spurring interest
and progress in deception detection research. Deception can
be affected by a range of factors in diverse real-world situations. Thus, it is necessary to create deception datasets from
different scenarios. However, current datasets are still insufﬁcient to drive further progress and inspire novel ideas due
to their limitations on both quantity and quality. These limitations include (1) the small number of deceptive samples
and subjects, (2) the lack of rich annotated visual and speech
attributes, and (3) the variety of protocols. It is imperative to
build a larger and richer deception detection dataset. In particular, more deceptive samples and subjects, better annotations for facial movements, gestures, and audio attributes,

22135

