This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DETA: Denoised Task Adaptation for Few-Shot Learning
Ji Zhang1
1

Lianli Gao2 *

Xu Luo1

Hengtao Shen1

Jingkuan Song2

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC)
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, UESTC
{jizhang.jim,juana.alian}@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Few-Shot Learning (FSL) refers to rapidly deriving new
knowledge from a limited number of samples, a central capability that humans naturally possess, but “data-hungry”
machines still lack. Over the past years, a community-wide
enthusiasm has been ignited to narrow this gap, especially
in fields such as computer vision [15,26,47], machine translation [4, 30, 54] and reinforcement learning [9, 17, 39].
The general formulation of FSL involves two stages: 1)
training-time task-agnostic knowledge accumulation, and
2) test-time task-specific knowledge acquisition, a.k.a. task
adaptation. In particular, the former stage seeks to pre-train
* Corresponding author.

Shots

Image
Noise

Ways

Test-time task adaptation in few-shot learning aims to
adapt a pre-trained task-agnostic model for capturing taskspecific knowledge of the test task, rely only on few-labeled
support samples. Previous approaches generally focus on
developing advanced algorithms to achieve the goal, while
neglecting the inherent problems of the given support samples. In fact, with only a handful of samples available, the
adverse effect of either the image noise (a.k.a. X-noise) or
the label noise (a.k.a. Y-noise) from support samples can
be severely amplified. To address this challenge, in this
work we propose DEnoised Task Adaptation (DETA), a
first, unified image- and label-denoising framework orthogonal to existing task adaptation approaches. Without extra supervision, DETA filters out task-irrelevant, noisy representations by taking advantage of both global visual information and local region details of support samples. On
the challenging Meta-Dataset, DETA consistently improves
the performance of a broad spectrum of baseline methods
applied on various pre-trained models. Notably, by tackling the overlooked image noise in Meta-Dataset, DETA establishes new state-of-the-art results. Code is released at
https://github.com/JimZAI/DETA.

Support samples of a few-shot task

Abstract

Label
Noise

Figure 1. Dual noises in the support samples of a few-shot task.
Image noise (a.k.a. X-noise): the target object regions are often
obscured by interfering factors such as cluttered backgrounds, image corruption, etc. Label noise (a.k.a. Y-noise): mislabeled samples. The goal of this work is to develop a first, unified image- and
label-denoising framework for reliable task adaptation.

a task-agnostic model on large amounts of training samples collected from a set of base classes. While the latter
targets adapting the pre-trained model for capturing taskspecific knowledge of the few-shot (or test) task with novel
classes, given a tiny set of labeled support samples. Early
progress in FSL has been predominantly achieved using
the idea of meta-learning, which aligns the learning objectives of the two stages to better generalize the accumulated
knowledge towards few-shot tasks [39, 47, 54]. Nevertheless, recent studies [13, 25, 35, 42] revealed that a good testtime task adaptation approach with any pre-trained models
– no matter what training paradigms they were learned by,
can be more effective than sophisticated meta-learning algorithms. Furthermore, with the recent success in model pretraining techniques [14, 16, 33], designing efficient adapterbased [24, 25, 55] or finetuning-based [6, 19, 46] task adaptation algorithms that can flexibly borrow “free” knowledge
from a wide range of pre-trained models is therefore of great
practical value, and has made remarkable progress in FSL.

11541

