This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyleLipSync: Style-based Personalized Lip-sync Video Generation
Taekyung Ki1⋆ Dongchan Min2⋆
1
AITRICS, 2 Graduate School of AI, KAIST
tkki@aitrics.com, alsehdcks95@kaist.ac.kr
https://stylelipsync.github.io

Abstract
In this paper, we present StyleLipSync, a style-based personalized lip-sync video generative model that can generate
identity-agnostic lip-synchronizing video from arbitrary audio. To generate a video of arbitrary identities, we leverage
expressive lip prior from the semantically rich latent space
of a pre-trained StyleGAN, where we can also design a
video consistency with a linear transformation. In contrast
to the previous lip-sync methods, we introduce pose-aware
masking that dynamically locates the mask to improve the
naturalness over frames by utilizing a 3D parametric mesh
predictor frame by frame. Moreover, we propose a few-shot
lip-sync adaptation method for an arbitrary person by introducing a sync regularizer that preserves lip-sync generalization while enhancing the person-specific visual information. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our model
can generate accurate lip-sync videos even with the zeroshot setting and enhance characteristics of an unseen face
using a few seconds of target video through the proposed
adaptation method.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, advances in deep learning have altered the dynamics of video creation. Now, users can easily
make and edit videos with the help of deep learning. In
particular, the task of generating a talking head video has
received great interest due to its various practical uses. It
can be applied in many applications such as film dubbing
into a different language, face-to-face live chats, and virtual avatars in games and videos. Thus, a lot of prior works
[21, 34, 28, 46, 45, 27] have been studied to generate a talking head video that has accurate lip shapes according to arbitrary audio inputs.
Most of the prior works mainly focus on enhancing synchronization between lip shapes and audio input. Some of
the previous methods [46, 9, 34] use intermediate structural
⋆ Equal contribution.

representations such as landmarks and 3D models. They
predicted the representations from the audio input and synthesized a talking head video of a target person. However, they suffered from inaccurate lip-sync results since
such representations are too sparse to produce fine-grained
details in lip-syncing. Recently, another line of methods
[28, 27] mapped input audio to latent space and leveraged
it to construct the mouth region of the target identity. While
it achieves satisfactory results in lip-syncing, it generated
blurry lower faces which are visually implausible. Furthermore, most methods only consider synthesizing frame-byframe, lacking temporal consistency at the video level.
In this paper, we propose StyleLipSync, a style-based
lip-sync video generative model that can generate identityagnostic lip-synchronizing video from the arbitrary audio input. Our model consists of the following components. First, different from a previous masking method
[21, 28, 27, 6] which masks the entire lower half face, we
propose Pose-aware Masking. We analyze that the previous
masking method cause unpleasant artifacts and unnatural
jaw moving in the generated videos. To circumvent this,
we utilize a 3D face mesh predictor [11, 23] and generate
lip masks with consideration of pose information and facial semantics such as jaw shape. Second, our image decoder is based on a style-based generator, namely StyleGAN [18, 19, 17]. StyleGANs have demonstrated their
effectiveness in various facial generative tasks, including
face editing[1, 2], face enhancement [42], and video generation [35, 24]. As a pre-trained StyleGAN already contains expressive and diverse face priors in style latent space
[1], we leverage it to synthesize the high-fidelity lip region
of the target person. Furthermore, thanks to the continuous and linear nature of the latent space [18, 13, 32], we
linearly manipulate the style codes using the audio input
to generate lip-synced video frames. Additionally, we propose Style-aware Masked Fusion to effectively adopt a skipconnection to our decoder, which helps to preserve the 2D
structure of the image and improves lip fidelity. Finally, we
propose a Moving-average based Latent Smoothing module
that makes the latent trajectory smoother for enhancing the

22841

