This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Domain Product Representation Learning for Rich-Content E-Commerce
Xuehan Bai *

Yan Li *

Yanhua Cheng
Wenjie Yang
Kuaishou Technology

†

Quan Chen

†

Han Li

{baixuehan03, liyan26, chengyanhua, chenquan06, lihan08}@kuaishou.com, wenjie.yang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

https://github.com/adxcreative/COPE

Abstract
The proliferation of short video and live-streaming platforms has revolutionized how consumers engage in online
shopping. Instead of browsing product pages, consumers
are now turning to rich-content e-commerce, where they
can purchase products through dynamic and interactive media like short videos and live streams. This emerging form
of online shopping has introduced technical challenges, as
products may be presented differently across various media domains. Therefore, a unified product representation
is essential for achieving cross-domain product recognition
to ensure an optimal user search experience and effective
product recommendations. Despite the urgent industrial
need for a unified cross-domain product representation,
previous studies have predominantly focused only on product pages without taking into account short videos and live
streams. To fill the gap in the rich-content e-commerce area,
in this paper, we introduce a large-scale cRoss-dOmain
Product rEcognition dataset, called ROPE. ROPE covers a
wide range of product categories and contains over 180,000
products, corresponding to millions of short videos and live
streams. It is the first dataset to cover product pages, short
videos, and live streams simultaneously, providing the basis for establishing a unified product representation across
different media domains. Furthermore, we propose a CrossdOmain Product rEpresentation framework, namely COPE,
which unifies product representations in different domains
through multimodal learning including text and vision. Extensive experiments on downstream tasks demonstrate the
effectiveness of COPE in learning a joint feature space for
all product domains.

1. Introduction
Recently, with the vicissitude in time spent by customers
on entertainment media, the way consumers shop online
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Illustrate the importance of cross-domain product representation for rich-content e-commerce. There are two solid demands for such new e-commerce: 1) The platform needs to provide accurate product results of product page, short video, and live
streaming corresponding to user’s query; 2) The platform is able
to recommend similar products of interest according to user’s behavior history. Both of the two tasks highly depend on a highperformance cross-domain product representation. Examples are
from the popular rich-content e-commerce platforms, including
TikTok, Kwai and Taobao.

has transformed significantly, and rich-content e-commerce
is becoming increasingly popular. In the rich-content ecommerce area, the products are sold not only with traditional product pages but also with dynamic and interactive
media formats, i.e., short videos and live streams. As a result, consumers are increasingly relying on these formats
to make informed purchase decisions. This shift has facilitated a more engaging shopping experience, bridging the
gap between consumers and sellers while presenting new
opportunities for platforms to capitalize on.
Despite the advantages of rich-content e-commerce, it
presents several technical challenges. One of the most significant challenges is the inconsistency in product presentation across different media domains. For instance, a product may appear entirely different in a live stream than on

5697

