This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MHEntropy: Entropy Meets Multiple Hypotheses for Pose and Shape Recovery
Rongyu Chen*
Linlin Yang*
Angela Yao
National University of Singapore
{rchen, yangll, ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
For monocular RGB-based 3D pose and shape estimation, multiple solutions are often feasible due to factors like occlusions and truncations. This work presents
a multi-hypothesis probabilistic framework by optimizing
the Kullback–Leibler divergence (KLD) between the data
and model distribution. Our formulation reveals a connection between the pose entropy and diversity in the multiple hypotheses that has been neglected by previous works.
For a comprehensive evaluation, besides the best hypothesis (BH) metric, we factor in visibility for evaluating diversity. Additionally, our framework is label-friendly – it
can be learned from only partial 2D keypoints, such as visible keypoints. Experiments on both ambiguous and realworld benchmarks demonstrate that our method outperforms other state-of-the-art multi-hypothesis methods. The
project page is at https://gloryyrolg.github.io/MHEntropy.

1. Introduction
Pose and shape estimation is a core component of augmented and virtual reality applications. The majority of
monocular 3D pose and shape estimation approaches [28,
31, 7, 3, 15] are designed to predict only a single solution, yet 3D recovery from a monocular input is an inverse
problem. Multiple solutions are feasible, especially under
settings with occlusions, truncations, low image quality, or
other ambiguities. It is therefore meaningful and desirable
to make multi-hypothesis predictions. Multiple hypotheses
are also useful in downstream tasks such as 2D keypoint
fitting [21] and multi-view fusion [21, 25].
Previous multi-hypothesis works use various 2D [2, 21,
37], 3D [39, 25, 2, 21, 37, 35], and mesh [2] reconstruction
losses to facilitate kinematically feasible poses and shapes,
while encouraging diversity in the solution set. Yet the
learning and evaluation for multi-hypothesis works are underdeveloped. Learning-wise, many existing works are not
label-friendly and often require one-to-many labeled data to
* Equal contribution.

(a) Occluded Input

(b) Visible versus Occluded

(c) Multiple Hypotheses

Figure 1. Our method estimates diverse and feasible hypotheses
for occluded joints while preserving accuracy for visible joints.

achieve diversity [21, 2, 35, 25], i.e., similar ambiguous observations with multiple distinct ground-truth poses. Such
labels are challenging to obtain, especially under occlusion
or out-of-view scenarios for which multi-hypothesis predictions are the most meaningful. While empirical efforts have
been made to avoid mode collapse while encouraging diversity [26, 27], these methods often do not fully explore the
solution space. It is, therefore, non-trivial to achieve feasible and as diverse as possible solutions.
Evaluation-wise, multi-hypothesis works use the best
hypothesis (BH) as the metric of choice [25, 2, 21, 37, 26].
BH measures the closest distance between a hypothesis set
and the ground truth. It emphasizes the accuracy of the closest hypothesis while ignoring the set holistically. Few works
explicitly and quantitatively evaluate the diversity of the
predicted hypotheses. When they do so, diversity is evaluated independently from the input [26]. Yet joints under occlusion or a lack of evidence feature more uncertainty, and
as such should correspond to more diversity, while joints
should be less diverse on unambiguous parts. Current multihypothesis evaluation schemes do not make such distinctions. Unwanted diversity on unambiguous joints also contributes to the calculation of overall diversity.

14840

