This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Look at the Neighbor: Distortion-aware Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for
Panoramic Semantic Segmentation

1

Xu Zheng1 Tianbo Pan1 Yunhao Luo3 Lin Wang1,2 *
AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ) 2 Dept. of CSE, HKUST 3 Brown University

zhengxu128@gmail.com, tpan695@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, devinluo27@gmail.com, linwang@ust.hk
Project Page:

https://vlislab22.github.io/DATR/

Feature Extraction

SA

DA

DATR
(a)

Trans4PASS

(b)

Figure 1: (a) We propose a novel UDA method that effectively addresses the distortion problems via the distortion-aware
attention (DA) module that extracts more salient textural details than those of self-attention (SA) [45]; (b) Our method
achieves more than 8% of mIoU than the SOTA method (with 24.98M parameters) [45] while taking only 4.64M parameters
on the Synthetic [46]-to-Real [20] scenarios.

Abstract
Endeavors have been recently made to transfer knowledge from the labeled pinhole image domain to the unlabeled panoramic image domain via Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA). The aim is to tackle the domain gaps
caused by the style disparities and distortion problem from
the non-uniformly distributed pixels of equirectangular projection (ERP). Previous works typically focus on transferring knowledge based on geometric priors with specially
designed multi-branch network architectures. As a result,
considerable computational costs are induced, and meanwhile, their generalization abilities are profoundly hindered
by the variation of distortion among pixels. In this paper, we find that the pixels’ neighborhood regions of the
ERP indeed introduce less distortion. Intuitively, we propose a novel UDA framework that can effectively address
the distortion problems for panoramic semantic segmenta∗ Corresponding author.

tion. In comparison, our method is simpler, easier to implement, and more computationally efficient. Specifically,
we propose distortion-aware attention (DA) capturing the
neighboring pixel distribution without using any geometric constraints. Moreover, we propose a class-wise feature
aggregation (CFA) module to iteratively update the feature
representations with a memory bank. As such, the feature similarity between two domains can be consistently
optimized. Extensive experiments show that our method
achieves new state-of-the-art performance while remarkably reducing 80% parameters.

1. Introduction
The burgeoning demand for omnidirectional and dense
scene understanding has stimulated the popularity of 360◦
cameras, which pose much wider field-of-view (FoV) in the
range of 360◦ × 180◦ than the 2D images captured by pin18687

