This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Universal Image Embeddings:
A Large-Scale Dataset and Challenge for Generic Image Representations
Nikolaos-Antonios Ypsilantis1
Kaifeng Chen2
Bingyi Cao2
Mário Lipovský2
2
2
Pelin Dogan-Schönberger
Grzegorz Makosa
Boris Bluntschli2
Mojtaba Seyedhosseini2
Ondřej Chum1
André Araujo2
1

2

VRG, FEE, Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract

1. Introduction
The past decade has witnessed significant progress in
image representations that are capable of discriminating objects at a fine-grained or instance level. Several techniques
[54, 49, 58, 19] have been demonstrated to learn such image embeddings when given data from a specific domain,
for example images of different birds or images of different landmarks. Recently, there has been growing interest in
general purpose visual search systems that can identify ob∗ Correspondence: ypsilnik@fel.cvut.cz, francischen@google.com.

Specialist Embedding Paradigm (Previous Work)
Car images

Training
Model

Car
embedding

Natural world
embedding
Product
embedding

Landmark images
Training
Model

Landmark
embedding

…

Fine-grained and instance-level recognition methods are
commonly trained and evaluated on specific domains, in
a model per domain scenario. Such an approach, however, is impractical in real large-scale applications. In this
work, we address the problem of universal image embedding, where a single universal model is trained and used
in multiple domains. First, we leverage existing domainspecific datasets to carefully construct a new large-scale
public benchmark for the evaluation of universal image
embeddings, with 241k query images, 1.4M index images
and 2.8M training images across 8 different domains and
349k classes. We define suitable metrics, training and
evaluation protocols to foster future research in this area.
Second, we provide a comprehensive experimental evaluation on the new dataset, demonstrating that existing approaches and simplistic extensions lead to worse performance than an assembly of models trained for each domain
separately. Finally, we conducted a public research competition on this topic, leveraging industrial datasets, which
attracted the participation of more than 1k teams worldwide. This exercise generated many interesting research
ideas and findings which we present in detail. Project webpage: https://cmp.felk.cvut.cz/univ_emb/

Google

Universal Embedding Paradigm (Our Work)
Images from many domains
Universal
embedding

Training
Model

Figure 1: Previous work (top) on learning image embeddings has
mainly focused on representations that are specialized for narrow
domains, such as cars, landmarks, natural world, products, among
others. While this may lead to high performance, it cannot scale
to meet demands of modern general purpose visual search systems, which are required to identify objects in many domains. In
this work, we consider the problem of learning universal image
embeddings (bottom), which are representations that can encode
fine-grained visual information about multiple domains. We propose the first large-scale dataset for research on universal image
embeddings and additionally present results from a public industrial challenge in this area.

jects from many domains [70, 7, 9]. The use of per-domain
models in general-purpose systems is very expensive and
generally impractical, since a large number of models would
need to be developed and maintained. The holy grail for this
kind of application is a unified model that can discriminate
fine-grained objects across several domains, which we refer

11290

