This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Identify Critical States for Reinforcement Learning from Videos
Haozhe Liu1† , Mingchen Zhuge1† , Bing Li1B , Yuhui Wang1 , Francesco Faccio1,2
Bernard Ghanem1 , Jürgen Schmidhuber1,2,3
1
AI Initiative, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
2
The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA/USI/SUPSI, 3 NNAISENSE
{haozhe.liu, mingchen.zhuge, bing.li, yuhui.wang,
francesco.faccio, bernard.ghanem, juergen.schmidhuber}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Recent work on deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has
pointed out that algorithmic information about good policies can be extracted from offline data which lack explicit
information about executed actions [45, 46, 30]. For example, videos of humans or robots may convey a lot of implicit information about rewarding action sequences, but
a DRL machine that wants to profit from watching such
videos must first learn by itself to identify and recognize
relevant states/actions/rewards. Without relying on groundtruth annotations, our new method called Deep State Identifier learns to predict returns from episodes encoded as
videos. Then it uses a kind of mask-based sensitivity analysis to extract/identify important critical states. Extensive experiments showcase our method’s potential for understanding and improving agent behavior. The source code and the
generated datasets are available at https://github.com/AIInitiative-KAUST/VideoRLCS.

1. Introduction
In deep reinforcement learning (DRL), the cumulative
reward—also known as the return—of an episode is obtained through a long sequence of dynamic interactions between an agent (i.e., a decision-maker) and its environment.
In such a setting, the rewards may be sparse and delayed,
and it is often unclear which decision points were critical to
achieve a specific return.
Several existing methods use the notion of localizing
critical states, such as EDGE [19] and RUDDER [1]. These
methods typically require explicit action information or policy parameters to localize critical states. This limits their
potential applicability in settings like video-based offline
† Equal Contribution.
B Corresponding Author.
Accepted to ICCV23.

Figure 1. Motivation of the proposed method. In the illustrated
race between a turtle and a rabbit, the sleep state is critical in determining the winner of the race. Our method is proposed to identify
such critical states.

RL, where an agent’s actions are often hard to measure, annotate, or estimate [72, 32]. To avoid this pitfall, in this
work, we explicitly study the relationship between sequential visual observations and episodic returns without accessing explicit action information.
Inspired by the existing evidence that frequently only a
few decision points are important in determining the return
of an episode [1, 12], and as shown in Fig. 1, we focus
on identifying the state underlying these critical decision
points. However, the problem of directly inferring critical
visual input based on the return is nontrivial [12], and compounded by our lack of explicit access to actions or policies
during inference. To overcome these problems—inspired
by the success of data-driven approaches [65, 39, 24]—our
method learns to infer critical states from historical visual
trajectories of agents.
We propose a novel framework, namely the Deep State
Identifier, to identify critical states in video-based environments. A principal challenge of working in such settings
lies in acquiring ground-truth annotations of critical states;

1955

