This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking pose estimation in crowds: overcoming the detection information
bottleneck and ambiguity
Mu Zhou*

Lucas Stoffl*
Mackenzie Weygandt Mathis
Alexander Mathis
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
alexander.mathis@epfl.ch

Abstract
Frequent interactions between individuals are a fundamental challenge for pose estimation algorithms. Current
pipelines either use an object detector together with a pose
estimator (top-down approach), or localize all body parts
first and then link them to predict the pose of individuals (bottom-up). Yet, when individuals closely interact,
top-down methods are ill-defined due to overlapping individuals, and bottom-up methods often falsely infer connections to distant bodyparts. Thus, we propose a novel
pipeline called bottom-up conditioned top-down pose estimation (BUCTD) that combines the strengths of bottomup and top-down methods. Specifically, we propose to
use a bottom-up model as the detector, which in addition
to an estimated bounding box provides a pose proposal
that is fed as condition to an attention-based top-down
model. We demonstrate the performance and efficiency of
our approach on animal and human pose estimation benchmarks. On CrowdPose and OCHuman, we outperform previous state-of-the-art models by a significant margin. We
achieve 78.5 AP on CrowdPose and 48.5 AP on OCHuman, an improvement of 8.6% and 7.8% over the prior
art, respectively. Furthermore, we show that our method
strongly improves the performance on multi-animal benchmarks involving fish and monkeys. The code is available at
https://github.com/amathislab/BUCTD

1. Introduction
Imagine somebody hands you an image of a person and
asks you “to annotate the pose”. For your exquisite primate visual system this is a trivial task that you can readily
achieve. Now imagine somebody hands you another image
that contains two people, arm-in-arm. You are likely frustrated and will ask whose pose you should annotate? In response to whose pose you should annotate, your opponent
will likely point at the person she has in mind. Based on
the pointing, it’s again easy to annotate the right pose. Our
* Authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Overview of our bottom-up conditioned top-down
pose estimation (BUCTD) approach and benchmarking results. BUCTD uses a bottom-up pose model as instance detector, which is computationally cheaper than existing, widely-used
object detectors (see inset Table). The pose proposals from the
pose detector are used to calculate bounding boxes and to condition our novel, conditional top-down stage. Note that, as in a
standard top-down paradigm, only one image crop plus its corresponding conditional pose is presented to the BUCTD. We can
substantially boost performance on both human & animal benchmarks, with especially large gains in crowded scenes (Tables 2, 7).

work proposes a hybrid deep learning framework for pose
estimation that is inspired by this interaction.
This simple interaction highlights the ambiguity problem
of top-down approaches in crowds. They first localize individuals with a dedicated object detector [33, 34, 12, 27]

14689

