This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Implicit Surface Evolution
Tiago Novello

Vinicius da Silva

Guilherme Schardong

Luiz Schirmer

Helio Lopes

Luiz Velho

IMPA

PUC-Rio

U Coimbra

Unisinos

PUC-Rio

IMPA

Abstract
This work investigates the use of smooth neural networks
for modeling dynamic variations of implicit surfaces under the level set equation (LSE). For this, it extends the
representation of neural implicit surfaces to the space-time
R3⇥ R, which opens up mechanisms for continuous geometric transformations. Examples include evolving an initial surface towards general vector fields, smoothing and
sharpening using the mean curvature equation, and interpolations of initial conditions.
The network training considers two constraints. A data
term is responsible for fitting the initial condition to the corresponding time instant, usually R3⇥{0}. Then, a LSE term
forces the network to approximate the underlying geometric
evolution given by the LSE, without any supervision. The
network can also be initialized based on previously trained
initial conditions, resulting in faster convergence compared
to the standard approach.

Our method is the first neural approach in geometry processing, that does not consider numerical approximations
of the LSE solution during sampling and does not discretize
the LSE in the loss function.
Our strategy has two steps to train f . First, a sample
{pi , g(pi )} enables us to train the initial condition f = g on
R3 ⇥ {0}. Second, an LSE constraint is used to fit f into
a solution of the LSE in R3 ⇥ R. This term does not need
any supervision, i.e. it does not consider samples of f . This
constraint only uses samples in the form (pi , ti ). The only
requirement of our method is that f must be smooth. Given
this, our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• Extension of neural implicit surfaces to space-time
without the use of numerical/discrete approximations.
Encoding the space-time coordinates as input of the
network allows us to represent the whole implicit animation in a single network;
• Development of a neural framework to fit solutions of
an LSE using only its analytical expression (Sec 4).
Moreover, the network training considers only the initial condition of the LSE problem as data;

1. Introduction
A neural implicit function g : R3 ! R is a smooth neural network that represents an implicit function. Since g is
smooth, objects from the differential geometry of its regular
level sets can be used in closed form [37, 27].
This work investigates the extension of the domain of
neural implicit functions to the space-time R3 ⇥ R, encoding the evolution of the function g as a higher-dimensional
function f : R3⇥R ! R. The resulting animation is governed by a PDE, the level set equation (LSE) @f
@t = v krf k,
which encodes the propagation of the level sets St of f (·, t)
towards their normals with speed v. The choice of the function v depends on the underlying geometric model. LSE is
an important tool for geometry processing applications.
We propose to use a neural network f : R3 ⇥ R ! R to
represent the above level set function. For this, we train f to
learn the evolution St of an initial surface S under a given
LSE. Accordingly, we add the constraint f = g on R3 ⇥{0},
to the LSE. If g is the signed distance function (SDF) of S,
then a solution f of this problem encodes an animation of S.

• The method is flexible enough to be used in a variety of
applications, such as surface motion by vector fields,
smoothing, sharpening, and interpolation (Sec 6);
• We also propose a novel network initialization based
on previously trained initial conditions (Sec 4.4).

2. Related Works
Many problems, such as shape correspondence, topology
changes, and animation of deformable objects, can be posed
using implicit surfaces [17, 34, 3, 4, 14, 13]. Studying their
shape properties through differential geometry leads to a
framework for intrinsic operations. An example is smoothing a surface using the mean curvature equation, an important PDE in geometry processing [6, 5, 15, 13]. Problems in
this topic rely on computing derivativess – a hard task when
dealing with meshes [7, 11, 12]. A practical neural implicit
approach would allow us to compute such objects in closed
form, and it is the objective of this work.

14279

