This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SA-BEV: Generating Semantic-Aware Bird’s-Eye-View Feature
for Multi-view 3D Object Detection

1

Jinqing Zhang1 , Yanan Zhang1 , Qingjie Liu1,2,3 *, Yunhong Wang1,3
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou, China
{zhangjinqing, zhangyanan, qingjie.liu, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, the pure camera-based Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV)
perception provides a feasible solution for economical autonomous driving. However, the existing BEV-based multiview 3D detectors generally transform all image features
into BEV features, without considering the problem that
the large proportion of background information may submerge the object information. In this paper, we propose
Semantic-Aware BEV Pooling (SA-BEVPool), which can filter out background information according to the semantic
segmentation of image features and transform image features into semantic-aware BEV features. Accordingly, we
propose BEV-Paste, an effective data augmentation strategy that closely matches with semantic-aware BEV feature.
In addition, we design a Multi-Scale Cross-Task (MSCT)
head, which combines task-specific and cross-task information to predict depth distribution and semantic segmentation
more accurately, further improving the quality of semanticaware BEV feature. Finally, we integrate the above modules into a novel multi-view 3D object detection framework,
namely SA-BEV. Experiments on nuScenes show that SABEV achieves state-of-the-art performance. Code has been
available at https://github.com/mengtan00/SA-BEV.git.

1. Introduction
Camera and LiDAR are the two most commonly used
sensors for 3D object detection, which is essential to autonomous driving systems. LiDAR-based methods [4, 12,
33, 39, 34, 35, 42] have attained excellent performance due
to the accurate spatial structure information of point clouds,
but the expensive LiDAR sensor reduces its universality. In
contrast, camera-based methods [30, 29, 31, 18, 19] are relatively low-cost with plentiful semantic information, but are
constrained by the lack of geometric depth cues.
* indicates the corresponding author.

Original Frame

Pasted Frame

After-pasting Frame

Figure 1: Comparison between normal BEV features (upper row) and semantic-aware BEV features (lower row).
The brightness reveals the norm of the features and the red
/ green boxes are the ground truth of the original / pasted
frame. The last column shows BEV-Paste, an data augmentation strategy that matches semantic-aware BEV features.

Considering the performance gap between camera and
LiDAR, the Bird’s-Eye-View paradigm transforms multiview image features into the BEV feature to make the following 3D perception easier [22, 10]. This practical and
scalable camera-only paradigm is gaining popularity, and
numerous advancements have allowed it to reach high perceptual precision [15, 14, 16, 8, 11]. The core step of the
BEV paradigm is generating virtual points from image features, which will be projected into the “pillarized” BEV
space. The features of the virtual points in the same pillar are then cumulated as the BEV feature. However, this
operation does not fully utilize the semantic information of
the image features and will inject massive background information that submerges object information.
In order to take full advantage of the valuable semantic

3348

