This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Global Adaptation meets Local Generalization: Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Wenhao Chai1
1

Zhongyu Jiang2

Zhejiang University

Jenq-Neng Hwang2
2

University of Washington

Abstract
When applying a pre-trained 2D-to-3D human pose lifting model to a target unseen dataset, large performance
degradation is commonly encountered due to domain shift
issues. We observe that the degradation is caused by two
factors: 1) the large distribution gap over global positions
of poses between the source and target datasets due to variant camera parameters and settings, and 2) the deficient diversity of local structures of poses in training. To this end,
we combine global adaptation and local generalization in
PoseDA, a simple yet effective framework of unsupervised
domain adaptation for 3D human pose estimation. Specifically, global adaptation aims to align global positions of
poses from the source domain to the target domain with a
proposed global position alignment (GPA) module. And local generalization is designed to enhance the diversity of
2D-3D pose mapping with a local pose augmentation (LPA)
module. These modules bring significant performance improvement without introducing additional learnable parameters. In addition, we propose local pose augmentation
(LPA) to enhance the diversity of 3D poses following an
adversarial training scheme consisting of 1) a augmentation generator that generates the parameters of pre-defined
pose transformations and 2) an anchor discriminator to ensure the reality and quality of the augmented data. Our approach can be applicable to almost all 2D-3D lifting models. PoseDA achieves 61.3 mm of MPJPE on MPI-INF3DHP under a cross-dataset evaluation setup, improving
upon the previous state-of-the-art method by 10.2%.

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation is an essential computer vision task which aims to estimate the coordinates of 3D
joints from single-frame images or videos. This task can be
further used for several downstream tasks in multiple object tracking [1, 15, 13, 21], person re-identification [45],
action recognition [44], robot [47], human body reconstruction [14], sports application [64], etc. However, large-scale

Gaoang Wang1 B

translation

source 3d pose

guide

output 3d pose

augment

source 3d pose

source 2d pose

target 2d pose

output 2d pose

Global Adaptation

Local Generalization

Figure 1. PoseDA addresses 3D human pose domain adaptation
problem through global adaptation and local generalization. The
2D poses from target dataset are used to guide the translation of
3D poses from source dataset. And the local root-relative poses
also are augmented to achieve better generalization ability.

3D-annotated datasets are hard to obtain. Existing methods are usually built on an off-the-shelf 2D pose estimators [9, 46] following two-stage schemes.
Deep learning methods [37, 41] have achieved great
success in the mapping from 2D to 3D in the past
decade. Despite their success in in-distribution data, these
fully-supervised methods show poor performance in crossdataset inference [18]. We argue that the real bottleneck
lies in the domain gap of 3D pose data rather than the 2D3D lifting network architecture or training strategy. Existing datasets either lack enough diversity in laboratorial environments [23] or lack adequate quantity and accuracy in the wild [38] due to the complex visual condition [59, 57, 58, 34, 33, 24]. We model the pose domain gap
in terms of global position and local pose separately shown
in Figure 1. As for the global position, the camera intrinsic
and extrinsic parameters are completely different in different datasets, resulting in performance degradation in crossdataset evaluation. And for the local pose, the lack of action
diversity also limits the generalization ability of the model.
Addressing the domain adaptation or generalization problem is a crucial step for 3D human pose estimation to move
from toy experiments to real-world applications. Recent
14655

