This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DVGaze: Dual-View Gaze Estimation
Yihua Cheng
Beihang University
Beijing, China

Feng Lu*
Beihang University
Beijing, China

yihua c@buaa.edu.cn

lufeng@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Human gaze provides important cues for understanding
human cognition [25] and behavior [9]. It has applications in
various fields such as salience detection [32, 8, 31], virtual
reality [23, 20, 18] and human-computer interaction [11, 7].
Gaze estimation methods estimate human gaze from facial appearance. Conventional gaze estimation methods usually learn person-specific eye models and fit the eye model
* Corresponding Author
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(NSFC) under grant 62372019.

ࣦ௚௔௭௘

Transformer

Gaze estimation methods estimate gaze from facial appearance with a single camera. However, due to the limited
view of a single camera, the captured facial appearance cannot provide complete facial information and thus complicate
the gaze estimation problem. Recently, camera devices are
rapidly updated. Dual cameras are affordable for users and
have been integrated in many devices. This development
suggests that we can further improve gaze estimation performance with dual-view gaze estimation. In this paper, we
propose a dual-view gaze estimation network (DV-Gaze).
DV-Gaze estimates dual-view gaze directions from a pair of
images. We first propose a dual-view interactive convolution
(DIC) block in DV-Gaze. DIC blocks exchange dual-view
information during convolution in multiple feature scales.
It fuses dual-view features along epipolar lines and compensates for the original feature with the fused feature. We
further propose a dual-view transformer to estimate gaze
from dual-view features. Camera poses are encoded to indicate the position information in the transformer. We also
consider the geometric relation between dual-view gaze directions and propose a dual-view gaze consistency loss for
DV-Gaze. DV-Gaze achieves state-of-the-art performance on
ETH-XGaze and EVE datasets. Our experiments also prove
the potential of dual-view gaze estimation. We release codes
in https://github.com/yihuacheng/DVGaze.

Cam. A

Cam. B
Cam. 6D Pose

ࣦ௚ୡ

ࣦ௚௔௭௘

Figure 1. We explore dual-view gaze estimation in this work. We
propose DV-Gaze to estimate gaze directions from a pair of images.
DV-Gaze contains dual-view interactive convolution blocks which
exchange the information of a pair of images during convolution
in multiple feature scales, and a transformer to estimate gaze from
dual-view feature.

to estimate human gaze. These model-based methods need
to build specific camera system which contains multiple IR
cameras and light sources [13]. Although model-based methods have good accuracy, the complex camera system brings
high costs and harms flexibility. Appearance-based gaze
estimation methods have low requirements in devices. It
only requires a single webcam to capture facial appearance
and directly learns a mapping function from the appearance
to gaze. The low requirement means appearance-based gaze
estimation methods have larger potential than model-based
methods. They attract much attention and become a hotspot.
However, the low requirement also brings limitations. In
particular, one single webcam has a limited field of view
and therefore captures incomplete facial appearance due to
facial self-occlusion. The problem complicates gaze estimation and brings performance drop. To handle the problem,
recent methods usually design efficient feature extraction
networks[6, 29] or synthesize more images to cover data
space[24, 30].
In this paper, we explore a new direction for gaze estimation. Recently, camera devices are rapidly developed
and the cost of camera is also decreased. Dual cameras are
affordable for users [12] and have been applied in many

20632

