This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ray Conditioning: Trading Photo-consistency for Photo-realism in Multi-view
Image Generation
Eric Ming Chen1

Sidhanth Holalkere1
1

Cornell University

Ruyu Yan1
2

Kai Zhang2

Abe Davis1

Adobe Research

Pose Cond. [6]

https://ray-cond.github.io

1. Introduction
Modeling the distributions of natural images has long
been an important problem that is extensively studied. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) and diffusion models are two types of generative models that have successfully shown impressive capabilities of learning image
distributions—the generated samples are almost indistinguishable from real photos [11, 33, 16, 34].
While optimizing for the photo-realism of individual
samples, these generative models rarely allow for multiview image generation, where photo-consistency matters.
Recently, many multi-view image synthesizers have been
proposed that try to optimize for both photo-realism and
photo-consistency [6, 41, 13, 26]. They generally follow a
“synthesize-3D-then-render” paradigm: 3D representations
are synthesized, and then images are rendered (at specified camera poses). Such 3D-aware generative models, especially EG3D [6], achieve high-quality multi-view image
generation results, despite being trained only on single-view

Ray Cond.

Multi-view image generation attracts particular attention these days due to its promising 3D-related applications,
e.g., image viewpoint editing. Most existing methods follow a paradigm where a 3D representation is first synthesized, and then rendered into 2D images to ensure photoconsistency across viewpoints. However, such explicit bias
for photo-consistency sacrifices photo-realism, causing geometry artifacts and loss of fine-scale details when these
methods are applied to edit real images. To address this
issue, we propose ray conditioning, a geometry-free alternative that relaxes the photo-consistency constraint. Our
method generates multi-view images by conditioning a 2D
GAN on a light field prior. With explicit viewpoint control,
state-of-the-art photo-realism and identity consistency, our
method is particularly suited for the viewpoint editing task.

EG3D [6]

Abstract

Input
Inversion
Rotation
Figure 1. Challenges With Viewpoint Editing. Conditioning a
2D GAN’s latent space on pose does not ensure that an identity remains consistent across views. 3D-aware GANs such as EG3D [6]
struggle to reconstruct high-frequency details such as wrinkles and
hair. Our ray conditioning method most faithfully reproduces the
input image, and preserves identity when editing the viewpoint.

image data with poses.
However, photo-realism and photo-consistency are oftentimes two competing goals: photo-realism very explicitly favors image quality over control, while photoconsistency more implicitly favors control over quality. A
few examples of this conflict include fine-scale detail and
view-dependent appearance in the multi-view 3D reconstruction and 3D generation problems. Details are either filtered from 3D representations (leaving them smoother and
more diffuse than real ones) or misinterpreted as geometric
artifacts [39]. As shown in Figure 1, although EG3D allows
explicit camera control and generates photo-consistent images at different viewpoints, it fails to reproduce the subtle
details, e.g., the wrinkles and hairs, in the input image. Conditioning a 2D GAN’s latent space on camera pose does not
ensure that the identity remains consistent across views.
Our work is motivated by the observation that, for cer-

23242

