This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parametric Depth Based Feature Representation Learning for Object Detection
and Segmentation in Bird’s-Eye View
∗

Jiayu Yang1,3 , Enze Xie2 , Miaomiao Liu1 , Jose M. Alvarez3
1
Australian National University, 2 The University of Hong Kong, 3 NVIDIA
{jiayu.yang, miaomiao.liu}@anu.edu.au, xieenze@connect.hku.hk, josea@nvidia.com
Feature Transformation

Inputs

Multi-task Estimation

f 3D
f 2D
Im
ag

eF

ea
tu

3D Featu

re

e

re Volum

3D Object Detection

Z

O3D

f̂ BEV

Y

X

Parametric Depth based
Feature Transformation

Multi-view Images

Unified
BEV Feature

Visibility Aware
BEV
BEV Segmentation Visibility Map

Figure 1: Given multi-view images and camera parameters, our framework utilize parametric depth to transform image
feature into BEV space for jointly estimating 3D object detection, BEV segmentation and a BEV visibility map. Code
available at: https://github.com/NVlabs/ParametricBEV

Abstract
Recent vision-only perception models for autonomous
driving achieved promising results by encoding multi-view
image features into Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) space. A critical step and the main bottleneck of these methods is transforming image features into the BEV coordinate frame. This
paper focuses on leveraging geometry information, such as
depth, to model such feature transformation. Existing works
rely on non-parametric depth distribution modeling leading
to significant memory consumption, or ignore the geometry information to address this problem. In contrast, we
propose to use parametric depth distribution modeling for
feature transformation. We first lift the 2D image features
to the 3D space defined for the ego vehicle via a predicted
parametric depth distribution for each pixel in each view.
Then, we aggregate the 3D feature volume based on the 3D
space occupancy derived from depth to the BEV frame. Finally, we use the transformed features for downstream tasks
such as object detection and semantic segmentation. Existing semantic segmentation methods do also suffer from an
hallucination problem as they do not take visibility information into account. This hallucination can be particularly
problematic for subsequent modules such as control and
planning. To mitigate the issue, our method provides depth
uncertainty and reliable visibility-aware estimations. We
further leverage our parametric depth modeling to present
a novel visibility-aware evaluation metric that, when taken
∗ The work is done during an internship at NVIDIA

into account, can mitigate the hallucination problem. Extensive experiments on object detection and semantic segmentation on the nuScenes datasets demonstrate that our
method outperforms existing methods on both tasks.

1. Introduction
In autonomous driving, multiple input sensors are often available, each of which has its coordinate frame, such
as the coordinate image frame used by RGB cameras or
the egocentric coordinate frame used by the Lidar scanner.
Downstream tasks, such as motion planning, usually require
inputs in a unified egocentric coordinate system, like the
widely used Bird’s Eye View (BEV) space. Thus, transforming features from multiple sensors into the BEV space
has become a critical step for autonomous driving. Here,
we focus on this transformation for the vision-only setup
where we take as input multi-view RGB images captured in
a single time stamp by cameras mounted on the ego vehicle and output estimation results, such as object detection
and segmentation, in a unified BEV space, see Fig. 1. In
general, accurate depth information is crucial to achieve effective transformations.
Early methods[16, 22] forgo explicit depth estimation
and learn implicit feature transformations using neural networks, which suffers from the generalization problem since
the neural network does not have an explicit prior of the underlying geometric relations. More recent methods [18, 33]

8483

