This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

F&F Attack: Adversarial Attack against Multiple Object Trackers by Inducing
False Negatives and False Positives
Tao Zhou1 Qi Ye1∗ Wenhan Luo2∗ Kaihao Zhang3 Zhiguo Shi1 Jiming Chen1
1
Zhejiang University 2 Sun Yat-sen University 3 Australian National University
{zhoutao2015, qi.ye, shizg, cjm}@zju.edu.cn, whluo.china@gmail.com, super.khzhang@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-object tracking (MOT) aims to build moving trajectories for number-agnostic objects. Modern multi-object
trackers commonly follow the tracking-by-detection strategy. Therefore, fooling detectors can be an effective solution
but it usually requires attacks in multiple successive frames,
resulting in low efficiency. Attacking association processes
improves efficiency but may require model-specific design,
leading to poor generalization. In this paper, we propose a
novel False negative and False positive attack (F&F attack)
mechanism: it perturbs the input image to erase original
detections and to inject deceptive false alarms around original ones while integrating the association attack implicitly. The mechanism can produce effective identity switches
against multi-object trackers by only fooling detectors in
a few frames. To demonstrate the flexibility of the mechanism, we deploy it to three multi-object trackers (ByteTrack, SORT, and CenterTrack) which are enabled by two
representative detectors (YOLOX and CenterNet). Comprehensive experiments on MOT17 and MOT20 datasets show
that our method significantly outperforms existing attackers, revealing the vulnerability of the tracking-by-detection
paradigm to detection attacks.

1. Introduction
As a common visual perception task, multi-object tracking (MOT) aims to build moving trajectories for numberagnostic objects. This requires the multi-object tracker
to be capable of perceiving the birth, continuation, and
termination of targets. To this end, most MOT methods
[33, 22, 37, 34] follow the tracking-by-detection paradigm,
working together with a detector [12, 38]. Given a new
∗ Corresponding author.

Qi Ye is with the College of Control Science and Engineering and the
State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang University, and also with the Key Lab of CS&AUS of Zhejiang Province.
Project page: https://infzhou.github.io/FnFAttack/index.html

Clean frame 𝐼𝐼𝑡𝑡−1

Attacked frames 𝐼𝐼̃𝑡𝑡 and 𝐼𝐼̃𝑡𝑡+1
Attack ByteTrack

Clean frame 𝐼𝐼𝑡𝑡+2

Clean frame 𝐼𝐼𝑡𝑡−1

Attacked frames 𝐼𝐼̃𝑡𝑡 and 𝐼𝐼̃𝑡𝑡+1
Attack SORT

Clean frame 𝐼𝐼𝑡𝑡+2

Clean frame 𝐼𝐼𝑡𝑡−1

Attack CenterTrack

Attacked frame 𝐼𝐼𝑡𝑡

Clean frame 𝐼𝐼𝑡𝑡+1

Figure 1: By erasing original detections and injecting deceptive false alarms around the original ones, our method
misleads multi-object trackers to switch tracking identities
of most targets after only attacking 1 or 2 frames. Bounding boxes with different colors represent different identities.
Best viewed in color.
frame, the detector first finds all objects of interest. These
detections are then associated with historical trajectories by
various cues, like motion cues [3, 33, 37] and appearance
cues [34, 29]. It has important applications in surveillance,
autonomous driving, robotics [19], etc. Despite having been
studied for decades and its importance, the robustness of
MOT to attacks has just gained attention in recent years.
In many other computer vision problems, numerous works
have studied adversarial attacks against various visual perception tasks such as detection [28, 30], tracking [32, 14],
semantic segmentation [30], etc since the vulnerability of
deep learning models to adversarial examples is first investigated in [27].
As detection is fundamental to tracking, attacking the detectors is a primary solution for the MOT attack. By utiliz-

4573

