This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MSI: Maximize Support-Set Information for Few-Shot Segmentation
Seonghyeon Moon
Rutgers University

Samuel S. Sohn
Rutgers University

Honglu Zhou
NEC Laboratories America

sm2062@rutgers.edu

samuel.sohn@rutgers.edu

hozhou@nec-labs.com

Sejong Yoon
The College of New Jersey

Vladimir Pavlovic
Rutgers University

yoons@tcnj.edu

vladimir@rutgers.edu

Muhammad Haris Khan
Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence

Mubbasir Kapadia
Rutgers University

muhammad.haris@mbzuai.ac.ae

mubbasir.kapadia@rutgers.edu

Abstract
FSS (Few-shot segmentation) aims to segment a target
class using a small number of labeled images (support set).
To extract information relevant to the target class, a dominant approach in best performing FSS methods removes
background features using a support mask. We observe that
this feature excision through a limiting support mask introduces an information bottleneck in several challenging
FSS cases, e.g., for small targets and/or inaccurate target
boundaries. To this end, we present a novel method (MSI),
which maximizes the support-set information by exploiting two complementary sources of features to generate super correlation maps. We validate the effectiveness of our
approach by instantiating it into three recent and strong
FSS methods. Experimental results on several publicly
available FSS benchmarks show that our proposed method
consistently improves performance by visible margins and
leads to faster convergence. Our code and trained models are available at: https://github.com/moonsh/
MSI-Maximize-Support-Set-Information

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) have
achieved state-of-the-art results across several mainstream
computer vision (CV) problems, including object detection
[26, 27] and semantic segmentation [18, 2, 38]. An important factor underlying the success of DCNNs is largescale annotated datasets, which are costly and cumbersome
to acquire in many dense prediction tasks, such as semantic segmentation. Moreover, these models struggle to segment novel objects when only a few annotated examples are

Figure 1. Recent FSS baseline (VAT[9]) struggles to accurately
segment the target object in several challenging scenarios in PASCAL [5] and COCOi [15]: (a) the same instance of the target class
is not masked, e.g., the sofa on the right, (b) the support mask
is very small compared to the entire image, e.g., flowers in the
pot, (c) support mask is missing some target boundary information, e.g., the front and chimney of the train, and (d) the background contains some important contextual information, unavailable in the support mask, e.g., shoes and grass. Our method (MSI)
is capable of accurately segmenting target objects. It maximizes
the support set information to compensate for the limited support
mask information and can exploit relevant contextual information
from the background.

available. Many existing few-shot segmentation (FSS) approaches [25, 30, 34, 23, 31, 33, 35, 13, 32, 16, 37, 19, 21,
11, 12, 9, 22] aim to address this shortcoming. The problem
settings in FSS require accurate segmentation of a target ob-

19266

