This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PASTA: Proportional Amplitude Spectrum Training Augmentation for
Syn-to-Real Domain Generalization
Prithvijit Chattopadhyay* Kartik Sarangmath∗ Vivek Vijaykumar
Georgia Institute of Technology

Judy Hoffman

{prithvijit3, ksarangmath3, vivekvjk, judy}@gatech.edu

GTAV

https://github.com/prithv1/PASTA

Abstract
Synthetic data offers the promise of cheap and bountiful
training data for settings where labeled real-world data is
scarce. However, models trained on synthetic data significantly underperform when evaluated on real-world data.
In this paper, we propose Proportional Amplitude Spectrum
Training Augmentation (PASTA), a simple and effective augmentation strategy to improve out-of-the-box synthetic-toreal (syn-to-real) generalization performance. PASTA perturbs the amplitude spectra of synthetic images in the Fourier
domain to generate augmented views. Specifically, with
PASTA we propose a structured perturbation strategy where
high-frequency components are perturbed relatively more
than the low-frequency ones. For the tasks of semantic segmentation (GTAV→Real), object detection (Sim10K→Real),
and object recognition (VisDA-C Syn→Real), across a total
of 5 syn-to-real shifts, we find that PASTA outperforms more
complex state-of-the-art generalization methods while being
complementary to the same.

1. Introduction
For complex tasks, deep models often rely on training
with substantial labeled data. Real-world data can be expensive to label and an available labeled training set often
captures only a limited set of real-world appearance diversity. Synthetic data offers an opportunity to cheaply generate diverse samples that can better cover the anticipated
variance of real-world test data. However, models trained
on synthetic data often struggle to generalize to real world
data – e.g., the performance of a vanilla DeepLabv3+ [13]
(ResNet-50 backbone) architecture on semantic segmentation drops from 73.45 mIoU on GTAV [58] to 28.95 mIoU
on Cityscapes [18] for the same set of classes. Several approaches have been considered to tackle this problem.
* Equal Contribution. Correspondence to prithviijt3@gatech.edu

Original Image

Augmented Image

Figure 1: PASTA augmentation samples. A synthetic image
from GTAV [58] when augmented with RandAugment [19]
[Top] and PASTA [Bottom]. We find that PASTA creates augmented views different from existing photometric operations.
In this paper, we propose a novel augmentation strategy,
called Proportional Amplitude Spectrum Training Augmentation (PASTA), to address the synthetic-to-real generalization problem. PASTA, as an augmentation strategy for synthetic data, aims to satisfy three key criteria: (1) strong
out-of-the-box generalization performance, (2) plug-andplay compatibility with existing methods, and (3) benefits
across tasks, backbones, and shifts. PASTA achieves this by
perturbing the amplitude spectra (obtained by applying 2D
FFT to input images) of the source synthetic images in the
Fourier domain. While prior work has explored augmenting images in the Fourier domain [71, 73, 31], they mostly
rely on the observations that – (1) among the amplitude and
phase spectra, phase tends to capture more high-level semantics [52, 51, 55, 25, 72] and (2) low-frequency (LF) bands of
the amplitude spectrum tend to capture style information /
low-level statistics (illumination, lighting, etc.) [73].
We further observe that synthetic images have less diversity in the high-frequency (HF) bands of their amplitude
spectra compared to real images (see Sec. 3.3 for a detailed
discussion). Motivated by these key observations, PASTA
provides a structured way to perturb the amplitude spectra of

19288

