This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrastive Continuity on Augmentation Stability Rehearsal for Continual
Self-Supervised Learning
Haitao Wen, Xiaoliang Zhang, Heqian Qiu ∗,
Lanxiao Wang, Hongliang Li ∗
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
Haoyang Cheng,

chenghaoyang@std.uestc.edu.cn, haitaowen@std.uestc.edu.cn, xlzhang@std.uestc.edu.cn,
hqqiu@uestc.edu.cn, lanxiao.wang@std.uestc.edu.cn, hlli@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Self-supervised learning has attracted a lot of attention
recently, which is able to learn powerful representations
without any manual annotations. However, self-supervised
learning needs to develop the ability to continuously learn
to cope with a variety of real-world challenges, i.e., Continual Self-Supervised Learning (CSSL). Catastrophic forgetting is a notorious problem in CSSL, where the model
tends to forget the learned knowledge. In practice, simple rehearsal or regularization will bring extra negative effects while alleviating catastrophic forgetting in CSSL, e.g.,
overfitting on the rehearsal samples or hindering the model
from encoding fresh information. In order to address catastrophic forgetting without overfitting on the rehearsal samples, we propose Augmentation Stability Rehearsal (ASR)
in this paper, which selects the most representative and discriminative samples by estimating the augmentation stability for rehearsal. Meanwhile, we design a matching strategy
for ASR to dynamically update the rehearsal buffer. In addition, we further propose Contrastive Continuity on Augmentation Stability Rehearsal (C2 ASR) based on ASR. We show
that C2 ASR is an upper bound of the Information Bottleneck
(IB) principle, which suggests that C2 ASR essentially preserves as much information shared among seen task streams
as possible to prevent catastrophic forgetting and dismisses
the redundant information between previous task streams
and current task stream to free up the ability to encode fresh
information. Our method obtains a great achievement compared with state-of-the-art CSSL methods on a variety of
CSSL benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) has received
much attention from the community due to its great po∗ Corresponding authors.

tential [11, 21, 18, 5, 12, 49]. Self-supervised learning
is able to learn beneficial representations for a variety of
downstream tasks without any manual annotations, where
contrastive learning based on dual branch framework is the
mainstream, as shown in Figure 1(a). However, data is often
presented as streams progressively over time in real-world
scenarios. It’s nearly infeasible for self-supervised learning to collect the whole data streams to train the networks,
since the ever-increasing data makes the notoriously costly
training of self-supervised learning models even more expensive and sometimes it can’t even access previous data
due to privacy protection. Self-supervised learning needs
to develop continuity to cope with a variety of real-world
challenges, which is also called Continual Self-Supervised
Learning (CSSL) [16], as shown in Figure 1(c).
Continual learning (CL) aims to learn from nonstationary data distributions, as shown in Figure 1(b).
Catastrophic forgetting is a notorious problem in CL, which
refers to that the model tends to forget what it has already
learned. Many methods [20, 40, 47, 39, 25, 50, 32, 1, 4] are
proposed to alleviate it. CSSL also suffers from catastrophic
forgetting, and some pioneers start to address this problem.
Rehearsal-based method LUMP [33] utilizes rehearsal samples to augment current task samples by mixup [51], and
regularization-based method CaSSLe [16] encourages current model to maintain a consistency with previous state via
a prediction head. However, LUMP which is based on dark
experience sampling strategy for rehearsal tends to overfit
on the rehearsal samples due to the long training epoches of
self-supervised learning [16], and CaSSLe introduces too
much invariance among task streams, which preserves most
information of previous task streams and hinders the model
from learning fresh knowledge.
In order to address catastrophic forgetting without overfitting on the rehearsal samples, we propose Augmentation
Stability Rehearsal (ASR) in this paper, which selects the
most representative and discriminative samples by estimat-

5707

