This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ICD-Face: Intra-class Compactness Distillation for Face Recognition
Zhipeng Yu1∗

Jiaheng Liu2∗
Haoyu Qin3 Yichao Wu3 Kun Hu3
Jiayi Tian2 Ding Liang3
1
2
SEECE, UCAS Beihang University 3 SenseTime Research

Abstract
Knowledge distillation is an effective model compression
method to improve the performance of a lightweight student
model by transferring the knowledge of a well-performed
teacher model, which has been widely adopted in many
computer vision tasks, including face recognition (FR).
The current FR distillation methods usually utilize the
Feature Consistency Distillation (FCD) (e.g., L2 distance)
on the learned embeddings extracted by the teacher and
student models. However, after using FCD, we observe that
the intra-class similarities of the student model are lower
than the intra-class similarities of the teacher model a lot.
Therefore, we propose an effective FR distillation method
called ICD-Face by introducing intra-class compactness
distillation into the existing distillation framework. Specifically, in ICD-Face, we first propose to calculate the
similarity distributions of the teacher and student models,
where the feature banks are introduced to construct sufficient and high-quality positive pairs. Then, we estimate the
probability distributions of the teacher and student models
and introduce the Similarity Distribution Consistency
(SDC) loss to improve the intra-class compactness of the
student model. Extensive experimental results on multiple
benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed ICD-Face for face recognition.

1. Introduction
Face recognition (FR) has been well-investigated for
many years. Most of the progress is credited to largescale training datasets [64, 22], resource-intensive networks
with millions of parameters [15, 43] and effective loss
functions [7, 52]. Although larger FR models usually exhibit better recognition performance, the requirements for
huge computational resources are usually prohibitive on
mobile and embedded devices. Therefore, how to develop lightweight and effective FR models in resource* Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: Jiaheng Liu (liujiaheng@buaa.edu.cn).

（a）Positive Pairs

（c）Performance Results

（b）Negative Pairs

Figure 1: (a) The similarity distributions of positive pairs
based on different methods. “ArcFace (T)” and “ArcFace
(S)” mean teacher and student models are trained by ArcFace [7]. “FCD (S)” denotes the student model is trained
by FCD. (b) The similarity distributions of negative pairs
based on different methods. (c) True Accept Rate (TAR)
and threshold results of the teacher and student models using different methods.

limited scenarios has become an emergency problem in recent years. Knowledge distillation [16] is a popular strategy
for compressing models, which transfers the “knowledge”
from the teacher model to the lightweight student model.
Most existing knowledge distillation methods usually
aim to guide the student to mimic the teacher’s behavior by introducing probability constraints (e.g., KL divergence [16]) between the teacher’s predictions and student
models. However, for FR, the performance is usually evaluated in an open-set setting, where the identities of the testing set are disjoint from the training set. Meanwhile, at
the testing phase, the similarities of feature embedding are
employed for FR instead of the probabilities of the classifier used in classical close-set classification. Therefore,
it is more important to improve the discriminative ability
of the feature embedding of the student model for FR. A

21042

