This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RMP-Loss: Regularizing Membrane Potential Distribution for Spiking Neural
Networks
Yufei Guo*, Xiaode Liu*, Yuanpei Chen, Liwen Zhang, Weihang Peng, Yuhan Zhang,
Xuhui Huang, Zhe Ma†
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC, China
Scientific Research Laboratory of Aerospace Intelligent Systems and Technology, China

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) as one of the biologyinspired models have received much attention recently. It
can significantly reduce energy consumption since they
quantize the real-valued membrane potentials to 0/1 spikes
to transmit information thus the multiplications of activations and weights can be replaced by additions when implemented on hardware. However, this quantization mechanism will inevitably introduce quantization error, thus causing catastrophic information loss. To address the quantization error problem, we propose a regularizing membrane
potential loss (RMP-Loss) to adjust the distribution which is
directly related to quantization error to a range close to the
spikes. Our method is extremely simple to implement and
straightforward to train an SNN. Furthermore, it is shown
to consistently outperform previous state-of-the-art methods over different network architectures and datasets.

1. Introduction
Recently, many efforts have been done to make deep
neural networks (DNNs) lightweight, so that they can be
deployed in devices where energy consumption is limited. To this end, several approaches have been proposed, including network pruning [61], network quantization [18, 37, 15], knowledge transfer/distillation [46], neural architecture search [65, 39], and spiking neural networks
(SNNs) [23, 19, 22, 17, 52, 36, 44, 55, 54, 63, 49, 56, 57].
The SNN provides a special way to reduce energy consumption following the working mechanism of the brain neuron.
Its neurons accumulate spikes from previous neurons and
present spikes to posterior neurons when the membrane potential exceeds the firing threshold. This information transmission paradigm will convert the computationally expensive multiplication to computationally convenient additions
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author, mazhe thu@163.com.

thus making SNNs energy-efficient when implemented on
hardware. Specialized neuromorphic hardware based on an
event-driven processing paradigm is currently under various
stages of development, e.g., SpiNNaker [31], TrueNorth [1],
Tianjic [45], and Loihi [9], where SNNs can be efficiently
implemented further. Due to the advantage of computational efficiency and rapid development of neuromorphic
hardware, the SNN has gained more and more attention.
Although SNNs have been widely studied, their performance is still not comparable with that of DNNs. This performance gap is largely related to the quantization of the
real-valued membrane potential to 0/1 spikes for the firing
of the SNN in implementation [21]. The excessive information loss induced by the firing activity forcing all information only to two values will cause accuracy to decrease.
Although information loss is important for computer vision
tasks and the quantization will cause information loss too,
the essential role of the activation function is to introduce
non-linearity for neural networks [43]. Therefore, how to
effectively reduce the information loss of membrane potential quantization is of high research importance. However,
as far as we know, few studies have focused on directly solving this problem. The quantization error problem also exists
in these methods that convert the ANN model to an SNN
model [11, 4, 36]. However, these methods solve the problem by changing the activation function in ANNs or increasing timesteps in SNNs, which don’t work for SNN training.
InfLoR-SNN [21] adds a membrane potential redistribution
function in the spiking neuron to reduce the quantization error via redistributing the membrane potential. However, it
will decrease the biological plausibility of the SNN and increase the inference burden. This paper focuses on reducing
the quantization error in SNN training directly and aims to
introduce no burden for the SNN.
Quantization error is smaller when the membrane potential is close to the spiking threshold or reset values [21].
Hence, to mitigate the information loss, we suggest redistributing the membrane potential to where the membrane
potential is closer to the 0/1 spike. Then an additional

17391

