This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FemtoDet: An Object Detection Baseline for Energy Versus Performance
Tradeoffs
Peng Tu1 , Xu Xie1 , GUO AI1 , Yuexiang Li 2 , Yawen Huang2∗ , Yefeng Zheng2
1 MicroBT Inc. 2 Jarvis Lab, Tencent

Abstract
Efficient detectors for edge devices are often optimized
for parameters or speed count metrics, which remain in
weak correlation with the energy of detectors. However,
some vision applications of convolutional neural networks,
such as always-on surveillance cameras, are critical for energy constraints. This paper aims to serve as a baseline
by designing detectors to reach tradeoffs between energy
and performance from two perspectives: 1) We extensively
analyze various CNNs to identify low-energy architectures,
including selecting activation functions, convolutions operators, and feature fusion structures on necks. These underappreciated details in past work seriously affect the energy
consumption of detectors; 2) To break through the dilemmatic energy-performance problem, we propose a balanced
detector driven by energy using discovered low-energy components named FemtoDet. In addition to the novel construction, we improve FemtoDet by considering convolutions and training strategy optimizations. Specifically, we
develop a new instance boundary enhancement (IBE) module for convolution optimization to overcome the contradiction between the limited capacity of CNNs and detection
tasks in diverse spatial representations, and propose a recursive warm-restart (RecWR) for optimizing training strategy to escape the sub-optimization of light-weight detectors
by considering the data shift produced in popular augmentations. As a result, FemtoDet with only 68.77k parameters
achieves a competitive score of 46.3 AP50 on PASCAL VOC
and 1.11 W & 64.47 FPS on Qualcomm Snapdragon 865
CPU platforms. Extensive experiments on COCO and TJUDHD datasets indicate that the proposed method achieves
competitive results in diverse scenes.

1. Introduction
The deployment of efficient convolutional neural networks (CNNs) enabled immense progress [23, 29, 30, 31,
4, 9, 41] in vision detectors for edge devices, in which they
∗ Corresponding author; First author’s Email: yh.peng.tu@gmail.com

consistently reduce parameters and speed counts for improving accuracy. However, these metrics are not correlated
well with the efficiency of the models in terms of energy.
Evaluation metrics, such as parameters, do not take into account the energy cost of models, resulting in a nontrivial
effect on the energy cost of detectors. Compared with the
same architecture, the parameters of models are positively
correlated with their energy cost (shown in Table 2). However, in the case of equal model parameters, their energy
consumption may be negatively correlated or even irrelevant to the model parameters (shown in Table 1). Considering that various activation functions, convolution operators,
and feature fuse structures may not increase model parameters, but generate more energy costs. Similarly, the speed
count is also not well correlated with energy, as it can be optimized by the degree of parallelism. These disconnections
will leave customized efficient detectors unavailable, when
they are deployed under severe energy constraints like the
always-on surveillance cameras.
This paper aims to reduce the energy costs of efficient
object detectors, while improving their performances by
achieving energy versus performance tradeoffs. Specifically, these bottlenecks fall into several categories:
1) Detector components with unknown energy. Most
current object detection methods focus either on latencyoriented [5, 34, 44] or accuracy-oriented [9, 38, 32, 36]
works. There are very limited works toward the energy cost
of the detector components, which is the first obstacle to
designing energy-performance-balanced detectors. To identify energy-efficient components of detectors, we followed
[42] to benchmark their energy metrics from three types
of structures, i.e., activation functions, convolution operators, and necks of detectors. The following finding is acquired: Firstly, some activation functions have been widely
used, because of their ability to improve models without
adding more parameters. They have increased costs, yet
received very limited attention. As shown in Table 1, we
set ReLU [1] based models as a baseline. When replacing the ReLU with the GELU [16], 4.40% performance
is gained, while 12.50% energy cost is increased, and the
corresponding factor of the mean energy versus the perfor-

13318

