This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S-VolSDF: Sparse Multi-View Stereo Regularization of Neural Implicit Surfaces
Haoyu Wu

Alexandros Graikos
Dimitris Samaras
Stony Brook University

{haoyuwu,agraikos,samaras}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Neural rendering of implicit surfaces performs well in
3D vision applications. However, it requires dense input views as supervision. When only sparse input images
are available, output quality drops significantly due to the
shape-radiance ambiguity problem. We note that this ambiguity can be constrained when a 3D point is visible in
multiple views, as is the case in multi-view stereo (MVS).
We thus propose to regularize neural rendering optimization
with an MVS solution. The use of an MVS probability volume and a generalized cross entropy loss leads to a noisetolerant optimization process. In addition, neural rendering
provides global consistency constraints that guide the MVS
depth hypothesis sampling and thus improves MVS performance. Given only three sparse input views, experiments
show that our method not only outperforms generic neural
rendering models by a large margin but also significantly
increases the reconstruction quality of MVS models.

1. Introduction
Neural surface reconstruction techniques, coupled with
coordinate-based neural network models, have become increasingly popular in the field of 3D vision [74, 61, 75]. Although these methods perform very well, they require dense
input views as supervision. This is limiting for many realworld applications where sparse input images are the only
source of information, such as robotics, augmented reality,
autonomous driving, and scene reconstruction in-the-wild.
As shown in Fig. 1, the reconstruction quality of a scene
using VolSDF [74] (a state-of-the-art technique) drops significantly when only 3 views are used. This is due to the
shape-radiance ambiguity problem [82].
The shape-radiance ambiguity [82] means that there is
a high probability an incorrect geometry reconstruction satisfies the photometric constraint when it is visible from a
single view only, as is in the case of sparse views. In that
scenario, the photometric loss alone can not guide the model
toward a correct solution. To regularize this, we need to
constrain surface points to be visible from multiple views,

(a) Sparse Set of 3 Input Views

(b) VolSDF

(c) Our method

Figure 1. Shape-Radiance Ambiguity. In the last two rows, we
compare the novel view synthesis results from VolSDF [74] and
our model: RGB renderings (left), predicted normal maps (middle), and expected depth maps (right).

hence, we need correspondences, as in multi-view stereo
(MVS) [7, 38, 68, 71, 72, 9, 77, 21, 70, 80, 66, 69, 63, 84,
86, 16]. Thus, we propose to guide neural rendering optimization with information from MVS. The challenge is
how to effectively incorporate the noisy MVS predictions
into the neural rendering pipeline.
Many modern MVS methods [71, 21, 16, 9] integrate
the evidence for each possible 3D point into a probability
volume and regress depth from it. In order to avoid possible errors in MVS 3D point reconstruction, we do not use
point estimates, but the whole probability volume. We also
note that the rendering weights in neural rendering methods
and the probability volume in MVS actually have the same
meaning: the probability that a point at a particular location
is visible by multiple views. Based on recent MVS literature [46], we can think of all possible 3D points on a ray
as interior or exterior to the object (i.e. a binary classification problem). Thus, we can treat the MVS probability

3556

