This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SegGPT: Towards Segmenting Everything In Context
Xinlong Wang1 *

Xiaosong Zhang1∗

Yue Cao1∗

Wen Wang2

1 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence

Chunhua Shen2

2 Zhejiang University

Tiejun Huang1,3

3 Peking University

Code & Demo: https://github.com/baaivision/Painter

the big red sphere

all the spheres

shadows

top surfaces

SegGPT

contour of all spheres

multiple arbitrary parts

rainbow

objects in a video

ADE20K semantic segmentation

Figure 1: SegGPT is capable of segmenting everything in context with only one single model, which uses in-context examples
to indicate different tasks. For each sample, the orange box □ on the left displays the example/prompt image and its
corresponding mask, while the blue box □ on the right shows the input image and the resulting mask output. The mask
represents the bright region attached to the image. The caption for each sample (in the yellow box) is only for explanation.
Notably, SegGPT can perform arbitrary object segmentation (segment different components of the scene, such as the big red
sphere, all the spheres, contour of all spheres, top surfaces, and shadows), multiple part segmentation (specialized parts of the
iconic Statue of Liberty), rainbow segmentation, video object segmentation without videos in training, and close-set semantic
segmentation with learnable prompt tuning. More examples are shown in Figure 5.

Abstract
We present SegGPT, a generalist model for segmenting everything in context. We unify various segmentation tasks into
a generalist in-context learning framework that accommodates different kinds of segmentation data by transforming
them into the same format of images. The training of SegGPT is formulated as an in-context coloring problem with
random color mapping for each data sample. The objective is to accomplish diverse tasks according to the context,
rather than relying on specific colors. After training, SegGPT can perform arbitrary segmentation tasks in images
* Equal contribution. Correspondence to xinlong.wang96@gmail.com.

or videos via in-context inference, such as object instance,
stuff, part, contour, and text. SegGPT is evaluated on a
broad range of tasks, including few-shot semantic segmentation, video object segmentation, semantic segmentation, and
panoptic segmentation. Our results show strong capabilities
in segmenting in-domain and out-of-domain targets, either
qualitatively or quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Segmentation is one of the most fundamental problems
in computer vision, which aims to localize and re-organize
meaningful concepts at the pixel level, e.g., foreground, cat-

1130

