This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HSR-Diff: Hyperspectral Image Super-Resolution via Conditional Diffusion
Models

1

Chanyue Wu1∗ , Dong Wang1 *, Yunpeng Bai2∗ , Hanyu Mao1 , Ying Li1†, Qiang Shen2
National Engineering Laboratory for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean Big Data Application
Technology, Shaanxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Speech & Image Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Business and Physical Sciences, Aberystwyth
University, U.K.
{chanyuewu, dongwang, maomhy}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

lybyp@nwpu.edu.cn {yub3, qqs}@aber.ac.uk

Abstract
Despite the proven significance of hyperspectral images
(HSIs) in performing various computer vision tasks, its potential is adversely affected by the low-resolution (LR) property in the spatial domain, resulting from multiple physical
factors. Inspired by recent advancements in deep generative
models, we propose an HSI Super-resolution (SR) approach
with Conditional Diffusion Models (HSR-Diff) that merges
a high-resolution (HR) multispectral image (MSI) with the
corresponding LR-HSI. HSR-Diff generates an HR-HSI via
repeated refinement, in which the HR-HSI is initialized with
pure Gaussian noise and iteratively refined. At each iteration, the noise is removed with a Conditional Denoising
Transformer (CDFormer) that is trained on denoising at different noise levels, conditioned on the hierarchical feature
maps of HR-MSI and LR-HSI. In addition, a progressive
learning strategy is employed to exploit the global information of full-resolution images. Systematic experiments have
been conducted on four public datasets, demonstrating that
HSR-Diff outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral images (HSIs) contain dozens or hundreds
of spectral bands, enabling them to provide more faithful
knowledge of targeted scenes than conventional imaging
modalities. As such, HSIs play an irreplaceable role in various computer vision tasks, including classification [35, 42],
segmentation [6], and tracking [32]. Although HSIs contain rich spectral information, contemporary hyperspectral
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author. This work is supported by the National Natural

Science Foundation of China under Grant (62271400), and in part by the
Shaanxi Provincial Key R&D Program, China (2023-GHZD-02).

LR-HSI

Fusion-based
HSI-SR

HR-HSI
HR-MSI

Figure 1: Illustration of fusion-based Hyperspectral Image
Super-Resolution (HSI-SR).
imaging sensors lack high-resolution (HR) in the spatial domain, due to the stringent constraint of typically low signalto-noise ratios. Their widespread use is significantly hindered by this fact. Restricted by hardware limitations, a
practical way to work around this problem is to fuse the
low-resolution (LR) HSI with an HR multispectral image
(MSI). This requires the implementation of so-called HSI
super-resolution (SR)[36], as shown in Figure 1.
Over the past few decades, a significant amount of
research efforts have been devoted to developing HSISR approaches, which can be roughly classified into
five categories [44]: Extensions of pansharpening [5,
25, 27], Bayesian inference-based methods [1, 29], matrix factorization-based methods [2], tensor-based methods
[18], and deep learning (DL)-based methods [31]. Whilst
pansharpening methods [26] have been extended to the field
of HSI-SR, such approaches are prone to spectral distortion.
Bayesian inference-based approaches rely on the assumption of prior knowledge, thereby having a weak flexibility in
dealing with different HSI structures. Matrix factorizationbased techniques reshape the 3D HSIs and MSIs into matrices, thus facing the challenge of learning the required
relationship between space and spectrum. Although sev-

7083

