This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Evaluation and Improvement of Interpretability for Self-Explainable
Part-Prototype Networks
Qihan Huang1 , Mengqi Xue1 , Wenqi Huang2 , Haofei Zhang1 ,
Jie Song1, 3, † , Yongcheng Jing4 , Mingli Song1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Digital Grid Research Institute, China Southern Power Grid,
3
Zhejiang University - China Southern Power Grid Joint Research Centre on AI,
4
The University of Sydney
{qh.huang,mqxue,haofeizhang,sjie,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn,
huangwqcsg@163.com, yjin9495@uni.sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Part-prototype networks (e.g., ProtoPNet, ProtoTree, and
ProtoPool) have attracted broad research interest for their
intrinsic interpretability and comparable accuracy to noninterpretable counterparts. However, recent works find that
the interpretability from prototypes is fragile, due to the semantic gap between the similarities in the feature space and
that in the input space. In this work, we strive to address this
challenge by making the first attempt to quantitatively and
objectively evaluate the interpretability of the part-prototype
networks. Specifically, we propose two evaluation metrics,
termed as “consistency score” and “stability score”, to
evaluate the explanation consistency across images and the
explanation robustness against perturbations, respectively,
both of which are essential for explanations taken into practice. Furthermore, we propose an elaborated part-prototype
network with a shallow-deep feature alignment (SDFA) module and a score aggregation (SA) module to improve the
interpretability of prototypes. We conduct systematical evaluation experiments and provide substantial discussions to
uncover the interpretability of existing part-prototype networks. Experiments on three benchmarks across nine architectures demonstrate that our model achieves significantly superior performance to the state of the art, in both
the accuracy and interpretability. Our code is available at
https://github.com/hqhQAQ/EvalProtoPNet.

1. Introduction
Part-prototype networks are recently emerged deep selfexplainable models for image classification, which achieve
1 † Corresponding author.

Prototype

Image 1

Prototype

Image 2

(a) Inconsistency

Image

Perturbed Image

(b) Instability

Figure 1. (a) Inconsistency. A prototype may mistakenly correspond to different object parts in different images. (b) Instability.
A prototype may mistakenly correspond to different object parts in
the original image and the slightly perturbed image. The samples
are from ProtoPNet trained on ResNet34 backbone [12].

excellent performance in an interpretable decision-making
manner. In particular, ProtoPNet [7] is the first part-prototype
network, with the follow-up part-prototype networks (e.g.,
ProtoTree [31], ProtoPool [33], TesNet [44], and ProtoPShare [34]) built upon its framework. At its core, partprototype networks define multiple trainable prototypes that
represent specific object parts and emulate human perception
by comparing object parts across images to make predictions.
Currently, part-prototype networks have been extended to
various domains (e.g., graph neural network [54], deep reinforcement learning [19], and image segmentation [35]).
However, the current part-prototype networks only
demonstrate their interpretability with only a few visualization examples, and ignore the problem that the learned prototypes of part-prototype networks do not have adequately
credible interpretability [13, 20, 36]. The reasons for such unreliable interpretability are twofold: (1) Inconsistency. The
basic design principle of part-prototype networks [7] is that
each prototype is associated with a specific object part, but
it is not guaranteed that the corresponding object part of a

2011

