This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Knowledge Proxy Intervention for Deconfounded Video Question Answering
Jiangtong Li1 , Li Niu1∗, Liqing Zhang1∗
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{keep moving-Lee,ustcnewly,lqzhang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, Video Question-Answering (VideoQA) has
drawn more and more attention from both the industry and
the research community. Despite all the success achieved
by recent works, dataset bias always harmfully misleads
current methods focusing on spurious correlations in training data. To analyze the effects of dataset bias, we frame
the VideoQA pipeline into a causal graph, which shows
the causalities among video, question, aligned feature between video and question, answer, and underlying confounder. Through the causal graph, we prove that the confounder and the backdoor path lead to spurious causality.
To tackle the challenge that the confounder in VideoQA
is unobserved and non-enumerable in general, we propose a model-agnostic framework called Knowledge Proxy
Intervention (KPI), which introduces an extra knowledge
proxy variable in the causal graph to cut the backdoor
path and remove the effect of confounder. Our KPI framework exploits the front-door adjustment, which requires no
prior knowledge about the confounder. The effectiveness
of our KPI framework is corroborated by three baseline
methods on five benchmark datasets, including MSVD-QA,
MSRVTT-QA, TGIF-QA, NExT-QA, and Causal-VidQA.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Video Question-Answering (VideoQA)
has drawn more attention from the industry and research
community due to its essential role in interactive artificial
intelligence and recognition science. In VideoQA, there are
three crucial challenges, (1) how to capture the visual clues
in the video (e.g., object, action, and causality), (2) how to
parse the semantics and syntax in language, and (3) how to
align the visual clue with the linguistic semantics and syntax. Therefore, lots of works [12, 25, 22, 62, 35, 34, 5] have
studied the VideoQA from these three aspects, and have also
achieved great success in both open-ended VideoQA [66,
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Two examples show how dataset bias affects the answer.
The biased answer is generated by HQGA [62]. Green and red
denote the ground-truth and the biased answer for each question.

24] and multi-choice VideoQA [24, 61, 32].
As the core of VideoQA, video (V), question (Q), and
the aligned feature between video and question (aligned feature for short, H) play essential roles in predicting answer
(A). However, due to dataset bias, most of existing methods, which target at predicting answers directly from the
observational probability P (A|V, Q, H), will be inevitably
misled to spurious correlation, and have trouble in revealing
the causal relation between the V, Q, H, and A. In Figure 7,
we show two examples to explain how dataset bias affects
the answer prediction. For example, in Figure 7 (a), since
the kangaroo can rarely appear indoors, the model would ignore the “unique jumping pose” and the “distinct wobble of
tail” from the kangaroo, and regard it as a cat. Furthermore,
dataset bias is from nature (Zipf’s law [60] and social conventions [19]), i.e., more cats are indoors, and more kangaroos are outdoors. Therefore, simply enlarging the dataset
would never eliminate dataset bias. To this end, we focus
on dataset bias in VideoQA task and exploit the concepts of
confounder to analyze and alleviate this problem.
The causal graph of the VideoQA pipeline is illustrated
in Figure 2 (a), where V, Q, H, A, and C represent video,
question, aligned feature, answer, and confounder, respec-

2782

