This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCOB: Universal Text Understanding via Character-wise Supervised
Contrastive Learning with Online Text Rendering for Bridging Domain Gap
Daehee Kim1† , Yoonsik Kim1†∗ , DongHyun Kim1 , Yumin Lim2 , Geewook Kim1 , Taeho Kil1
1

NAVER Cloud AI 2 Seoul National University

{daehee.k,yoonsik.kim90}@navercorp.com

Abstract
Inspired by the great success of language model (LM)based pre-training, recent studies in visual document understanding have explored LM-based pre-training methods
for modeling text within document images. Among them,
pre-training that reads all text from an image has shown
promise, but often exhibits instability and even fails when
applied to broader domains, such as those involving both
visual documents and scene text images. This is a substantial limitation for real-world scenarios, where the processing of text image inputs in diverse domains is essential. In this paper, we investigate effective pre-training
tasks in the broader domains and also propose a novel
pre-training method called SCOB that leverages characterwise supervised contrastive learning with online text rendering to effectively pre-train document and scene text domains by bridging the domain gap. Moreover, SCOB enables weakly supervised learning, significantly reducing
annotation costs. Extensive benchmarks demonstrate that
SCOB generally improves vanilla pre-training methods and
achieves comparable performance to state-of-the-art methods. Our findings suggest that SCOB can be served generally and effectively for read-type pre-training methods. The
code will be available at https://github.com/naver-ai/scob.

1. Introduction
Visually-situated language, which encompasses a mixture of texts and visual objects such as documents, tables,
infographics, and user interfaces, is now ubiquitous in modern human civilization. Accordingly, automatically reading
and understanding visually-situated language with machine
learning systems is considered commercially valuable and
challenging. Considering the usability and training convenience for machine learning systems, Visual Document Un† Equal contribution
∗ Corresponding author and Project leader
2 This work was done while the author was at NAVER Cloud AI

Figure 1. Our proposed SCOB is applicable to pre-training tasks
of generative text understanding models, including text-read and
OCR-read. (Top) Our renderer generates images at the word-level
with diverse fonts and sizes. Shapes of “A”s and “R”s are little
different respectively in the real image (blue box), but their shapes
vary significantly in the rendered image (red box). (Bottom) By
applying the character-wise supervised contrastive loss, “A”s and
“R”s are clustered respectively and the clusters of “A” and “R”
push away each other in the embedding space.

derstanding (VDU) and Scene Text Understanding (STU)
tasks have been separately studied for visually-situated language. VDU mainly handles visually scanned or binarized
document images, whereas STU takes images in real-world
and dynamic environments as input, as shown in Figure 2.
In the context of VDU, Donut [32] has been proposed as
a sequence generation model, which pre-trains a text-read
task of reading all texts in raster scan order from an image, as illustrated in Figure 2. Meanwhile, Pix2seq [7] is an
image-to-sequence model that extends to the object detection task by gridding images and using coordinate tokens on
the grid. These recent studies [7, 32, 42] suggest that prompt
control in a sequence generation approach can successfully

19562

