This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Creative Birds: Self-Supervised Single-View 3D Style Transfer
Renke Wang1∗ Guimin Que1∗ , Shuo Chen2† , Xiang Li3 , Jun Li1† , Jian Yang1
1

PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
RIKEN, 3 Nankai University

{wrk226,qgm226131,xiang.li.implus,junli,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn shuo.chen.ya@riken.jp
∗

Contributes equally

†

Corresponding author

Source

Source

Target

Target

x:119°, y:22°, z:124°

x:34°, y:-45°, z:124°

x:176°, y:14°, z:95°

x:4°, y:-14°, z:95°

x:147°, y:42°, z:122°

x:50°, y:-28°, z:126°

Source View

Target View

Custom View

Custom View

Target View

Source View

Figure 1: We propose a method to generate 3D birds by transferring both the geometric and textural style of target image to
source. The left and right pictures show the 3D birds between populations of the same and different species, respectively.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel method for single-view
3D style transfer that generates a unique 3D object with
both shape and texture transfer. Our focus lies primarily
on birds, a popular subject in 3D reconstruction, for which
no existing single-view 3D transfer methods have been developed. The method we propose seeks to generate a 3D
mesh shape and texture of a bird from two single-view images. To achieve this, we introduce a novel shape transfer generator that comprises a dual residual gated network
(DRGNet), and a multi-layer perceptron (MLP). DRGNet
extracts the features of source and target images using a
shared coordinate gate unit, while the MLP generates spatial coordinates for building a 3D mesh. We also introduce a semantic UV texture transfer module that implements textural style transfer using semantic UV segmentation, which ensures consistency in the semantic meaning of the transferred regions. This module can be widely
adapted to many existing approaches. Finally, our method
constructs a novel 3D bird using a differentiable renderer.
Experimental results on the CUB dataset verify that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on the singleview 3D style transfer task. Code is available at https:
//github.com/wrk226/creative_birds.

1. Introduction
Neural image style transfer has received increasing attention in computer vision communities due to its remark-

able success in many automatic creations. These applications mainly belong to a 2D style transfer, which transfers
the artistic style of one reference image to another content
image. Recently, it is extended to transfer the shape and texture style of one 3D object to another for editing 3D content
in augmented reality and virtual reality [41]. However, this
extension needs to acquire the 3D information on objects
which suffers from the significant problem of being arduous, high-cost, and time-consuming. In contrast, taking a
single-view object image is easier and cheaper than 3D data
as cameras (e.g., mobile phones) are used widely in everyday life. Therefore, we address a new task of generating a
3D object with novel shape and texture by transferring one
single-view object image to another, instead of acquiring
3D input information. We refer to this task as a single-view
3D style transfer.
Prior works have primarily handled either 3D style transfer or single-view 3D reconstruction but have not simultaneously considered both for the aforementioned task. The
former heavily depends on the 3D information of the object
as an input, which is often expensive and time-consuming.
For example, 3DStyleNet [41] requires training on a large
dataset of 3D shapes, while Neural Renderer [20] transfers
the style of an image onto a 3D mesh. In addition, 3D scene
stylization [12, 27] generates stylized novel view synthesis
from multiple RGB images given an arbitrary style. The latter approach can easily implement 3D object reconstruction
using single-view images. Classical methods predict the reconstructed information of a 3D object from the single-view

8775

