This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dec-Adapter: Exploring Efficient Decoder-Side Adapter for Bridging Screen
Content and Natural Image Compression
Sheng Shen,

Huanjing Yue*, Jingyu Yang*
Tianjin University

{codyshens, huanjing.yue, yjy}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Natural image compression has been greatly improved
in the deep learning era. However, the compression performance will be heavily degraded if the pretrained encoder is directly applied on screen content image compression. Meanwhile, we observe that parameter-efficient transfer learning (PETL) methods have shown great adaptation
ability in high-level vision tasks. Therefore, we propose a
Dec-Adapter, a pioneering entropy-efficient transfer learning module for the decoder to bridge natural image and
screen content compression. The adapter’s parameters are
learned during encoding and transmitted to the decoder for
image-adaptive decoding. Our Dec-Adapter is lightweight,
domain-transferable, and architecture-agnostic with generalized performance in bridging the two domains. Experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms all existing methods by a large margin in terms of BD-rate performance on screen content image compression. Specifically, our method achieves over 2 dB gain compared with
the baseline when transferred to screen content image compression.

1. Introduction
With the growing demand for high-resolution images
and videos online, efficient and more versatile image compression methods are essential for storage and transmission.
In recent years, learning-based image compression (LIC)
approaches [2, 3, 29, 8, 47] have been emerging and quickly
surpassed traditional codecs, such as JPEG [36], BPG [4]
and VVC [11]. These methods learn optimal non-linear
transforms and probabilities for entropy coding by training
end-to-end networks.
However, the model that minimizes the expected rate and
distortion (RD) cost on a specified dataset may not be ideal
* Corresponding authors. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62231018 and
Grant 62072331.

Figure 1. Comparison of our Dec-Adapter against other transfer
learning methods on screen content dataset SIQAD [39] in terms
of BD-rate. All the methods are based on the same LIC compression model, i.e., Cheng2020 [8] (namely the baseline).

for every test case due to the difference between the properties of a specific image and the statistic properties of a
dataset. It is especially challenging when the test image
comes from a different domain. For example, applying a
model trained on natural images to screen content images
will lead to worse performance. An intuitive approach to
solve this problem is fine-tuning the model on a screen content dataset. However, this approach has two drawbacks: it
will reduce the model’s generalization to its original data
domain and consume considerable resources for fine-tuning
a large model. Therefore, it is essential to explore alternative solutions to address these problems.
There are some works exploring content-adaptive image
compression. One approach is adjusting the parameters of
the encoder neural network [35], but this has shown limited improvement, as shown in Figure 1. Another approach
is to adapt the the parameters of the decoder [23, 34, 46],
which needs to transmit the adapted parameters to the decoder side. Therefore, a large adapter will cause a heavy
bitrate overhead. The third approach is to modify the la-

12887

