This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PatchCT: Aligning Patch Set and Label Set with Conditional Transport
for Multi-Label Image Classiﬁcation
Miaoge Li∗ , Dongsheng Wang∗ , Xinyang Liu, Zequn Zeng, Ruiying Lu, Bo Chen
National Key Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing
Xidian University, Xi’an, Shanxi 710071, China
{limiaoge, wds, xinyangatk}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Mingyuan Zhou
McCombs School of Business
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Multi-label image classiﬁcation is a prediction task that
aims to identify more than one label from a given image. This
paper considers the semantic consistency of the latent space
between the visual patch and linguistic label domains and
introduces the conditional transport (CT) theory to bridge
the acknowledged gap. While recent cross-modal attentionbased studies have attempted to align such two representations and achieved impressive performance, they required
carefully-designed alignment modules and extra complex
operations in the attention computation. We ﬁnd that by
formulating the multi-label classiﬁcation as a CT problem,
we can exploit the interactions between the image and label
efﬁciently by minimizing the bidirectional CT cost. Specifically, after feeding the images and textual labels into the
modality-speciﬁc encoders, we view each image as a mixture of patch embeddings and a mixture of label embeddings,
which capture the local region features and the class prototypes, respectively. CT is then employed to learn and align
those two semantic sets by deﬁning the forward and backward navigators. Importantly, the deﬁned navigators in CT
distance model the similarities between patches and labels,
which provides an interpretable tool to visualize the learned
prototypes. Extensive experiments on three public image
benchmarks show that the proposed model consistently outperforms the previous methods.

1. Introduction
Multi-label image classiﬁcation is a fundamental yet challenging task in computer vision, where a set of objects needs
* Authors contributed equally.

Cl , e3
1

lM
l6

l5
…

boat

l7

cat

l2

l3 dog

Text Domain

frisbee

e4

e1

aero

eN

e3

l1

e6

Cl , e1

e7 … e2

Image Domain

3

Cl , e6
3

Embedding Space
label embedding

patch embedding

Figure 1: Motivation of the proposed PatchCT. We represent each
image as a set of patch embeddings and a set of label embeddings,
and then the conditional transport is employed as a semantic regularization to align such two domains.

to be predicted within one image. It has practical applications in wide ﬁelds such as image retrieval [45], scene
understanding [37], recommendation [48, 24], and biology
analysis [21, 1]. In addition to identifying the regions of interest, multi-label image classiﬁcation also requires special
attention on 1) semantic information of labels, e.g., label
correlations, and 2) interactions between the visual image
and textual label domains. Thus, it is often more complex
and challenging compared to single-label case.
To address the aforementioned challenges, several signiﬁcant attempts have been developed from various directions.
An increasing research attention is to learn semantic label
representation. The core idea is intuitive: labels should be
more correlated if they co-occurrence often. For instance,
trafﬁc lights usually co-appeared with crosswalk, and chair
has a high conﬁdence score to appear if table exists in the
image. Existing methods adopt pair-wise ranking loss, co-

15348

