This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A soft nearest-neighbor framework for continual semi-supervised learning

1

Inria†

2

Enrico Fini∗2
University of Trento

Moin Nabi3
3

Elisa Ricci2,4

SAP AI Research

Despite significant advances, the performance of stateof-the-art continual learning approaches hinges on the unrealistic scenario of fully labeled data. In this paper, we
tackle this challenge and propose an approach for continual semi-supervised learning—a setting where not all the
data samples are labeled. A primary issue in this scenario
is the model forgetting representations of unlabeled data
and overfitting the labeled samples. We leverage the power
of nearest-neighbor classifiers to nonlinearly partition the
feature space and flexibly model the underlying data distribution thanks to its non-parametric nature. This enables
the model to learn a strong representation for the current
task, and distill relevant information from previous tasks.
We perform a thorough experimental evaluation and show
that our method outperforms all the existing approaches by
large margins, setting a solid state of the art on the continual semi-supervised learning paradigm. For example, on
CIFAR-100 we surpass several others even when using at
least 30 times less supervision (0.8% vs. 25% of annotations). Finally, our method works well on both low and
high resolution images and scales seamlessly to more complex datasets such as ImageNet-100. Our source code is
publicly available at https://github.com/kangzhiq/NNCSL.

1. Introduction
Several efforts have been devoted to the continual learning (CL) [18] paradigm wherein training data samples arrive sequentially. However, most of the state-of-the-art CL
methods [11, 12, 20] are based on a strong assumption: the
data is fully labeled. This is an unrealistic requirement as
labeling data is oftentimes expensive for the expertise required or the amount of annotations, hazardous due to privacy or safety concerns, or impractical in a real-time online
scenario. A natural way of tackling this issue is by leveraging the semi-supervised learning framework, where not all
the data samples are labeled.
∗ Zhiqi Kang and Enrico Fini contributed equally to this work
† Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France.

Average Accuracy

Abstract

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
00.8% 5%
NNCSL
CCIC

4

Karteek Alahari1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Average Accuracy

Zhiqi Kang∗1

Percentage
ER
iCaRL

25%
LwF

70
60
50
40
30
20

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Task
NNCSL
CSL
CSL + feat. dist.
PAWS

Figure 1: Left: The average accuracy with different percentages of labeled data on CIFAR-100. Our method (NNCSL)
with 0.8% of the labels outperforms or matches the performance of all other methods at 25%. Right: Comparison of
different versions of our approach and PAWS [3]. CSL is
equivalent to NNCSL without our NND loss.
In recent years, this stimulated the community to investigate a new line of research named continual semisupervised learning [8, 44, 51]. It refers to the setting where
each task in the sequence is semi-supervised. This learning
scenario brings novel challenges, as the models catastrophically forget the representations of unlabeled data while also
overfitting the labeled set. This is further exacerbated by another well-studied phenomenon in CL: overfitting the experience replay buffer [10]. These challenges result in vanilla
CL methods underperforming, as they lack the ability to extract information from the unlabeled set, thus largely overfitting to the labeled set [52]. On the other hand, semisupervised learning approaches [15, 29, 46, 57] balance well
the labeled and unlabeled sets but cannot handle the continual scenario, and suffer from forgetting even when paired
with well-known CL methods (see Fig. 1 (right) and Tab. 1).
A few recent approaches [8, 51] partially mitigate these
issues on small-scale datasets. The method in [51] relies on
generative models to replay previous classes, which leads to
a sizeable computational and memory overhead, making it
difficult to scale to larger datasets such as ImageNet. Boschini et al. [8] proposed to contrast among samples of different classes and tasks. However, [8] falls short with smaller
memory buffers, larger datasets, more tasks, or higher resolution images (see Fig. 1 (left) and results in Sec. 6). There-

11868

