This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Among Us: Adversarially Robust Collaborative Perception by Consensus
Yiming Li1,∗ Qi Fang1, * Jiamu Bai1 Siheng Chen2,3 Felix Juefei-Xu4 Chen Feng1,†
1
New York University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 Meta AI
{yimingli, qifang, jb7082}@nyu.edu, sihengc@sjtu.edu.cn, felixu@meta.com, cfeng@nyu.edu
https://github.com/coperception/ROBOSAC

Abstract
Multiple robots could perceive a scene (e.g., detect objects) collaboratively better than individuals, although easily suffer from adversarial attacks when using deep learning. This could be addressed by the adversarial defense, but
its training requires the often-unknown attacking mechanism. Differently, we propose ROBOSAC, a novel samplingbased defense strategy generalizable to unseen attackers.
Our key idea is that collaborative perception should lead to
consensus rather than dissensus in results compared to individual perception. This leads to our hypothesize-and-verify
framework: perception results with and without collaboration from a random subset of teammates are compared until
reaching a consensus. In such a framework, more teammates in the sampled subset often entail better perception
performance but require longer sampling time to reject potential attackers. Thus, we derive how many sampling trials are needed to ensure the desired size of an attacker-free
subset, or equivalently, the maximum size of such a subset
that we can successfully sample within a given number of
trials. We validate our method on the task of collaborative
3D object detection in autonomous driving scenarios.

1. Introduction
Perception is a fundamental capability for autonomous
robots to understand their surroundings [1–3]. Singlerobot perception suffers from long-range or occlusion issues which stem from limited sensing capabilities and inadequate individual viewpoints [4]. Therefore, collaborative perception (co-perception) is proposed to provide more
viewpoints for each robot via communication, so that robots
can see further and better [5–7].
In literature, raw-data-level and decision-level fusion
both demonstrate satisfactory performance in terms of robustness and precision [8, 9]. The recent development
of deep learning has revolutionized many fields including
* indicates equal contribution
† Corresponding author. The work is supported by NSF grants 2238968

and 2026479.

Sampling
Who is the attacker
among us?

Hypothesis
Generation

Consensus
Verification

Perception
Output
Ego-robot

Attacker

Benign robot

Individual
observation

Adversarial
message

Benign message

Figure 1: Overview of ROBOSAC. Ego-robot aims to find
several benign collaborators with a hypothesize-and-verify
procedure until reaching a consensus or using up the sampling budget. Consensus is checked between the results
with and without the selected teammates.
robotic perception, and feature-level fusion has been proposed in which intermediate representations from a deep
neural network (DNN) are shared amongst robots. Unlike raw-data-level and decision-level fusion approaches,
feature-level fusion presents the advantages of good compressibility and the preservation of contextual information,
further enhancing the performance-bandwidth trade-off in
multi-robot perception [5, 10–12].
Although the original motivation for collaborative perception is to promote resilience and robustness via information sharing, the communication channel could potentially become a wide-open backdoor in DNN-based perception models due to the well-known adversarial vulnerability
of DNNs [13]. Prior work has shown that a maliciouslycrafted imperceptible perturbation added on the shared feature can drastically alter the perception output, jeopardizing
the perception system [14]. To solve the safety concerns,
adversarial training has been exploited [14], yet it introduces extra overhead during training and fails to generalize

186

