This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Query6DoF: Learning Sparse Queries as Implicit Shape Prior for
Category-Level 6DoF Pose Estimation
Ruiqi Wang1 , Xinggang Wang1 , Te Li†2,3 , Rong Yang2,3 , Minhong Wan†2,3 , Wenyu Liu†1
1

Hubei Key Laboratory of Smart Internet Technology, School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology
2
Research Center for Intelligent Robotics, Research Institute of Interdisciplinary Innovation, Zhejiang Lab, China
3
Zhejiang Engineering Research Center for Intelligent Robotics, China

Abstract

a) Conventional
Input Point
Cloud

Category-level 6DoF object pose estimation intends to
estimate the rotation, translation, and size of unseen objects. Many previous works use point clouds as a prelearned shape prior to overcome intra-category variability. The shape prior is deformed to reconstruct instances’
point clouds in canonical space and to build dense 3D-3D
correspondences between the observed and reconstructed
point clouds. However, the pre-learned shape prior is not
jointly optimized with estimation networks, and they are
trained with a surrogate objective. We propose a novel
6D pose estimation network, named Query6DoF, based on
a series of category-specific sparse queries that represent
the prior shape. Each query represents a shape component, and these queries are learnable embeddings that can
be optimized together with the estimation network according to the point cloud reconstruction loss, the normalized
object coordinate loss, and the 6d pose estimation loss.
Query6DoF adopts a deformation-and-matching paradigm
with attention, where the queries dynamically extract features from regions of interest using the attention mechanism
and then directly regress results. Furthermore, Query6DoF
reduces computation overhead through the sparseness of
the queries and the incorporation of a lightweight global information injection block. With the aforementioned design,
Query6DoF achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) pose estimation performance on the NOCS datasets. The source code
and models are available at https://github.com/
hustvl/Query6DoF.

† Corresponding authors: Wenyu Liu (liuwy@hust.edu.cn),
Te Li (lite@zhejianglab.com) and Minhong Wan (wanmh@
zhejianglab.com).

Pre-learned
Shape Prior

Deformation
&
Matching

Correspond
ence
Umeyama
Reconstructed
Model

b) Ours
Input Point
Cloud

Deformation
&
Matching
with Attention

Deformed
Queries

Query-Point
Correspond
ence

Regression

Queries

Figure 1: Comparisons with conventional works. a) Conventional methods adopt pre-learned shape prior and have
a two-stage pipeline, i.e., deforming the prior and building correspondences between points. b) Our method uses
sparse learnable queries as the shape prior and conducts
query/feature-based deformation and matching.

1. Introduction
Category-level object pose estimation is aimed at estimating an object’s rotation, translation, and size from an
RGB-D scene within a given set of categories. This task
has attracted increasing attention due to its vital role in
robotics [5], 3D understanding [4, 22], and augmented reality [29]. Compared with instance-level object pose estimation, category-level object pose estimation doesn’t require
obtaining the object’s CAD model in advance, making it
more generally applicable.
Many existing methods [2, 7, 16, 30, 41, 38, 20, 35] solve
this problem as shown in Figure 1(a). First, they attempt
to reconstruct the input object point cloud in the Normalized Object Coordinate Space [34] (NOCS). Then they estimate the 3D-3D correspondences between the input ob-

14055

