This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature Prediction Diffusion Model for Video Anomaly Detection
Cheng Yan1 ,
1

Shiyu Zhang1 ,

Tianjin University

2

Yang Liu2 ,

Guansong Pang3 ,*
3

Zhejiang University

Wenjun Wang1

Singapore Management University

Abstract
Anomaly detection in the video is an important research
area and a challenging task in real applications. Due to
the unavailability of large-scale annotated anomaly events,
most existing video anomaly detection (VAD) methods focus
on learning the distribution of normal samples to detect the
substantially deviated samples as anomalies. To well learn
the distribution of normal motion and appearance, many
auxiliary networks are employed to extract foreground object or action information. These high-level semantic features effectively ﬁlter the noise from the background to decrease its inﬂuence on detection models. However, the capability of these extra semantic models heavily affects the
performance of the VAD methods. Motivated by the impressive generative and anti-noise capacity of diffusion model
(DM), in this work, we introduce a novel DM-based method
to predict the features of video frames for anomaly detection. We aim to learn the distribution of normal samples without any extra high-level semantic feature extraction models involved. To this end, we build two denoising
diffusion implicit modules to predict and reﬁne the features.
The ﬁrst module concentrates on feature motion learning,
while the last focuses on feature appearance learning. To
the best of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst DM-based method
to predict frame features for VAD. The strong capacity of
DMs also enables our method to more accurately predict
the normal features than non-DM-based feature predictionbased VAD methods. Extensive experiments show that the
proposed approach substantially outperforms state-of-theart competing methods. The code is available atFPDM.

1. Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) aims at identifying the
unusual events that rarely appear and are different from normal behaviors in videos. Successfully detecting the anomalies, such as trafﬁc accidents, violence, and stampedes, is of
great importance in ubiquitous video surveillance for pub* Guansong Pang is the corresponding author, e-mail: pangguansong@gmail.com

Object
Detection

Action
Recognition

Images

Optical Flow

Discriminator

0/1 z

Generator

GAN-based approach

Encoder

Decoder

Auto-encoder-based approach

Encoder

Diffusion

Images/Features

Images/Features

Diffusion

Diffusion model-based approach

Features

Images

Figure 1. Overview of three generative VAD approaches. Existing state-of-the-art GAN-based or auto-encoder-based approaches
heavily rely on foreground object or action information extracted
by auxiliary models, such as object detection, action recognition
or optical ﬂow network, to generate features/images for effective
performance. By contrast, our proposed diffusion model-based approach does not have this reliance and can make accurate feature
prediction using only simple networks as encoder to extract basic
image features as input.

lic safety. However, VAD is a challenging task since the
anomaly events are unbounded in real-world applications
and it is difﬁcult to collect large-scale labeled data.
There have been many VAD methods [9,10,14,19,23,33,
34,39,45,46,57,62,68,71] proposed over the years to handle
this issue, in which one-class learning-based methods are
preferred due to the relatively accessible normal training set
and their capacity to achieve better performance [44]. The
one-class VAD methods assume the availability of the training data in which all samples are normal, and build different
models to learn the distribution of normal data. Generative modeling is a widely-used technique in this line since
the normal samples can be better generated than anomalies after training. Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN)
[22, 52, 71, 72] and Auto-Encoder (AE) [24, 29, 40, 46] are
two popular frameworks. Although these generative approaches achieve promising performance in VAD, there are
three main challenges: (1) the GAN/AE-based methods suffer from the weak generative capacity, leading to more noise
from the low-quality generated image, which reduces the

5527

