This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ExBluRF: Efficient Radiance Fields for
Extreme Motion Blurred Images
Dongwoo Lee1
1

Jeongtaek Oh2
Jaesung Rim3
Sunghyun Cho3,4
Kyoung Mu Lee1,2
2
Dept. of ECE&ASRI, IPAI, Seoul National University, Korea
3
GSAI, 4 Dept. of CSE, POSTECH, Korea

{dongwoo.lee,ohjtgood}@snu.ac.kr

{jsrim123,s.cho}@postech.ac.kr

kyungmu@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We present ExBluRF, a novel view synthesis method for
extreme motion blurred images based on efficient radiance
fields optimization. Our approach consists of two main
components: 6-DOF camera trajectory-based motion blur
formulation and voxel-based radiance fields. From extremely blurred images, we optimize the sharp radiance
fields by jointly estimating the camera trajectories that generate the blurry images. In training, multiple rays along
the camera trajectory are accumulated to reconstruct single blurry color, which is equivalent to the physical motion blur operation. We minimize the photo-consistency
loss on blurred image space and obtain the sharp radiance fields with camera trajectories that explain the blur
of all images. The joint optimization on the blurred image space demands painfully increasing computation and
resources proportional to the blur size. Our method solves
this problem by replacing the MLP-based framework to
low-dimensional 6-DOF camera poses and voxel-based radiance fields. Compared with the existing works, our approach restores much sharper 3D scenes from challenging
motion blurred views with the order of 10× less training
time and GPU memory consumption.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have made great
progress on novel view synthesis in recent years. A number of follow-up works pay attention to NeRF’s [31] photorealistic view synthesis performance, and focus on improving training [10, 51] and rendering [13, 40] speed for practical applications. However, enhancing NeRF’s rendering
quality from degraded multi-view images is yet to be explored extensively.
Camera motion blur is a representative degradation of
images taken under low-light conditions and camera shake.
Optimizing NeRF from the motion blurred images suf-

(a) Blurry Views

(b) Rendered Novel View

Figure 1: Given a set of extremely blurred multi-view images (a), our method restores sharp radiance fields and renders clearly deblurred novel views (b).
fers from the severe shape-radiance ambiguity [61] and
produces inaccurate 3D geometry reconstruction and lowquality view synthesis of the scene.
One naive solution for this problem is to apply deep
learning based 2D image deblurring [5, 59] to the input
images before optimizing NeRF. However, this straightforward approach has two limitations: 1) Pre-training and finetuning strategy of the deep neural network is invalid, since
NeRF is per-scene optimized without pairs of sharp images.
2) Independently deblurred multi-view images may yield
inconsistent geometry in 3D space, and cannot be recovered
with NeRF’s optimization.
The first work that considers the blurry images in NeRF’s
optimization is DeblurNeRF [28]. DeblurNeRF incorporates 2D pixel-wise blur kernel estimation [2] in front of
NeRF’s ray marching operation. The end-to-end framework of DeblurNeRF restores sharp 3D scenes from moderate motion blurred images. However, in extreme motion
blur cases, the 2D pixel-wise kernel approach is difficult to
converge with plausible deblurring, because the blur kernels are spatially varying severely with 6-degree of freedom

17639

