This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Divide and Conquer: a Two-Step Method for High Quality Face De-identification
with Model Explainability
Yunqian Wen1 , Bo Liu2 , Jingyi Cao1 , Rong Xie1 , Li Song1, 3,
1
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of Computer Science University of Technology Sydney
3
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
1

{wenyunqian, cjycaojingyi, xierong, song li}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Face de-identification involves concealing the true identity of a face while retaining other facial characteristics.
Current target-generic methods typically disentangle identity features in the latent space, using adversarial training
to balance privacy and utility. However, this pattern often leads to a trade-off between privacy and utility, and the
latent space remains difficult to explain. To address these
issues, we propose IDeudemon, which employs a “divide
and conquer” strategy to protect identity and preserve utility step by step while maintaining good explainability. In
Step I, we obfuscate the 3D disentangled ID code calculated
by a parametric NeRF model to protect identity. In Step II,
we incorporate visual similarity assistance and train a GAN
with adjusted losses to preserve image utility. Thanks to
the powerful 3D prior and delicate generative designs, our
approach could protect the identity naturally, produce high
quality details and is robust to different poses and expressions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed
IDeudemon outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Concerns about individual private information disclosure are growing with the development of computer vision
techniques and image understanding applications. Face deidentification is a process which aims to remove all identification information of the person from an image, while
maintaining as much information on the action and its context [1]. Ideally, while the identity information is protected,
other identity-agnostic features (e.g., pose, expression and
background) will not be affected. The de-identified images
can still be used for identity-agnostic tasks, such as face
detection and expression recognition. Accordingly, great
efforts are paid to achieve an effective privacy utility tradeoff [2–9]. Face de-identification can allow individuals to
share personal portraits with confidence, while eliminating
some ethical and legal restraints on facial data releasing.

2

{bo.liu}@uts.edu.au

Early face de-identification methods carry out various
obfuscation operations on detected private area, which seriously impair the image’s ornamental value and are not reliable when facing advanced face recognition tools [10]. Ksame family methods [11–13] are once hot, but they are restrained by their strict using conditions. At present, there
are two main types of methods. One kind uses adversarial
noise to generate de-identified faces which can be visually
indistinguishable from the original one [14–16]. However,
they are highly dependent on the accessibility to target systems, and lack generalization ability. The other kind exploits generative adversarial networks (GANs) to disentangle, manipulate and finally protect identity features in the
latent spaces [2–9]. These methods strive to strike a balance
between privacy and utility through adversarial training in a
network. The results depend heavily on the degree of latent
space disentanglement, which is neither clear nor satisfactory. Besides, most existing methods cannot preserve various poses and expressions, which also need to be improved.
Unlike previous works, we aim to break away from this
traditional privacy utility trade-off in face de-identification
studies, and instead provide a reliable and explainable
method of protecting individual identities. Our inspiration
for this approach stems from the observation that wearing a
human skin mask can effectively change one’s identity. This
realization highlights that a convincing de-identification requires substantial changes to the overall geometry of the
facial features such as eyes, nose, ears, mouth, and facial bones. Such transformations are practically impossible
to achieve with mere makeup or even surgical procedures
(since that surpass the physical limits of the human body).
In contrast, hairstyle, accessories, and skin color are examples of identity-agnostic features that can be easily altered
by a stylist. However, they significantly impact the human
perception of visual similarity between two faces. Thus, we
contend that protecting privacy and retaining utility can be
two distinct objectives that necessitate different strategies.
By separating these objectives, we can focus on each objective independently to achieve better results.

5148

