This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilled Reverse Attention Network for Open-world Compositional Zero-Shot
Learning

1

y.li@csiro.au

Yun Li1 Zhe Liu2 Saurav Jha2 Lina Yao1,2
CSIRO Data61 2 University of New South Wales

zheliu912@gmail.com

saurav.jha@unsw.edu.au

Abstract

Peeled-Apple

lina.yao@data61.csiro.au

Sliced-Apple Peeled-Orange Sliced-Orange

Unseen

Open-World Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (OWCZSL) aims to recognize new compositions of seen attributes and objects. In OW-CZSL, methods built on the
conventional closed-world setting degrade severely due to
the unconstrained OW test space. While previous works
alleviate the issue by pruning compositions according to
external knowledge or correlations in seen pairs, they introduce biases that harm the generalization. Some methods
thus predict state and object with independently constructed
and trained classifiers, ignoring that attributes are highly
context-dependent and visually entangled with objects. In
this paper, we propose a novel Distilled Reverse Attention
Network to address the challenges. We also model attributes
and objects separately but with different motivations, capturing contextuality and locality, respectively. We further
design a reverse-and-distill strategy that learns disentangled representations of elementary components in training
data supervised by reverse attention and knowledge distillation. We conduct experiments on three datasets and consistently achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance.

1. Introduction
Humans can recognize complex concepts never seen before (e.g., the pink elephant) by composing their knowledge
of familiar visual primitives (elephants and other pink objects). This ability of compositional learning is considered
a hallmark of human intelligence [17] that deep learning
methods clearly lack [18]. Deep learning often requires a
large quantity of labeled examples to train. However, realworld instances follow a long-tailed distribution [34, 38],
making it impractical to gather supervision for all categories. Compositional Zero-shot Learning (CZSL) mimics
the human ability to tackle these issues [31, 23, 29, 15].
CZSL learns the compositionality of seen objects (e.g.
fruits, animals, etc.) and attributes (e.g. colors, sizes, etc.)
as primitives to recognize unseen attribute-object pairs. For

Seen
Remove Extracted features
1
Attribute:
Sliced
Entangled
Object:
Apple

3

Disentangled
5
Attribute:
Peeled

Residual features
2

Small overlap
4

Large overlap
6

Object:
Orange

Attribute:
Peeled

Object:
Apple

Figure 1: Motivation behind our disentangling strategy
for OW-CZSL. When extracted features of objects and attributes are disentangled (images 3 and 5), their residual
features (images 4 and 6) carry sufficient information about
each other to classify correctly, and produce large overlap
between the object residuals and the attribute features (images 4 and 5). For entangled attribute-object features (images 1 and 3), the phenomena are otherwise reversed (image
2: few object information; images 1 and 4: small overlap).

example, CZSL composes and generalizes Peeled-Orange
and Sliced-Apple to Peeled-Apple (Fig. 1). Conventional
CZSL methods characterize closed-world (CW-CZSL) settings [31, 28, 30, 23], where unseen attribute-object pairs
contained in test images are given as priors to restrict the
search space. For example, the test space of the widely-used
benchmark MIT-States [13] is simplified to 1,662 compositions out of 28,175 possible pairs (115 attributes × 245
objects) for CW-CZSL. This setup fundamentally reduces
the generalization ability of CZSL models. Therefore, in
this work, we study a more realistic and challenging task:
unconstrained Open-World CZSL (OW-CZSL) [14, 15, 26,
27], where arbitrary compositions may appear at test time.
A notable line of works for CW-CZSL projects attributeobject pairs and images onto a shared embedding space
to perform similarity-based composition classification [41,

1782

