This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MATE: Masked Autoencoders are Online 3D Test-Time Learners
M. Jehanzeb Mirza†1,2
Inkyu Shin†3
Jaesung Choe3
Mateusz Kozinski1
1

Wei Lin†1
Andreas Schriebl1
Horst Possegger1
In So Kweon3
1,2
Horst Bischof

Kunyang Sun4
Kuk-Jin Yoon3

Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Austria.
2
Christian Doppler Laboratory for Embedded Machine Learning.
3
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea.
4
Southeast University, China.

Abstract
Test-Time-Training

1. Introduction
Recent deep neural networks show impressive performance in classifying 3D point clouds. However, their success is warranted only if the test data originates from the
same distribution as training data. In real-world scenarios,
this assumption is often violated. A LiDAR point cloud can
be corrupted, for example, due to sensor malfunction or environmental factors. It has been shown in [19, 22] that, even
seemingly insignificant perturbations, like introduction of
† Equally contributing authors.

Correspondence: muhammad.mirza@icg.tugraz.at

Model Update

mask

Encoder

Decoder

`

Our MATE is the first Test-Time-Training (TTT) method
designed for 3D data, which makes deep networks trained
for point cloud classification robust to distribution shifts occurring in test data. Like existing TTT methods from the 2D
image domain, MATE also leverages test data for adaptation.
Its test-time objective is that of a Masked Autoencoder: a
large portion of each test point cloud is removed before it is
fed to the network, tasked with reconstructing the full point
cloud. Once the network is updated, it is used to classify
the point cloud. We test MATE on several 3D object classification datasets and show that it significantly improves
robustness of deep networks to several types of corruptions
commonly occurring in 3D point clouds. We show that MATE
is very efficient in terms of the fraction of points it needs for
the adaptation. It can effectively adapt given as few as 5% of
tokens of each test sample, making it extremely lightweight.
Our experiments show that MATE also achieves competitive
performance by adapting sparsely on the test data, which
further reduces its computational overhead, making it ideal
for real-time applications.

Test Input

Masked Input

Reconstruction
Airplane
Car
Lamp

Encoder

Classifier

Online Evaluation

Figure 1: Overview of our Test-Time Training methodology. We adapt the encoder to a single out-of-distribution
(OOD) test sample online by updating its weights using a
self-supervised reconstruction task. We then use the updated
weights to make a prediction on the test sample. To enable
this approach, the encoder, decoder, and the classifier are
co-trained in the classification and reconstruction tasks [17],
which is not shown in the figure.

jitter or minute amount of noise to the point cloud, can significantly decrease the performance of several state-of-the-art
3D object recognition architectures. This lack of robustness
can limit the utility of 3D recognition in numerous applications, including in construction industry, geo-surveying,
manufacturing and autonomous driving. Distribution shifts
that can affect 3D data are diverse in nature and it might not
be feasible to train the network for all the shifts which can
possibly be observed in point clouds at test-time. Thus, there
is a need to adapt to these shifts online at test-time, in an
unsupervised manner.
Test-Time Training (TTT) leverages unlabeled test data

16709

