This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAGI: Multi-Annotated Explanation-Guided Learning
Annotator 1

Annotator 2

Annotator 3

Yifei Zhang, Siyi Gu, Yuyang Gao, Bo Pan, Xiaofeng Yang, Liang Zhao*
Emory University
Atlanta, GA, United States
{yifei.zhang2, carrie.gu, yuyang.gao, bo.pan, xyang43, liang.zhao}@emory.edu

Abstract
Explanation supervision is a technique in which the
model is guided by human-generated explanations during
training. This technique aims to improve the predictability
of the model by incorporating human understanding of the
prediction process into the training phase. This is a challenging task since it relies on the accuracy of human annotation labels. To obtain high-quality explanation annotations, using multiple annotations to do explanation supervision is a reasonable method. However, how to use multiple
annotations to improve accuracy is particularly challenging
due to the following: 1) The noisiness of annotations from
different annotators; 2) The lack of pre-given information
about the corresponding relationship between annotations
and annotators; 3) Missing annotations since some images
are not labeled by all annotators. To solve these challenges,
we propose a Multi-annotated explanation-guided learning (MAGI) framework to do explanation supervision with
comprehensive and high-quality generated annotations. We
first propose a novel generative model to generate annotations from all annotators and infer them using a newly
proposed variational inference-based technique by learning
the characteristics of each annotator. We also incorporate
an alignment mechanism into the generative model to infer
the correspondence between annotations and annotators in
the training process. Extensive experiments on two datasets
from the medical imaging domain demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed framework in handling noisy annotations while obtaining superior prediction performance compared with previous SOTA.

1. Introduction
In medical imaging, deep learning models are often used
to provide predictions for tasks such as diagnosing diseases
and they have shown exceptional performance [11, 40, 42,
33, 16, 44, 45]. However, these models can be seen as a
* Corresponding author.

Annotator 1

Annotator 3

AI generated

Human annotation
has higher quality

Annotator 2

Annotator 4

Consensus

Figure 1: An example showing the challenges present in
explanation supervision: (a) Model-generated explanations
still lack accuracy compared with human annotation. (b)
The model performance heavily relies on the quality of human explanation labels, which is often inconsistent and incomplete among different annotators.
“black box”, making it difficult for clinicians to understand
why a particular diagnosis was made [1]. An important line
of research to tackle such limitations is to provide posthoc explanations of the model behavior [12, 27, 31]. A
popular way to achieve this in computer vision is through
the use of attention maps, which highlight specific regions
of an image that are most relevant for the model’s prediction [31]. Despite the attention mechanism being an increasingly prominent component in deep neural networks
(DNNs) as a means of explanation, little research has been
done to analyze whether attention is trustworthy and how to
further improve it until recently.
Recently, explanation supervision, a technique that
jointly optimizes prediction loss and explanation loss between ground-truth annotations and model-generated explanations, has started to show promising effects in improving
both the predictability and interpretability of deep neural
networks [9, 13, 34]. By injecting explanation as a supervision signal, models aim to explain the decision-making process at either the local or global level. Global explanations
provide a general understanding of how the model works
across the entire dataset, while local explanation techniques
are applied for each input data and are therefore more com-

1977

