This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pseudo Flow Consistency for Self-Supervised 6D Object Pose Estimation
Yang Hai 1 ,

Rui Song 1 ,
1

Jiaojiao Li 1 ,

David Ferstl 2 ,

State Key Laboratory of ISN, Xidian University,

2

Yinlin Hu 2

MagicLeap

Abstract
Most self-supervised 6D object pose estimation methods
can only work with additional depth information or rely on
the accurate annotation of 2D segmentation masks, limiting
their application range. In this paper, we propose a 6D object pose estimation method that can be trained with pure
RGB images without any auxiliary information. We first obtain a rough pose initialization from networks trained on
synthetic images rendered from the target’s 3D mesh. Then,
we introduce a refinement strategy leveraging the geometry constraint in synthetic-to-real image pairs from multiple different views. We formulate this geometry constraint
as pixel-level flow consistency between the training images
with dynamically generated pseudo labels. We evaluate our
method on three challenging datasets and demonstrate that
it outperforms state-of-the-art self-supervised methods significantly, with neither 2D annotations nor additional depth
images.

Depth

Mask

Depth

Mask

Network
Network

(a) Existing self-supervised 6D object pose methods

Flow 1

Flow 2

Flow 1

Flow 2

Network
Network

(b) Our solution based on pseudo flow consistency
Figure 1. Comparison of self-supervised object pose methods.
(a) Most existing self-supervised object pose methods rely on either the depth image [55, 54, 4, 31] or additional mask annotations [61, 46], limiting their application range. (b) By contrast,
our method can be trained only with the guidance of flow consistency based on the intrinsic geometry constraint of multiple different views, and produces more accurate results than existing solutions, without relying on any auxiliary information.

1. Introduction
The goal of 6D object pose estimation is to accurately
estimate the 3D rotation and 3D translation of a rigid object with respect to the camera, which gives essential information about the world beyond classical 2D understanding
and is a fundamental component in many applications, such
as robotic manipulation [5], autonomous driving [36], and
augmented reality [37].
Recent progress in this field has significantly improved
the robustness and accuracy of the model [49, 60, 21, 56,
7, 29, 19, 18]. Most of these approaches, however, rely on
a large number of real images with accurate 6D pose annotations. But, compared to classical 2D annotation, these
6D annotations are either very hard to obtain [38, 34] or are
prone to contain large labeling errors [16, 11, 58]. Some
recent methods propose to use techniques based on image
synthesis [15] or self-supervised learning [55, 54] to handle
this problem. The main problem with synthetic images is
the large domain gap to the real images, making the model’s
generalization ability suffers in practice [42, 60]. On the
other hand, most self-supervised methods rely on additional

information. Some can only work with additional depth images [55, 54, 31, 4] or others need pixel-level annotation of
a segmentation mask [46, 61], which prevents the general
applicability, as shown in Fig. 1.
In this work, we propose a self-supervised framework
for 6D object pose estimation, which relies on neither depth
nor additional 2D annotations. We first generate a synthetic
dataset based on rendered images from the target’s 3D mesh
and train networks only on this dataset to get a rough pose
initialization. To close the domain gap between the synthetic and real data, we use a refinement strategy where we
compare the rendered reference image according to the initial pose and the real input based on pseudo labels [47, 62].
Pseudo labeling is widely used in many computer vision
tasks [52, 59, 12, 8]. However, the two fundamental problems of pseudo labeling are still open questions in 6D object
pose estimation, including the generative strategy of creating pseudo labels and the selection strategy of extracting
high-quality labels from the noisy candidates, as shown in
Fig. 2.

14075

