This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Both Diverse and Realism Matter:
Physical Attribute and Style Alignment for Rainy Image Generation
Changfeng Yu1 , Shiming Chen2,3 , Yi Chang1, *, Yibing Song4 , Luxin Yan1
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Carnegie Mellon University 3 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
4
AI3 Institute, Fudan University
1

ycf@hust.edu.cn, {gchenshiming, owuchangyuo, yibingsong.cv}@gmail.com, yanluxin@hust.edu.cn

Real Rain

Additive Model

Video-process Model

(a) Proposed

(b) Additive Model

(c) Video-process Model

Proposed

(d) Real Rain Removal

Figure 1: Comparision of different rain image generation model. (a) The proposed method can generate diverse and realistic
images by manipulating attributes of rain streak. In contrast, the additive model [49] generates diverse but less realistic images
(shown in (b)), while video-process model [43] produces realistic but homogeneous images (shown in (c)). Furthermore, (d)
shows the real rain removal of classical deraining methods, trained on datasets generated by different rain generation models.

Abstract
Although considerable progress has been made in image
deraining under synthetic data, real rain removal is still a
tough problem due to the huge domain gap between synthetic and real data. Besides, difficulties in collecting and
labeling diverse real rain images hinder the progress of this
field. Consequently, we attempt to promote real rain removal from rain image generation (RIG) perspective. Existing RIG methods mainly focus on diversity but miss realistic, or the realistic but neglect diversity of the generation.
To solve this dilemma, we propose a physical alignment and
controllable generation network (PCGNet) for diverse and
realistic rain generation. Our key idea is to simultaneously
utilize the controllability of attributes from synthetic and the
realism of appearance from real data. Specifically, we devise a unified framework to disentangle background, rain
attributes, and appearance style from synthetic and real
data. Then we collaboratively align the factors with a novel
semi-supervised weight moving strategy for attribute, an explicit distribution modeling method for real rain style. Furthermore, we pack these aligned factors into the generation
model, achieving physical controllable mapping from the

attributes to real rain with image-level and attribute-level
consistency loss. Extensive experiments show that PCGNet
can effectively generate appealing rainy results, which significantly improve the performance under synthetic and real
scenes for all existing deraining methods.

1. Introduction
The objective of single image deraining (SID) is to reclaim a clean image from the rainy image, a task often
deemed an indispensable preliminary stage within outdoor
computer vision tasks such as flow estimation [15, 47], detection [33], and segmentation [9]. Top performing SID
methods [13, 49, 39, 43, 44, 19, 28, 48, 40, 29, 41, 50, 10]
are suffering from a common issue: the scarcity of paired
real rainy-clean images, thereby resulting in an obvious
performance drop in the real rain removal. To overcome
this issue, tremendous efforts have been made to advance
the real image deraining era. However, most of them
[44, 52, 7, 23, 45, 54, 55, 58] focus on the network architecture for real rain removal, while fewer works [43, 53, 42]
have paid attention to datasets via paired clean-rain image
generation. In this work, we attempt to promote the real rain

12387

