This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Single Depth-image 3D Reflection Symmetry and Shape Prediction
Zhaoxuan Zhang, Bo Dong∗ , Tong Li, Felix Heide, Pieter Peers, Baocai Yin∗ , Xin Yang*

Abstract
In this paper, we present Iterative Symmetry Completion Network (ISCNet), a single depth-image shape completion method that exploits reflective symmetry cues to obtain
more detailed shapes. The efficacy of single depth-image
shape completion methods is often sensitive to the accuracy
of the symmetry plane. ISCNet therefore jointly estimates
the symmetry plane and shape completion iteratively; more
complete shapes contribute to more robust symmetry plane
estimates and vice versa. Furthermore, our shape completion method operates in the image domain, enabling more
efficient high-resolution, detailed geometry reconstruction.
We perform the shape completion from pairs of viewpoints,
reflected across the symmetry plane, predicted by a reinforcement learning agent to improve robustness and to simultaneously explicitly leverage symmetry. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of ISCNet on a variety of object categories
on both synthetic and real-scanned datasets.

1. Introduction
Symmetry is an intrinsic geometric property present in
the vast majority of man-made and natural objects [12, 17],
and which has been exploited to improve the efficacy of applications such as shape matching [12], segmentation [13],
object retrieval [8], and robotic grasping [34].
In this paper, we aim to leverage symmetry as an aid
for the completion of shapes from partial observations [23,
24, 28]. Recently, Yao et al. [39] presented Front2Back, a
framework for 3D shape reconstruction from a single RGB
image. A key observation in Front2Back is that a (nearly)
complete 3D model can be effectively described by a pair
of 2.5D visible surface images taken from opposite views
(i.e., front and back views). Based on this observation,
Front2Back completes a shape by synthesizing a back view
using a global 3D reflective symmetry plane from a given
front view. However, the reconstruction quality is significantly affected by the input front view angle (Figure 1(d)).
Moreover, Front2Back assumes the availability of a ‘perfect’ symmetry plane, which in practice is challenging to
obtain from partial observations [21, 22, 45].
* Co-corresponding authors.

(a) Input Depth Map &
(b) PoinTr [40]
Observed Surface

(c) IF-Net [3]

(d) Front2Back [39]
(e) Ours
(f) Ground Truth
Figure 1. ISCNet more efficiently leverages symmetry cues for
robust shape completion from a single depth image compared to
prior methods.

We present ISCNet (Iterative Shape Completion Network), a single depth-image shape completion method that
explicitly leverages symmetry cues. Our key insight is that
symmetry detection and symmetry-based shape completion
are complementary tasks that can provide constructive cues
to the other task. Symmetry detection can help shape completion by providing object-centric information about missing geometrical features, and shape completion can provide
more robust symmetry cues by filling in missing geometry.
Departing from existing work [33] that assumes an ideal
prediction of the symmetry plane, ISCNet iteratively refines
the symmetry plane and the reconstructed shape jointly.
Furthermore, unlike Front2Back [39], ISCNet does not rely
on the initial input viewpoint to a-priori fix the synthetic
back view camera position but instead leverages a trained
reinforcement learning (RL) policy to select optimal pairs
of reflection viewpoints at each iteration. We empirically
found that predetermining the viewpoints is less effective
than RL-based viewpoint selection which can more effectively deal with the dynamic shape of a partial point cloud
during the refinement process.
Specifically, ISCNet takes as input a single depth image and reprojects it to an incomplete point cloud. Instead
of explicitly detecting a symmetry plane, we estimate the
pose [30] that aligns the symmetry plane to the X-Y plane.
Based on the current estimate of the point cloud and symmetry aligning pose, an RL agent determines a pair of re-

8896

