This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Zero Domain Gap: A Comprehensive Study of Realistic LiDAR
Simulation for Autonomy Testing
Sivabalan Manivasagam1,2∗

Ioan Andrei Bârsan1,2 * Jingkang Wang1,2
1

Waabi

2

Ze Yang1,2

Raquel Urtasun1,2

University of Toronto

{siva, andrei, jwang, zyang, urtasun}@waabi.ai

Sample Title

Abstract

Pulse Eﬀects

Testing the full autonomy system in simulation is the
safest and most scalable way to evaluate autonomous vehicle performance before deployment. This requires simulating sensor inputs such as LiDAR. To be effective, it is
essential that the simulation has low domain gap with the
real world. That is, the autonomy system in simulation
should perform exactly the same way it would in the real
world for the same scenario. To date, there has been limited analysis into what aspects of LiDAR phenomena affect autonomy performance. It is also difficult to evaluate
the domain gap of existing LiDAR simulators, as they operate on fully synthetic scenes. In this paper, we propose
a novel “paired-scenario” approach to evaluating the domain gap of a LiDAR simulator by reconstructing digital
twins of real world scenarios. We can then simulate LiDAR
in the scene and compare it to the real LiDAR. We leverage this setting to analyze what aspects of LiDAR simulation, such as pulse phenomena, scanning effects, and asset
quality, affect the domain gap with respect to the autonomy system, including perception, prediction, and motion
planning, and analyze how modifications to the simulated
LiDAR influence each part. We identify key aspects that
are important to model, such as motion blur, material reflectance, and the accurate geometric reconstruction of traffic participants. This helps provide research directions for
improving LiDAR simulation and autonomy robustness to
these effects. For more information, please visit the project
website: https://waabi.ai/lidar-dg

Scanning Eﬀects

1. Introduction
Accurately testing the behavior of robots such as selfdriving vehicles (SDVs) is of paramount importance to ensure their safe deployment in the real world. The safest,
most scalable and sustainable way to test the autonomy
system is through simulation. To assess the safety of the
* Indicates equal contribution.

Asset Quality

LiDAR
LiDAR Simulation
Simulation

Multi-Echo
Added
Multi-Echo
Added

Real
Real

Figure 1. Analysis Overview. We study the impact of pulse effects, scanning effects, and asset quality on LiDAR simulation
realism. We depict one example of a pulse effect domain gap:
failure to model multiple echoes causes the object detector to fail,
resulting in an unsafe autonomy plan. The bottom row depicts
the front-camera view, for reference only, followed by the relevant
LiDAR: original simulation, added multi-echoes, and real. We denote multi-echoes re-added by the middle method in orange. Subtle differences in the area highlighted with the arrow stem from
weak returns on truck’s rear wheels, impacting the domain gap.

full system, it is critical to evaluate the complete autonomy
stack in such a simulator. This is a must, as small changes
in one sub-component (e.g., a missed detection) can cause a
chain reaction of downstream effects that significantly alter
the outcome, and might result in a safety hazard. To evaluate the full autonomy, we must simulate all the inputs to the
system. This requires high fidelity sensor simulation with
low domain gap with respect to the real world. That is, the
performance of the autonomy system in simulation on all
scenarios should match the real world performance.
In the past few years, a wide range of LiDAR simulation
systems have been developed, as LiDAR is the primary sensor in many modern autonomy stacks [11, 53, 37, 62]. Most
LiDAR simulation systems first perform virtual world creation to build a 3D scene, either using CAD models [16, 23],
data-driven assets [55, 35], or a combination [18]. They
then perform sensor rendering, which simulates the LiDAR
scanning process to generate point clouds, either through

8272

