This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Authentic Face Restoration with Iterative Diffusion Models and Beyond
Yang Zhao

Tingbo Hou

Yu-Chuan Su

Xuhui Jia
Google

Yandong Li

Matthias Grundmann

{yzhaoeric, tingbo, ycsu, xhjia, yandongli, grundman}@google.com

Abstract
An authentic face restoration system is becoming increasingly demanding in many computer vision applications, e.g., image enhancement, video communication,
and taking portrait. Most of the advanced face restoration models can recover high-quality faces from lowquality ones but usually fail to faithfully generate realistic and high-frequency details that are favored by users.
To achieve authentic restoration, we propose IDM, an
Iteratively learned face restoration system based on denoising Diffusion Models (DDMs). We define the criterion of an
authentic face restoration system, and argue that denoising
diffusion models are naturally endowed with this property
from two aspects: intrinsic iterative refinement and extrinsic iterative enhancement. Intrinsic learning can preserve
the content well and gradually refine the high-quality details, while extrinsic enhancement helps clean the data and
improve the restoration task one step further. We demonstrate superior performance on blind face restoration tasks.
Beyond restoration, we find the authentically cleaned data
by the proposed restoration system is also helpful to image generation tasks in terms of training stabilization and
sample quality. Without modifying the models, we achieve
better quality than state-of-the-art on FFHQ and ImageNet
generation using either GANs or diffusion models.

1. Introduction
Face images convey critical information and are used in
every corner of our daily lives, e.g., social networks, conference calls, and taking portrait, to name a few. Humans are
very sensitive to delicate facial features. High-quality faces
are the most preferred and typically are the key to the success of these applications. However, unknown and complicated image degradations are inevitable in real-world scenarios due to e.g. camera defocus, encoding artifacts, motion blur, and noises. In recent years, rapid progress has
been made in developing a blind face restoration capability
as a post-processing step to restore low-quality photos into
high-quality ones faithfully.
Most existing popular works exploit pretrained facial

prior networks [43, 54, 3, 47, 4, 3] in assisting recovering photorealistic facial features even if the input is much
deficient. Their success derived from the advanced power
of generative models in encapsulating high quality priors,
e.g., StyleGANs [9, 19] and VQVAE [42, 31]. Other works
use auxiliary information as guidance, such as face landmarks [6], component features [23], and high-quality exemplars [24, 25]. Advanced architectures, including CNNs and
Transformers [45, 26] have been explored to alleviate face
degradation issues. These works are based on building Unet models that restore low-quality faces into high-quality
counterparts. The performance difference is often primarily
attributed to the model design.
Although these works have achieved notable progress by
generating perceptually realistic faces and reporting good
numeric results on the benchmarks like PSNR (Peak Signalto-Noise Ratio) and FID (Fréchet Inception Distance) [13],
they still struggle over several important factors, e.g., fail to
preserve delicate identity features, hallucinate uncanny artifacts especially in the presence of severe degradation, lose
desired high-frequency details such as around facial hair. A
quick test is to let the model perform restoration on slightly
degraded faces that can make us distinguish delicate differences before and after restoration. As shown in Figure 1,
we evaluate two state-of-the-art works CodeFormer [54]
and GFPGAN [43] on four examples from CelebA-HQ
data [17, 27]. Both models either lose identity details, e.g.,
freckles and eyelashes or unexpectedly damage the original high-quality components like mustache and hair. The
former issue sometimes raises ethical concerns, and the latter holds users from applying the restoration model broadly
to fulfill their demands as the regression is unsatisfactory.
We conjecture the aforementioned limitations not only from
the design choices of their model, but also the quality of
training data, as some ground-truth images are still noisy as
seen in Figure 1. In some sense, it contradicts the goal of
recovering low-quality images into high-quality images if
the ground-truth data is not clean, implying that training a
restoration model is an ill-posed problem. Moreover, calculating pairwise metrics like PSNR between the predictions
and the ground truth could also be problematic in evaluation. Intuitively, noisy training data can harm the restoration
model’s performance compared with clean data.

7312

