This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PointDC: Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation of 3D Point Clouds via
Cross-modal Distillation and Super-Voxel Clustering
Zisheng Chen1 *, Hongbin Xu1,2 *, Weitao Chen2 , Zhipeng Zhou3 , Haihong Xiao1 , Baigui Sun2 ,
Xuansong Xie2 , Wenxiong kang1,4†
1
South China University of Technology
2
Alibaba Group, 3 Chinese Academy of Science, 4 Pazhou Laboratory
halveschen@163.com

hongbinxu1013,hillskyxm@gmail.com

auwxkang@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Semantic segmentation of point clouds usually requires
exhausting efforts of human annotations, hence it attracts
wide attention to the challenging topic of learning from
unlabeled or weaker forms of annotations. In this paper,
we take the first attempt for fully unsupervised semantic
segmentation of point clouds, which aims to delineate semantically meaningful objects without any form of annotations. Previous works of unsupervised pipeline on 2D images fails in this task of point clouds, due to: 1) Clustering
Ambiguity caused by limited magnitude of data and imbalanced class distribution; 2) Irregularity Ambiguity caused
by the irregular sparsity of point cloud. Therefore, we propose a novel framework, PointDC, which is comprised of
two steps that handle the aforementioned problems respectively: Cross-Modal Distillation (CMD) and Super-Voxel
Clustering (SVC). In the first stage of CMD, multi-view visual features are back-projected to the 3D space and aggregated to a unified point feature to distill the training of
the point representation. In the second stage of SVC, the
point features are aggregated to super-voxels and then fed
to the iterative clustering process for excavating semantic
classes. PointDC1 yields a significant improvement over
the prior state-of-the-art unsupervised methods, on both the
ScanNet-v2 (+18.4 mIoU) and S3DIS (+11.5 mIoU) semantic segmentation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation of 3D point cloud is a crucial
problem that assigns each individual point to a known ontology. The segmentation models can delineate objects at
* These authors contributes equally.
† Corresponding author.
1 The
code is released
SCUT-BIP-Lab/PointDC.

at:

https://github.com/

Figure 1. From unannotated point clouds, we would like a segmentation system to discover the semantic concepts automatically
without any supervision.

a fine granularity of object boundary, which is helpful for
multiple downstream applications, such as robotic navigation, autonomous vehicles, and scene parsing. Despite the
immense progress of fully-supervised schemes in 3D semantic segmentation, the success crucially relies on largescale datasets and annotations. Unfortunately, it requires
exhausting efforts to conduct semantic-level per-point annotations (e.g. ≈ 22.3 minutes per indoor scene for annotation [7]).
To reduce the efforts on the tedious process of semantic annotations, several works were proposed to create 3D
semantic segmentation systems that can be trained from
weaker forms of annotations, including projected 2D images [32], subcloud-level [34], segment-level [28], and
point-level annotations [23, 35, 14]. However, few works
attempt to handle the great challenge of 3D semantic segmentation without any form of human annotations or motion cues. In this paper, we aim to build an unsupervised 3D
semantic segmentation framework that can automatically
excavate meaningful semantic features from point clouds,
as shown in Fig. 1.
Some efforts of unsupervised semantic segmentation

14290

