This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ego-Only: Egocentric Action Detection without Exocentric Transferring
Huiyu Wang1 Mitesh Kumar Singh1 Lorenzo Torresani1
1

Meta AI

Abstract
We present Ego-Only, the first approach that enables
state-of-the-art action detection on egocentric (first-person)
videos without any form of exocentric (third-person) transferring. Despite the content and appearance gap separating
the two domains, large-scale exocentric transferring has
been the default choice for egocentric action detection. This
is because prior works found that egocentric models are difficult to train from scratch and that transferring from exocentric representations leads to improved accuracy. However, in this paper, we revisit this common belief. Motivated by the large gap separating the two domains, we
propose a strategy that enables effective training of egocentric models without exocentric transferring. Our EgoOnly approach is simple. It trains the video representation
with a masked autoencoder finetuned for temporal segmentation. The learned features are then fed to an off-the-shelf
temporal action localization method to detect actions. We
find that this renders exocentric transferring unnecessary by
showing remarkably strong results achieved by this simple
Ego-Only approach on three established egocentric video
datasets: Ego4D, EPIC-Kitchens-100, and Charades-Ego.
On both action detection and action recognition, Ego-Only
outperforms previous best exocentric transferring methods
that use orders of magnitude more labels. Ego-Only sets
new state-of-the-art results on these datasets and benchmarks without exocentric data.

1. Introduction
In this paper we consider the problem of action detection from egocentric videos [30, 21, 19] captured by headmounted devices. While action detection in third-person
videos [6, 36] has been the topic of extended and active research by the computer vision community, the formulation
of this task in the first-person setting is underexplored.
One major challenge of egocentric action detection is
the lack of data, i.e. insufficient amount of egocentric
videos to train large-capacity models to competitive results.
For example, existing methods such as Ego-Exo [43] and
Charades-Ego [56], attempted to train egocentric models

Ego4D Detection mAP

Charades-Ego Recognition mAP

Ego-Only

40 Ego-Only

LaViLa
EgoVLP
transfer EgoVLP 30 Ego-Exo
SSDA
10
20 ActorObserverNet
Ego4D
5
10
scratch
scratch
0 14K
0
14M data
33K
400M data
ego
exo (log)
ego
exo (log)
15

Figure 1. Our Ego-Only approach achieves state-of-the-art results
on Ego4D [30] action detection and Charades-Ego [56] action
recognition without any extra data or labels (Section 4). Compared
with exocentric transferring, Ego-Only uses orders of magnitude
fewer labels, simplifies the pipeline, and improves the results.
Egocentric Videos
(length: 480 seconds)

Exocentric Videos
(length: 10 seconds)

Figure 2. Domain gap between egocentric videos (Ego4D [30])
and exocentric videos (Kinetics-400 [37]). Exocentric videos are
typically in the form of short trimmed clips, which show the actors
as well as the contextual scene. Egocentric videos are dramatically
longer, capture close-up object interactions but only the hands of
the actor. These differences make it challenging to transfer models
from exocentric action recognition to egocentric action detection.

from scratch using egocentric data only, but failed to obtain
satisfactory results. Therefore, current egocentric action detection methods rely on out-of-domain large-scale exocentric (third-person) videos [37] or even images [22], under
the assumption that the large-scale pretraining with proper
transferring techniques can mitigate the negative effect of
the domain gap between egocentric and exocentric videos.
This hope is reinforced by the observation that deep neural networks exhibit invariance to object viewpoints [55],

5250

