This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Privacy Preserving Localization via Coordinate Permutations
Linfei Pan1
1

Johannes L. Schönberger2
Viktor Larsson3
Marc Pollefeys1,2
1
2
3
ETH Zurich
Microsoft
Lund University

{linfei.pan, marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch, 2 joschonb@microsoft.com, 3 viktor.larsson@math.lth.se

Abstract
Recent methods on privacy-preserving image-based localization use a random line parameterization to protect
the privacy of query images and database maps. The lifting of points to lines effectively drops one of the two geometric constraints traditionally used with point-to-point
correspondences in structure-based localization. This leads
to a significant loss of accuracy for the privacy-preserving
methods. In this paper, we overcome this limitation by devising a coordinate permutation scheme that allows for recovering the original point positions during pose estimation. The recovered points provide the full 2D geometric constraints and enable us to close the gap between
privacy-preserving and traditional methods in terms of accuracy. Another limitation of random line methods is their
vulnerability to density based 3D line cloud inversion attacks. Our method not only provides better accuracy than
the original random line based approach but also provides
stronger privacy guarantees against these recently proposed attacks. Extensive experiments on standard benchmark datasets demonstrate these improvements consistently
across both scenarios of protecting the privacy of query images as well as the database map.

1. Introduction
The interest in commercial solutions for cloud-based localization and mapping in mixed reality and robotics (e.g.,
Google VPS [34], Microsoft Azure Spatial Anchors [21], or
Facebook LiveMaps [1]) has raised a host of privacy concerns [24, 31, 35, 51]. Recently, several approaches have
been introduced by the research community to address these
concerns [14,17–19,25,45–47]. The common theme underlying these methods is based on the principle of lifting traditional point-based features to randomly oriented lines to
conceal the appearance of query images and database maps.
While this family of approaches is successful in enabling
privacy preserving image-based localization and mapping,
it comes at significant trade-offs in terms of accuracy and
recall. These trade-offs are primarily caused by the fact that

Figure 1: Privacy-preserving localization. Top Left: The
client extracts keypoints and descriptors from the query image. Top Right: The client secretly pairs keypoints and permutes their coordinates; hiding their true position from the
server. Bottom Left: Server performs localization using the
permuted points and recovers the original 2D positions for
points that exist in both query and map. Bottom Right: Feature inversion on the set of recovered points only reveals
objects that are already present in the map.
the privacy preserving line-to-point or point-to-line correspondences provide weaker geometric constraints than the
traditional point-to-point correspondences [46]. When concealing the content of images or maps, the number of constraints is effectively halved, as each point-to-line or lineto-point reprojection only contributes a 1D geometric constraint compared to the 2D constraint from a point-to-point
reprojection. Especially for the hard to localize images,
where only few correspondences can be recovered during
feature matching, this limitation makes a significant difference in terms of accuracy and recall.

18174

