This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniZoomer: Learning to Move and Zoom in on Sphere at High-Resolution
Zidong Cao1 Hao Ai1,2 * Yan-Pei Cao2 Ying Shan2 Xiaohu Qie2 Lin Wang1,3†
1
AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ) 2 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG 3 Dept. of CSE, HKUST
caozidong1996@gmail.com, hai033@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, caoyanpei@gmail.com
yingsshan@tencent.com, tigerqie@tencent.com, linwang@ust.hk

0.5

1.5

2

3

3.5

Zoom Level

Figure 1: From top to bottom: equirectangular projection (ERP) of omnidirectional images, perspective projection from
ERP images with a specific field-of-view (FoV), w.r.t. the blue regions, and results from LAU-Net, OmniZoomer and ground
truth. From left to right: increasing zoom levels. Our approach can move to the object of interest, and freely zoom in and
zoom out on omnidirectional images, which can recover clear and preserved textural details with increasing zoom levels.

Abstract
Omnidirectional images (ODIs) have become increasingly popular, as their large field-of-view (FoV) can offer
viewers the chance to freely choose the view directions in
immersive environments such as virtual reality. The Möbius
transformation is typically employed to further provide the
opportunity for movement and zoom on ODIs, but applying it to the image level often results in blurry effect and
aliasing problem. In this paper, we propose a novel deep
learning-based approach, called OmniZoomer, to incorporate the Möbius transformation into the network for movement and zoom on ODIs. By learning various transformed
feature maps under different conditions, the network is enhanced to handle the increasing edge curvatures, which alleviates the blurry effect. Moreover, to address the alias∗ Intern at ARC Lab, Tencent PCG.
† Corresponding author

ing problem, we propose two key components. Firstly, to
compensate for the lack of pixels for describing curves,
we enhance the feature maps in the high-resolution (HR)
space and calculate the transformed index map with a spatial index generation module. Secondly, considering that
ODIs are inherently represented in the spherical space, we
propose a spherical resampling module that combines the
index map and HR feature maps to transform the feature
maps for better spherical correlation. The transformed feature maps are decoded to output a zoomed ODI. Experiments show that our method can produce HR and highquality ODIs with the flexibility to move and zoom in to
the object of interest. Project page is available at http:
//vlislab22.github.io/OmniZoomer/.

1. Introduction
Omnidirectional images (ODIs) have garnered significant attention as a means to maximize the amount of
content and context captured within a single image, and

12897

