This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning with Diversity: Self-Expanded Equalization for Better Generalized
Deep Metric Learning
Jiexi Yan1 , Zhihui Yin2 , Erkun Yang2 , Yanhua Yang1 *, and Heng Huang3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
2
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland College Park, USA
1

{jxyan1995,yzh.xdu,erkunyang}@gmail.com, yanhyang@xidian.edu.cn, henghuanghh@gmail.com

Accessible Training Data

Abstract

Category Shift
Domain Shift

Category Shift

Exploring good generalization ability is essential in deep
metric learning (DML). Most existing DML methods focus
on improving the model robustness against category shift to
keep the performance on unseen categories. However, in
addition to category shift, domain shift also widely exists
in real-world scenarios. Therefore, learning better generalization ability for the DML model is still a challenging
yet realistic problem. In this paper, we propose a new selfexpanded equalization (SEE) method to effectively generalize the DML model to both unseen categories and domains.
Specifically, we take a ‘min-max’ strategy combined with
a proxy-based loss to adaptively augment diverse out-ofdistribution samples that vastly expand the span of original
training data. To take full advantage of the implicit crossdomain relations between source and augmented samples,
we introduce a domain-aware equalization module to induce the domain-invariant distance metric by regularizing
the feature distribution in the metric space. Extensive experiments on two benchmarks and a large-scale multi-domain
dataset demonstrate the superiority of our SEE over the existing DML methods.

1. Introduction
Learning an effective metric to measure the visual similarities among examples is a fundamental problem in many
computer vision tasks, such as image retrieval [15, 24],
face recognition [10, 32] and person re-identification [54,
55, 22]. Metric learning aims to automatically learn a
task-specific distance metric under which samples from the
same class are encouraged to be closer than those from
different classes. Taking advantage of deep learning technique [8, 14], deep metric learning (DML) methods employ
deep neural networks (DNNs) [8, 52, 51] to extract more
* Corresponding Author

Seen Class Seen Single Domain

Deep Metric Learning

Unseen Class Seen Domain

Single-Domain Generalization

Single-Domain Generalized
Deep Metric Learning

Seen Class Unseen Domain

Unseen Class Unseen Domain

Different Testing Data

Figure 1. Comparisons of the single-domain generalized DML
task with the conventional DML and single-domain generalization. The better generalization ability of the learned DML model
is needed to adapt both unseen categories and domains.

representative feature embeddings and demonstrate superior performance.
In standard DML settings[23, 25, 33], we hope the
trained metric model can better generalize to unseen classes
in the testing phase, which aligns more with the scenarios in practical applications. To this end, many methods,
such as XBM [41], DRML [59], and DCML [2], have been
proposed to alleviate the impact of such category shift and
learn discriminative metric that generalizes well to unseen
classes. However, in many real-world applications, there
exists not only category shift but also domain shift between
the training data and testing data as shown in Figure 1. For
example, the retrieval gallery in image retrieval includes images with different styles, but we can only use real images
for training, as usual. Therefore, these DML methods suffer
from poor generalization due to the impact of domain shift.
Simultaneously ensuring better generalization ability to unseen categories and unseen domains for the metric model is
a more challenging problem.
To further explore improving the generalization ability of
DML, we propose a practical yet challenging task, namely

19365

