This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Adversarial Patch for Cross-modal Attacks in the Physical World
Xingxing Wei1,2 ,* Yao Huang1 , Yitong Sun1 , Jie Yu3
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
2
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou 311228, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
{xxwei, y huang, yt sun, sy2106137}@buaa.edu.cn

Table 1. Various adversarial attacks in different settings.

Abstract
Recently, physical adversarial attacks have been presented to evade DNNs-based object detectors. To ensure the
security, many scenarios are simultaneously deployed with
visible sensors and infrared sensors, leading to the failures
of these single-modal physical attacks. To show the potential risks under such scenes, we propose a unified adversarial patch to perform cross-modal physical attacks, i.e., fooling visible and infrared object detectors at the same time
via a single patch. Considering different imaging mechanisms of visible and infrared sensors, our work focuses on
modeling the shapes of adversarial patches, which can be
captured in different modalities when they change. To this
end, we design a novel boundary-limited shape optimization to achieve the compact and smooth shapes, and thus
they can be easily implemented in the physical world. In addition, to balance the fooling degree between visible detector and infrared detector during the optimization process,
we propose a score-aware iterative evaluation, which can
guide the adversarial patch to iteratively reduce the predicted scores of the multi-modal sensors. We finally test
our method against the one-stage detector: YOLOv3 and
the two-stage detector: Faster RCNN. Results show that
our unified patch achieves an Attack Success Rate (ASR)
of 73.33% and 69.17%, respectively. More importantly, we
verify the effective attacks in the physical world when visible and infrared sensors shoot the objects under various settings like different angles, distances, postures, and scenes.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial examples [18], which pose a serious security threat
to DNNs-based object detectors in the physical world[31,
34, 33]. These physical attacks can help to evaluate the
* Corresponding author

Single-modal
Cross-modal

Digital world
[28],[4],[30],[8],
[11],[13] etc.
[1],[21]etc.

Physical world
[20], [17] [10],[6]
[26],[29],[33] etc.
Ours

robustness of DNNs deployed in real-life systems, which
have important practical values. Recently, RGB sensors
and thermal infrared sensors have been simultaneously used
in many safety-critical tasks such as security monitoring.
When performing object detection tasks, visible images
could provide abundant information on the target’s texture
in the daytime, while infrared images could display the target’s thermal distribution at night. Thus, combining visible
images and infrared images together will result in a roundthe-clock application. To evade object detectors under such
multi-modal imaging scenarios, a necessary way is to develop a cross-modal physical attack to fool visible object
detectors and infrared object detectors at the same time.
However, current physical attacks are limited in the
single-modal domain. For example, some studies [20, 6, 27]
hide from object detectors in the visible modality, and
some studies [34, 33, 25] hide from object detectors in
the infrared modality. Because visible sensors and infrared
sensors have different imaging mechanisms, these singlemodal physical attacks cannot simultaneously attack multimodal object detectors. Specifically, the generated perturbations in the visible modality can not be captured by infrared sensors, and in turn, changing the object’s thermal
radiation would not be reflected in the visible light domain.
There also exist some cross-modal attacks in the digital
world [1, 21, 24], but they usually aim to modify the image pixels or point clouds after sensors’ imaging, ignoring
the different imaging mechanisms across sensors, and thus
cannot transfer to physical world well.
Based on these discussions, this paper aims to design a
unified cross-modal attack in the physical world to fill
in the gap of this area, as illustrated in Table 1. Generally
speaking, the lack of features that can operate in different

4445

