This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AttT2M: Text-Driven Human Motion Generation with Multi-Perspective
Attention Mechanism

1

Chongyang Zhong1,2 *, Lei Hu1,2 *, Zihao Zhang1 *, Shihong Xia1,2†
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zhongchongyang, hulei19z, zhangzihao, xsh}@ict.ac.cn

A person walks in
a circle clockwise

Abstract
Generating 3D human motion based on textual descriptions has been a research focus in recent years. It requires the generated motion to be diverse, natural, and
conform to the textual description. Due to the complex
spatio-temporal nature of human motion and the difficulty
in learning the cross-modal relationship between text and
motion, text-driven motion generation is still a challenging problem. To address these issues, we propose AttT2M,
a two-stage method with multi-perspective attention mechanism: body-part attention and global-local motion-text
attention. The former focuses on the motion embedding
perspective, which means introducing a body-part spatiotemporal encoder into VQ-VAE to learn a more expressive discrete latent space. The latter is from the crossmodal perspective, which is used to learn the sentencelevel and word-level motion-text cross-modal relationship.
The text-driven motion is finally generated with a generative transformer. Extensive experiments conducted on
HumanML3D and KIT-ML demonstrate that our method
outperforms the current state-of-the-art works in terms of
qualitative and quantitative evaluation, and achieve finegrained synthesis and action2motion. Our code is in
https://github.com/ZcyMonkey/AttT2M.

A man walks up on set of
steps to the right, then turns
right and walks up another
set of steps.

A person runs in a
circle anticlockwise

A person walks in the shape of a j

Figure 1. Text-driven generation visualization. Our method
achieves high-quality motion that is precisely consistent with semantically rich text descriptions.

1. Introduction
With the expansion of application scenarios and demands, cross-modal human motion synthesis has become a
hot research topic in computer vision and graphics. Among
them, text-driven human motion synthesis aims to synthesize natural human motion that matches a given text description, which can be applied to intelligent animation production, virtual reality, game and film industry, human-robotics
interaction, etc.
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

However, introducing natural language descriptions as
constraints for motion synthesis, which means using crossmodal high-level semantics to control the motion synthesis
process, is a difficult interdisciplinary problem involving
natural language processing, motion modeling, and crossmodal relationship learning. With the availability of pretrained language models such as CLIP [35], BERT [10],
and GPT [36] for natural language processing, there are
still two challenges that remained: (1) human motion is
high-dimensional data with irregular spatial structure and
highly dynamic temporal characteristics. It is challenging

509

