This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Object Discovery by Low-Dimensional Object Motion
Sadra Safadoust
Fatma Güney
KUIS AI Center and Department of Computer Engineering, Koç University
ssafadoust20@ku.edu.tr

Abstract
Recent work in unsupervised multi-object segmentation
shows impressive results by predicting motion from a single image despite the inherent ambiguity in predicting motion without the next image. On the other hand, the set of
possible motions for an image can be constrained to a lowdimensional space by considering the scene structure and
moving objects in it. We propose to model pixel-wise geometry and object motion to remove ambiguity in reconstructing flow from a single image. Specifically, we divide
the image into coherently moving regions and use depth to
construct flow bases that best explain the observed flow in
each region. We achieve state-of-the-art results in unsupervised multi-object segmentation on synthetic and real-world
datasets by modeling the scene structure and object motion.
Our evaluation of the predicted depth maps shows reliable
performance in monocular depth estimation.

1. Introduction
Finding objects on visual data is one of the oldest problems in computer vision, which has been shown to work
to great extent in the presence of labeled data. Achieving
it without supervision is important given the difficulty of
obtaining pixel-precise masks for the variety of objects encountered in everyday life. In the absence of labels, motion
provides important cues to group pixels corresponding to
objects. The existing solutions use motion either as input
to perform grouping or as output to reconstruct as a way of
verifying the predicted grouping. The current methodology
fails to incorporate the underlying 3D geometry creating the
observed motion. In this work, we show that modeling geometry together with object motion significantly improves
the segmentation of multiple objects without supervision.
Unsupervised multi-object discovery is significantly
more challenging than the single-object case due to mutual
occlusions. Therefore, earlier methods in unsupervised segmentation focused on separating a foreground object from
the background whereas multi-object methods have been
mostly limited to synthetic datasets or resorted to additional

fguney@ku.edu.tr

supervision on real-world data such as sparse depth [15].
While sparse-depth supervision can be applied to driving
scenarios [15], depth information is not typically available
on common video datasets. Moreover, video segmentation
datasets such as DAVIS [48, 49] contain a wide variety of
categories under challenging conditions such as appearance
changes due to lighting conditions or motion blur. The motion information can be obtained from video sequences via
optical flow. Optical flow not only provides motion cues for
grouping [64] but can also be used for training on synthetic
data without suffering from the domain gap while transferring to real data [63]. The problems in optical flow prediction on real-world data can be mitigated to some extent by
relating flow predictions from multiple frames [63].
In addition to problems in predicting optical flow, requiring flow as input prohibits the application of the method on
static images. Another line of work [11, 33] uses motion for
supervision at train time only. Based on the observation that
objects create distinctive patterns in flow, initial work [11]
fits a simple parametric model to the flow in each object region to capture the object motion. This way, the network
can predict object regions that can potentially move coherently from a single image at test time. There is an inherent
ambiguity in predicting motion from a single image. Therefore, the follow-up work [33] predicts a distribution of possible motion patterns to reduce this ambiguity. This also
allows extending it to the multi-object case by mitigating
the over-segmentation problem of the initial work [11].
In this work, we propose to model pixel-wise geometry
to remove ambiguity in reconstructing flow from a single
image. Optical flow is the difference between the 2D projections of the 3D world in consecutive time steps. By modeling the 3D geometry creating these projections, we directly address the mutual occlusion problem due to interactions of multiple objects. This problem has been crudely addressed by previous work with a depth-ordered layer representation [63]. Instead of assuming a single depth layer per
object, we predict pixel-wise depth which provides more
expressive power in explaining the observed motion. Furthermore, we do not use flow as input during inference, allowing us to evaluate our method on single-image datasets.

734

