This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rickrolling the Artist:
Injecting Backdoors into Text Encoders for Text-to-Image Synthesis
Lukas Struppek 1
Dominik Hintersdorf 1
Kristian Kersting 1,2,3,4
1
2
Technical University of Darmstadt
Centre for Cognitive Science
3
4
Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI)
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)
{struppek, hintersdorf, kersting}@cs.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
While text-to-image synthesis currently enjoys great popularity among researchers and the general public, the security of these models has been neglected so far. Many
text-guided image generation models rely on pre-trained
text encoders from external sources, and their users trust
that the retrieved models will behave as promised. Unfortunately, this might not be the case. We introduce backdoor
attacks against text-guided generative models and demonstrate that their text encoders pose a major tampering risk.
Our attacks only slightly alter an encoder so that no suspicious model behavior is apparent for image generations
with clean prompts. By then inserting a single character trigger into the prompt, e.g., a non-Latin character or
emoji, the adversary can trigger the model to either generate images with pre-defined attributes or images following
a hidden, potentially malicious description. We empirically
demonstrate the high effectiveness of our attacks on Stable
Diffusion and highlight that the injection process of a single
backdoor takes less than two minutes. Besides phrasing our
approach solely as an attack, it can also force an encoder
to forget phrases related to certain concepts, such as nudity or violence, and help to make image generation safer.
Our source code is available at https://github.com/
LukasStruppek/Rickrolling-the-Artist.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image synthesis is receiving much attention in
academia and social media. Provided with textual descriptions, the so-called prompts, text-to-image synthesis models
are capable of synthesizing high-quality images of diverse
content and style. Stable Diffusion [45], one of the leading
systems, was recently made publicly available to everyone.
Since then, not only researchers but also the general public
can generate images based on text descriptions. While the
public availability of text-to-image synthesis models also

raises numerous ethical and legal issues [17, 19, 53, 61, 65],
the security of these models has not yet been investigated.
Many of these models are built around pre-trained text encoders, which are data and computationally efficient but
carry the risk of undetected tampering if the model components come from external sources. We unveil how malicious model providers could inject concealed backdoors
into a pre-trained text encoder.
Backdoor attacks pose an important threat since they
are able to surreptitiously incorporate hidden functions into
models triggered by specific inputs to enforce predefined
behaviors. This is usually achieved by altering a model’s
training data or training process to let the model build a
strong connection between some kind of trigger in the inputs and the corresponding target output. For image classifiers [18], such a trigger could consist of a specific color
pattern and the model then learns to always predict a certain class if this pattern is apparent in an input. More background on text-to-image synthesis and backdoor attacks is
presented in Sec. 2.
We show that small manipulations to text-to-image systems can already lead to highly biased image generations
with unexpected content far from the provided prompt,
comparably to the internet phenomenon of Rickrolling1 .
We emphasize that backdoor attacks can cause serious
harm, e.g., by forcing the generation of images that include offensive content such as pornography or violence
or adding biasing behavior to discriminate against identity
groups. This can cause harm to both the users and the model
providers. Fig. 1 illustrates the basic concept of our attack.
Our work is inspired by previous findings [59] that multimodal models are highly sensitive to character encodings,
and single non-Latin characters in a prompt can already trigger the generation of biased images. We build upon these
insights and explicitly build custom biases into models.
1 Rickrolling describes an internet meme that involves the unexpected
appearance of a music video from Rick Astley. See also https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rickrolling.

4584

