This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Feature Deblurring Diffusion for Detecting Out-of-Distribution Objects
Aming Wu1 Da Chen2 Cheng Deng1 *
1
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
2
University of Bath
amwu@xidian.edu.cn, da.chen@bath.edu, chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Forward Feature Blurring

Abstract

1. Introduction
Discriminating known from unknown objects is indispensable for building reliable detection systems. Currently,
most object detection models [38, 14, 53, 2] usually follow
* Corresponding author

⋯
𝑥0

𝑥1

𝑥𝑇

ID Feat.

OOD Feat.

Input

𝑥0

𝑥1

𝑥𝑇

⋯

To promote the safe application of detectors, a task of unsupervised out-of-distribution object detection (OOD-OD)
is recently proposed, whose goal is to detect unseen OOD
objects without accessing any auxiliary OOD data. For
this task, the challenge mainly lies in how to only leverage the known in-distribution (ID) data to detect OOD objects accurately without affecting the detection of ID objects, which can be framed as the diffusion problem for
deep feature synthesis. Accordingly, such challenge could
be addressed by the forward and reverse processes in the
diffusion model. In this paper, we propose a new approach
of Deep Feature Deblurring Diffusion (DFDD), consisting of forward blurring and reverse deblurring processes.
Specifically, the forward process gradually performs Gaussian Blur on the extracted features, which is instrumental in retaining sufficient input-relevant information. By
this way, the forward process could synthesize virtual OOD
features that are close to the classification boundary between ID and OOD objects, which improves the performance of detecting OOD objects. During the reverse process, based on the blurred features, a dedicated deblurring
model is designed to continually recover the lost details in
the forward process. Both the deblurred features and original features are taken as the input for training, strengthening the discrimination ability. In the experiments, our
method is evaluated on OOD-OD, open-set object detection, and incremental object detection. The significant performance gains over baselines demonstrate the superiorities of our method. The source code will be made available
at: https://github.com/AmingWu/DFDD-OOD.

OOD Testing Data

⋯
Reverse Feature Deblurring

Detection Results

Figure 1. Deep Feature Deblurring Diffusion (DFDD) for detecting OOD objects. The forward process aims to synthesize virtual
OOD features (as shown in the blue stars) by gradually performing Gaussian Blur on the extracted feature maps, which reduces
the impact of lacking OOD data and improves the ability of detecting OOD objects. Meanwhile, the reverse stage is to recover
the deblurred results (as shown in dark orange) of the forward output. Finally, both the deblurred results and original feature maps
(as shown in orange) are taken as the input for training, which enhances the discrimination of the object classifier.

a close-set assumption, i.e., the training and testing stages
share the same category space. However, the real scenario
is open and full of unknown objects, presenting significant
challenges for close-set assumption based detectors. To promote the safe deployment of detectors, a task of unsupervised out-of-distribution object detection (OOD-OD) [6] is
proposed, aiming to detect OOD objects never-seen-before
during training without using any auxiliary OOD data.
For unsupervised OOD-OD [6], there exist two essential
challenges: one is to only leverage the given in-distribution
(ID) data to improve the ability of discriminating OOD objects. Another is to avoid the performance degradation of
ID object detection. One feasible solution [6, 37] is to synthesize a series of virtual OOD features based on the ID
data, which promotes the detector to learn a clear boundary
between ID and OOD objects. The work [6] first utilizes
ID data to estimate class-conditional distribution for each

13381

