This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting 3-DoF Ground-to-Satellite Camera Localization Accuracy via
Geometry-Guided Cross-View Transformer
Yujiao Shi1 , Fei Wu1 , Akhil Perincherry2 , Ankit Vora2 and Hongdong Li1
1
The Australian National University 2 Ford Motor Company
yujiao.shi@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Image retrieval-based cross-view localization methods
often lead to very coarse camera pose estimation, due to
the limited sampling density of the database satellite images. In this paper, we propose a method to increase the
accuracy of a ground camera’s location and orientation by
estimating the relative rotation and translation between the
ground-level image and its matched/retrieved satellite image. Our approach designs a geometry-guided cross-view
transformer that combines the benefits of conventional geometry and learnable cross-view transformers to map the
ground-view observations to an overhead view. Given the
synthesized overhead view and observed satellite feature
maps, we construct a neural pose optimizer with strong
global information embedding ability to estimate the relative rotation between them. After aligning their rotations,
we develop an uncertainty-guided spatial correlation to
generate a probability map of the vehicle locations, from
which the relative translation can be determined. Experimental results demonstrate that our method significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art. Notably, the likelihood of
restricting the vehicle lateral pose to be within 1m of its
Ground Truth (GT) value on the cross-view KITTI dataset
has been improved from 35.54% to 76.44%, and the likelihood of restricting the vehicle orientation to be within 1◦ of
its GT value has been improved from 19.64% to 99.10%.

1. Introduction
Autonomous robots, such as unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs) and unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs), are becoming more and more popular in various fields of applications. One of the most demanding capabilities of autonomous vehicles is navigating and executing tasks autonomously in complex environments, especially in environments with poor GPS signals. This motivates recent research on vision-based localization.
Ground-to-satellite image-based localization is a vision-

(a) Joint 3-DoF pose optimization [29]

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Conventional image-retrieval methods for ground-tosatellite localization provide a rough location and orientation estimation for the ground camera, denoted by the red dot and arrow
in the images. This paper aims to refine this pose under the same
ground-to-satellite image-matching context. Compared to joint rotation and translation optimization [29], which is susceptible to local minima (a), this paper introduces a new method that allows
dense search at all possible locations. Our method produces a
probability map (b) over the continuous search space of vehicle
locations, thus achieving high localization accuracy.

based localization task that aims to estimate the location and
orientation of a ground camera by matching a ground-level
image against a large satellite map. The task was originally
proposed for city-scale localization and tackled by image
retrieval techniques. However, image retrieval techniques
can only provide a rough pose approximation of the ground
camera, and the sample density of the database image always dictates the estimated pose accuracy.
Recent works have explored increasing the localization
accuracy by estimating a relative translation and rotation
between the ground and its matching satellite images. Existing works have tried to regress the relative translation by

21516

