This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MeMOTR: Long-Term Memory-Augmented Transformer
for Multi-Object Tracking

1

Ruopeng Gao1
Limin Wang1,2,B
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University

Abstract
As a video task, Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) is expected to capture temporal information of targets effectively. Unfortunately, most existing methods only explicitly
exploit the object features between adjacent frames, while
lacking the capacity to model long-term temporal information. In this paper, we propose MeMOTR, a long-term
memory-augmented Transformer for multi-object tracking.
Our method is able to make the same object’s track embedding more stable and distinguishable by leveraging longterm memory injection with a customized memory-attention
layer. This significantly improves the target association
ability of our model. Experimental results on DanceTrack
show that MeMOTR impressively surpasses the state-of-theart method by 7.9% and 13.0% on HOTA and AssA metrics, respectively. Furthermore, our model also outperforms
other Transformer-based methods on association performance on MOT17 and generalizes well on BDD100K. Code
is available at https://github.com/MCG-NJU/MeMOTR.

1. Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) [8, 23, 29] aims to detect multiple objects and maintain their identities in a video
stream. MOT can be applied to numerous downstream
tasks, such as action recognition [7], behavior analysis [16],
and so on. It is also an important technique for real-world
applications, e.g., autonomous driving and surveillance.
According to the definition of MOT, this task can be
formally divided into two parts: object detection and association. For a long time, pedestrian tracking datasets
(like MOT17 [23]) have had mainstream domination in the
community. However, these datasets have insufficient challenges in target association because of their almost linear motion pattern. Therefore, tracking-by-detection methods [5, 32, 43] achieve the state-of-the-art performance of
MOT for several years. They first adopt a robust object deB : Corresponding author (lmwang@nju.edu.cn).

2

Shanghai AI Lab

tector (e.g., YOLOX [12]) to independently localize the objects in each frame and associate them with IoU [3, 40] or
ReID features [26]. However, associating targets becomes
a critical challenge in some complex scenarios, like group
dancers [29] and sports players [8, 13]. These similar appearances and erratic movements may cause existing methods to fail. Recently, Transformer-based tracking methods [22, 42] have introduced a new fully-end-to-end MOT
paradigm. Through the interaction and progressive decoding of detect and track queries in Transformer, they simultaneously complete detection and tracking. This paradigm
is expected to have greater potential for object association
due to the flexibility of Transformer, especially in the above
complex scenes.
Although these Transformer-based methods achieve excellent performance, they still struggle with some complicated issues, such as analogous appearances, irregular motion patterns, and long-term occlusions. We hypothesize
that more intelligent leverage of temporal information can
provide the tracker a more effective and robust representation for each tracked target, thereby relieving the above issues and boosting the tracking performance. Unfortunately,
most previous methods [22, 42] only exploit the image or
object features between two adjacent frames, which lacking
the utilization of long-term temporal information.
Based on the analysis above, in this paper, we focus on
leveraging temporal information by proposing a long-term
Memory-augmented Multi-Object Tracking method with
TRansformer, coined as MeMOTR. We exploit detect and
track embeddings to localize newborn and tracked objects
via a Transformer Decoder, respectively. Our model maintains a long-term memory with the exponential recursion
update algorithm [28] for each tracked object. Afterward,
we inject this memory into the track embedding, reducing
its abrupt changes and thus improving the model association
ability. As multiple tracked targets exist in a video stream,
we apply a memory-attention layer to produce a more distinguishable representation. Besides, we present an adaptive aggregation to fuse the object feature from two adjacent
frames to improve tracking robustness.
In addition, we argue that the learnable detection query

9901

