This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ntroduction
LISTER: Neighbor Decoding for Length-Insensitive Scene Text Recognition

Decoder types
• CTC

Changxu Cheng, Peng Wang, Cheng Da, Qi Zheng, Cong Yao

• Attention

Abstract

• Robust to long text
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
• Hard decoding
{ccx0127,wdp0072012,dc.dacheng08,zhengqisjtu,yaocong2010}@gmail.com
• 通过现象
• Not well for irregular text
• Par. Attn.
•
•

diversity in length constitutes a significant charac•TheFast
teristic of text. Due to the long-tail distribution of text
• Sensitive
to textmethods
lengthfor scene text recognition
lengths,
most existing
RNN
Attn.
(STR) only
work well on short or seen-length text, lack•
Slow
ing the capability of recognizing longer text or performAttention
drift This is a crucial issue, since the
ing• length
extrapolation.
lengths
of the text to be recognized are usually not given in
Nb.
Attn
advance in
real-world
applications, but it has not been ad•
Robust to
long text
equately investigated in previous works. Therefore, we pro• Relative Fast
pose in this paper a method called Length-Insensitive Scene
TExt Recognizer (LISTER), which remedies the limitation
regarding the robustness to various text lengths. Specifically, a Neighbor Decoder is proposed to obtain accurate
character attention maps with the assistance of a novel
neighbor matrix regardless of the text lengths. Besides, a
Feature Enhancement Module is devised to model the longrange dependency with low computation cost, which is able
to perform iterations with the neighbor decoder to enhance
the feature map progressively. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to achieve effective length-insensitive
scene text recognition. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that the proposed LISTER algorithm exhibits obvious superiority on long text recognition and the ability for length extrapolation, while comparing favourably with the previous
state-of-the-art methods on standard benchmarks for STR
(mainly short text)1 .

1. Introduction
Scene text recognition (STR) is a popular topic in the
computer vision community [40, 41, 42, 34, 54, 18, 36,
48, 5], which aims at extracting machine-readable symbols from scene text images. Recently, a variety of works
have pushed forward the recognition performance from
the perspective of arbitrary-shaped text [42, 28, 57], combining language models [42, 54, 18, 36, 47], etc. However, sequence length, as a vital characteristic of text, is
1 https://github.com/AlibabaResearch/AdvancedLiterateMachinery

RNN

qi
Attend

𝛼#

q
v

k

𝛼$

(b) Parallel Attention
𝛼&

Neighbor Matrix 𝑁!×!
q0

𝛼

k

(a) Serial Attention
𝛼%

Attend

k

𝛼'
image feature
hidden state
learnable embedding

(c) Neighbor Attention

𝛼 attention maps

Figure 1. Different attention mechanisms for STR. α in green is
the attention maps produced by: (a) complicated RNN in a serial
way (Transformer decoder does similar), (b) pre-defined learnable
limited queries in a parallel way, (c) the proposed novel neighbor
matrix in a serial but simple and efficient way.

rarely discussed. In fact, instances of long text occur frequently in websites, compound words, text lines, codes and
multi-lingual scenarios [7]. As revealed in previous studies [19, 49], existing methods cannot handle images with
long text very well. We regard it as a key issue worthy of
in-depth investigation. Concretely, we ought to systematically analyze the performance of existing methods on text
of different lengths and explore an effective way to realize
length-insensitive STR.
According to our observation, decoders in scene text
recognition models are directly associated with the objective of text prediction, thus they are highly likely to play an
important role in length-insensitive STR. In previous works,
there are three types of text decoders: CTC [20, 40]-based
decoder, serial attention decoder [42, 33, 5], and parallel
attention decoder [49, 54, 18]. The CTC-based decoder
makes dense prediction on the feature sequence, and then
re-organizes the text by a pre-defined rule. It is efficient,
robust to long text recognition, and can be applied to multiline recognition [53, 50], but has some trouble in feature
learning [30, 22]. The serial attention decoder (Fig. 1(a))
adopts RNN or the Transformer decoder to predict characters step by step, which is slow in inference, and may en-

19541

