This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-label affordance mapping from egocentric vision
Lorenzo Mur-Labadia
Jose J. Guerrero
Ruben Martinez-Cantin
I3A - Universidad de Zaragoza
lmur, jguerrer, rmcantin@unizar.es

Abstract
Accurate affordance detection and segmentation with
pixel precision is an important piece in many complex systems based on interactions, such as robots and assitive devices. We present a new approach to affordance perception which enables accurate multi-label segmentation. Our
approach can be used to automatically extract grounded
affordances from first person videos of interactions using
a 3D map of the environment providing pixel level precision for the affordance location. We use this method to
build the largest and most complete dataset on affordances
based on the EPIC-Kitchen dataset, EPIC-Aff, which provides interaction-grounded, multi-label, metric and spatial
affordance annotations. Then, we propose a new approach
to affordance segmentation based on multi-label detection
which enables multiple affordances to co-exists in the same
space, for example if they are associated with the same object. We present several strategies of multi-label detection
using several segmentation architectures. The experimental
results highlight the importance of the multi-label detection.
Finally, we show how our metric representation can be exploited for build a map of interaction hotspots in spatial
action-centric zones and use that representation to perform
a task-oriented navigation.

1. Introduction
When humans repeatedly interact in a close environment, we associate a set of affordable actions with a certain
distribution of objects in a physical space. For example,
we associate a pan on a stove with cooking, but the same
pan on the sink with washing. A joined spatial-semantic
understanding contains powerful insights to understand human behaviour. This requires a close combination of perception, mapping and navigation algorithms; with potential applications in augmented reality systems [60, 61], but
also guiding a robot [19, 36] or assistive devices [68]. In
the last years, the ability of deep learning models to extract
high-level representations has improved the perception of
autonomous agents, while egocentric vision offers a pow-

Figure 1. From a sequence of egocentric observations, our agent
creates a spatial-metric multi-label representation of the affordances, enabling a task-oriented navigation.

erful viewpoint for modelling human-object interaction understanding. Recent advances include anticipating future
actions [23, 26, 1], model the hands-object manipulation
[22, 77, 27, 16], detect the change in an object state [2],
identify interaction hotspots [20, 54] or create topological
maps [55]. Despite the fast movements of a headset camera,
egocentric perception has also contributed to the mapping
and planning phases: localising the agent in a known 3D
map [43], performing visual navigation [56, 62] or building
third-person (allocentric) maps [7, 47].
Gibson’s perception theory presents affordances as the
potential actions that the environment offers to the agent
based on its motor capabilities [25]. For example, the person can afford taking a glass, but the affordances of a soup
in a pan can be mixing, emptying, scooping and pouring
simultaneously. This multiplicity models better complex
dynamic environments and opens the door to multi-agent
collaboration with task synchronization. Although some
authors have focused on more complex affordance models
[50, 75], affordance perception is typically defined as a classification problem. Some authors have focused instead on
grounded affordances [20], which provide a more flexible
setup and are truly associated with motor capabilities, show-

5238

