This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tracking Anything with Decoupled Video Segmentation
Ho Kei Cheng1†

Seoung Wug Oh2
Brian Price2
Alexander Schwing1
Joon-Young Lee2
1
2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Adobe Research

{hokeikc2,aschwing}@illinois.edu, {seoh,bprice,jolee}@adobe.com

Figure 1. Visualization of our semi-online video segmentation results. Top: our algorithm (DEVA) extends Segment Anything (SAM) [27]
to video for open-world video segmentation with no user input required. Bottom: DEVA performs text-prompted video segmentation for
novel objects (with prompt “beyblade”, a type of spinning-top toy) by integrating Grounding-DINO [34] and SAM [27].

Abstract
Training data for video segmentation are expensive
to annotate. This impedes extensions of end-to-end algorithms to new video segmentation tasks, especially in
large-vocabulary settings. To ‘track anything’ without
training on video data for every individual task, we develop a decoupled video segmentation approach (DEVA),
composed of task-specific image-level segmentation and
class/task-agnostic bi-directional temporal propagation.
Due to this design, we only need an image-level model
for the target task (which is cheaper to train) and a
universal temporal propagation model which is trained
once and generalizes across tasks. To effectively combine these two modules, we use bi-directional propagation for (semi-)online fusion of segmentation hypotheses
from different frames to generate a coherent segmenta-

tion. We show that this decoupled formulation compares
favorably to end-to-end approaches in several data-scarce
tasks including large-vocabulary video panoptic segmentation, open-world video segmentation, referring video
segmentation, and unsupervised video object segmentation. Code is available at: hkchengrex.github.io/
Tracking-Anything-with-DEVA.

1. Introduction
Video segmentation aims to segment and associate objects in a video. It is a fundamental task in computer vision
and is crucial for many video understanding applications.
Most existing video segmentation approaches train endto-end video-level networks on annotated video datasets.
They have made significant strides on common benchmarks
like YouTube-VIS [61] and Cityscape-VPS [24]. However,

1316

