This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Imitator: Personalized Speech-driven 3D Facial Animation
Balamurugan Thambiraja1
Darren Cosker3
1

Ikhsanul Habibie2
Christian Theobalt2

Sadegh Aliakbarian3
Justus Thies1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland, Germany
3
Mesh Labs, Microsoft, Cambridge, UK

Figure 1: Imitator is a novel method for personalized speech-driven 3D facial animation. Given an audio sequence and a
personalized style-embedding as input, we generate person-specific motion sequences with accurate lip closures for bilabial
consonants (’m’,’b’,’p’). The style-embedding of a subject can be computed from a short reference video (e.g., 5s).

Abstract
Speech-driven 3D facial animation has been widely explored, with applications in gaming, character animation,
virtual reality, and telepresence systems. State-of-the-art
methods deform the face topology of the target actor to sync
the input audio without considering the identity-specific
speaking style and facial idiosyncrasies, thus, resulting
in unrealistic and inaccurate lip movements. To address
this, we present Imitator, a speech-driven facial expression synthesis method, which learns identity-specific details from a short input video and produces novel facial
expressions matching the identity-specific speaking style
and facial idiosyncrasies of the target actor. Specifically,
we train a style-agnostic transformer on a large facial expression dataset which we use as a prior for audio-driven
facial expressions. We utilize this prior to optimize for
identity-specific speaking style based on a short reference

video. To train the prior, we introduce a novel loss function
based on detected bilabial consonants to ensure plausible
lip closures and consequently improve the realism of the
generated expressions. Through detailed experiments and
user studies, we show that our approach improves Lip-Sync
by 49% and produces expressive facial animations from
input audio while preserving the actor’s speaking style.
Project page: https://balamuruganthambiraja.
github.io/Imitator

1. Introduction
3D digital humans raised a lot of attention in the past
few years as they aim to replicate the appearance and motion of real humans for immersive applications, like telepresence in AR or VR, character animation and creation
for entertainment (movies and games), and virtual mirrors
for e-commerce. Especially, with the introduction of neu1
20621

