This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Frequency Filters As Efficient Global Token Mixers
Zhipeng Huang1,2 * Zhizheng Zhang2† Cuiling Lan2 Zheng-Jun Zha1 Yan Lu2 Baining Guo2
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
Recent vision transformers, large-kernel CNNs and
MLPs have attained remarkable successes in broad vision
tasks thanks to their effective information fusion in the
global scope. However, their efficient deployments, especially on mobile devices, still suffer from noteworthy challenges due to the heavy computational costs of self-attention
mechanisms, large kernels, or fully connected layers. In
this work, we apply conventional convolution theorem to
deep learning for addressing this and reveal that adaptive frequency filters can serve as efficient global token
mixers. With this insight, we propose Adaptive Frequency
Filtering (AFF) token mixer. This neural operator transfers a latent representation to the frequency domain via
a Fourier transform and performs semantic-adaptive frequency filtering via an elementwise multiplication, which
mathematically equals to a token mixing operation in the
original latent space with a dynamic convolution kernel as
large as the spatial resolution of this latent representation.
We take AFF token mixers as primary neural operators to
build a lightweight neural network, dubbed AFFNet. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed AFF token mixer and show that AFFNet achieve superior accuracy and efficiency trade-offs compared to other
lightweight network designs on broad visual tasks, including visual recognition and dense prediction tasks. Code
is available at https://github.com/microsoft/
TokenMixers.

1. Introduction
Remarkable progress has been made in ever-changing vision network designs to date, wherein effective token mixing in the global scope is constantly highlighted. Three existing dominant network families, i.e., Transformers, CNNs
and MLPs achieve global token mixing with their respective
ways. Transformers [16, 63, 40, 12, 80, 74] mix tokens with
self-attention mechanisms where pairwise correlations between query-key pairs are taken as mixing weights. CNNs
* This work was done when Zhipeng Huang was an intern at MSRA.
† Correspondence to zhizzhang@microsoft.com.

Figure 1. Comparison of Top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K [55] between our proposed AFFNet to some state-of-the-art lightweight
networks that have global token mixing. The bubble size corresponds to FLOPs.

achieve competitive performance with transformers by scaling up their kernel sizes [51, 15, 38, 9]. MLPs [60, 25, 35]
provide another powerful paradigm via fully connections
across all tokens. All of them are effective but computationally expensive, imposing remarkable challenges in practical
deployments, especially on edge devices.
Recently, there is increased attention on improving the
efficiency of token mixing in transformers. Some works
[30, 40, 12, 22, 45, 50, 31, 75] squeeze the scope of token mixing in different ways to compromise the representation capacities of neural networks for their efficiencies.
Other works reduce the complexity of the matrix operations
in self-attention by making use of the associativity property
of matrix products [29] or low-rank approximation methods
[20, 76]. These methods all sacrifice the expressiveness of
neural networks and lead to unsatisfactory performance of
efficient network designs. A general-purpose global token
mixing for lightweight networks is still less explored. Better
trade-off between accuracy and efficiency for global-scope
token mixing is worthy of further study.
In this work, we reveal that adaptive frequency filters can
serve as efficient global token mixers, inspired by the convolution theorem [44, 53, 48] widely used in conventional
signal processing. This theorem states that a convolution
in one domain mathematically equals the Hadamard product (also known as elementwise product) in its corresponding Fourier domain. This equivalence allows us to frame

6049

