This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Augmenting and Aligning Snippets for Few-Shot Video Domain Adaptation
Yuecong Xu1 * Jianfei Yang2 * Yunjiao Zhou2 Zhenghua Chen1† Min Wu1 Xiaoli Li1
1
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore 2 Nanyang Technological University
{xuyu0014, yang0478, yunjiao001, chen0832}e.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
For video models to be transferred and applied seamlessly across video tasks in varied environments, Video Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (VUDA) has been introduced to improve the robustness and transferability of video
models. However, current VUDA methods rely on a vast
amount of high-quality unlabeled target data, which may
not be available in real-world cases. We thus consider
a more realistic Few-Shot Video-based Domain Adaptation (FSVDA) scenario where we adapt video models with
only a few target video samples. While a few methods
have touched upon Few-Shot Domain Adaptation (FSDA)
in images and in FSVDA, they rely primarily on spatial
augmentation for target domain expansion with alignment
performed statistically at the instance level. However,
videos contain more knowledge in terms of rich temporal and semantic information, which should be fully considered while augmenting target domains and performing alignment in FSVDA. We propose a novel SSA2 lign
to address FSVDA at the snippet level, where the target
domain is expanded through a simple snippet-level augmentation followed by the attentive alignment of snippets
both semantically and statistically, where semantic alignment of snippets is conducted through multiple perspectives. Empirical results demonstrate state-of-the-art performance of SSA2 lign across multiple cross-domain action recognition benchmarks. Code will be provided at:
https://github.com/xuyu0010/SSA2lign.

1. Introduction
Video Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (VUDA) [4, 7,
51, 46, 53] aims to improve the generalizability and robustness of video models by transferring knowledge to new domains, and is widely applied in scenarios where massive
labeled videos are unavailable. Current VUDA methods
assume that sufficient target data are accessible which enables domain alignment by minimizing cross-domain distri* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

{wumin, xlli}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

bution discrepancies and obtaining domain invariant representations [4, 7, 54]. However, this assumption may not be
feasible in real-world applications such as in smart hospitals
and security surveillance where video models are leveraged
for anomaly behavior recognition [35, 32], and are expected
to be functional at all times even across different environments. It is more practical to obtain a few labeled videos
during the early stage of model deployment to improve the
transferred models’ performances in the new (target) environment. A Few-Shot Video Domain Adaptation (FSVDA)
task is hence formulated to enable knowledge learned from
labeled source video to be transferred to the target video
domain given only very limited labeled target videos.
With only several target domain samples, FSVDA is
more challenging than VUDA, since aligning distributions
with limited samples is harder. A few research have
touched on the image-based Few-Shot Domain Adaptation
(FSDA) [27, 45, 49, 11] by domain alignment, e.g., moment matching or adversarial training, between a spatialaugmented target domain and a filtered target-similar source
domain. More recently, there have been a few early research
on FSVDA [12, 13] which extends the above strategies to
videos by viewing each video sample as a whole and obtaining frame-based video features.
However, there are two major shortcomings when the
image-based FSDA is applied to video domains. Firstly, applying frame-level spatial augmentation towards individual
video frames ignores and undermines temporal correlation
across sequential frames, and we find that such augmentation would result in only minor or even negative effects on
FSVDA performance. Secondly, the effectiveness of domain alignment methods is built upon sufficient source domain and target domain data that depicts the distribution
discrepancy, which is not available in FSVDA. Even worse,
statistical estimation of video data distribution is less accurate due to the complicated temporal structure of video data.
In this paper, we aim to overcome these two challenges by
designing more effective target domain augmentation and
semantic alignment in the spatial-temporal domain.
To this end, we propose to address the FSVDA task
by a Snippet-attentive Semantic-statistical Alignment with

13445

