This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Large-Scale Person Detection and Localization using Overhead Fisheye Cameras
Lu Yang1 *, Liulei Li2 *, Xueshi Xin1 , Yifan Sun3 , Qing Song1 , Wenguan Wang4†
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 2 ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
3

Baidu 4 ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
https://LOAFisheye.github.io/

Abstract
Location determination finds wide applications in daily
life. Instead of existing efforts devoted to localizing tourist
photos captured by perspective cameras, in this article, we
focus on devising person positioning solutions using overhead fisheye cameras. Such solutions are advantageous in
large field of view (FOV), low cost, anti-occlusion, and unaggressive work mode (without the necessity of cameras carried by persons). However, related studies are quite scarce,
due to the paucity of data. To stimulate research in this exciting area, we present LOAF, the first large-scale overhead
fisheye dataset for person detection and localization. LOAF
is built with many essential features, e.g., i) the data cover
abundant diversities in scenes, human pose, density, and
location; ii) it contains currently the largest number of annotated pedestrian, i.e., 457K bounding boxes with groundtruth location information; iii) the body-boxes are labeled
as radius-aligned so as to fully address the positioning challenge. To approach localization, we build a fisheye person
detection network, which exploits the fisheye distortions by
a rotation-equivariant training strategy and predict radiusaligned human boxes end-to-end. Then, the actual locations
of the detected persons are calculated by a numerical solution on the fisheye model and camera altitude data. Extensive experiments on LOAF validate the superiority of our
fisheye detector w.r.t. previous methods, and show that our
whole fisheye positioning solution is able to locate all persons in FOV with an accuracy of 0.5 m, within 0.1 s.

1. Introduction
Accurate position finding of persons attracts growing interest from both research and industrial communities, since
it plays a crucial role in numerous location-sensitive application scenarios (e.g., surveillance, smart home, public health).
Nevertheless, due to the line-of-sight (LOS) issue, GPS is
unreliable in interior spaces and urban canyon. To overcome
1 The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
2 Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang.

Figure 1: Person positioning using overhead fisheye camera: We
detect humans on omnidirectional images and then project detects
onto the real world coordinates to obtain physical locations. Compared with using perspective cameras, our fisheye camera based
solution is favored in low cost, high accuracy, and fast speed.

such limitation, various alternative solutions are investigated.
Signal based solutions, including Bluetooth [13] and WiFi [74], are popular, but they are easily interfered by changing environments and nearby human bodies [73]. A complementary stream of work is vision based; they typically
make use of traditional cameras, RGBD cameras, or in-built
smartphone cameras, and enjoy the advantage of reliable
services. To get location information, visual positioning solutions usually refer to a pre-acquired 3D map or a geotagged database as the scene representation [63], or directly
utilize the captured image to estimate the camera pose [39].
Although visual localization has been a hotspot issue for
many years, existing efforts are mainly dedicated to urban
place recognition or indoor camera localization, based on
perspective cameras [63, 39, 62, 43]. None of them addresses person positioning by using overhead fisheye cameras, even though fisheye cameras are widely used in visual
surveillance applications. One possible reason is the lack of
accessible datasets, compounded by considerable costs in-

19961

