This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Instance-level Prompts for Rehearsal-free Continual Learning
Dahuin Jung1, ,* Dongyoon Han2 , Jihwan Bang3 , Hwanjun Song4,∗,†
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea,
2
NAVER AI Lab, 3 NAVER Cloud, 4 AWS AI Labs
annajung0625@snu.ac.kr, {dongyoon.han, jihwan.bang}@navercorp.com, hwanjuns@amazon.com

We introduce Domain-Adaptive Prompt (DAP), a novel
method for continual learning using Vision Transformers
(ViT). Prompt-based continual learning has recently gained
attention due to its rehearsal-free nature. Currently, the
prompt pool, which is suggested by prompt-based continual learning, is key to effectively exploiting the frozen pretrained ViT backbone in a sequence of tasks. However, we
observe that the use of a prompt pool creates a domain scalability problem between pre-training and continual learning. This problem arises due to the inherent encoding of
group-level instructions within the prompt pool. To address
this problem, we propose DAP, a pool-free approach that
generates a suitable prompt in an instance-level manner
at inference time. We optimize an adaptive prompt generator that creates instance-specific fine-grained instructions
required for each input, enabling enhanced model plasticity and reduced forgetting. Our experiments on seven
datasets with varying degrees of domain similarity to ImageNet demonstrate the superiority of DAP over state-ofthe-art prompt-based methods. Code is publicly available
at https://github.com/naver-ai/dap-cl.

1. Introduction
Humans can learn and solve continuously emerging
tasks by leveraging knowledge from past experiences. Inspired by it, continual learning (CL) methods aim at tackling a sequence of tasks using a single model without experiencing performance deterioration in previously learned
tasks [1, 56, 59]. Typically, rehearsal-based methods [5, 7,
22, 42], motivated by the complementary learning systems
of humans [35], store a data subset of past tasks to alleviate forgetting while acquiring new information. By
maintaining a replay buffer of reasonable size, this approach has shown superiority over regularization [8, 25]
* Work was done while working at NAVER AI Lab.
† Corresponding author.

DAP DualPrompt (w/o Tune) DualPrompt (w/ Tune) L2P (w/o Tune) L2P (w/ Tune)
100

Average Accuracy (%)

Abstract

90
80
70
60
50
40

CIFAR-100

Pets

EuroSAT

RESISC45

ISIC

Lower Similarity

Figure 1. Average accuracy changes of prompt-based CL methods
including DAP across five datasets with varying levels of domain
similarity to ImageNet. The datasets are sorted with domain similarity in descending order from left to right.

and architecture-based methods [2, 33] in various settings.
However, the rehearsal-based approach is reluctant to use
when data privacy is concerned, or the memory budget is
tight. In this regard, lately, prompt-based rehearsal-free
CL methods, such as L2P [58] and DualPrompt [57], have
been presented and proved to outperform existing rehearsalbased methods without relying on a replay buffer.
Prompt-based learning was initially introduced in the
field of natural language processing for effective transfer
learning [31]. Instead of fine-tuning entire weights, it is
able to condition an untouched (frozen) pre-trained backbone such that it performs well to a specific downstream
task. That is, only small additional weights (prompts) are
trained to adjust learned representations from a source task
to a new target task. Recently, with the recent advent of
Vision Transformers (ViT) [15], the notion of prompt-based
learning has been adapted in CL [14, 47, 51, 55, 57, 58].
L2P and DualPrompt maintain a prompt pool, which is a
constant number of prompts to learn shared prompts across
tasks to mitigate forgetting as well as to benefit from previously learned task knowledge. Hence, the prompt pool is
considered a set of instructions to tune the frozen backbone
to adapt to a sequence of new tasks.
Currently, most pre-trained backbones frozen in promptbased learning are assumed to be trained on a large-scale
natural image collection like ImageNet; L2P and Dual-

11847

