This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sat2Density: Faithful Density Learning from Satellite-Ground Image Pairs
Ming Qian1,2 Jincheng Xiong1 Gui-Song Xia1 Nan Xue2 *
1
LIESMARS, Wuhan University 2 Ant Group
https://sat2density.github.io

Abstract
This paper aims to develop an accurate 3D geometry
representation of satellite images using satellite-ground image pairs. Our focus is on the challenging problem of
3D-aware ground-views synthesis from a satellite image.
We draw inspiration from the density field representation
used in volumetric neural rendering and propose a new approach, called Sat2Density. Our method utilizes the properties of ground-view panoramas for the sky and non-sky
regions to learn faithful density fields of 3D scenes in a
geometric perspective. Unlike other methods that require
extra depth information during training, our Sat2Density
can automatically learn accurate and faithful 3D geometry via density representation without depth supervision.
This advancement significantly improves the ground-view
panorama synthesis task. Additionally, our study provides
a new geometric perspective to understand the relationship
between satellite and ground-view images in 3D space.

(a) Learned density from satellite images

1. Introduction
The emergence of satellite imagery has significantly enhanced our daily lives by providing easy access to a comprehensive view of the planet. This bird’s-eye view offers
valuable information that compensates for the limited perspective of ground-level observations by humans. However, what specific information does satellite imagery provide, and why is it so crucial? In this paper, we propose
that the most critical insights come from the analysis of the
geometry, topology, and geography of cross-view observations captured by paired satellite and ground-level images.
Building on this hypothesis, we aim to address the challenging problem of synthesizing ground-level images from
paired satellite and ground-level imagery by leveraging density representations of 3D scenes.
The challenge of generating ground-level images from
satellite imagery is tackled by leveraging massive datasets
containing both satellite images and corresponding ground* Corresponding author

(b) Synthesized panoramas

(c) Rendered depth

Figure 1. Sat2Density trains with a collection of satellite-ground
image pairs, without depth, or multi-view supervision. Our 3d
GAN enables the synthesis of scenes conditioned on a satellite
image, producing multi-view-consistent ground-view renderings
and geometry. Please see the project page for more videos.

level panoramas captured at the same geographical coordinates. However, the drastic differences in viewpoint between the two types of images, combined with the limited
overlap of visual features and large appearance variations,
create a highly complex and ill-posed learning problem. To
address this challenge, researchers have extensively studied the use of conditional generative adversarial networks,
which leverage high-level semantics and contextual information in a generative way [19, 20, 33, 26, 12]. However,
since the contextual information used is typically at the im-

3683

