This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient LiDAR Point Cloud Oversegmentation Network
Le Hui1 , Linghua Tang2 , Yuchao Dai1 , Jin Xie2∗ and Jian Yang2∗
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology
huile@nwpu.edu.cn, {tanglinghua, csjxie, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, daiyuchao@gmail.com

Abstract
Point cloud oversegmentation is a challenging task since
it needs to produce perceptually meaningful partitions (i.e.,
superpoints) of a point cloud. Most existing oversegmentation methods cannot efficiently generate superpoints
from large-scale LiDAR point clouds due to complex and
inefficient procedures. In this paper, we propose a simple
yet efficient end-to-end LiDAR oversegmentation network,
which segments superpoints from the LiDAR point cloud
by grouping points based on low-level point embeddings.
Specifically, we first learn the similarity of points from
the constructed local neighborhoods to obtain low-level
point embeddings through the local discriminative loss.
Then, to generate homogeneous superpoints from the sparse
LiDAR point cloud, we propose a LiDAR point grouping
algorithm that simultaneously considers the similarity of
point embeddings and the Euclidean distance of points
in 3D space. Finally, we design a superpoint refinement
module for accurately assigning the hard boundary points
to the corresponding superpoints. Extensive results on two
large-scale outdoor datasets, SemanticKITTI and nuScenes,
show that our method achieves a new state-of-the-art in
LiDAR oversegmentation. Notably, the inference time of
our method is 100× faster than that of other methods. Furthermore, we apply the learned superpoints to the LiDAR
semantic segmentation task and the results show that using
superpoints can significantly improve the LiDAR semantic
segmentation of the baseline network. Code is available at
https://github.com/fpthink/SuperLiDAR.

1. Introduction
In modern self-driving cars, 3D LiDAR sensor acquires
precise distance measurements of surrounding objects and
∗ Corresponding authors.

Le Hui and Yuchao Dai are with Shaanxi Key Laboratory of
Information Acquisition and Processing, China. Linghua Tang, Jin Xie
and Jian Yang are with Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for
High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key
Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, China.

their surface characteristics for large-scale outdoor scene
understanding. In recent years, LiDAR semantic segmentation [21] has been widely studied, and a variety of
approaches have emerged with impressive results. However, LiDAR oversegmentation is rarely explored in 3D
computer vision. Unlike LiDAR semantic segmentation,
LiDAR oversegmentation outputs the perceptually meaningful tessellation of point cloud. The resulting superpoint
is a set of points, which are semantically and geometrically
homogeneous in the local regions of the objects. The superpoint representation can adaptively and flexibly represent
local geometric structures of objects. Therefore, studying
LiDAR oversegmentation is very meaningful for LiDAR
point cloud based applications. However, the sparsity,
noise, and irregularity of LiDAR point clouds bring great
challenges to LiDAR oversegmentation.
Early point cloud oversegmentation methods are usually optimization based methods. Lin et al. [17] casted superpoint segmentation problem as a subset selection
problem, and developed a heuristic algorithm that utilizes
handcrafted local information of the point cloud to segment
superpoints by minimizing the energy function. Guinard et
al. [8] formulated point cloud oversegmentation as a structured optimization problem and used handcrafted local
descriptors to produce geometrically simple superpoints
through a greedy graph-cut algorithm [14]. However, due
to sparse LiDAR point clouds, the computed handcrafted
features are less discriminative, so the resulting superpoints
cannot produce clear boundaries between similar objects.
Landrieu et al. [13] introduced a deep network to extract
point embeddings, which are used to replace handcrafted
features in [14] for segmenting superpoints. Since it is a
two-stage method, the processing procedure of superpoint
segmentation is complex and time-consuming. Recently,
Hui et al. [11] proposed an end-to-end superpoint network
that iteratively learns the point-superpoint association map
for clustering superpoints. Nonetheless, it requires postprocessing to filter the noise points. In short, due to
complex and inefficient procedures, the above methods
cannot efficiently generate superpoints from large-scale
LiDAR point clouds.

18003

