This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EgoTV
: Egocentric Task Veriﬁcation
from Natural Language Task Descriptions
Rishi Hazra1 ,*

Brian Chen2 , Akshara Rai2 , Nitin Kamra2 , Ruta Desai2
1
Örebro University 2 Meta
rishi.hazra@oru.se, {bc2754,nitinkamra,akshararai,rutadesai}@meta.com
https://rishihazra.github.io/EgoTV

Abstract
To enable progress towards egocentric agents capable of
understanding everyday tasks speciﬁed in natural language,
we propose a benchmark and a synthetic dataset called
Egocentric Task Veriﬁcation (EgoTV). The goal in EgoTV is
to verify the execution of tasks from egocentric videos based
on the natural language description of these tasks. EgoTV
contains pairs of videos and their task descriptions for
multi-step tasks – these tasks contain multiple sub-task decompositions, state changes, object interactions, and subtask ordering constraints. In addition, EgoTV also provides
abstracted task descriptions that contain only partial details
about ways to accomplish a task. Consequently, EgoTV
requires causal, temporal, and compositional reasoning of
video and language modalities, which is missing in existing
datasets. We also ﬁnd that existing vision-language models
struggle at such all round reasoning needed for task veriﬁcation in EgoTV. Inspired by the needs of EgoTV, we propose a novel Neuro-Symbolic Grounding (NSG) approach
that leverages symbolic representations to capture the compositional and temporal structure of tasks. We demonstrate
NSG’s capability towards task tracking and veriﬁcation on
our EgoTV dataset and a real-world dataset derived from
CrossTask [82] (CTV). We open-source the EgoTV and CTV
datasets and the NSG model for future research on egocentric assistive agents.

1. Introduction
Inspired by recent progress in visual systems [40, 65],
we consider an assistive egocentric agent capable of reasoning about daily activities. When invoked via natural language commands, for e.g., while baking a cake, the agent
understands the steps involved in baking, tracks progress
through the various stages of the task, detects and proactively prevents mistakes by making suggestions. Such a vir* Work done while interning at Meta.

tual agent [11] would empower users to learn new skills and
accomplish tasks efﬁciently.
Developing this egocentric agent capable of tracking and
verifying everyday tasks based on their natural language
speciﬁcation is challenging for multiple reasons. First, such
an agent must reason about various ways of doing a multistep task speciﬁed in natural language. This entails decomposing the task into relevant actions, state changes, object interactions as well as any necessary causal and temporal relationships between these entities. Secondly, the
agent must ground these entities in egocentric observations
to track progress and detect mistakes. Lastly, to truly be
useful, such an agent must support tracking and veriﬁcation for a combination of tasks and, ideally, even unseen
tasks. These three challenges – causal and temporal reasoning about task structure from natural language, visual
grounding of sub-tasks, and compositional generalization –
form the core goals of our work.
As our ﬁrst contribution, we propose a benchmark –
) – and a correEgocentric Task Veriﬁcation (EgoTV
sponding dataset in the AI2-THOR [29] simulator. Given
a natural language (NL) task description and a corresponding egocentric video of an agent, the goal of EgoTV is to
verify whether the task was successfully completed in the
video or not. EgoTV contains multi-step tasks with ordering constraints on the steps and abstracted NL task descriptions with omitted low-level task details inspired by the
needs of real-world assistants. We also provide splits of the
dataset focused on different generalization aspects, e.g., unseen visual contexts, compositions of steps, and tasks (see
Figure 1). Consequently, EgoTV dataset provides the ﬁnegrained control necessary for rigorous testing and reﬁnement of task reasoning models, which is often missing in
real-world datasets [17, 10]. Yet, EgoTV mirrors the real
world by leveraging visual photo-realism and task diversity.
Our second contribution is a novel approach for orderaware visual grounding – Neuro-Symbolic Grounding
(NSG), capable of compositional reasoning and generalizing to unseen tasks owing to its ability to leverage ab-

15417

