This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Communication-efficient Federated Learning with Single-Step Synthetic
Features Compressor for Faster Convergence
Yuhao Zhou1,2 , Mingjia Shi1,2 , Yuanxi Li3 , Yanan Sun1,2 , Qing Ye1,2,∗ , Jiancheng Lv1,2, *
1
Sichuan University
2
Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence
3
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{sooptq, 3101ihs}@gmail.com, yuanxi3@illinois.edu, {yeqing, ysun, lvjiancheng}@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Reducing communication overhead in federated learning (FL) is challenging but crucial for large-scale distributed privacy-preserving machine learning. While methods utilizing sparsification or other techniques can largely
reduce the communication overhead, the convergence rate
is also greatly compromised. In this paper, we propose a
novel method named Single-Step Synthetic Features Compressor (3SFC) to achieve communication-efficient FL by
directly constructing a tiny synthetic dataset containing
synthetic features based on raw gradients. Therefore, 3SFC
can achieve an extremely low compression rate when the
constructed synthetic dataset contains only one data sample. Additionally, the compressing phase of 3SFC utilizes
a similarity-based objective function so that it can be optimized with just one step, considerably improving its performance and robustness. To minimize the compressing error, error feedback (EF) is also incorporated into 3SFC.
Experiments on multiple datasets and models suggest that
3SFC has significantly better convergence rates compared
to competing methods with lower compression rates (i.e.,
up to 0.02%). Furthermore, ablation studies and visualizations show that 3SFC can carry more information than
competing methods for every communication round, further
validating its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Until now, federated learning [22] (FL) is deemed as one
of the most promising distributed techniques [8, 3] to tackle
the isolated data island problem with privacy guarantees.
However, the training process of FL involves frequent exchanging of model parameters between central servers and
participating clients, which is becoming increasingly expensive, especially considering the rapid growth of model
* Corresponding Author

size today [6, 16, 10]. Moreover, participating clients of FL
typically operate at unreliable and limited network connection rates compared to data centers [15], further hindering
the large-scale deployments of FL. Consequently, communication is becoming the primary bottleneck for flexible FL
at the scale [5].
To explore possible approaches for reducing communication overhead in FL, various methods have been proposed
targeting different objectives. The work in [30, 21] applied top-k sparsification to the gradients so that only the
most important information is transmitted at each epoch.
Moreover, Wangni [33] reported that using top-k sparsification with error feedback (EF), the communication overhead of ResNet-50 [12] trained on ImageNet [24] could
be reduced by 99.6% while maintaining nearly the same
model accuracy. On the other hand, The work in [2, 4]
employed quantification to represent gradients by a lower
precision data type with a considerably smaller size. Later
Karimireddy [17] introduced error feedback to quantification as well, substantially improving the rate of convergence. In [11], instead of gradients, several data samples
distilled from the full training dataset were transmitted as
they are much smaller than the gradients, and they can produce similar gradients through back-propagation. More recently, Li [19] and Wu [34] proposed compressing and decompressing communication data using compressed sensing and knowledge distillation, respectively.
While the methods mentioned above have been proven
useful in reducing communication overhead reduction, empirical evidence indicates that they both suffer from degraded model convergence rates. This means that the model
is expected to converge much slower with a smaller compression rate, as demonstrated in Figure 1. Here, the compression rate is defined as Equation 1. In this paper, we propose a single-step synthetic features compressor (3SFC), to
boost the convergence rate during training and carry more
information under a limited communication budget. Instead
15031

