This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LATR: 3D Lane Detection from Monocular Images with Transformer
Yueru Luo1,2

Chaoda Zheng1,2 Xu Yan1,2 Tang Kun3 Chao Zheng3
Shuguang Cui2,1 Zhen Li2,1 *
1
FNii, CUHK-Shenzhen 2 SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen 3 Tencent Map, T Lab

Abstract
3D lane detection from monocular images is a fundamental yet challenging task in autonomous driving. Recent advances primarily rely on structural 3D surrogates
(e.g., bird’s eye view) built from front-view image features
and camera parameters. However, the depth ambiguity
in monocular images inevitably causes misalignment between the constructed surrogate feature map and the original image, posing a great challenge for accurate lane detection. To address the above issue, we present a novel
LATR model, an end-to-end 3D lane detector that uses 3Daware front-view features without transformed view representation. Specifically, LATR detects 3D lanes via crossattention based on query and key-value pairs, constructed
using our lane-aware query generator and dynamic 3D
ground positional embedding. On the one hand, each query
is generated based on 2D lane-aware features and adopts
a hybrid embedding to enhance the lane information. On
the other hand, 3D space information is injected as positional embedding from an iteratively-updated 3D ground
plane. LATR outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods on both synthetic Apollo and realistic OpenLane and
ONCE-3DLanes by large margins (e.g., 11.4 gain in terms
of F1 score on OpenLane). Code will be released at
https://github.com/JMoonr/LATR.

1. Introduction
3D Lane Detection is critical for various applications in
autonomous driving, such as trajectory planning and lane
keeping [48]. Despite the remarkable progress of LiDARbased methods in other 3D perception tasks [56, 13], recent advances in 3D lane detection prefer using a monocular camera since it owns desirable advantages compared
to LiDARs. Apart from the low deployment cost, cameras
offer a longer perception range compared to other sensors
and can produce high-resolution images with rich textures,
which are crucial for detecting slim and long-span lanes.
Due to the lack of depth information, detecting 3D lanes
* Corresponding author

(a)

misaligned

Backbone

NMS

IPM

Detector
BEV Features

(b)

Anchors

3D Lane Detection

Dynamic 3D Ground
K, V

Backbone

iteratively
updated

well-aligned
Lane-aware Query
Generator
Lane-aware Features

Q

Transformer
Decoder
3D Lane Detection

Figure 1. (a) Previous methods mainly utilize camera parameters
and inverse perspective mapping (IPM) to transform the features
into a surrogate space (e.g., BEV), and further perform 3D lane
detection through anchors and non-maximum suppression (NMS).
(b) We propose the novel LATR, an anchor-free and NMS-free
Transformer architecture, to perform 3D lane detection right on
the front view. Using lane-aware queries and dynamic 3D ground
positional embedding, our model produces well-aligned 3D features and achieves superior 3D lane detection.

from monocular images is challenging. A straightforward
solution is to reconstruct the 3D lane layout based on 2D
segmentation results and per-pixel depth estimation, as proposed in SALAD [49]. However, this method requires
high-quality depth data for training and heavily relies on
the precision of the estimated depth. Alternatively, CurveFormer [1] employs polynomials to model the 3D lane from
the front view. While it avoids indefinite view transformation, the polynomial form adopted in their design restricts
the flexibility of capturing diverse lane shapes. In contrast,
current mainstream methods favor the utilization of 3D surrogate representations [7, 5, 8, 23, 3, 14]. These surrogate
representations are constructed based on front-view image
features and camera parameters, with no reliance on depth
information. Since lanes inherently reside on the road, most
of these methods build the 3D surrogate by projecting the
image features into a bird’s eye view (BEV) via inverse
perspective mapping (IPM) [31]. However, IPM is strictly
based on the flat ground assumption, thereby introducing
misalignment between the 3D surrogate and the original image in many real driving scenarios (e.g., uphill/downhill and

7941

