This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving CLIP Fine-tuning Performance
Yixuan Wei1 , Han Hu2 ,* Zhenda Xie1 , Ze Liu3 , Zheng Zhang2 , Yue Cao2 ,
Jianmin Bao2 , Dong Chen2 , Baining Guo2
1
Tsinghua University 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 USTC
{t-yixuanwei,hanhu,t-zhxie,t-liuze,zhez,yuecao,jianbao,doch,bainguo}@microsoft.com

Abstract
CLIP models have demonstrated impressively high zeroshot recognition accuracy, however, their fine-tuning performance on downstream vision tasks is sub-optimal. Contrarily, masked image modeling (MIM) performs exceptionally for fine-tuning on downstream tasks, despite the absence of semantic labels during training. We note that
the two tasks have different ingredients: image-level targets versus token-level targets, a cross-entropy loss versus a regression loss, and full-image inputs versus partialimage inputs. To mitigate the differences, we introduce a
classical feature map distillation framework, which can simultaneously inherit the semantic capability of CLIP models while constructing a task incorporated key ingredients of MIM. Experiments suggest that the feature map
distillation approach significantly boosts the fine-tuning
performance of CLIP models on several typical downstream vision tasks. We also observe that the approach
yields new CLIP representations which share some diagnostic properties with those of MIM. Furthermore, the feature map distillation approach generalizes to other pretraining models, such as DINO, DeiT and SwinV2-G,
reaching a new record of 64.2 mAP on COCO object
detection with +1.1 improvement. The code and models are publicly available at https://github.com/
SwinTransformer/Feature-Distillation.

1. Introduction
The pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm is instrumental in the success of deep learning methods in computer
vision, as evidenced by numerous influential works such
as [20, 30, 13, 39]. One common practice is to use
model weights pre-trained on ImageNet-1k classification
task [10] as the initialization for various downstream vision
tasks, such as object detection [13] and semantic segmentation [39]. However, this approach faces two key challenges:
* Corresponding Author. The work is done when Yixuan Wei, Zhenda
Xie, and Ze Liu are interns at Microsoft Research Asia.

Table 1: Improving the fine-tuning performance of the
ViT-B/16 CLIP model [42] via a classical feature distillation framework. The model is distilled on ImageNet-1K
dataset [10] with images only for 300 epochs. Clear gains
are observed on four evaluation benchmarks. MAE [17] results are also listed in gray for reference.
IN-1K (%) ADE20K
COCO
NYUv2
linear f.t.
mIoU APbox APmask RMSE (↓)
MAE [17] 68.0 83.6
48.1
46.5 40.9
0.383
Method

CLIP [42]
FD-CLIP
∆

79.5 82.9
80.1 85.0
↑0.6 ↑2.1

49.5
51.7
↑2.2

45.0
48.2
↑3.2

39.8
42.5
↑2.7

0.416
0.352
↓0.064

the difficulty in scaling up high-quality image classification
data, and the limited semantic information contained in category labels, both of which constrain the ability to further
improve model performance.
The recent CLIP [42] alleviates these challenges. It utilizes contrastive learning to learn representations from webscale noisy vision-language pairs. The learned representations exhibit impressive semantic modeling capabilities,
as evidenced by performance on zero-shot image classification and image-text retrieval tasks. Meanwhile, a new
self-supervised pre-training method based on masked image modeling (MIM) [2, 58, 17] has also attracted great
attention for its excellent fine-tuning performance on various downstream tasks. Without losing generalizability, we
mainly discuss MAE [17] in this paper.
When comparing the two pre-training methods, the CLIP
model learns richer semantic information reflected by its superior linear probing performance on ImageNet-1K. However, its fine-tuning performance on most other tasks are
worse than MAE, as shown in Tab. 1. This observation appears counter-intuitive since models with better semantics
are usually considered to have better transferability. This
raises a further question: can CLIP be made as successful
as, or even surpass, MIM in fine-tuning? To answer this
question, we firstly decompose the ingredients of these pretraining methods into three aspects: input ratios, training

5439

