This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoSign: Exploring Co-occurrence Signals in Skeleton-based
Continuous Sign Language Recognition

1

Peiqi Jiao1,2 , Yuecong Min1,2 , Yanan Li3 , Xiaotao Wang3 , Lei Lei3 , Xilin Chen1,2
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Xiaomi Inc., China
{peiqi.jiao,yuecong.min}@vipl.ict.ac.cn
{liyanan3, wangxiaotao, leilei1}@xiaomi.com, xlchen@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

B
RH

The co-occurrence signals (e.g., hand shape, facial expression, and lip pattern) play a critical role in Continuous Sign Language Recognition (CSLR). Compared to RGB
data, skeleton data provide a more efficient and concise
option, and lay a good foundation for the co-occurrence
exploration in CSLR. However, skeleton data are often
used as a tool to assist visual grounding and have not attracted sufficient attention. In this paper, we propose a
simple yet effective GCN-based approach, named CoSign,
to incorporate Co-occurrence Signals and explore the potential of skeleton data in CSLR. Specifically, we propose a group-specific GCN to better exploit the knowledge of each signal and a complementary regularization
to prevent complex co-adaptation across signals. Furthermore, we propose a two-stream framework that gradually fuses both static and dynamic information in skeleton
data. Experimental results on three public CSLR datasets
(PHOENIX14, PHOENIX14-T and CSL-Daily) show that
the proposed CoSign achieves competitive performance
with recent video-based approaches while reducing the
computation cost during training.

1. Introduction
Sign languages, as the primary means of communication
within the Deaf community, are naturally evolved and diversely structured systems in a rule-governed way [2]. Due
to their unique physical transmission system, the grammar
and vocabulary of sign languages differ greatly from that
of spoken languages. To provide a convenient channel between the Deaf and hearing people, vision-based Sign Language Recognition (SLR) has attracted much attention [23]
and recent works can be roughly divided into Isolated Sign

LH
M
F

B
RH
LH

M
F

Figure 1. Two examples of signs, EUROPA (Europe, the upper)
and UNWETTER (storm, the lower), from PHOENIX14 dataset.
SignWriting [43] entries (lexical notations) are positioned at the
bottom left-hand corner of images and the occurred signals (B,
RH, LH, M and F represent body, right hand, left hand, mouth
and face, respectively) are marked on the left side of the images.
EUROPA is mainly signed with mouth, right hand and body, and
nearly all signals occurred in UNWETTER.

Language Recognition (ISLR) [28, 18] and Continuous
Sign Language Recognition (CSLR) [1, 30].
Different to ISLR which predicts the corresponding
gloss from a segmented sign video, CSLR aims to recognize
a sequence of glosses from a continuous image sequence
and is more common in real-life applications. Video-based
CSLR develops rapidly in the last few years [13, 35, 9, 32, 5,
17, 30, 6]. However, video-based approaches are sensitive
to background and illumination changes [21] and may introduce privacy concerns [3]. Meanwhile, the computation
cost is a considerable problem because sign videos contain
much visual redundancy and recent CSLR approaches usually extract visual features in a frame-by-frame way. Compared with videos, skeleton data provide a more concise and
efficient representation for human body.

20676

