This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BEVPlace: Learning LiDAR-based Place Recognition using Bird’s Eye View
(a) Range Images
Images
Lun Luo1,2,4 , Shuhang Zheng2 , Yixuan Li2 , Yongzhi Fan2 , Beinan Yu2 , Si-Yuan Cao1,2∗ ,
Junwei Li1,2 , Hui-Liang Shen1,2,3 *
1
Ningbo Innovation Center, Zhejiang University
2
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
3
(b) BEV Images
Key Laboratory of Collaborative Sensing and Autonomous Unmanned Systems of Zhejiang Province
4
HAOMO.AI Technology Co., Ltd.
{luolun, zhengsh, yixuanli, tony fan, yubeinan, cao siyuan, lijunwei7788, shenhl}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Place recognition is a key module for long-term SLAM
systems. Current LiDAR-based place recognition methods usually use representations of point clouds such as unordered points or range images. These methods achieve
high recall rates of retrieval, but their performance may degrade in the case of view variation or scene changes. In this
work, we explore the potential of a different representation
in place recognition, i.e. bird’s eye view (BEV) images. We
validate that, in scenes of slight viewpoint changes, a simple
NetVLAD network trained on BEV images achieves comparable performance to the state-of-the-art place recognition methods. For robustness to view variations, we propose a rotation-invariant network called BEVPlace. We
use group convolution to extract rotation-equivariant local
features from the images and NetVLAD for global feature
aggregation. In addition, we observe that the distance between BEV features is correlated with the geometry distance
of point clouds. Based on the observation, we develop a
method to estimate the position of the query cloud, extending the usage of place recognition. The experiments conducted on large-scale public datasets show that our method
1) achieves state-of-the-art performance in terms of recall
rates, 2) is robust to view changes, 3) shows strong generalization ability, and 4) can estimate the positions of
query point clouds. Source codes are publicly available at
https://github.com/zjuluolun/BEVPlace .

1. Introduction
Place recognition plays an important role in both the map
construction and localization phases of long-term Simulta* Corresponding author.

(a) Range Images

(b) BEV Images

(c) Performance Comparison

Figure 1. (a) Two range images projected from two point clouds of
KITTI that are 5 meters apart from each other. A small point cloud
translation will cause distortions such as scale changes and occlusion. (b) The corresponding BEV images. The scale and position
distribution of objects on the road almost remains unchanged. (c)
Performance on various datasets. A simple BEV-based NetVALD
network achieves comparable Top-1 recall to the SOTA methods.
Our BEVPlace enhances the baseline further.

neous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) systems [3]. In
the map construction phase, it can provide loop closure constraints to eliminate the accumulated drift of the odometry.

8700

