This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

E3Sym: Leveraging E(3) Invariance for Unsupervised 3D Planar Reflective
Symmetry Detection
Ren-Wu Li1,2
1

Ling-Xiao Zhang1

Chunpeng Li1 *

Yu-Kun Lai3

Lin Gao1,2

Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University

renwuli1024@gmail.com, {zhanglingxiao, cpli, gaolin}@ict.ac.cn, LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk

Abstract
Detecting symmetrical properties is a fundamental task
in 3D shape analysis. In the case of a 3D model with planar
symmetries, each point has a corresponding mirror point
w.r.t. a symmetry plane, and the correspondences remain invariant under any arbitrary Euclidean transformation. Our
proposed method, E3Sym, aims to detect planar reflective
symmetry in an unsupervised and end-to-end manner by
leveraging E(3) invariance. E3Sym establishes robust point
correspondences through the use of E(3) invariant features
extracted from a lightweight neural network, from which
the dense symmetry prediction is produced. We also introduce a novel and efficient clustering algorithm to aggregate
the dense prediction and produce a detected symmetry set,
allowing for the detection of an arbitrary number of planar symmetries while ensuring the method remains differentiable for end-to-end training. Our method also possesses
the ability to infer reasonable planar symmetries from incomplete shapes, which remains challenging for existing
methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate that E3Sym
is both effective and robust, outperforming state-of-the-art
methods.

1. Introduction
Symmetry is a ubiquitous phenomenon in the real world,
from microscopic to macroscopic, from virtual to the natural world, from architecture to art. Over the last few
decades, considerable attention has been paid to symmetry detection from 2D to 3D. As a valuable property in 3D
shape analysis, symmetry is employed in a wide range of
* Corresponding author

tasks such as 3D reconstruction [26, 45, 47, 10], pose estimation [1], shape matching [17], etc. As a result, robust
and accurate symmetry detection is required for various applications. In this paper, we focus on detecting global planar
symmetry of 3D shapes.
Most of the early advances fall into one of the three categories: matching-based [27, 49, 46], sampling-based [43,
7, 31, 16, 20] and regression-based [15, 11, 42] methods.
Matching-based methods detect symmetries by matching
local shape signatures in pairs, generating potential symmetry planes, and optimizing them to obtain reasonable
solutions. Therefore, the key of matching-based methods
is to make the local shape signatures robust or invariant
w.r.t. Euclidean transformations. By sampling numerous
candidates in the transformation space and further verification, the main issue of sampling-based methods is their high
computational complexity if exhaustive sampling is used, or
generating inaccurate candidates when heuristic sampling
is used, necessitating complicated optimization. With the
help of expressive power of deep neural networks and large
amounts of training data, regression-based methods detect
symmetries by regressing symmetry parameters or symmetry point coordinates in a supervised [15, 42] or unsupervised [11] fashion.
It is evident that if we can establish accurate symmetric correspondences from the shape, it is straightforward to
find the planar symmetries. Generally, the symmetric correspondences with similar appearances or geometric structures are in a way that is position and orientation invariant.
The correspondence matching is based on the fact that local
shape patterns of symmetric counterparts are invariant and
should not be sensitive to symmetry transformations. Although this seems intuitive, how to establish the correspondences accurately and robustly is still challenging, which

14543

