This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D EFORM T OON 3D: Deformable Neural Radiance Fields for 3D Toonification
Junzhe Zhang1,3 * Yushi Lan1 * Shuai Yang1 Fangzhou Hong1
Quan Wang3 Chai Kiat Yeo2 Ziwei Liu1 Chen Change Loy1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
Nanyang Technological University 3 SenseTime Research
{shuai.yang,asckyeo,ziwei.liu,ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
{junzhe001,yushi001, fangzhou001}@e.ntu.edu.sg

Real Space

Pixar

Caricature II

Rapunzel

{wangquan}@sensetime.com

Animation

Editing

Style Degree Control

Figure 1: We propose D EFORM T OON 3D, an efficient 3D toonification framework which supports geometry-texture decomposed toonification over multiple styles. D EFORM T OON 3D is fine-tuning free and could be easily extended to a series of
downstream applications designed for the pre-trained GAN, e.g., animation given a driving video, semantic attributes editing
(+ bangs and smile), and flexible style degree control.

Abstract
In this paper, we address the challenging problem of
3D toonification, which involves transferring the style of
an artistic domain onto a target 3D face with stylized geometry and texture. Although fine-tuning a pre-trained 3D
GAN on the artistic domain can produce reasonable performance, this strategy has limitations in the 3D domain. In
particular, fine-tuning can deteriorate the original GAN latent space, which affects subsequent semantic editing, and
requires independent optimization and storage for each new
style, limiting flexibility and efficient deployment. To overcome these challenges, we propose D EFORM T OON 3D, an
effective toonification framework tailored for hierarchical
3D GAN. Our approach decomposes 3D toonification into

subproblems of geometry and texture stylization to better
preserve the original latent space. Specifically, we devise
a novel StyleField that predicts conditional 3D deformation
to align a real-space NeRF to the style space for geometry stylization. Thanks to the StyleField formulation, which
already handles geometry stylization well, texture stylization can be achieved conveniently via adaptive style mixing
that injects information of the artistic domain into the decoder of the pre-trained 3D GAN. Due to the unique design,
our method enables flexible style degree control and shapetexture-specific style swap. Furthermore, we achieve efficient training without any real-world 2D-3D training pairs
but proxy samples synthesized from off-the-shelf 2D toonification models. Code is released at https://github.
com/junzhezhang/DeformToon3D.

* Equal contribution.

9144

