This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Estimator Meets Equilibrium Perspective:
A Rectified Straight Through Estimator for Binary Neural Networks Training
Xiao-Ming Wu1 , Dian Zheng1 , Zuhao Liu1 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3,4 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China, 2 Pengcheng Lab, China,
3
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China,
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{wuxm65, zhengd35, liuzh327}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Binarization of neural networks is a dominant paradigm
in neural networks compression. The pioneering work
BinaryConnect uses Straight Through Estimator (STE) to
mimic the gradients of the sign function, but it also causes
the crucial inconsistency problem. Most of the previous
methods design different estimators instead of STE to mitigate it. However, they ignore the fact that when reducing the
estimating error, the gradient stability will decrease concomitantly. These highly divergent gradients will harm the
model training and increase the risk of gradient vanishing
and gradient exploding. To fully take the gradient stability into consideration, we present a new perspective to the
BNNs training, regarding it as the equilibrium between the
estimating error and the gradient stability. In this view, we
firstly design two indicators to quantitatively demonstrate
the equilibrium phenomenon. In addition, in order to balance the estimating error and the gradient stability well, we
revise the original straight through estimator and propose a
power function based estimator, Rectified Straight Through
Estimator (ReSTE for short). Comparing to other estimators, ReSTE is rational and capable of flexibly balancing
the estimating error with the gradient stability. Extensive
experiments on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets show that
ReSTE has excellent performance and surpasses the stateof-the-art methods without any auxiliary modules or losses.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have revolutionary development
in recent years since its admirable ability to learn discriminate features [31, 20, 15, 38, 45]. But they tend to require
massive computational cost and memory cost, which is unsuitable to deploy at some resource-limited devices. To this
* denotes the corresponding author.

2

2

1

1

0

large estimating error

-1

highly divergent
gradients

0

-1

-2
-2

-1

0

1

(a) Large Estimating Error with
Unchanged Gradients

2

-2
-2

-1

0

1

2

(b) Small Fitting Error with
Highly Variable Gradients

Figure 1: The intuitive illustrations of the equilibrium perspective of BNNs training, i.e., the equilibrium between the
estimating error and the gradient stability. When reducing
the estimating error, the gradients will become highly divergent, which harms the model training and increases the risk
of gradient vanishing and gradient exploding. Blue, orange
lines represent the estimators and sign function respectively.

end, many network compression methods have been proposed [25, 19, 23], such as pruning [39, 59, 58, 13], tiny
model design [55, 25, 49, 29], distillation [40, 50, 56] and
tensor decomposition[43]. Among them, network quantization [8, 44, 32, 21, 1] is a kind of excellent method with
high compression ratio and little performance degradation.
Binary Neural Networks (BNNs) [8, 9, 27], an extreme case
of network quantization which aims to quantize 32-bit inputs into 1-bit, attract great research enthusiasm in recent
years due to its extremely high compression ratio and great
performance in neural networks compression.
In BNNs research, the pioneering work BinaryConnect [8] proposes to apply sign function to binary the fullprecision inputs in forward process, and use the straight
through estimator (STE) to mimic the gradients of the sign
function when backpropagation, which achieves great performance. However, the difference between the forward

17055

