This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Workie-Talkie: Accelerating Federated Learning by Overlapping Computing and
Communications via Contrastive Regularization
Rui Chen1 , Qiyu Wan1 , Pavana Prakash1 , Lan Zhang2 , Xu Yuan3 , Yanmin Gong4 , Xin Fu1 , and Miao Pan1
1

University of Houston, 2 Michigan Technological University, 3 University of Delaware, 4 University of
Texas at San Antonio

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) over mobile edge devices is a
promising distributed learning paradigm for various mobile
applications. However, practical deployment of FL over
mobile devices is very challenging because (i) conventional
FL incurs huge training latency for mobile edge devices
due to interleaved local computing and communications of
model updates, (ii) there are heterogeneous training data
across mobile edge devices, and (iii) mobile edge devices
have hardware heterogeneity in terms of computing and
communication capabilities.
To address aforementioned challenges, in this paper, we
propose a novel “workie-talkie” FL scheme, which can
accelerate FL’s training by overlapping local computing
and wireless communications via contrastive regularization
(FedCR). FedCR can reduce FL’s training latency and almost
eliminate straggler issues since it buries/embeds the time
consumption of communications into that of local training.
To resolve the issue of model staleness and data heterogeneity co-existing, we introduce class-wise contrastive regularization to correct the local training in FedCR. Besides, we
jointly exploit contrastive regularization and subnetworks to
further extend our FedCR approach to accommodate edge devices with hardware heterogeneity. We deploy FedCR in our
FL testbed and conduct extensive experiments. The results
show that FedCR outperforms its status quo FL approaches
on various datasets and models.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the hardware advance, edge devices are becoming capable of training deep neural networks (DNNs)
on-device [8, 1]. Meanwhile, federated learning (FL) has
been emerging as a powerful distributed learning framework
which enables collaborative training without sharing the data.
FL over edge devices is promising to provide various appli-

cations, including e-Healthcare [2], map construction for
autonomous driving [36], smart farming in agricultural IoT,
etc. One of the most important challenges hindering FL over
edge devices from flying is the huge latency of FL training, which is mainly caused by wireless communications
between FL server and edge devices, data heterogeneity, and
hardware heterogeneity of edge devices.
Popular FL frameworks consider to interleave the computing of local model training and communications of local
model updates for FL training [22, 16]. If such FL training
is carried out across GPU clusters with Ethernet connection
(50-100 Gbps [32]), the network latency (≤1 ms) is negligible. Nevertheless, FL over edge devices are connected wirelessly, so the transmission bandwidth is limited and network
latency is too big to ignore. To cut the network latency in
wireless communications of model updates, recent research
efforts in [38, 37] overlapped local training phase with the
wireless transmission phase of model update. The update
correction scheme [38] was also developed to handle the issue of model staleness [4], which means using an old version
of global model to perform local training during FL training.
As demonstrated in our empirical studies (Section 3.1), the
existing update correction schemes face significant accuracy
drops and fail to improve the system efficiency when the
training data of edge devices are heterogeneous.
For most FL cases, local data distributions of edge devices are different from the overall global distribution. When
FL clients conduct local training on their own data, the local
model updates point to the direction towards the local optima,
which may not be consistent with the objective of the aggregated global model. It is called model drift issue [13, 17, 18],
and result in unstable FL training, which can severely slow
down the FL convergence. To address data heterogeneity
issue, existing approaches chose to share data across a subset
of devices [6], or to correct the local updates via variance
reduction [13]. However, those FL methods above cannot
deal with the model staleness issue. Besides, they do not
consider the hardware heterogeneity of edge devices.

16999

