This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Microfacet Fields for Inverse Rendering
Alexander Mai

Dor Verbin

Falko Kuester

Sara Fridovich-Keil

Google Research

UC San Diego

UC Berkeley

dorverbin@google.com

fkuester@ucsd.edu

sfk@eecs.berkeley.edu





UC San Diego
atm008@ucsd.edu





 

 

Figure 1: Our method (top) recovers materials, geometry, and illumination that closely resemble the ground truth (bottom),
optimizing directly from calibrated images of a scene. Here we show results on the materials scene from NeRF [27]: a
rendered novel view (left), surface normals (middle), and environment map illumination (right). Insets show high-fidelity
reflections, including interreflections, as well as accurate geometry, even in concave regions.

Abstract
We present Neural Microfacet Fields, a method for recovering materials, geometry, and environment illumination
from images of a scene. Our method uses a microfacet reflectance model within a volumetric setting by treating each
sample along the ray as a (potentially non-opaque) surface.
Using surface-based Monte Carlo rendering in a volumetric
setting enables our method to perform inverse rendering efficiently by combining decades of research in surface-based
light transport with recent advances in volume rendering
for view synthesis. Our approach outperforms prior work
in inverse rendering, capturing high fidelity geometry and
high frequency illumination details; its novel view synthesis
results are on par with state-of-the-art methods that do not
recover illumination or materials.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous recovery of the light sources illuminating
a scene and the materials and geometry of objects inside it,
given a collection of images, is a fundamental problem in
computer vision and graphics. This decomposition enables
editing and downstream usage of a scene: rendering it from
novel viewpoints, and arbitrarily changing the scene’s illumination, geometry, and material properties. This disentanglement is especially useful for creating 3D assets that can
be inserted into other environments and realistically rendered under novel lighting conditions.
Recent methods for novel view synthesis based on neural radiance fields [27] have been highly successful at decomposing scenes into their geometry and appearance components, enabling rendering from new, unobserved view1408

