This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Video Action Detection with Token Dropout and Context Refinement
Lei Chen1 Zhan Tong2 Yibing Song3 Gangshan Wu1 Limin Wang1,4 *
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Ant Group 3 AI3 Institute, Fudan University 4 Shanghai AI Lab
leichen1997@outlook.com
zhantong.2023@gmail.com
yibingsong.cv@gmail.com
gswu@nju.edu.cn
lmwang@nju.edu.cn

point to (an object), talk to

Abstract
Streaming video clips with large-scale video tokens impede vision transformers (ViTs) for efficient recognition,
especially in video action detection where sufficient spatiotemporal representations are required for precise actor identification. In this work, we propose an end-toend framework for efficient video action detection (EVAD)
based on vanilla ViTs. Our EVAD consists of two specialized designs for video action detection. First, we propose a
spatiotemporal token dropout from a keyframe-centric perspective. In a video clip, we maintain all tokens from its
keyframe, preserve tokens relevant to actor motions from
other frames, and drop out the remaining tokens in this
clip. Second, we refine scene context by leveraging remaining tokens for better recognizing actor identities. The region of interest (RoI) in our action detector is expanded
into temporal domain. The captured spatiotemporal actor identity representations are refined via scene context in
a decoder with the attention mechanism. These two designs make our EVAD efficient while maintaining accuracy,
which is validated on three benchmark datasets (i.e., AVA,
UCF101-24, JHMDB). Compared to the vanilla ViT backbone, our EVAD reduces the overall GFLOPs by 43% and
improves real-time inference speed by 40% with no performance degradation. Moreover, even at similar computational costs, our EVAD can improve the performance by 1.1
mAP with higher resolution inputs. Code is available at
https://github.com/MCG-NJU/EVAD.

1. Introduction
Vision transformers (ViTs) have improved a series of
recognition performance, including image classification [9,
46, 20] and object detection [5, 8, 40]. The image patches
are regarded as tokens for ViT inputs for self-attention computations. When recognizing a video clip, we notice that the
* Corresponding author.

…

…

…

…

…

enter

…

Keyframe

Non-keyframe

Figure 1: Spatiotemporal token dropout from a keyframecentric perspective. We maintain tokens from the keyframe
of a video clip, preserve a small amount of tokens from nonkeyframes based on actor motions, and drop out the remaining tokens in this clip. On the first row, we preserve tokens
relevant to the waving hand in non-keyframes as they benefit recognizing the action ‘point to’. On the second row, we
drop out tokens irrelevant to the action ‘entering’ in nonkeyframes for efficient recognition.
tokens are from each frame and thus formulate a large-scale
input for ViTs. These video tokens introduce heavy computations during training and inference, especially in the
self-attention computation step. While attempts have been
made to reduce vision tokens [36, 28, 12, 47] for fast computations, it is still challenging for video action detection
(VAD) [41, 16, 26] to balance accuracy and efficiency. This
is because in VAD we need to localize actors in each frame
and recognize their corresponding identities. For each actor, the temporal motion in video sequences shall be maintained for consistent identification. Meanwhile, the scene
context ought to be kept to differentiate from other actors.
Sufficient video tokens representing both actor motions and
scene context will preserve VAD accuracy, which leaves a

10388

