This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Unified Decompositional and Compositional NeRF for
Editable Novel View Synthesis
Yuxin Wang1
1

Wayne Wu2

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

2

Dan Xu1 *

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

ywangom@connect.ust.hk, wuwenyan0503@gmail.com, danxu@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Implicit neural representations have shown powerful capacity in modeling real-world 3D scenes, offering superior
performance in novel view synthesis. In this paper, we target a more challenging scenario, i.e., joint scene novel view
synthesis and editing based on implicit neural scene representations. State-of-the-art methods in this direction typically consider building separate networks for these two
tasks (i.e., view synthesis and editing). Thus, the modeling of interactions and correlations between these two tasks
is very limited, which, however, is critical for learning highquality scene representations. To tackle this problem, in this
paper, we propose a unified Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)
framework to effectively perform joint scene decomposition
and composition for modeling real-world scenes. The decomposition aims at learning disentangled 3D representations of different objects and the background, allowing for
scene editing, while scene composition models an entire
scene representation for novel view synthesis. Specifically,
with a two-stage NeRF framework, we learn a coarse stage
for predicting a global radiance field as guidance for point
sampling, and in the second fine-grained stage, we perform
scene decomposition by a novel one-hot object radiance
field regularization module and a pseudo supervision via inpainting to handle ambiguous background regions occluded
by objects. The decomposed object-level radiance fields are
further composed by using activations from the decomposition module. Extensive quantitative and qualitative results
show the effectiveness of our method for scene decomposition and composition, outperforming state-of-the-art methods for both novel-view synthesis and editing tasks1 .

1. Introduction
The reconstruction and rendering of natural scenes are
important for computers to understand the 3D physical
* Corresponding author
1 Project: https://w-ted.github.io/publications/udc-nerf

Background
Radiance Field

Object
Radiance Field

Composited
Radiance Field

Backward for Decomposition

Point on the background
Point on the object
Contributes to composition
No contributition to composition
Density prediction

Figure 1. Illustration of our decomposition-composition design. It
enables scene editing and novel view synthesis in a unified NeRF
framework. The proposed decomposition targets learning disentangled 3D representations of different foreground objects and the
background, allowing for scene editing, while scene composition
constructs an entire scene representation for novel view synthesis.

world. Fine-grained object-level representations within the
scene can bring significant benefits in various applications,
such as scene understanding, novel content generation via
object editing, and robotic manipulation. The emerging
neural rendering techniques [17, 18, 24] allow learning
object-level or scene-level representations from multi-view
posed images and enable rendering high-quality images
from novel views. However, most implicit neural methods
model an entire scene and lack fine-grained representations
of objects in the scene, which severely limits object-level
scene representation and understanding.
Learning effective 3D object-aware implicit neural scene
representations is still in its infancy. Existing works that
tackle this challenging problem typically utilize additional
object-level semantic supervision as a priori knowledge in
the model optimization [35, 37, 42]. For instance, ObjectSDF [35] considers learning object-level geometries and
semantics with an implicit signed distance function (SDF),
which achieves effective scene composition from object-

18247

