This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D VR Sketch Guided 3D Shape Prototyping and Exploration
Ling Luo1,2

Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1,2
Tao Xiang1,2
Yulia Gryaditskaya1,3

Yi-Zhe Song1,2

1

SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Center on Artificial Intelligence
3
CCM, Surrey Institute for People-Centered AI and CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom
2

Abstract
3D shape modeling is labor-intensive, time-consuming,
and requires years of expertise. To facilitate 3D shape modeling, we propose a 3D shape generation network that takes
a 3D VR sketch as a condition. We assume that sketches
are created by novices without art training and aim to reconstruct geometrically realistic 3D shapes of a given category. To handle potential sketch ambiguity, our method
creates multiple 3D shapes that align with the original
sketch’s structure. We carefully design our method, training the model step-by-step and leveraging multi-modal 3D
shape representation to support training with limited training data. To guarantee the realism of generated 3D shapes
we leverage the normalizing flow that models the distribution of the latent space of 3D shapes. To encourage the
fidelity of the generated 3D shapes to an input sketch, we
propose a dedicated loss that we deploy at different stages
of the training process. The code is available at https:
//github.com/Rowl1ng/3Dsketch2shape.

1. Introduction
The demand for convenient tools for 3D content creation constantly grows as the creation of virtual worlds becomes an integral part of various fields such as architecture
and cinematography. Recently, several works have demonstrated how text and image priors can be used to create
3D shapes [43, 28, 27, 16, 26]. However, it is universally accepted that text is much less expressive or precise
than a 2D freehand sketch in conveying spatial or geometric information [53, 12, 44]. Therefore, many works focus on sketch-based modeling from 2D sketches [38, 5, 4,
6, 31, 25, 13, 46, 58, 57, 55, 17, 21] as a convenient tool
for creating virtual 3D content. Yet, 2D sketches are ambiguous, and depicting a complex 3D shape in 2D requires
substantial sketching expertise. As Virtual Reality (VR)

Sketch

Randomly generated 3D shapes for a given sketch

Figure 1. Given a VR (Virtual Reality) sketch input, we generate 3D shape samples that satisfy three requirements: (1 - fidelity)
reconstructed shapes follow the overall structure of a quick VR
sketch; (2 - diversity) reconstructed shapes contain some diversity
in shape details: such as a hollow or solid backrest, and (3 - realism) reconstructions favor geometrically realistic 3D shapes of a
given category.

headsets and associated technologies progress [20, 19, 35],
more and more works consider 3D VR sketch as an input modality in the context of 3D modeling [52, 54, 42]
and retrieval [23, 24, 22, 51, 33, 34, 32]. Firstly, 3D VR
sketches are drawn directly in 3D and therefore provide a
more immersive and intuitive design experience. Secondly,
3D VR sketches offer a natural way to convey volumetric shapes and spatial relationships. Moreover, the use of
3D VR sketches aligns with advancements in virtual reality
technology, making the process of sketching and designing
more future-proof and adaptable to emerging technologies.
Existing works on 3D shape modeling assume carefully
created inputs and focus primarily on the interface and logistics of the sketching process. In this paper, we introduce
a novel method for 3D shape modeling that utilizes 3D VR
sketching. Our method does not require professional sketch
training or detailed sketches and is trained and tested on a
dataset of sketches created by participants without art experience. This approach ensures that our model can accommodate a diverse range of users and handle sketches that
might be less polished or precise, making it more accessible and practical for real-world applications. Considering
the sparsity of VR sketches, a single 3D shape model may

9267

