This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRFrac: Neural Radiance Fields through Refractive Surface
Yifan Zhan∗ Shohei Nobuhara† Ko Nishino† Yinqiang Zheng∗
∗
The University of Tokyo, Japan † Kyoto University, Japan
zhan-yifan@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp, {nob, kon}@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, yqzheng@ai.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) is a popular neural representation for novel view synthesis. By querying spatial
points and view directions, a multilayer perceptron (MLP)
can be trained to output the volume density and radiance
along a ray, which lets us render novel views of the scene.
The original NeRF and its recent variants, however, are
limited to opaque scenes dominated with diffuse reflection surfaces and cannot handle complex refractive surfaces well. We introduce NeRFrac to realize neural novel
view synthesis of scenes captured through refractive surfaces, typically water surfaces. For each queried ray, an
MLP-based Refractive Field is trained to estimate the distance from the ray origin to the refractive surface. A refracted ray at each intersection point is then computed by
Snell’s Law, given the input ray and the approximated local normal. Points of the scene are sampled along the refracted ray and are sent to a Radiance Field for further radiance estimation. We show that from a sparse set of images, our model achieves accurate novel view synthesis of
the scene underneath the refractive surface and simultaneously reconstructs the refractive surface. We evaluate the
effectiveness of our method with synthetic and real scenes
seen through water surfaces. Experimental results demonstrate the accuracy of NeRFrac for modeling scenes seen
through wavy refractive surfaces. Github page: https:
//github.com/Yifever20002/NeRFrac.

1. Introduction
Neural view synthesis has become one of the most popular topics in computer vision and graphics, thanks to the
breakthrough brought by NeRF[25]. Many follow-up works
have extended NeRF in various ways. Parameterization
of the viewing direction, however, has basically stayed
the same, which fundamentally limits their application to
opaque and mostly Lambertian surfaces which is easier to
interpolate with a neural representation. Significant departures from this fundamental requirement implicitly imposed
by the viewing parameterization can cause dramatic accu-

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Refraction causes significant erroneous deformations to NeRF as it fundamentally relies on straight-line
sampling. It produces artifacts when dealing with scenes
behind refractive surface. (b) Novel view synthesis of an
underwater scene. Our method is physically-based and
renders scenes through the refractive surface accurately in
comparison to past state-of-the-art NeRFs.

racy drop. To handle specular reflection, for instance, a
non-trivial reparameterization becomes essential [45].
Another limitation of NeRF is that it samples points on
straight rays. This is a stronger assumption than one may
think, as it implies that, under any circumstances, light
travels along a straight line from the scene surfaces to the

18402

