This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G2L: Semantically Aligned and Uniform Video Grounding
via Geodesic and Game Theory
Hongxiang Li1 , Meng Cao2,1 , Xuxin Cheng1 , Yaowei Li1 , Zhihong Zhu1 , Yuexian Zou1†
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
{lihongxiang, chengxx, zhihongzhu, ywl}@stu.pku.edu.cn; {mengcao, zouyx}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Query ‫ ݍ‬: The person sharpens the blade on the second belt.

The recent video grounding works attempt to introduce
vanilla contrastive learning into video grounding. However,
we claim that this naive solution is suboptimal. Contrastive
learning requires two key properties: (1) alignment of features of similar samples, and (2) uniformity of the induced
distribution of the normalized features on the hypersphere.
Due to two annoying issues in video grounding: (1) the coexistence of some visual entities in both ground truth and
other moments, i.e. semantic overlapping; (2) only a few
moments in the video are annotated, i.e. sparse annotation
dilemma, vanilla contrastive learning is unable to model
the correlations between temporally distant moments and
learned inconsistent video representations. Both characteristics lead to vanilla contrastive learning being unsuitable
for video grounding. In this paper, we introduce Geodesic
and Game Localization (G2L), a semantically aligned and
uniform video grounding framework via geodesic and game
theory. We quantify the correlations among moments leveraging the geodesic distance that guides the model to learn
the correct cross-modal representations. Furthermore, from
the novel perspective of game theory, we propose semantic
Shapley interaction based on geodesic distance sampling to
learn ﬁne-grained semantic alignment in similar moments.
Experiments on three benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Video grounding [18, 59, 36, 45, 17, 75, 8, 69, 72, 67,
6, 25] aims to identify the timestamps semantically corresponding to a given query within an untrimmed video,
which is a challenging multimedia retrieval task due to ﬂexibility and complexity of the query and video content. The
video grounding model needs well to model the complex
cross-modal correlations and semantic information.
† Corresponding author.

12032

݉ଵ

݉ଶ

݉ଷ

݉ସ

݉ହ

݉଺

Video
GT

(a)

Moment
Query
Positive
Negative
Pull close
Push away
Geodesic
Shapley Interaction

݉ହ
݉଺
݉ହ
݉ଷ
݉ଶ ݉ଵ

݉଺
݉ଷ

݉ଶ

݉ଵ

݉ସ

݉ସ

‫ݍ‬

‫ݍ‬

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of video grounding. ‘GT’ indicates the
ground truth. A comparison of (b) existing contrastive learningbased methods and (c) our proposed G2L method. G2L makes
semantically similar video moments closer in representation space
while exploring nuances among similar moments.

Contrastive learning [10, 23, 43] is proposed to learn representations by contrasting positive pairs against negative
pairs. With the popularity of contrastive learning in visionlanguage tasks [34, 13, 46, 7, 5, 64, 62], several works also
apply it to video grounding. Nan et al. [45] propose a dual
contrast learning to learn more informative feature representations by maximizing the mutual information between
the query and the corresponding video clips. This naive solution, however, achieves sub-optimum performance.
Generally, contrastive learning requires two key properties [58]: alignment and uniformity. Alignment favors encoders that assign similar features to similar samples. Uniformity prefers a feature distribution that preserves maximal
information, i.e., the uniform distribution on the unit hypersphere. We argue that these two issues are not satisﬁed in
current video grounding works with contrastive learning.
Firstly, the semantic overlapping issue is widespread,

