This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tiny Updater: Towards Efficient
Neural Network-Driven Software Updating
Linfeng Zhang, Kaisheng Ma*
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
zhanglinfeng1997@outlook.com, kaisheng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Mobile Phones

Servers
1. Donwload the whole model

Significant advancements have been accomplished with
deep neural networks in diverse visual tasks, which have
substantially elevated their deployment in edge device software. However, during the update of neural networkbased software, users are required to download all the
parameters of the neural network anew, which harms the
user experience. Motivated by previous progress in model
compression, we propose a novel training methodology
named Tiny Updater to address this issue. Specifically,
by adopting the variant of pruning and knowledge distillation methods, Tiny Updater can update the neural networkbased software by only downloading a few parameters
(10%∼20%) instead of all the parameters in the neural
network. Experiments on eleven datasets of three tasks,
including image classification, image-to-image translation,
and video recognition have demonstrated its effectiveness.
Codes have been released in https://github.com/
ArchipLab-LinfengZhang/TinyUpdater.

1. Introduction
With the availability of large-scale datasets [15, 16, 51]
and high-performance computing platforms, deep neural
networks have achieved remarkable achievements in various visual tasks such as image classification [18, 28, 75, 80],
segmentation [53, 62], and object detection [50, 67, 68, 76].
Encouraged by their impressive performance, numerous
software developers have effectively integrated neural networks into their software products and deployed them on
edge devices such as mobile phones and tablet computers.
Typically, the development roadmap for a neural
network-based software follows the paradigm illustrate in
Figure 1(a). Initially, users install the software by downloading all the neural network parameters from a cloud platform. Subsequently, as the software interacts with its users,
an abundance of new training data and requirements can be
* Corresponding author

2. Collect more data from users
4. Re-donwload the whole model
3. Re-train
model

5. Update

(a) Traiditional Model Updating

Mobile Phones

Servers
1. Donwload the whole model
2. Collect more data from users

3. Re-train model
by only changing
~10% parameters

4. Re-donwload only the changed
~10% parameters
5. Update

(b) Efficient Model Updating (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) the traditional model updating
scheme and (b) the proposed efficient model updating. In efficient
model updating, only around 10% parameters in the neural network are actually changed and thus users only require to download
these changed parameters for updating.

collected. Then, software developers may retrain the neural
network with the gathered data and update their software
to enhance its performance. However, during the retraining phase, all the neural network parameters are typically
changed compared to their values before updating. Consequently, users are compelled to download all the parameters
of the neural network again from the cloud platform, seriously impairing their experience. While recent research
has explored text prompts and adapter layers to fine-tune a
large-scale pre-trained model at a low training cost [52, 79],
there have been no prior efforts to reduce the download cost
during model updating, which has a more direct impact on
users with edge devices.
This paper proposes the challenge of efficient model updating with the objective of reducing the download overhead of neural network-based software during updating. As
1
23447

