This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UMIFormer: Mining the Correlations between Similar Tokens
for Multi-View 3D Reconstruction
Zhenwei Zhu† Liying Yang† Ning Li Chaohao Jiang Yanyan Liang*
Macau University of Science and Technology

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction, which lifts 2D view images to a 3D
representation of an object, is a challenging problem. It
plays an important role in numerous technologies, including intelligent driving, augmented reality and robotics. In
the situation of single-view input, previous works have attempted to improve performance by strengthening the network capabilities [9, 30, 21, 13, 35] and leveraging the
geometric information as priors knowledge [38, 39, 34].
However, for multi-view reconstruction, researchers con† Equal contribution. Email: {garyzhu1996, lyyang69}@gmail.com
* Corresponding author. Email: yyliang@must.edu.mo

Similar Tokens
Similar
Tokens

In recent years, many video tasks have achieved breakthroughs by utilizing the vision transformer and establishing spatial-temporal decoupling for feature extraction. Although multi-view 3D reconstruction also faces multiple
images as input, it cannot immediately inherit their success due to completely ambiguous associations between
unstructured views. There is not usable prior relationship, which is similar to the temporally-coherence property in a video. To solve this problem, we propose a
novel transformer network for Unstructured Multiple Images (UMIFormer). It exploits transformer blocks for decoupled intra-view encoding and designed blocks for token rectification that mine the correlation between similar tokens from different views to achieve decoupled interview encoding. Afterward, all tokens acquired from various
branches are compressed into a fixed-size compact representation while preserving rich information for reconstruction by leveraging the similarities between tokens. We empirically demonstrate on ShapeNet and confirm that our decoupled learning method is adaptable for unstructured multiple images. Meanwhile, the experiments also verify our
model outperforms existing SOTA methods by a large margin. Code will be available at https://github.com/
GaryZhu1996/UMIFormer.

Anchor

(a) Video tasks

(b) Multi-view 3D reconstruction

Figure 1: Comparison of the positional correspondence used for
inter-image-decoupled feature extraction in (a) video tasks and (b)
multi-view 3D reconstruction. Video tasks exploit the temporallycoherence property to establish the prior relationship as shown in
(a). For multi-view reconstruction, each patch is treated as an anchor and associated with its similar tokens from other views to
build the positional correspondence as shown in (b).

centrate on how to extract sufficient feature representation for the object shape from unstructured multiple images
[5, 32, 37, 33, 29]. This paper is devoted to multi-view 3D
reconstruction using the voxel representation.
In our investigation, the deep-learning-based algorithms
for multi-view reconstruction typically involve two steps:
feature extraction and shape reconstruction. The latter is
generally accomplished using a 3D decoder module, while
there are various solutions for the former including CNNbased and transformer-based methods.
CNN-based methods usually separate the feature extraction process into two stages. The first stage exploits a
backbone network to encode on intra-view-dimension while
the second stage processing on inter-view-dimension aggregate the features obtained from different views. The fusion method can be a pooling layer [22, 19, 10], a recurrent
unit [5, 11, 16] or an attention operator [37]. In addition,
Pix2Vox series [32, 33] put merger after decoder, which directly fusion the voxels predicted from different views, and
also achieve good results. To realize the merger adapting
the global state, GARNet [44] sets up two fusion modules,
which are located before and after the decoder respectively.
Transformer-based methods [29, 36, 26] that can directly

18226

