This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoGoPrompt: Synthetic Text Images Can Be Good Visual Prompts for
Vision-Language Models
Cheng Shi, Sibei Yang†
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
{shicheng2022,yangsb}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Project Page: https://chengshiest.github.io/logo †: Corresponding author
Activation Score between Text Image and Pure Image

0

30
Synthetic Text as Visual Prompt

Image

Bullet train

Bullet train
Bullet train

Correct Text Prompt

Taxicab
Bullet train

Higher score

Taxicab
Taxicab

Wrong Text Prompt

Taxicab

Lower score

Figure 1: Why can synthetic text images be good visual prompts for CLIP: (a) Images are sorted in ascending order of their
zero-shot CLIP scores with the text “A photo of train”. (b) Significant improvement of zero-shot CLIP scores for images
with synthetic text images as visual prompts. (c) Comparison of base-to-new generalization among prompt-tuning methods.

Abstract
Prompt engineering is a powerful tool used to enhance
the performance of pre-trained models on downstream
tasks. For example, providing the prompt “Let’s think step
by step” improved GPT-3’s reasoning accuracy to 63% on
MutiArith while prompting “a photo of” filled with a class
name enables CLIP to achieve 80% zero-shot accuracy on
ImageNet. While previous research has explored prompt
learning for the visual modality, analyzing what constitutes
a good visual prompt specifically for image recognition is
limited. In addition, existing visual prompt tuning methods’
generalization ability is worse than text-only prompting
tuning. This paper explores our key insight: synthetic
text images are good visual prompts for vision-language
models! To achieve that, we propose our LoGoPrompt,
which reformulates the classification objective to the
visual prompt selection and addresses the chicken-and-egg
challenge of first adding synthetic text images as class-wise
visual prompts or predicting the class first. Without any
trainable visual prompt parameters, experimental results
on 16 datasets demonstrate that our method consistently
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in few-shot learning,

base-to-new generalization, and domain generalization.

1. Introduction
Large-scale contrastive vision-language models (VLMs)
like CLIP [34] and ALIGN [18], pretrained on large-scale
image-text pairs via contrastive learning, encode general
knowledge about the alignment of visual concepts and textual sequences. VLMs with dual-encoder separately encode
images and texts into vectors in joint embedding space, enabling the transfer for downstream image classification by
treating image vectors as “image features” and text vectors
corresponding to classes as “classification weights”, respectively. The class-specific weights can encoded from handcraft prompts [34, 18, 10, 24, 25], such as “a photo of a
[class]”, where the [class] token is filled with real class
names. Thanks to exploring open-set visual concepts with
high-capacity text encoder, VLMs with handcraft prompts
show impressive potential in zero-shot transfer to image
classification tasks.
Recently, CoOp [52] and CoCoOp [53] utilize prompt
tuning [21, 27, 25] to learn a continuous text prompt with
only a few shots of images and improve zero-shot VLMs’
performance. However, the text prompt tuning can only

2932

