This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VidStyleODE: Disentangled Video Editing via StyleGAN and NeuralODEs
Tolga Birdal
Imperial College London

Duygu Ceylan
Adobe Research

{mali18, abond19}@ku.edu.tr

tbirdal@imperial.ac.uk

ceylan@adobe.com

Levent Karacan
Iskenderun Technical University

Erkut Erdem
Hacettepe University

Aykut Erdem
Koç University

levent.karacan@iste.edu.tr

erkut@cs.hacettepe.edu.tr

aerdem@ku.edu.tr

Driving
video

Moayed Haji Ali*
Andrew Bond*
Koç University

Input
t=3

t=6

t=9

t=12

t=15

t=17

(c) Disentangled
Video Manipulation

(b) Video Style
Manipulation

(a) Image
Animation

t=0

Long Sleeves

Sleeveless

Co-driving
Video

(d) Temporal Interpolation

(e) Temporal Extrapolation

Figure 1. VidStyleODE provides a spatiotemporal video representation in which motion and content info are disentangled, making it
ideal for: (a) animating images, (b) consistent video appearance manipulation based on text, (c) body part motion transfer ([blue] boxes)
from a co-driving video while preserving remaining driving video dynamics ([orange] boxes) intact, (d) temporal interpolation, and (e)
extrapolation. Zoom in for better viewing.

Abstract
We propose VidStyleODE , a spatiotemporally continuous
disentangled video representation based upon StyleGAN and
Neural-ODEs. Effective traversal of the latent space learned
by Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) has been the
basis for recent breakthroughs in image editing. However,
the applicability of such advancements to the video domain
has been hindered by the difficulty of representing and controlling videos in the latent space of GANs. In particular,
videos are composed of content (i.e., appearance) and complex motion components that require a special mechanism to
disentangle and control. To achieve this, VidStyleODE en-

codes the video content in a pre-trained StyleGAN W+ space
and benefits from a latent ODE component to summarize
the spatiotemporal dynamics of the input video. Our novel
continuous video generation process then combines the two
to generate high-quality and temporally consistent videos
with varying frame rates. We show that our proposed method
enables a variety of applications on real videos: text-guided
appearance manipulation, motion manipulation, image animation, and video interpolation and extrapolation. Project
website: https://cyberiada.github.io/VidStyleODE

7523

