This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Referring Video Object Segmentation with Cyclic Structural Consensus
Xiang Li1 ,* Jinglu Wang2 , Xiaohao Xu3 , Xiao Li2 , Bhiksha Raj1,4 , Yan Lu2
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Microsoft Research Asia, 3 University of Michigan,
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Abstract

1. Introduction
Referring video object segmentation (R-VOS) aims to
segment a referred object in a video given a linguistic expression. R-VOS has witnessed growing interest thanks to
its promising potential in human-computer interaction, such
as video editing and augmented reality.
In previous studies [1, 40, 7, 3], the R-VOS problem is
addressed with the strict assumption that the referred object
appears in the video, thus requiring object-level semantic
consensus between the expression and the video. However, this assumption is not always true in practice, leading
* This work was done when Xiang Li and Xiaohao Xu were interns at
MSRA.

Positive

R-VOS
CSC

False Pred.
True Pred.

‫܀‬૛ -VOS

Target Object

Negative

Referring Video Object Segmentation (R-VOS) is a challenging task that aims to segment an object in a video based
on a linguistic expression. Most existing R-VOS methods
have a critical assumption: the object referred to must appear in the video. This assumption, which we refer to as
“semantic consensus”, is often violated in real-world scenarios, where the expression may be queried against false
videos. In this work, we highlight the need for a robust RVOS model that can handle semantic mismatches. Accordingly, we propose an extended task called Robust R-VOS
(R2 -VOS), which accepts unpaired video-text inputs. We
tackle this problem by jointly modeling the primary R-VOS
problem and its dual (text reconstruction). A structural
text-to-text cycle constraint is introduced to discriminate
semantic consensus between video-text pairs and impose it
in positive pairs, thereby achieving multi-modal alignment
from both positive and negative pairs. Our structural constraint effectively addresses the challenge posed by linguistic diversity, overcoming the limitations of previous methods that relied on the point-wise constraint. A new evaluation dataset, R2 -Youtube-VOS is constructed to measure
the model robustness. Our model achieves state-of-the-art
performance on R-VOS benchmarks, Ref-DAVIS17 and RefYoutube-VOS, and also our R2 -Youtube-VOS dataset.

Query expression: “a kangaroo in the middle of two”

R-VOS

False Pred.

‫܀‬૛ -VOS

True Pred.
(None)

CSC

Video

Input frame

Prediction
2

Figure 1. Illustration of the new R -VOS task. A linguistic expression is given to query a set of videos without the semantic
consensus assumption in R2 -VOS. Videos containing the referred
object by the expression are positive, otherwise negative. Existing R-VOS methods such as Referformer [40] easily segment irrelevant objects in both positive and negative videos, as they do
not investigate the consensus. In contrast, our R2 -VOS method
achieves greater accuracy by incorporating cyclic structural consensus (CSC).

to severe false-alarm problems in negative videos (referred
object does not present in the video), as demonstrated in
Fig. 1. This limitation hinders the application of such methods in scenarios where matched vision-language pairs are
not available. We argue that the current R-VOS task is incomplete when assuming that the referred object always exists in the video.
Even with semantic consensus in positive videolanguage pairs, locating the correct object is still challenging due to its multimodal nature. Recent method MTTR
[1] employs multimodal transformer encoders to learn a
joint representation, and localizes the object by ranking all
presented objects in the video. ReferFormer [40] and the
image method ReTR [15] adopt the linguistic expression
as a query to the transformer decoder to avoid redundant
ranking of all objects. However, these latest R-VOS methods still suffer from a semantic misalignment of the segmented object and the linguistic expression, as shown in
Fig. 1. Some previous works [30, 2, 5] attempt to enhance
the alignment by imposing cycle consistency between referring expressions and their reconstructed counterparts, with-

22236

