This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRF-LOAM: Neural Implicit Representation for Large-Scale
Incremental LiDAR Odometry and Mapping
Junyuan Deng1 * Qi Wu 1∗ Xieyuanli Chen2† Songpengcheng Xia1 Zhen Sun1
Guoqing Liu1 Wenxian Yu1 Ling Pei1†
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Navigation and Location Based Services, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
College of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology
Abstract
Simultaneously odometry and mapping using LiDAR
data is an important task for mobile systems to achieve
full autonomy in large-scale environments. However, most
existing LiDAR-based methods prioritize tracking quality
over reconstruction quality. Although the recently developed neural radiance ﬁelds (NeRF) have shown promising advances in implicit reconstruction for indoor environments, the problem of simultaneous odometry and mapping
for large-scale scenarios using incremental LiDAR data remains unexplored. To bridge this gap, in this paper, we propose a novel NeRF-based LiDAR odometry and mapping
approach, NeRF-LOAM, consisting of three modules neural
odometry, neural mapping, and mesh reconstruction. All
these modules utilize our proposed neural signed distance
function, which separates LiDAR points into ground and
non-ground points to reduce Z-axis drift, optimizes odometry and voxel embeddings concurrently, and in the end generates dense smooth mesh maps of the environment. Moreover, this joint optimization allows our NeRF-LOAM to be
pre-trained free and exhibit strong generalization abilities
when applied to different environments. Extensive evaluations on three publicly available datasets demonstrate
that our approach achieves state-of-the-art odometry and
mapping performance, as well as a strong generalization
in large-scale environments utilizing LiDAR data. Furthermore, we perform multiple ablation studies to validate
the effectiveness of our network design. The implementation of our approach will be made available at https:
//github.com/JunyuanDeng/NeRF-LOAM .

1. Introduction
Simultaneous odometry and mapping is an important
component for autonomous mobile systems to achieve full
autonomy in large-scale environments. It estimates the 6degree-of-freedom poses of the vehicle and simultaneously
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors





$7(ɋ0Ɍ 

Figure 1. Simultaneously odometry and dense mapping results on
KITTI07. We present the reconstruction and the odometry result.
The odometry results are colored by the absolute trajectory errors
(ATE). Our proposed novel NeRF-LOAM accurately estimates the
poses of a mobile system and reconstructs the dense mesh map of
the outdoor large-scale environment.

builds a map of the environment, which are fundamental prerequisites for downstream tasks like path planning
and collision avoidance. LiDAR sensors have been widely
adopted for odometry and mapping due to their ability to
provide precise range measurements and robustness to illumination changes. However, it can be argued that the current LiDAR odometry and mapping algorithms prioritize
tracking quality over dense reconstruction quality, which
may overlook the potential beneﬁts of accurately capturing
environmental geometry and generating high-ﬁdelity reconstructions. Despite the popularity of LiDAR-based incremental pose estimation [15, 41, 26, 39], research on highlevel dense map reconstruction, especially deep-learningbased algorithms remains scarce.
Recently, neural radiance ﬁelds (NeRF) [32] has shown
promising potentials in representing 3D scenes implicitly
using a neural network and parallelly pose tracking methods [33, 51, 45]. Although such representation can achieve
seminal reconstruction with accurate poses, they concentrate on indoor pose tracking and scene representation with
RGB-D sensors. The sparsity of LiDAR data and the lack
of RGB information present signiﬁcant challenges for ap-

8218

