This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Spatio-Temporal Structure Prediction for Self-supervised Learning
on Point Cloud Videos
Zhiqiang Shen1,5 *, Xiaoxiao Sheng1 *, Hehe Fan2†, Longguang Wang3 , Yulan Guo4 ,
Qiong Liu5 , Hao Wen5 , Xi Zhou1,5
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Zhejiang University 3 Aviation University of Air Force
4
5
Sun Yat-sen University
CloudWalk

Abstract
Recently, the community has made tremendous progress
in developing effective methods for point cloud video understanding that learn from massive amounts of labeled data.
However, annotating point cloud videos is usually notoriously expensive. Moreover, training via one or only a few
traditional tasks (e.g., classification) may be insufficient to
learn subtle details of the spatio-temporal structure existing
in point cloud videos. In this paper, we propose a Masked
Spatio-Temporal Structure Prediction (MaST-Pre) method
to capture the structure of point cloud videos without human
annotations. MaST-Pre is based on spatio-temporal pointtube masking and consists of two self-supervised learning
tasks. First, by reconstructing masked point tubes, our
method is able to capture the appearance information of
point cloud videos. Second, to learn motion, we propose
a temporal cardinality difference prediction task that estimates the change in the number of points within a point
tube. In this way, MaST-Pre is forced to model the spatial
and temporal structure in point cloud videos. Extensive experiments on MSRAction-3D, NTU-RGBD, NvGesture, and
SHREC’17 demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method. The code is available at https://github.
com/JohnsonSign/MaST-Pre.

1. Introduction
In physics, motion is the phenomenon in which position changes over time. Because point clouds provide precise position information, i.e., 3D coordinates, point cloud
videos, which evolve over time, can accurately describe
the 3D motion in the real world. Effectively understanding point cloud videos can significantly improve intelligent
agents on the interaction with environments. Therefore,
the community has developed a few effective methods for
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

Time
Input Point Cloud Video

Temporal Cardinality Difference Prediction

Masked Point Cloud Video
Input Point Cloud Video Reconstruction

Point Tube:
t-1

t

t+1

Figure 1. Our MaST-Pre is based on spatio-temporal point-tube
masking. To enable a model to capture the appearance structure
in point cloud videos, we ask it to reconstruct masked point tubes.
To equip the model with motion modeling ability, we develop a
temporal cardinality difference prediction task.

point cloud video understanding, including video classification [9–12,40,50] and semantic segmentation [6,24,42,43].
However, most of these methods are based on supervised
learning and that requires much effort to carefully annotate massive amounts of labels. Moreover, learning via
only classification or segmentation may make deep neural networks take too much emphasis on the task itself
but largely ignore the subtle details of the instinct spatiotemporal structure in point cloud videos. To alleviate those
problems, we propose a self-supervised learning method on
point cloud videos.
Self-supervised learning uses supervisory signals from
the data itself and enables deep neural networks to learn
from massive data without human annotations. This is important to recognize more subtle patterns in data. Networks pre-trained with self-supervised learning usually
yield higher performance than when solely trained in a supervised manner [5, 15, 16, 19]. Although self-supervised

16580

