This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Sample Quality of Diffusion Models Using Self-Attention Guidance
Susung Hong

Gyuseong Lee
Wooseok Jang
Korea University, Seoul, Korea

Seungryong Kim

{susung1999, jpl358, jws1997, seungryong kim}@korea.ac.kr

(a) ADM [7] without (top) and with (bottom) SAG

(b) Stable Diffusion [27] without (top) and with (bottom) SAG

Figure 1: Qualitative comparisons between unguided (top) and self-attention-guided (bottom) samples. Unlike classifier
guidance (CG) [7] or classifier-free guidance (CFG) [14], self-attention guidance (SAG) does not necessarily require an
external condition, e.g., a class label or text prompt, nor additional training, improving the details of the images generated by
pre-trained diffusion models such as (a) unconditional ADM [7] and (b) Stable Diffusion [27] with an empty prompt.

Abstract
Denoising diffusion models (DDMs) have attracted attention for their exceptional generation quality and diversity. This success is largely attributed to the use of class- or
text-conditional diffusion guidance methods, such as classifier and classifier-free guidance. In this paper, we present a
more comprehensive perspective that goes beyond the traditional guidance methods. From this generalized perspective, we introduce novel condition- and training-free strategies to enhance the quality of generated images. As a simple solution, blur guidance improves the suitability of intermediate samples for their fine-scale information and structures, enabling diffusion models to generate higher quality
samples with a moderate guidance scale. Improving upon
this, Self-Attention Guidance (SAG) uses the intermediate
self-attention maps of diffusion models to enhance their stability and efficacy. Specifically, SAG adversarially blurs
only the regions that diffusion models attend to at each iteration and guides them accordingly. Our experimental re-

sults show that our SAG improves the performance of various diffusion models, including ADM, IDDPM, Stable Diffusion, and DiT. Moreover, combining SAG with conventional guidance methods leads to further improvement.

1. Introduction
Recently, denoising diffusion models (DDMs) [31, 33,
12, 7, 13, 27], which synthesize images from noise through
an iterative denoising process, have been actively researched and attracted attention due to their exceptional performance in synthesizing high-quality and diverse images.
Behind this remarkable success lies the introduction of
diffusion guidance methods [7, 20, 14]. Several studies
have revealed that to improve the quality of image samples
generated by diffusion models, guidance techniques using
The project page and code can be accessed at:
https://ku-cvlab.github.io/Self-Attention-Guidance/

7462

