This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReLeaPS : Reinforcement Learning-based Illumination Planning
for Generalized Photometric Stereo
Jun Hoong Chan1,2,†

Heng Guo3,4

Jieji Ren5

Zongqing Lu1,2

Boxin Shi1,2,‡

Platform

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo estimates the surface normal of an
object from images taken in a fixed camera viewpoint under
different light directions. From the early work of Woodham
[24], photometric stereo can be solved with at least three
calibrated lights under the ideal Lambertian reflectance assumption. However, shape recovery in the real-world scene
is more complex. For brevity, we denote generalized phoProject page: https://jhchan0805.github.io/ReLeaPS
† Equal contributions.
‡ Corresponding author.

Mean Angular Error / deg

Light

Illumination planning in photometric stereo aims to find
a balance between surface normal estimation accuracy and
image capturing efficiency by selecting optimal light configurations. It depends on factors such as the unknown shape
and general reflectance of the target object, global illumination, and the choice of photometric stereo backbones, which
are too complex to be handled by existing methods based on
handcrafted illumination planning rules. This paper proposes a learning-based illumination planning method that
jointly considers these factors via integrating a neural network and a generalized image formation model. As it is
impractical to supervise illumination planning due to the
enormous search space for ground truth light configurations, we formulate illumination planning using reinforcement learning, which explores the light space in a photometric stereo-aware and reward-driven manner. Experiments
on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that photometric stereo under the 20-light configurations from our
method is comparable to, or even surpasses that of using
lights from all available directions.

1

5

2
4

3

Robot
Arm
Object

Pitch

Rotate

Number of Lights
Q-value Map

Abstract

Mean Angular Error /
deg.

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Osaka University
5
School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
junhoong95@stu.pku.edu.cn, {ybh1998, zongqing.lu, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn,
heng.guo@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp, jiejiren@sjtu.edu.cn

1

2

3

4

Angular
error map

1

Bohan Yu1,2,†

1st step

2nd step

3rd step

4th step

Figure 1. (Left) Our online illumination planning validation setup
with the light direction being controlled by a robot arm. (Top
right) Normal estimation error under light distributions from different illumination planning methods. Photometric stereo using 20
lights from our illumination planning outperforms existing methods (DC05 [3] and TK22 [21]), and can even obtain comparable
results that use 100 light candidates (All). (Bottom right) Illumination planning results for a sphere object based on our ReLeaPS,
where the light directions are updated iteratively from the Q-value
map, driven by the reward of surface normal estimation errors.

tometric stereo as recovering surface normal from image
observations with consideration of general non-Lambertian
reflectances and global illumination effects such as shadows and inter-reflections. To achieve generalized photometric stereo, more lights with uniform distribution are generally preferred in existing methods [17], which can be timeconsuming and impractical. To overcome this limitation,
it is desirable to develop appropriate illumination planning
strategies that can achieve similar or better accuracy with a
limited number of light directions.
Despite the importance of illumination planning, few
methods have been proposed. An optimal offline light
source placement for Lambertian photometric stereo [3] has

9167

