This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TrackFlow: Multi-Object Tracking with Normalizing Flows
Gianluca Mancusi1
1

Aniello Panariello1
Simone Calderara1

Angelo Porrello 1
Rita Cucchiara1,3

University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy

Abstract
The field of multi-object tracking has recently seen a
renewed interest in the good old schema of tracking-bydetection, as its simplicity and strong priors spare it from
the complex design and painful babysitting of tracking-byattention approaches. In view of this, we aim at extending tracking-by-detection to multi-modal settings, where a
comprehensive cost has to be computed from heterogeneous
information e.g., 2D motion cues, visual appearance, and
pose estimates. More precisely, we follow a case study
where a rough estimate of 3D information is also available
and must be merged with other traditional metrics (e.g., the
IoU). To achieve that, recent approaches resort to either
simple rules or complex heuristics to balance the contribution of each cost. However, i) they require careful tuning
of tailored hyperparameters on a hold-out set, and ii) they
imply these costs to be independent, which does not hold in
reality. We address these issues by building upon an elegant
probabilistic formulation, which considers the cost of a candidate association as the negative log-likelihood yielded by
a deep density estimator, trained to model the conditional
joint probability distribution of correct associations. Our
experiments, conducted on both simulated and real benchmarks, show that our approach consistently enhances the
performance of several tracking-by-detection algorithms.

2

GoatAI S.r.l.

Matteo Fabbri2
3

IIT-CNR, Italy

tracks in subsequent steps. Tracking-by-regression unifies
detection and motion analysis, with a single module that
simultaneously locates the bounding boxes and their displacement w.r.t. the previous frame. Finally, in trackingby-attention, an end-to-end deep tracker based on selfattention [79] manages the life-cycle of a set of track predictions through the video sequence.

1. Introduction

Although the two latter paradigms have recently sparked
the research interest, tracking-by-detection still proves to be
competitive [88, 11], under its simplicity, reliability, and
the emergence of super-accurate object detectors [27]. In
light of these considerations, we aim to strengthen trackingby-detection algorithms by enriching the information they
usually leverage – i.e., the displacement between estimated
and actual bounding boxes [82, 88] – with additional cues.
Indeed, as shown by several works of multi-modal tracking [14, 87], the visual domain is just one of the possible sources that may contribute. The pose of the skeleton [16], the depth maps [62, 18] and even thermal measurements [45] are concepts that can gain further robustness, as
they encode a deeper understanding of the scene. In particular, as humans move and interact in a three-dimensional
space, one of the goals of this work is to provide the tracker
with the (predicted) distance from the camera, thus resembling what is generally acknowledged as “2.5D”. To achieve
that, we train a per-istance distance deep regressor on MOTSynth [25], a recently released synthetic dataset displaying
immense variety in scenes, lightning/weather conditions,
pedestrians’ appearance, and behaviors.

Real-time multi-person tracking in crowded real-world
scenarios is a challenging and difficult problem with applications ranging from autonomous driving to visual surveillance. Indeed, the work done to create a reliable tracker that
can function in every environment is noteworthy.
The most successful methods currently available in
literature can be broadly grouped into three main categories: tracking-by-detection [10, 5, 39], tracking-byregression [26, 36, 51], and tracking-by-attention [56, 85,
83]. In tracking-by-detection, bounding boxes are computed independently for each frame and associated with

However, the fusion of multi-modal representations
poses a big question: how to weigh the contribution of each
input domain to the overall cost? It represents a crucial step,
as its design directly impacts the subsequent assignment optimization problem: in this respect, existing works resort to
handwritten formulas and heuristics e.g., DeepSORT [82]
computes two different cost matrices and combines them
through a weighted sum. Notably, the authors of [62] build
upon a probabilistic formulation, which recasts the cost ci,j
as the likelihood of the event “the i-th detection belongs to
the j-th tracklet”. Afterward, it is about estimating a den-

9531

