This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Local or Global: Selective Knowledge Assimilation for Federated Learning
with Limited Labels
Yae Jee Cho†
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA

Gauri Joshi
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA

Dimitrios Dimitriadis†
Amazon
Seattle, WA

yaejeec@andrew.cmu.edu

gaurij@andrew.cmu.edu

dbdim@amazon.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [27] enables collaborative learning across clients without explicit disclosure of their local
data [18, 38]. In FL, a server updates its global model by
aggregating the local gradients obtained from clients’ training on their datasets. These clients can be a number of
edge-devices such as cell-phones (cross-device) [44] or a
handful of hospitals, for example, willing to train a model
for disease prediction without sharing patients’ private data
† Work done while at Microsot Research.

D

D

7

FF DF

3

FF DF

Many existing FL methods assume clients with fullylabeled data, while in realistic settings, clients have limited
labels due to the expensive and laborious process of labeling. Limited labeled local data of the clients often leads
to their local model having poor generalization abilities
to their larger unlabeled local data, such as having classdistribution mismatch with the unlabeled data. As a result,
clients may instead look to benefit from the global model
trained across clients to leverage their unlabeled data, but
this also becomes difficult due to data heterogeneity across
clients. In our work, we propose F ED L ABEL where clients
selectively choose the local or global model to pseudo-label
their unlabeled data depending on which is more of an expert of the data. We further utilize both the local and global
models’ knowledge via global-local consistency regularization which minimizes the divergence between the two models’
outputs when they have identical pseudo-labels for the unlabeled data. Unlike other semi-supervised FL baselines, our
method does not require additional experts other than the
local or global model, nor require additional parameters to
be communicated. We also do not assume any server-labeled
data or fully labeled clients. For both cross-device and crosssilo settings, we show that F ED L ABEL outperforms other
semi-supervised FL baselines by 8-24%, and even outperforms standard fully supervised FL baselines (100% labeled
data) with only 5-20% of labeled data.

3 F

D

D

DD

F

D

D

DD

(a) CIFAR10 (Cross-Device) (b) OrganAMNIST (Cross-Silo)

Figure 1: Test accuracy of the global model for varying amount

of labeled local data in each client. The fewer the labeled data,
the lower the test accuracy for standard FL algorithms (FedAvg,
FedProx) while our proposed F ED L ABEL performs significantly
higher. For CIFAR10, F ED L ABEL achieves an even higher test
accuracy than when 100% of labels are used.

(cross-silo) [32]. While FL can indeed allow clients to train a
single global model without private data sharing, a crucial yet
often overlooked limitation found in realistic FL scenarios is
that labels can be scarce [13, 9, 2, 21, 34]. In cross-device
settings, owners of edge-devices rarely go through the effort
of labeling all of their local data such as photos, resulting in
only a few labeled samples and a large volume of unlabeled
data. Similarly in cross-silo settings, such as hospitals collaborating for predicting diseases, labeling is often a laborious
process where healthcare experts are required to process volumes of patients’ data [15, 12]. Such scarcity of labels can
lead to severe performance degadation as shown in Fig. 1.
A naïve approach to tackle label scarcity in clients is
using standard semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods devised for general machine learning (ML) applications at each
client, using its own local data. For example, consistency
regularization methods [41] or pseudo-labeling methods [35]
can be directly used with each client’s local data with its local model. However, with limited labels, the feature-label
pair distribution of the labeled data can be different from
that of the unlabeled data as shown in Fig. 2 and previous
work [47, 3]. We call this difference between the two distributions as class distribution mismatch. As such, the limited

17087

