This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

zPROBE: Zero Peek Robustness Checks for Federated Learning
Zahra Ghodsi1 *, Mojan Javaheripi2⇤ , Nojan Sheybani2⇤ , Xinqiao Zhang2⇤ ,
Ke Huang3 , Farinaz Koushanfar2
1
2
Purdue University, University of California San Diego, 3 San Diego State University
1
2

zahra@purdue.edu

{mojan, nsheyban, x5zhang, farinaz}@ucsd.edu
3

khuang@sdsu.edu

Abstract
Privacy-preserving federated learning allows multiple
users to jointly train a model with coordination of a central
server. The server only learns the final aggregation result,
thereby preventing leakage of the users’ (private) training
data from the individual model updates. However, keeping the individual updates private allows malicious users
to degrade the model accuracy without being detected, also
known as Byzantine attacks. Best existing defenses against
Byzantine workers rely on robust rank-based statistics, e.g.,
setting robust bounds via the median of updates, to find malicious updates. However, implementing privacy-preserving
rank-based statistics, especially median-based, is nontrivial
and unscalable in the secure domain, as it requires sorting of
all individual updates. We establish the first private robustness check that uses high break point rank-based statistics
on aggregated model updates. By exploiting randomized
clustering, we significantly improve the scalability of our
defense without compromising privacy. We leverage the
derived statistical bounds in zero-knowledge proofs to detect and remove malicious updates without revealing the
private user updates. Our novel framework, zPROBE, enables Byzantine resilient and secure federated learning. We
show the effectiveness of zPROBE on several computer vision benchmarks. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that
zPROBE provides a low overhead solution to defend against
state-of-the-art Byzantine attacks while preserving privacy.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a popular
paradigm for training a central model on a dataset distributed
amongst many parties, by sending model updates and without requiring the parties to share their data. However, model
* Equal contribution

updates in FL can be exploited by adversaries to infer properties of the users’ private training data [28]. This lack of
privacy prohibits the use of FL in many machine learning
applications that involve sensitive data such as healthcare
information [31, 44] or financial transactions [45]. As such,
existing FL schemes are augmented with privacy-preserving
guarantees. Recent work propose secure aggregation protocols using cryptography [6, 3, 35]. In these protocols, the
server does not learn individual user updates, but only a final
aggregate with contribution from several users. Hiding individual updates from the server opens a large attack surface
for malicious clients to send invalid updates that compromise
the integrity of distributed training.
Byzantine attacks on FL are carried out by malicious
clients who manipulate their local updates to degrade
the model performance [13, 4, 2]. Popular high-fidelity
Byzantine-robust aggregation rules rely on rank-based statistics, e.g., trimmed mean [46, 43], median [46], mean around
median [42, 7], and geometric median [9, 21, 42]. These
schemes require sorting of the individual model updates
across users. As such, using them in secure FL is nontrivial
and unscalable to large number of users since the central
server cannot access the (plaintext) value of user updates.
In this work we address aforementioned challenges and
provide high break point Byzantine tolerance using rankbased statistics while preserving privacy. We propose a
median-based robustness check that derives a threshold for
acceptable model updates using securely computed mean
over random user clusters. Our thresholds are dynamic and
automatically change based on the distribution of the gradients. Notably, we do not need access to individual user
updates or public datasets to establish our defense. We leverage the computed thresholds to identify and filter malicious
users in a privacy-preserving manner. Our Byzantine-robust
framework, zPROBE, incorporates carefully crafted zeroknowledge proofs [39, 40] to check user behavior and identify possible malicious actions, including sending Byzantine

4860

