This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LD-ZNet: A Latent Diffusion Approach for Text-Based Image Segmentation
Koutilya PNVR† *

Bharat Singh‡∗

Pallabi Ghosh§

University of Maryland College Park†
{koutilya, djacobs}@umiacs.umd.edu

Behjat Siddiquie§

David Jacobs†

Vchar.ai‡

Amazon§

bharat@vchar.ai

{gpallabi, behjats}@amazon.com

Abstract
Large-scale pre-training tasks like image classification,
captioning, or self-supervised techniques do not incentivize
learning the semantic boundaries of objects. However, recent generative foundation models built using text-based latent diffusion techniques may learn semantic boundaries.
This is because they have to synthesize intricate details
about all objects in an image based on a text description.
Therefore, we present a technique for segmenting real and
AI-generated images using latent diffusion models (LDMs)
trained on internet-scale datasets. First, we show that the
latent space of LDMs (z-space) is a better input representation compared to other feature representations like RGB images or CLIP encodings for text-based image segmentation.
By training the segmentation models on the latent z-space,
which creates a compressed representation across several
domains like different forms of art, cartoons, illustrations,
and photographs, we are also able to bridge the domain
gap between real and AI-generated images. We show that
the internal features of LDMs contain rich semantic information and present a technique in the form of LD-ZNet
to further boost the performance of text-based segmentation. Overall, we show up to 6% improvement over standard
baselines for text-to-image segmentation on natural images.
For AI-generated imagery, we show close to 20% improvement compared to state-of-the-art techniques. The project
is available at https://koutilya-pnvr.github.io/LD-ZNet/.

1. Introduction
Teaching neural networks to accurately find the boundaries of objects is hard and annotation of boundaries at
internet scale is impractical. Also, most self-supervised
or weakly supervised problems do not incentivize learning
boundaries. For example, training on classification or captioning allows models to learn the most discriminative parts
of the image without focusing on boundaries [42, 60]. Our
insight is that Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) [38], which
* This work was done when Koutilya and Bharat were at Amazon.

A picture of an astronaut,
A picture of the Stonehenge
t=400
Latent Diffusion
Model

Latent Diffusion
Model
t=400
NULL

Figure 1: Coarse segmentation results from an LDM for two distinct images, demonstrating the encoding of fine-grained objectlevel semantic information within the model’s internal features.

can be trained without object level supervision at internet
scale, must attend to object boundaries, and so we hypothesize that they can learn features which would be useful for
open world image segmentation. We support this hypothesis by showing that LDMs can improve performance on this
task by up to 6%, compared to standard baselines and these
gains are further amplified when LDM based segmentation
models are applied on AI generated images.
To test the aforementioned hypothesis about the presence of object-level semantic information inside a pretrained LDM, we conduct a simple experiment. We compute the pixel-wise norm between the unconditional and
text-conditional noise estimates from a pretrained LDM as
part of the reverse diffusion process. This computation
identifies the spatial locations that need to be modified for
the noised input to align better with the corresponding text
condition. Hence, the magnitude of the pixel-wise norm
depicts regions that identify the text prompt. As shown in
the Figure 1, the pixel-wise norm represents a coarse segmentation of the subject although the LDM is not trained
on this task. This clearly demonstrates that these large scale
LDMs can not only generate visually pleasing images, but
their internal representations encode fine-grained semantic
information, that can be useful for tasks like segmentation.
Recently, text-based image segmentation has gained

4157

