This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Urban Radiance Field Representation with Deformable Neural Mesh Primitives
Fan Lu1 * Yan Xu2 * Guang Chen1 † Hongsheng Li2,3,4 Kwan-Yee Lin2,3 † Changjun Jiang1
1
Tongji University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 CPII
{lufan,guangchen,cjjiang}@tongji.edu.cn
yanxu@link.cuhk.edu.hk hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk junyilin@cuhk.edu.hk

Point Cloud

DNMP Initialization

Optimized Shapes & Radiance Features

Mip-NeRF: Novel View Synthesis (30° Rotated View)

Ours: Novel View Synthesis (30° Rotated View)

Figure 1. The basic idea of our method. Taking the patchy point clouds as inputs, we first voxelize the points and then initialize our
Deformable Neural Mesh Primitive (DNMP) for each voxel. During training, the shapes of DNMPs are deformed to model the underlying
3D structures, while the radiance features of DNMPs are learned to model the local radiance information for neural rendering. Based on
our representation, we achieve efficient and photo-realistic rendering for urban scenes.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have achieved great
success in the past few years. However, most current methods still require intensive resources due to ray marchingbased rendering. To construct urban-level radiance fields
efficiently, we design Deformable Neural Mesh Primitive (DNMP), and propose to parameterize the entire scene
with such primitives. The DNMP is a flexible and compact neural variant of classic mesh representation, which
enjoys both the efficiency of rasterization-based rendering and the powerful neural representation capability for
photo-realistic image synthesis. Specifically, a DNMP con* equal contribution. This work was done when Fan interned at Shanghai AI Laboratory. Fan’s contributions: 1) Code implementation; 2) Novel
database construction for latent space training and Loss Eq. (1); 3) Conducted most of the experiments. Yan’s contributions: 1) Proposed DNMP.
The structure design of DNMP and latent space construction for shape control; 2) Proposed representing the entire scene with local primitives as well
as the idea of hierarchical DNMP representation. 3) Drafted the paper and
designed most of the experiments.
†corresponding authors.

sists of a set of connected deformable mesh vertices with
paired vertex features to parameterize the geometry and
radiance information of a local area. To constrain the
degree of freedom for optimization and lower the storage
budgets, we enforce the shape of each primitive to be decoded from a relatively low-dimensional latent space. The
rendering colors are decoded from the vertex features (interpolated with rasterization) by a view-dependent MLP.
The DNMP provides a new paradigm for urban-level scene
representation with appealing properties: (1) High-quality
rendering. Our method achieves leading performance for
novel view synthesis in urban scenarios. (2) Low computational costs. Our representation enables fast rendering (2.07 ms/1K pixels) and low peak memory usage
(110 MB/1K pixels). We also present a lightweight version
that can run 33× faster than vanilla NeRFs, which is comparable to the highly-optimized Instant-NGP. Project page:
https://dnmp.github.io/.

465

