This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Anomaly Detection using Score-based Perturbation Resilience
Woosang Shin∗ 1,2
1

Jonghyeon Lee∗ 1,2

Taehan Lee1

Sangmoon Lee2

Jong Pil Yun† 1,3

Korea Institute of Industrial Technology (KITECH), South Korea
2
Kyungpook National University (KNU), South Korea
3
University of Science and Technology (UST), South Korea

{welldone, ljh0325, taehanlee}@kitech.re.kr

moony@knu.ac.kr

rebirth@kitech.re.kr

Abstract
Unsupervised anomaly detection is widely studied in industrial applications where anomalous data is difficult to
obtain. In particular, reconstruction-based anomaly detection can be a feasible solution if there is no option to use
external knowledge, such as extra datasets or pre-trained
models. However, reconstruction-based methods have limited utility due to poor detection performance. A scorebased model, also known as a denoising diffusion model,
recently has shown a high sample quality in the generation task. In this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised anomaly detection method leveraging the score-based
model. The proposed method shows promising performance
without requiring external knowledge. The score, a gradient of the log-likelihood, has a property that is available
for anomaly detection. The samples on the data manifold
can be restored instantly by the score, even if they are randomly perturbed. We call this score-based perturbation resilience. On the other hand, the samples that deviate from
the manifold cannot be restored in the same way. The variation of resilience depending on the sample position can
be an indicator to discriminate anomalies. We derive this
statement from a geometric perspective. Our method shows
superior performance on three benchmark datasets for industrial anomaly detection. Specifically, on MVTec AD, we
achieve image-level AUROC of 97.7% and pixel-level AUROC of 97.4% outperforming previous works that do not
use external knowledge.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection is an important task in the manufacturing industry. It finds its usage in production lines, such as
quality control through defect inspection. Consistent qual∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding author

Figure 1. Illustrations of the proposed method (Left) and the
reconstruction-based method (Right) for unsupervised anomaly
detection. The pink gradation solid line and dotted line denote
the negative log-likelihood and the manifold estimated by the reconstruction model, respectively.

ity control can be ensured by an automated anomaly detection system which reduces human labor and prevents the decrease in attention spans. Supervised anomaly detection is a
simple approach. However, sometimes, the supervised approach is not feasible in practical applications due to various
reasons. On real-world manufacturing lines, abnormal samples are rare. As a result, only a few abnormal samples are
available. Because abnormal samples are irregular and have
a large diversity, identifying abnormal patterns with a small
amount of data is difficult. Moreover, obtaining accurate
ground truth is time-consuming and requires experts with
domain knowledge. Thus, gathering an adequate dataset for
training the supervised method is impractical. Therefore, an
unsupervised approach that detects abnormal samples using
only abundant normal samples is widely used. The unsupervised approach to anomaly detection encourages learning useful features from only normal samples, with no prior

23372

