This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SMAUG: Sparse Masked Autoencoder for Efficient
Video-Language Pre-training
Yuanze Lin1 Chen Wei2
1
University of Washington

Huiyu Wang2 Alan Yuille2 Cihang Xie3
2
Johns Hopkins University 3 UC Santa Cruz

Abstract
Video-language pre-training is crucial for learning powerful multi-modal representation. However, it typically requires a massive amount of computation. In this paper,
we develop SMAUG, an efficient pre-training framework
for video-language models. The foundation component
in SMAUG is masked autoencoders. Different from prior
works which only mask textual inputs, our masking strategy considers both visual and textual modalities, providing a better cross-modal alignment and saving more pretraining costs. On top of that, we introduce a space-time
token sparsification module, which leverages context information to further select only “important” spatial regions
and temporal frames for pre-training. Coupling all these
designs allows our method to enjoy both competitive performances on text-to-video retrieval and video question answering tasks, and much less pre-training costs by 1.9× or
more. For example, our SMAUG only needs ∼50 NVIDIA
A6000 GPU hours for pre-training to attain competitive
performances on these two video-language tasks across six
popular benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Recently, video-language pre-training [27, 29, 2, 67, 12,
38, 54] stands as the common practice to learn cross-modal
representations on large-scale video-text datasets [47, 6, 2].
Such pre-trained models show strong transfer performances
on a range of vision and language tasks, including visual
question answering [62, 34], text-to-video retrieval [62, 1],
visual reasoning [48] and video understanding [33, 4, 58].
Nonetheless, the corresponding training cost of these advanced video-language models is enormous. For example, the training of CLIP4Clip [38] needs ∼2 weeks with 8
GPUs, which therefore largely limits their explorations in a
wider aspect. This invites us to ponder a thought-provoking
but rarely explored question in this paper: How can we
still pre-train powerful video-language models while significantly reducing their pre-training cost?
Interestingly, we note that the recent work Masked Au-

Figure 1: An overview of SMAUG (Sparse Masked
Autoencoder for video-langUaGe pre-training). (a) During
pre-training, we randomly mask out a large subset of individual frames’ patches, and then utilize the visible patches
and language sentences for video-text pre-training, which
includes masked visual/language modeling (MVM/MLM)
and etc. (b) The pre-trained models can then be fine-tuned
on several down-stream video-language tasks, e.g., text-tovideo retrieval and video question answering (video QA).
toencoders (MAE) [17], which establishes an efficient selfsupervised paradigm for training models at scale, potentially offering a solution to the aforementioned question.
In MAE, a large amount of image patches (e.g., 75%) are
masked. The heavy encoder only executes on a small portion of the visible patches, and the lightweight decoder
reconstructs the other large portion of masked patches.
This mask reconstruction process is a computationally efficient instantiation of masked visual modeling (i.e., MVM),
which has already been shown effective for helping videolanguage pre-training [13, 24]. Therefore, we conjecture
that resorting to such MAE fashion can substantially mitigate the computational burden and still achieve satisfactory
performances for video-language pre-training models.
Another interesting observation is that, even by masking
out a significant portion of image patches as in MAE, the
information could still be redundant [58, 11]. As argued
in [44, 31], not all patches are equally important: an im-

2459

