This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PlaneRecTR: Unified Query Learning for 3D Plane Recovery from a Single View
Jingjia Shi Shuaifeng Zhi* Kai Xu*
National University of Defense Technology, China

Abstract
3D plane recovery from a single image can usually be
divided into several subtasks of plane detection, segmentation, parameter estimation and possibly depth estimation. Previous works tend to solve it by either extending the RCNN-based segmentation network or the dense
pixel embedding-based clustering framework. However,
none of them tried to integrate above related subtasks into
a unified framework but treated them separately and sequentially, which we suspect is potentially a main source
of performance limitation for existing approaches. Motivated by this finding and the success of query-based learning in enriching reasoning among semantic entities, in this
paper, we propose PlaneRecTR, a Transformer-based architecture, which for the first time unifies all subtasks related to single-view plane recovery with a single compact
model. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments
demonstrate that our proposed unified learning achieves
mutual benefits across subtasks, obtaining a new state-ofthe-art performance on public ScanNet and NYUv2-Plane
datasets. Codes are available at https://github.
com/SJingjia/PlaneRecTR.

1. Introduction
Immersing in a virtual 3D world involves efficient reasoning about surrounding scenes, whose properties need
to be frequently updated. Though tremendous efforts have
been paid to create authentic 3D geometry from multi-view
image observations or even a single image, a trade-off exists between the reconstruction quality and efficiency, depending on the underlying scene representations [7, 21, 37,
38, 39]. 3D maps composed of sparse primitives such as
point clouds are light-weight to maintain but lack topological structures, while dense geometry like volumetric
grids and meshes are computational intensive to acquire and
maintain. In this spectrum, planar representation has been
proven to be a reliable alternative, which is compact, efficient, expressive and generalizable enough to be deployed
ubiquitously as well. Therefore, in practice it would always
1 Shuaifeng Zhi and Kai Xu are corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Illustration of PlaneRecTR. Our core idea is to use
unified query learning to jointly model all subtasks of single-view
plane recovery and output plane-level predictions, which achieves
mutual benefits among tasks and enables higher performance.

be ideal to infer planar information purely from a video sequence, or even a single image. Being a challenging and
yet fundamentally ill-posed computer vision problem, single view plane recovery/reconstruction has been extensively
researched and focused so far. There have been early attempts using image processing to extract low-level primitives, such as line segments and vanishing points, to extract
planar structures from the input image [8, 15].
As Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have become the major approach to tackle vision problems in the
past few years, their excelling in performance gradually
spreads to the plane estimation task. Pioneering works such
as PlaneNet [17] and PlaneRCNN [16] propose CNN-based
efficient solutions to piece-wise planar structure recovery
from a single image in a top-down manner. There have
also been bottom-up solutions such as PlaneAE [35] and
PlaneTR [23] which obtain plane-level masks by a postclustering procedure on top of learned deep pixel-wise embedding space. Recently, Transformers [25], as another major type of fundamental vision models, have made great
progress on various vision tasks [26, 9, 33, 24, 28]. The
success of vision Transformers does not merely comes from
its realization of global/long-range interaction across images via attention mechanisms, another important aspect is
the design of query-based set predictions, initially proposed
in Detection Transformer (DETR) [3] to enable reasoning
between detected instances and global context. The introduction of query learning technique to vision Transformers

9377

