This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pix2Video: Video Editing using Image Diffusion
Duygu Ceylan1* Chun-Hao P. Huang1* Niloy J. Mitra1,2
1
Adobe Research 2 University College London

Abstract
Image diffusion models, trained on massive image collections, have emerged as the most versatile image generator model in terms of quality and diversity. They support
inverting real images and conditional (e.g., text) generation, making them attractive for high-quality image editing
applications. We investigate how to use such pre-trained
image models for text-guided video editing. The critical
challenge is to achieve the target edits while still preserving
the content of the source video. Our method works in two
simple steps: first, we use a pre-trained structure-guided
(e.g., depth) image diffusion model to perform text-guided
edits on an anchor frame; then, in the key step, we progressively propagate the changes to the future frames via
self-attention feature injection to adapt the core denoising
step of the diffusion model. We then consolidate the changes
by adjusting the latent code for the frame before continuing
the process. Our approach is training-free and generalizes
to a wide range of edits. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
the approach by extensive experimentation and compare it
against four different prior and parallel efforts (on ArXiv).
We demonstrate that realistic text-guided video edits are
possible, without any compute-intensive preprocessing or
video-specific finetuning. https://duyguceylan.
github.io/pix2video.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based algorithms [8, 18, 48] have emerged as
the generative model of choice for image creation. They are
stable to train (even over huge image collections), produce
high-quality results, and support conditional sampling. Additionally, one can invert [31, 48] a given image into a pretrained diffusion model and subsequently edit using only
textual guidance [15]. Such a generic workflow, to handle
real images and interact using semantic text prompts, is an
exciting development and opens the door for many downstream content creation tasks.
However, the same workflow is barely available for
videos where the development of video diffusion models
* These authors contributed equally to this work

input video

per-frame

ours edit 1

ours edit 2

Figure 1: There has been exciting advancements in large
scale image generation models [41]. When applied independently to a sequence of images (‘per-frame’), however,
such methods produce inconsistent results across frames.
Our method uses a pre-trained and fixed image generation
model to consistently edit a video clip based on a target text
prompt. We show examples of two different edits (‘ours’).

is still in its infancy [32, 46, 61]. Not surprisingly, naively
applying an image-based workflow to each video frame produces inconsistent results (see Figure 1). Alternately, while
it is possible to use a single frame for style guidance and
employ video stylization propagation [20], the challenge
lies in stylizing new content revealed under changing occlusions across frames.
In this paper, we explore the feasibility of editing a video
clip using a pre-trained image diffusion model and text instructions with no additional training. We start by inverting
the input video clip and expecting the user to edit, using textual prompts, one of the video frames. The goal is then to
consistently propagate the edit across the rest of the video.
The challenge is to balance between respecting the user edit
and maintaining the plausibility and temporal coherency of
the output video. Image generation models already generate images faithful to the edit prompt. Hence, what remains

23206

