This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Long-tailed Object Detection via Step-wise Learning on Smooth-tail Data
Na Dong1,2 *
Yongqiang Zhang2
Mingli Ding2
Gim Hee Lee1
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
2
School of Instrument Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology
{dongna1994, zhangyongqiang, dingml}@hit.edu.cn

gimhee.lee@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Real-world data tends to follow a long-tailed distribution, where the class imbalance results in dominance of the
head classes during training. In this paper, we propose a
frustratingly simple but effective step-wise learning framework to gradually enhance the capability of the model in
detecting all categories of long-tailed datasets. Specifically,
we build smooth-tail data where the long-tailed distribution of categories decays smoothly to correct the bias towards head classes. We pre-train a model on the whole
long-tailed data to preserve discriminability between all categories. We then fine-tune the class-agnostic modules of
the pre-trained model on the head class dominant replay
data to get a head class expert model with improved decision boundaries from all categories. Finally, we train a
unified model on the tail class dominant replay data while
transferring knowledge from the head class expert model
to ensure accurate detection of all categories. Extensive
experiments on long-tailed datasets LVIS v0.5 and LVIS
v1.0 demonstrate the superior performance of our method,
where we can improve the AP with ResNet-50 backbone from
27.0% to 30.3% AP, and especially for the rare categories
from 15.5% to 24.9% AP. Our best model using ResNet-101
backbone can achieve 30.7% AP, which suppresses all existing detectors using the same backbone. Our source code is
available at https://github.com/dongnana777/
Long-tailed-object-detection.

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning are seen in many computer
vision tasks including object detection. Many deep learningbased approaches [5, 29, 4, 17, 23, 20, 18, 1, 39] are proposed and have shown impressive performance in localizing
and classifying objects of interest in 2D images. However,
it is important for these deep learning-based approaches
to be trained on balanced and representative datasets. Un* Work fully done while first author is a visiting PhD student at the
National University of Singapore.

Figure 1. LST [10] is more susceptible to catastrophic forgetting
due to their incremental learning scheme with numerous data splits.
We alleviate the problem by building smooth-tail data that flattens
long-tailed datasets and always maintains data from all categories.

fortunately, most real-world datasets always follow a longtailed distribution, where the head classes have a significantly
larger number of instances than the tail classes. Training on
such imbalanced datasets often leads to bias towards head
classes and significant performance degeneration of the tail
classes due to the extremely scarce samples.
To circumvent the long-tailed distribution problem of object detection task, many attempts exploit data re-sampling
and loss re-weighting approaches. Data re-sampling methods [6, 31] re-balance the distribution of the instance numbers of each category. Loss re-weighting methods [28, 30,
15] adopt different re-weighting strategies to adjust the loss
of different categories based on each category’s statistics. As
shown in Figure 2, Hu et al. [10] proposes LST which is a
"divide & conquer" strategy that leverages class-incremental
few-shot learning to solve the long-tailed distribution problem. The model is first trained with abundant labeled data of
the head classes. The categories in the long-tailed training
data is then sorted and divided according to the number of
samples to get the corresponding subsets for incremental
learning and merging of each part in N phases.
Despite the innovative adoption of class-incremental fewshot learning on the long-tailed distribution problem, we
find that [10] catastrophically forgets the knowledge of the
head classes and cannot sufficiently learn the tail classes in
their incremental learning process. We postulate that this

6940

