This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3DMiner: Discovering Shapes from Large-Scale Unannotated Image Datasets
Ta-Ying Cheng1 * Matheus Gadelha2 Sören Pirk2 Thibault Groueix2
Radomı́r Mĕch2 Andrew Markham1 Niki Trigoni1
1

2

University of Oxford

Adobe Research

Large-Scale Unannotated Image Datasets

Associated Poses and 3D Shapes

3DMiner

Figure 1: Overview. We present 3DMiner, a scalable framework designed to obtain associating poses and reconstruct shapes from diverse
and realistic sets of images without any 3D data, pose annotation, camera information, or keypoints.

Abstract
We present 3DMiner – a pipeline for mining 3D shapes
from challenging large-scale unannotated image datasets.
Unlike other unsupervised 3D reconstruction methods, we
assume that, within a large-enough dataset, there must exist images of objects with similar shapes but varying backgrounds, textures, and viewpoints. Our approach leverages the recent advances in learning self-supervised image
representations to cluster images with geometrically similar shapes and find common image correspondences between them. We then exploit these correspondences to obtain rough camera estimates as initialization for bundleadjustment. Finally, for every image cluster, we apply a progressive bundle-adjusting reconstruction method to learn a
neural occupancy field representing the underlying shape.
We show that this procedure is robust to several types of errors introduced in previous steps (e.g., wrong camera poses,
images containing dissimilar shapes, etc.), allowing us to
obtain shape and pose annotations for images in-the-wild.
When using images from Pix3D chairs, our method is capable of producing significantly better results than stateof-the-art unsupervised 3D reconstruction techniques, both
quantitatively and qualitatively. Furthermore, we show how
3DMiner can be applied to in-the-wild data by reconstructing shapes present in images from the LAION-5B dataset.
Project Page: https://ttchengab.github.io/3dminerOfficial.

1. Introduction
Learning-based systems that try to reason about 3D geometry from images suffer from a fundamental limitation:
the amount of available 3D data. Despite recent advances
in capturing the world tridimensionally, the biggest image
datasets still contain many orders of magnitude more data
points than their 3D counterparts. In practice, the sheer
quantity of images ends up capturing a much richer visual
vocabulary – different textures, illuminations, shapes, environments, types of objects and relationships between them.
Therefore, developing techniques that can leverage this information is the key to general, high-performing 3D reconstruction algorithms. Unfortunately, the abundance and variety of visual data in image datasets leads to great complexity when trying to extract 3D information. Consider
a very simple dataset consisting of multiple images of the
same object in the same environment taken from different
camera viewpoints. Extracting 3D information is not entirely trivial, but potentially doable through stucture-frommotion approaches. However, if we increase the complexity of this dataset by adding images of the object in different environments, different materials and with slight shape
variations, structure-from-motion techniques will fail. The
complexity only increases when we consider all the possible image permutations that one can find online: a myriad
* Work was partially done during internship at Adobe Research.

19331

