This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NPC: Neural Point Characters from Video
Shih-Yang Su1
Timur Bagautdinov2
Helge Rhodin1
1
The University of British Columbia 2 Reality Labs Research

Figure 1: Neural Point Characters (NPC) is an animatable point-based body model that improves fidelity and generality.
NPC can be learned from a single or multiple videos, generalizes well to novel poses and does not require a pre-built surface.
Back to front: driving motion, estimated point cloud, and neural character model. All faces are blurred for anonymity.

Abstract
High-fidelity human 3D models can now be learned directly from videos, typically by combining a template-based
surface model with neural representations. However, obtaining a template surface requires expensive multi-view
capture systems, laser scans, or strictly controlled conditions. Previous methods avoid using a template but rely on
a costly or ill-posed mapping from observation to canonical space. We propose a hybrid point-based representation for reconstructing animatable characters that does
not require an explicit surface model, while being generalizable to novel poses. For a given video, our method
automatically produces an explicit set of 3D points representing approximate canonical geometry, and learns an articulated deformation model that produces pose-dependent
point transformations. The points serve both as a scaffold
for high-frequency neural features and an anchor for efficiently mapping between observation and canonical space.
We demonstrate on established benchmarks that our representation overcomes limitations of prior work operating in
either canonical or in observation space. Moreover, our automatic point extraction approach enables learning models
of human and animal characters alike, matching the performance of the methods using rigged surface templates
despite being more general. Project website: https:
//lemonatsu.github.io/npc/.

1. Introduction
It is now possible to reconstruct photo-realistic characters from monocular videos, but reaching high-fidelity reconstructions still requires controlled conditions and dedicated capture hardware that prevents large-scale use. While
static scenes can be reconstructed from multiple views
recorded with a single moving camera, capturing dynamic
human motion demands controlled studio conditions [2, 22,
23, 39], usually with a large number of synchronized cameras. One way to tackle the monocular case is to exploit
the intuition that movement of the camera with respect to
a body part is roughly equivalent to moving a body part
with respect to the camera [43, 44]. However, the unconstrained setting remains difficult, as it requires establishing
correspondences across frames and through dynamic deformation.
A prominent line of work follows the traditional animation pipeline—rigging a surface mesh to an underlying
skeleton and equipping the mesh either with a neural texture [2, 22] or learnable vertex features [16, 34, 35]. This
approach is very efficient, as the forward mapping using forward kinematics provides a robust estimate of underlying
geometry in closed form, and it also allows for high-quality
reconstructions, as neural textures are capable of representing high-frequency details [22, 46]. However, it does require highly accurate 3D pose and body shape, which are

14795

