This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robustifying Token Attention for Vision Transformers
Yong Guo, David Stutz, Bernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
guoyongcs@gmail.com, {david.stutz,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract

1. Introduction
Despite the success of vision transformers (ViTs), their
performance still drops significantly on common image corruptions such as ImageNet-C [24, 52, 19], adversarial examples [18, 16, 40, 56], and out-of-distribution examples
as benchmarked in ImageNet-A/R/P [64, 24]. In this paper,
we examine a key component of ViTs, i.e., the self-attention
mechanism, to understand these performance drops. Interestingly, we discover a phenomenon we call token overfo-

Ours

Clean

FAN-B-Hybrid

Gaussian Noise

Despite the success of vision transformers (ViTs), they
still suffer from significant drops in accuracy in the presence
of common corruptions, such as noise or blur. Interestingly,
we observe that the attention mechanism of ViTs tends to
rely on few important tokens, a phenomenon we call token
overfocusing. More critically, these tokens are not robust
to corruptions, often leading to highly diverging attention
patterns. In this paper, we intend to alleviate this overfocusing issue and make attention more stable through two
general techniques: First, our Token-aware Average Pooling (TAP) module encourages the local neighborhood of
each token to take part in the attention mechanism. Specifically, TAP learns average pooling schemes for each token
such that the information of potentially important tokens
in the neighborhood can adaptively be taken into account.
Second, we force the output tokens to aggregate information from a diverse set of input tokens rather than focusing
on just a few by using our Attention Diversification Loss
(ADL). We achieve this by penalizing high cosine similarity
between the attention vectors of different tokens. In experiments, we apply our methods to a wide range of transformer
architectures and improve robustness significantly. For example, we improve corruption robustness on ImageNet-C
by 2.4% while improving accuracy by 0.4% based on stateof-the-art robust architecture FAN. Also, when fine-tuning
on semantic segmentation tasks, we improve robustness on
CityScapes-C by 2.4% and ACDC by 3.0%. Our code is
available at https://github.com/guoyongcs/TAPADL.

Input

Figure 1. Stability against image corruptions in terms of attention
visualization (left, a matrix of 196×196) and cosine similarity of
attention between clean and corrupted examples (right). Left: We
average the attention maps across different heads for visualization
and show the results of the last layer. We observe that ViTs put
too much focus on very few tokens, a phenomenon we call token
overfocusing. More critically, the attention of the baseline FAN
model [16] is fragile to image corruptions, e.g., with Gaussian
noise. Our approach, in contrast, alleviates token overfocusing
and thereby improves stability of the attention against corruptions.
Right: On ImageNet, we plot the distribution of cosine similarities
across all layers (without averaging heads) between clean and corrupted examples. We show that our model yields a significantly
higher similarity score than the baseline model.

cusing, where only few important tokens are relied upon by
the attention mechanism across all heads and layers. We
hypothesize that this overfocusing is particularly fragile to
the corruptions on input images and greatly hampers the robustness of the attention mechanism.
Starting from the state-of-the-art robust architecture
FAN [67], we exemplarily investigate the last attention layer
(see attention of other layers in supplementary). Specifically, Figure 1 shows a clean and a corrupted input image
as well as the corresponding attention maps. These are matrices of N × N , with N being the number of input/output
tokens. Here, the i-th row indicates which input tokens
(columns) the i-th output token “attends” to – darker red
indicates higher attention scores. Token overfocusing can
then, informally, be defined by observing pronounced vertical lines in the attention map: First, each output token (row)
focuses on only few important input tokens, ignoring most

17557

