This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ΣIGMA: Scale-Invariant Global Sparse Shape Matching
Maolin Gao1,4
Paul Roetzer3
Marvin Eisenberger1,4
Zorah Lähner2
Michael Moeller2
Daniel Cremers1,4,5
Florian Bernard3
1

Technical University of Munich 2 University of Siegen 3 University of Bonn
4
Munich Center for Machine Learning 5 University of Oxford

(a) Non-rigidity & scale difference

(b) Partiality & scale difference

Runtime vs. Shape Resolution

60
40
SM-comb [38]
PMSDP [25]
Mina [6]
Ours

20
0
0

1,000

2,000
Runtime (s)

3,000

(c) Global optimality (TOSCA)

Runtime (s·103 )

% Pairs w/ Closed Gap

Optimality vs. Runtime
80

4

Max. Time Budget

3

SM-comb [38]
PMSDP [25]
MINA [6]
Ours

2
1
0

2

4
6
# Faces ·103

8

(d) Scalability

Figure 1: We propose a sparse non-rigid shape matching approach that is provably invariant to rigid transformations and
global scaling, can (often) be solved to optimality, and scales linearly with mesh resolution. (a, b) Our matchings for nonrigid shapes with drastically different scale and partiality. (c, d) Our method is the only one that is able to both solve the
majority of pairs to global optimality within a time budget of 1h, as well as scaling up to high mesh resolutions.

Abstract
We propose a novel mixed-integer programming (MIP)
formulation for generating precise sparse correspondences
for highly non-rigid shapes. To this end, we introduce a
projected Laplace-Beltrami operator (PLBO) which combines intrinsic and extrinsic geometric information to measure the deformation quality induced by predicted correspondences. We integrate the PLBO, together with an
orientation-aware regulariser, into a novel MIP formulation that can be solved to global optimality for many practical problems. In contrast to previous methods, our approach is provably invariant to rigid transformations and
global scaling, initialisation-free, has optimality guarantees, and scales to high resolution meshes with (empirically observed) linear time. We show state-of-the-art results for sparse non-rigid matching on several challenging
3D datasets, including data with inconsistent meshing, as
well as applications in mesh-to-point-cloud matching.

1. Introduction
Finding correspondences or matchings between parts of
3D shapes is a well-studied problem that lies at the heart

of many tasks in computer vision, computer graphics and
beyond. Example tasks related to such 3D shape matching problems include generative shape modelling [49], 3D
shape analysis [34], motion capture [46], or model-based
image segmentation [5], which are relevant for applications
in autonomous driving, robotics, and biomedicine.
While 3D shape matching is traditionally addressed
in terms of an optimisation problem formulation, in recent years learning-based approaches became more popular. Specifically, with the advent of geometric deep learning we have witnessed a dramatic improvement in the performance of data-driven methods for 3D shape matching,
even for difficult settings such as unsupervised learning for
partial shapes [13, 3]. Yet, such learning-based approaches
lack theoretical guarantees, both regarding the (global) optimality and often also regarding structural properties of
obtained solutions. While optimality guarantees are crucial in safety-critical domains (e.g. autonomous driving,
or computer-aided surgery), desirable structural properties
may be related to geometric consistency, such as smoothness or the continuity of matchings [48]. From a technical point of view it is typically straightforward to impose respective structural properties within an optimisation-

645

