This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geometrized Transformer for Self-Supervised Homography Estimation

Jiazhen Liu and Xirong Li*
Key Lab of DEKE, Renmin University of China
{liujiazhen, xirong}@ruc.edu.cn
https://github.com/ruc-aimc-lab/GeoFormer

Abstract
For homography estimation, we propose Geometrized
Transformer (GeoFormer), a new detector-free feature
matching method. Current detector-free methods, e.g.
LoFTR, lack an effective mean to accurately localize
small and thus computationally feasible regions for crossattention diffusion. We resolve the challenge with an extremely simple idea: using the classical RANSAC geometry for attentive region search. Given coarse matches by
LoFTR, a homography is obtained with ease. Such a homography allows us to compute cross-attention in a focused manner, where key/value sets required by Transformers can be reduced to small fix-sized regions rather than
an entire image. Local features can thus be enhanced
by standard Transformers. We integrate GeoFormer into
the LoFTR framework. By minimizing a multi-scale crossentropy based matching loss on auto-generated training
data, the network is trained in a fully self-supervised manner. Extensive experiments are conducted on multiple realworld datasets covering natural images, heavily manipulated pictures and retinal images. The proposed method
compares favorably against the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Homography estimation, also known as perspective
transformation or planar projection, is a fundamental problem in computer vision and robotics. It involves estimating a 3 × 3 matrix that maps corresponding points in two
images taken from different viewpoints, assuming that the
scene is planar. Homography estimation has various applications including image/video stitching [32, 7], camera calibration [33], object recognition [17], and 3D reconstruction
[19, 34], etc. The problem is challenging due to various factors such as occlusions, noise, and perspective distortions.
* Corresponding author.

Various techniques have been developed to estimate homography efficiently and accurately. These include matching based methods [18, 4, 22] and unsupervised deep homography methods [10, 16, 31]. Matching based methods
detect distinctive features such as keypoints or corners from
given images and then match the features for homography
estimation. SuperGlue [24], for instance, employs SuperPoint [4] for feature detection and description, and then uses
Transformers [29] to enhance the features by self-attention
and cross-attention. The method however suffers from the
lack of discriminative features when dealing with textureless or blurry images [23]. Deep homography methods, on
the other hand, directly minimize the photometric or feature
differences between two images. As such, they can be sensitive to errors or ambiguities in the data, making them difficult to handle image pairs with a large baseline [16, 31, 10].
A novel trend is to develop detector-free feature matching methods, see NCNet [23], LoFTR [26], ASpanFormer
[3] and DKM [6]. These methods find matches by dense
pixel-to-pixel matching, with no need for keypoint detection. Conceptually, LoFTR can be viewed as a detector-free
variant of SuperGlue. Being detector-free means the number of features to be updated by Transformers is equal to
the number of pixels. In order to update high-resolution
feature maps at affordable computational cost, LoFTR has
to replace the normal Transformers with linear Transformers [11]. However, the latter tends to diffuse among large
areas instead of focusing sharply on corresponding regions
[3, 27]. Consequently, noise can be introduced during feature updating, resulting in incorrect matches. In order to
localize attention regions that are computationally feasible
for the normal Transformers, ASpanFormer regresses flow
maps in each cross-attention phase. However, flow map regression can be error-prone, see Fig. 1a.
In order to support local feature interaction and enhancement with standard Transformers, we propose in this paper Geometrized Transformer (GeoFormer). Our idea is extremely simple. Instead of flow map regression, we propose

9556

