This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Video Prediction via Sparsely Conditioned Flow Matching
Aram Davtyan*, Sepehr Sameni,* Paolo Favaro
Computer Vision Group, Institute of Computer Science, University of Bern, Switzerland
{aram.davtyan, sepehr.sameni, paolo.favaro}@unibe.ch

Abstract
We introduce a novel generative model for video prediction based on latent flow matching, an efficient alternative
to diffusion-based models. In contrast to prior work, we
keep the high costs of modeling the past during training and
inference at bay by conditioning only on a small random set
of past frames at each integration step of the image generation process. Moreover, to enable the generation of highresolution videos and to speed up the training, we work in
the latent space of a pretrained VQGAN. Finally, we propose to approximate the initial condition of the flow ODE
with the previous noisy frame. This allows to reduce the
number of integration steps and hence, speed up the sampling at inference time. We call our model Random frame
conditioned flow Integration for VidEo pRediction, or, in
short, RIVER. We show that RIVER achieves superior or
on par performance compared to prior work on common
video prediction benchmarks, while requiring an order of
magnitude fewer computational resources. Project website:
https://araachie.github.io/river.

1. Introduction
Video prediction, i.e., the task of predicting future
frames given past ones, is a fundamental component of an
agent that needs to interact with an environment [5]. This
capability enables planning and advanced reasoning, especially when other agents are in the scene [21, 20, 74]. More
in general, however, a video prediction model that can generalize to new unseen scenarios needs to implicitly understand the scene, i.e., detect and classify objects, learn how
each object moves and interacts, estimate the 3D shape and
location of the objects, model the laws of physics of the environment, and so on. In addition to naturally leading to
rich and powerful representations of videos, this task does
not require any labeling and is thus an excellent candidate
for learning from readily available unannotated datasets.
While the literature in video prediction is by now rela* Equal contribution.

Figure 1. RIVER achieves an ideal trade-off between quality of
generated videos and compute needed to train the model. This
makes research on video models more easily scalable.

tively rich [13, 5, 39], the quality of the predicted frames has
been achieving realistic levels only recently [67, 33, 27, 76].
This has been mostly due to the exceptional complexity of
this task and the difficulty of training models that can generalize well to unseen (but in-domain) data.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel training procedure for video prediction that is computationally
efficient and delivers high quality frame prediction. One of
the key challenges of synthesizing realistic predicted frames
is to ensure the temporal consistency of the generated sequence. To this aim, conditioning on as many past frames
as possible is a desirable requirement. In fact, with only
two past frames it is possible to predict only constant motions at test time, and for general complex motions, such
as object interactions (e.g., a ball bouncing off a cube in
CLEVRER [77]), many more frames are needed. However,
conditioning on many past frames comes either at the sacrifice of the video quality or at a high computational cost,
as shown in Figure 1. In the literature, we see two main approaches to address these issues: 1) models that take a fixed

23263

