This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LAN-HDR: Luminance-based Alignment Network for High Dynamic Range
Video Reconstruction
Haesoo Chung1 and Nam Ik Cho1,2
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, INMC, Seoul National University, Korea
2
IPAI, Seoul National University, Korea
{reneeish,nicho}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

1. Introduction
As diverse videos become easily accessible through
video-on-demand services, demands for high-quality video
content with high resolution and high dynamic range (HDR)
are naturally increasing. HDR content can provide a rich

High

Y channels

Inputs

Middle

Our Results

As demands for high-quality videos continue to rise,
high-resolution and high-dynamic range (HDR) imaging
techniques are drawing attention. To generate an HDR
video from low dynamic range (LDR) images, one of the
critical steps is the motion compensation between LDR
frames, for which most existing works employed the optical flow algorithm. However, these methods suffer from
flow estimation errors when saturation or complicated motions exist. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end HDR
video composition framework, which aligns LDR frames
in the feature space and then merges aligned features into
an HDR frame, without relying on pixel-domain optical
flow. Specifically, we propose a luminance-based alignment network for HDR (LAN-HDR) consisting of an alignment module and a hallucination module. The alignment
module aligns a frame to the adjacent reference by evaluating luminance-based attention, excluding color information. The hallucination module generates sharp details,
especially for washed-out areas due to saturation. The
aligned and hallucinated features are then blended adaptively to complement each other. Finally, we merge the
features to generate a final HDR frame. In training, we
adopt a temporal loss, in addition to frame reconstruction losses, to enhance temporal consistency and thus reduce flickering. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method performs better or comparable to state-of-the-art
methods on several benchmarks. Codes are available at
https://github.com/haesoochung/LAN-HDR.

Low

Chen [5]

Ours

Chen [5]

Ours

Chen [5]

Ours

Figure 1: Visual comparisons of the proposed and Chen et
al.’s method [5]. Our framework generates more detailed
texture in regions with saturation and motions by utilizing
luminance information.
viewing experience by displaying high contrast and a broad
range of colors. While HDR displays are already ubiquitous, there is still a lack of HDR content available for delivery.
Whereas HDR imaging techniques for still images have
been actively studied [8, 2, 33, 18, 45, 47, 35, 3, 38, 32,
10, 9, 1, 26, 49], those for videos have been relatively overlooked. Some early methods [41, 40, 23] proposed welldesigned hardware systems for direct HDR video acquisition, but these systems mostly require a sophisticated design and high cost. Since Kang et al. [21] reconstructed an
HDR video using a low dynamic range (LDR) image sequence with alternating exposures, this approach has been
12760

