This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FeatureNeRF: Learning Generalizable NeRFs by Distilling Foundation Models
Jianglong Ye1
Naiyan Wang2
Xiaolong Wang1
1
2
UC San Diego
TuSimple
Input

Rendered Feature Map

2D Keypoints Transfer

3D Keypoints Transfer

2D Part Co-segmentation
(a)

3D Part Co-segmentation
(b)

Figure 1: While most generalizable NeRFs focus on novel-view synthesis, we propose a framework named FeatureNeRF to
learn 3D semantic representations by distilling vision foundation models. After distillation, FeatureNeRF allows to render
novel-view feature maps given a single input image (a), which can be leveraged to various downstream tasks. Here, we show
how we propagate part segmentation labels and keypoints to different views and instances in both 2D and 3D domains (b).

Abstract
Recent works on generalizable NeRFs have shown
promising results on novel view synthesis from single or
few images. However, such models have rarely been applied on other downstream tasks beyond synthesis such as
semantic understanding and parsing. In this paper, we propose a novel framework named FeatureNeRF to learn generalizable NeRFs by distilling pre-trained vision foundation models (e.g., DINO, Latent Diffusion). FeatureNeRF
leverages 2D pre-trained foundation models to 3D space
via neural rendering, and then extract deep features for
3D query points from NeRF MLPs. Consequently, it allows to map 2D images to continuous 3D semantic feature volumes, which can be used for various downstream
tasks. We evaluate FeatureNeRF on tasks of 2D/3D semantic keypoint transfer and 2D/3D object part segmentation. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of FeatureNeRF as a generalizable 3D semantic feature extractor. Our project page is available at https:
//jianglongye.com/featurenerf/.

1. Introduction
Neural fields have emerged as a compelling paradigm for
representing a variety of visual signals [8, 10, 31, 32, 37]. In

particular, the Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF [32]), which
implicitly encodes density and color via Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs), has shown high quality novel view synthesis results from dense input images. A body of followup works [7, 27, 45, 54, 66] further reduce the dependency
on dense inputs and generalizes NeRF to unseen objects by
learning priors from large-scale multi-view image datasets.
With the remarkable abilities on reconstruction and view
synthesis of generalizable NeRFs, we ask the question:
Can we adapt such models to learn 3D representations as
foundations for general 3D applications (e.g., recognition,
matching) beyond view synthesis?
Recent years have witnessed the rise of vision foundation models [5, 40, 43, 67] that are pre-trained on web-scale
image datasets and demonstrate generalization capabilities
across massive vision tasks (e.g., CLIP [40], DINO [5], Latent Diffusion [47]). The feature space constructed by foundation models captures rich semantic and structural information of 2D visual data and make it possible to identify
object categories, parts and correspondences even without
extra supervisions [1, 5, 30]. Motivated by these works, our
goal is to leverage the powerful 2D foundations models to
obtain generalizable 3D features.
In this paper, we present FeatureNeRF, a unified framework for learning generalizable NeRFs from distilling pretrained 2D vision foundation models. Unlike previous gen-

8962

