This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Building3D: An Urban-Scale Dataset and Benchmarks for Learning Roof
Structures from Point Clouds
Ruisheng Wang, Shangfeng Huang, Hongxin Yang
University of Calgary, AB, Canada
{ruiswang, shangfeng.huang, hongxin.yang}@ucalgary.ca

(a) Aerial LiDAR point clouds of Tallinn

(b) A building point cloud

(c) A roof point cloud

(d) A mesh model

(e) A wireframe model

Figure 1. Illustration of Tallinn, one of the 16 cities in the Building3D dataset

Abstract
Urban modeling from LiDAR point clouds is an important topic in computer vision, computer graphics, photogrammetry and remote sensing. 3D city models have
found a wide range of applications in smart cities, autonomous navigation, urban planning and mapping etc.
However, existing datasets for 3D modeling mainly focus
on common objects such as furniture or cars. Lack of building datasets has become a major obstacle for applying deep
learning technology to specific domains such as urban modeling. In this paper, we present an urban-scale dataset consisting of more than 160 thousands buildings along with
corresponding point clouds, mesh and wireframe models,
covering 16 cities in Estonia about 998 Km2 . We extensively evaluate performance of state-of-the-art algorithms
including handcrafted and deep feature based methods. Experimental results indicate that Building3D has challenges

of high intra-class variance, data imbalance and largescale noises. The Building3D is the first and largest urbanscale building modeling benchmark, allowing a comparison
of supervised and self-supervised learning methods. We believe that our Building3D will facilitate future research on
urban modeling, aerial path planning, mesh simplification,
and semantic/part segmentation etc.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved tremendous success on computer vision applications such as image classification and
object detection [12, 20, 26, 47], semantic segmentation
[5, 11, 43] and human pose estimation [2, 55], to name a
few. With the increased availability of 3D point clouds that
found a wide range of applications in robotics, autonomous
driving and urban modeling, a recent research focus has
been shifted to deal with such massive 3D point clouds

20076

