This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Who are you referring to? Coreference resolution in image narrations
Arushi Goel1 , Basura Fernando2 , Frank Keller1 , and Hakan Bilen1
1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK
2
CFAR, IHPC, A*STAR, Singapore

Abstract
Coreference resolution aims to identify words and
phrases which refer to the same entity in a text, a core task
in natural language processing. In this paper, we extend
this task to resolving coreferences in long-form narrations
of visual scenes. First, we introduce a new dataset with
annotated coreference chains and their bounding boxes, as
most existing image-text datasets only contain short sentences without coreferring expressions or labeled chains.
We propose a new technique that learns to identify coreference chains using weak supervision, only from imagetext pairs and a regularization using prior linguistic knowledge. Our model yields large performance gains over several strong baselines in resolving coreferences. We also
show that coreference resolution helps improve grounding
narratives in images.

1. Introduction
Consider the image paired with the long-form description in Figure 1, an example from the Localized Narratives [47]. Can you tell whether the woman who is wearing spectacles refers to a person or another woman in
the text? We are remarkably good at identifying referring
expressions (or mentions) and determining which of them
corefer to the same entity, a task that we regularly perform
when we read text or engage in conversations. The text-only
version of this problem is known as coreference resolution
(CR) [29, 30, 57], a core task in natural language processing (NLP) with a large literature. While solving text-only
CR requires a very good understanding of the syntactic and
semantic properties of the language, the visual version of
CR shown in the example also demands an understanding
of the visual scene. In our example, a language model has
to figure out that a person can be a woman, has hands, and
correctly match it with her [hand] and the woman, but not
with another woman. However, a language model alone
cannot answer whether the woman refers to a person or the
woman. This can only be disambiguated after visually inspecting which of the two is wearing spectacles.

In the image we can see there is a person
who is standing and holding cardboard
sheets in her hand and she is wearing ash
colour jacket and there is another woman
sitting and at the back on the table there are
wine bottles and cardboard boxes and books
and the woman is wearing spectacles.

Figure 1: Coreference resolution from an image and narration pair. Each highlighted block of text is referred to as
a mention. The mentions in the same color corefer to the
same entity, and belong to the same coreference chain.
Text-only CR has been a crucial component for a range
of NLP applications including question answering [28, 14],
sentiment analysis [6, 43], summarization [19, 54] and machine translation [40, 4, 63]. Most text-only CR methods are
either rule-based [29, 49] using heuristics such as pronoun
match or exact match based on part of speech tagging, or are
learned on large annotated text datasets from domains such
as news text or Wikipedia articles [5, 31, 30, 21]. Stateof-the-art methods [30, 21] fail to resolve coreferences correctly in image narrations for a few reasons. First, CR in
image narrations often require image understanding (see
Fig. 1). Neural networks trained on text datasets [48, 9]
suffer from poor transferability and a significant performance drop when applied to image narrations because of
domain shift. Image narrations are unstructured and can
be noisy, unlike the well-edited text used during training
(such as news or Wikipedia). Moreover, standard imagetext datasets [34, 26, 8, 46] only contain short descriptions
with very few or no cases of coreference, thus, are not suitable for training text-only CR models.
Some prior work have looked at visual CR for specific
tasks. [50] and [53] link character mentions in TV shows
or movie descriptions to character occurrences in videos.
More recently, the Who’s Waldo dataset [13] links person
names in the caption to their occurrence in the image. However, these methods rely on a limited set of object categories
and referring expression types (see Table 3 discussed below), require annotated training data and therefore cannot

15247

