This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EmoSet: A Large-scale Visual Emotion Dataset with Rich Attributes
Jingyuan Yang1 , Qirui Huang1 , Tingting Ding1 , Dani Lischinski2 , Daniel Cohen-Or1,3 , Hui Huang1 *
1
Shenzhen University 2 The Hebrew University of Jerusalem 3 Tel Aviv University
{jingyuanyang.jyy, qrhuang2021, dingt6616, danix3d, cohenor, hhzhiyan}@gmail.com

Figure 1: EmoSet images are annotated with eight emotion categories (blue) and six emotion attributes (orange), where
different attributes may evoke different emotions.

Abstract
Visual Emotion Analysis (VEA) aims at predicting people’s emotional responses to visual stimuli. This is a
promising, yet challenging, task in affective computing,
which has drawn increasing attention in recent years. Most
of the existing work in this area focuses on feature design,
while little attention has been paid to dataset construction.
In this work, we introduce EmoSet, the first large-scale visual emotion dataset annotated with rich attributes, which
is superior to existing datasets in four aspects: scale, annotation richness, diversity, and data balance. EmoSet comprises 3.3 million images in total, with 118,102 of these images carefully labeled by human annotators, making it five
times larger than the largest existing dataset. EmoSet includes images from social networks, as well as artistic images, and it is well balanced between different emotion categories. Motivated by psychological studies, in addition to
emotion category, each image is also annotated with a set
of describable emotion attributes: brightness, colorfulness,
scene type, object class, facial expression, and human action, which can help understand visual emotions in a precise
and interpretable way. The relevance of these emotion attributes is validated by analyzing the correlations between
them and visual emotion, as well as by designing an attribute module to help visual emotion recognition. We be*Corresponding author.

lieve EmoSet will bring some key insights and encourage
further research in visual emotion analysis and understanding. Project page: https://vcc.tech/EmoSet.

1. Introduction
Emotions are different ways to think that our mind uses
to increase our intelligence [31]. Much of the research
in Artificial Intelligence (AI) has focused on designing
human-like machines, while neglecting emotional intelligence. Since emotions are innate to human beings, AI systems should aim to better understand emotions, in order to
succeed in mimicking human behavior. Affective computing [35] is an emerging field that aims to identify, understand, and respond to human emotions. This field has seen
significant progress in recent years, and has potential applications in areas such as education [49], healthcare [56],
advertising [42], and safety [9].
Visual Emotion Analysis (VEA) is a promising, yet challenging, task in affective computing, aiming to predict emotional responses to visual stimuli. For instance, when viewing the images in Figure 1, one not only recognizes the visual elements therein, but also may experience emotional
reactions. Furthermore, even though emotions are subjective, people tend to share similar reactions to the same external stimuli. With the prevalence of social networks, users
often choose to convey feelings via images shared on the in-

20383

