This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Computationally-Efficient Neural Image Compression with Shallow Decoders
Yibo Yang
Stephan Mandt
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
{yibo.yang, mandt}@uci.edu

Neural image compression methods have seen increasingly strong performance in recent years. However, they
suffer orders of magnitude higher computational complexity compared to traditional codecs, which hinders their
real-world deployment. This paper takes a step forward
in closing this gap in decoding complexity by adopting
shallow or even linear decoding transforms. To compensate for the resulting drop in compression performance,
we exploit the often asymmetrical computation budget between encoding and decoding, by adopting more powerful encoder networks and iterative encoding. We theoretically formalize the intuition behind, and our experimental results establish a new frontier in the trade-off between
rate-distortion and decoding complexity for neural image
compression. Specifically, we achieve rate-distortion performance competitive with the established mean-scale hyperprior architecture of Minnen et al. (2018) at less than
50K decoding FLOPs/pixel, reducing the baseline’s overall
decoding complexity by 80%, or over 90% for the synthesis transform alone. Our code can be found at https:
//github.com/mandt-lab/shallow-ntc.

BD-rate savings over BPG (%) on Kodak

Abstract

30

He 2022 ELIC
Wang 2023 EVC
Minnen 2020 CHARM

20
10

2-layer syn. + SGA
(proposed) Minnen 2018 Hyperprior

0

2-layer syn.
(proposed)

−10
JPEG-like syn.
(proposed)

−20
−30

Ballé 2017 Factorized Prior

0

100

200

300

400

Thousand MACs per pixel for decoding

Figure 1. R-D performance on Kodak v.s. decoding computation
complexity as measured in KMACs (thousand multiply-accumulate
operations) per pixel. The circle radius corresponds to the parameter count of the synthesis transform in each method (see Table. 1)

• We offer new insight into the image manifold parameterized by learned synthesis transforms in nonlinear
transform coding. Our results suggest that the learned
manifold is relatively flat and preserves linear combinations in the latent space, in contrast to its highly
nonlinear counterpart in generative modeling [11].

1. Introduction

• Inspired by the parallel between neural image compression and traditional transform coding, we study the
effect of linear synthesis transform within a hyperprior
architecture. We show that, perhaps surprisingly, a
JPEG-like synthesis can perform similarly to a deep linear CNN, and we shed light on the role of nonlinearity
in the perceptual quality of neural image compression.

Deep-learning-based methods for data compression [51]
have achieved increasingly strong performance on visual
data compression, increasingly exceeding classical codecs
in rate-distortion performance. However, their enormous
computational complexity compared to classical codecs, especially required for decoding, is a roadblock towards their
wider adoption [34, 37]. In this work, inspired by the parallel
between nonlinear transform coding and traditional transform coding [17], we replace deep convolutional decoders
with extremely lightweight and shallow (and even linear)
decoding transforms, and establish the R-D (rate-distortion)
performance of neural image compression when operating
at the lower limit of decoding complexity.
More concretely, our contributions are as follows:

• We give a theoretical analysis of the R-D cost of neural lossy compression in an asymptotic setting, which
quantifies the performance implications of varying the
complexity of encoding and decoding procedures.
• We equip our JPEG-like synthesis with powerful encoding methods, and augment it with a single hidden
layer. This simple approach yields a new state-of-the-

530

