This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

When Do Curricula Work in Federated Learning?
Saeed Vahidian1 , Sreevatsank Kadaveru1 , Woonjoon Baek1 , Weijia Wang1 , Vyacheslav Kungurtsev2 ,
Chen Chen3 , Mubarak Shah3 , Bill Lin1
3
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
2
Czech Technical University
1
UC San Diego
Saeed@ucsd.edu

Abstract
An oft-cited open problem of federated learning is the
existence of data heterogeneity among clients. One pathway to understanding the drastic accuracy drop in federated learning is by scrutinizing the behavior of the clients’
deep models on data with different levels of "difficulty",
which has been left unaddressed. In this paper, we investigate a different and rarely studied dimension of FL: ordered
learning. Specifically, we aim to investigate how ordered
learning principles can contribute to alleviating the heterogeneity effects in FL. We present theoretical analysis and
conduct extensive empirical studies on the efficacy of orderings spanning three kinds of learning: curriculum, anticurriculum, and random curriculum. We find that curriculum learning largely alleviates non-IIDness. Interestingly,
the more disparate the data distributions across clients the
more they benefit from ordered learning. We provide analysis explaining this phenomenon, specifically indicating how
curriculum training appears to make the objective landscape progressively less convex, suggesting fast converging
iterations at the beginning of the training procedure. We
derive quantitative results of convergence for both convex
and nonconvex objectives by modeling the curriculum training on federated devices as local SGD with locally biased
stochastic gradients. Also, inspired by ordered learning, we
propose a novel client selection technique that benefits from
the real-world disparity in the clients. Our proposed approach to client selection has a synergic effect when applied
together with ordered learning in FL.

1. Introduction
Inspired by the learning principle underlying the cognitive process of humans, curriculum learning (CL) deals
with a training paradigm for machine learning models in
which the difficulty of the training task is progressively
scaled, going from "easy" to "hard". Prior empirical studies
have demonstrated that CL is effective in avoiding bad local

minima and in improving the generalization results [1, 2].
Also interestingly, another line of work proposes the exact
opposite strategy of prioritizing the harder examples first,
such as [3, 4, 5]–these techniques are referred to as “anticurriculum". It is shown that certain tasks can benefit from
anti-curriculum techniques. However, in tasks such as object detection [6, 7], and large-scale text models [8] CL is
standard practice.
Although the empirical observations on CL appear to be
in conflict, this has not impeded the study of CL in machine learning tasks. Certain scenarios [9] have witnessed
the potential benefits of CL. The efficacy of CL has been explored in a considerable breadth of applications, including,
but not limited to, supervised learning tasks within computer vision [10], healthcare [11], reinforcement learning
tasks [12], natural language processing (NLP) [13] as well
as other applications such as graph learning [14], and neural
architecture search [15].
Curriculum learning has been studied in considerable
depth for the standard centralized training settings. However, to the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first
attempt at studying the methodologies, applications, and efficacy of CL in a decentralized training setting and in particular for federated learning (FL). In FL, the training time
budget and the communication bandwidth are the key limiting constraints, and as demonstrated in [9] CL is particularly effective in settings with a limited training budget. It
is an interesting proposition to apply the CL idea to an FL
setting, and that is exactly what we explore in our paper (in
Section 2).
The idea of CL is agnostic to the underlying algorithms
used for federation and hence can be very easily applied to
any of the state-of-the-art solutions in FL. Our technique
does not require a pre-trained expert model and does not
impose any additional synchronization overhead on the system. Also, as the CL is applied to the client, it does not add
any additional computational overhead to the server.
Further, we propose a novel framework for efficient

5084

