This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeO 360: Neural Fields for Sparse View Synthesis of Outdoor Scenes
Muhammad Zubair Irshad12 Sergey Zakharov2 Katherine Liu2 Vitor Guizilini2 Thomas Kollar2
Adrien Gaidon2 Zsolt Kira*1 Rares Ambrus*2
* denotes shared last authorship
1

2

Georgia Institute of Technology

Toyota Research Institute

{mirshad7, zkira}@gatech.edu, {firstname.lastname}@tri.global

a) Training

b) Inference

Scene Representation

Target
Views

Near
MLP

Near
MLP

Encode

Triplanar
Representation

Far
MLP

Far
MLP

Generalizable
Radiance Field

Source Views

c) Novel View Outputs

Source
Views

NeRF
Decoders

Figure 1: Overview: a) Given just a single or a few input images from a novel scene, our method renders new 360◦ views of
complex unbounded outdoor scenes b) We achieve this by constructing an image-conditional triplane representation to model
the 3D surrounding from various perspectives. c) Our method generalizes across novel scenes and viewpoints for complex
360◦ outdoor scenes.

Abstract
Recent implicit neural representations have shown great
results for novel view synthesis. However, existing methods
require expensive per-scene optimization from many views
hence limiting their application to real-world unbounded
urban settings where the objects of interest or backgrounds
are observed from very few views. To mitigate this challenge, we introduce a new approach called NeO 360, Neural fields for sparse view synthesis of outdoor scenes. NeO
360 is a generalizable method that reconstructs 360◦ scenes
from a single or a few posed RGB images. The essence
of our approach is in capturing the distribution of complex
real-world outdoor 3D scenes and using a hybrid imageconditional triplanar representation that can be queried
from any world point. Our representation combines the best
of both voxel-based and bird’s-eye-view (BEV) representations and is more effective and expressive than each. NeO
360’s representation allows us to learn from a large collection of unbounded 3D scenes while offering generalizability
to new views and novel scenes from as few as a single image
during inference. We demonstrate our approach on the pro-

posed challenging 360◦ unbounded dataset, called NeRDS
360, and show that NeO 360 outperforms state-of-the-art
generalizable methods for novel view synthesis while also
offering editing and composition capabilities. Project page:
zubair-irshad.github.io/projects/neo360.html

1. Introduction
Advances in learning-based implicit neural representations have demonstrated promising results for high-fidelity
novel-view synthesis [64], doing so from multi-view
images [60, 62]. The capability to infer accurate 3D scene
representations has benefits in autonomous driving [42, 16]
and robotics [22, 41, 21].
Despite great progress in neural fields [57] for indoor
novel view synthesis, these techniques are limited in their
ability to represent complex urban scenes as well as decompose scenes for reconstruction and editing. Specifically,
previous formulations [6, 46, 73] have focused on per-scene
optimization from a large number of views, thus increasing
their computational complexity. This requirement limits
their application to complex scenarios such as data cap-

9187

