This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP-Driven Universal Model for Organ Segmentation and Tumor Detection
Jie Liu1 , Yixiao Zhang2 , Jie-Neng Chen2 , Junfei Xiao2 , Yongyi Lu2 , Bennett A. Landman3 ,
Yixuan Yuan4,5 , Alan Yuille2 , Yucheng Tang3,6,⇤ , and Zongwei Zhou2, *
1
4

City University of Hong Kong 2 Johns Hopkins University 3 Vanderbilt University
Chinese University of Hong Kong 5 CUHK Shenzhen Research Institute 6 NVIDIA
Project: https://github.com/ljwztc/CLIP-Driven-Universal-Model

Abstract
An increasing number of public datasets have shown a
marked impact on automated organ segmentation and tumor detection. However, due to the small size and partially
labeled problem of each dataset, as well as a limited investigation of diverse types of tumors, the resulting models are
often limited to segmenting specific organs/tumors and ignore the semantics of anatomical structures, nor can they be
extended to novel domains. To address these issues, we propose the CLIP-Driven Universal Model, which incorporates
text embedding learned from Contrastive Language-Image
Pre-training (CLIP) to segmentation models. This CLIPbased label encoding captures anatomical relationships,
enabling the model to learn a structured feature embedding
and segment 25 organs and 6 types of tumors. The proposed
model is developed from an assembly of 14 datasets, using
a total of 3,410 CT scans for training and then evaluated
on 6,162 external CT scans from 3 additional datasets. We
rank first on the Medical Segmentation Decathlon (MSD)
public leaderboard and achieve state-of-the-art results on
Beyond The Cranial Vault (BTCV). Additionally, the Universal Model is computationally more efficient (6⇥ faster)
compared with dataset-specific models, generalized better
to CT scans from varying sites, and shows stronger transfer
learning performance on novel tasks.

1. Introduction
Enormous advances in medical imaging benefit from the
ever-growing number of annotated datasets [43, 1, 42, 31,
76]. Although a total of around 5,000 annotated abdominal CT scans are publicly available, it is still commonly
perceived that medical imaging datasets are too small to develop robust AI models [94, 72, 54, 66, 95, 13]. One reason
for this impression is the high cost of detailed per-voxel seg* Corresponding authors: Yucheng Tang (yuchengt@nvidia.com) and
Zongwei Zhou (zzhou82@jh.edu)

21152

Figure 1. Cosine similarity between CLIP embeddings. The
CLIP embedding reveals the intrinsic semantics of the anatomical
structures by mapping similar concepts close to each other in the
embedding space. For example, “Liver” has a large similarity with
“Liver Tumor” and “Hepatic Vessel” (the hepatic vessel returns
low-oxygen blood from the liver to the heart, which has a high
anatomical relationship with the liver).

mentation annotations, which can take nearly one hour per
organ for an expert annotator. Since each institute has time,
monetary, and clinical constraints, the number of CT scans
in each dataset is limited, and the types of annotated organs
vary significantly from institute to institute. Moreover, only
a small proportion (hundreds) of public CT scans contain
tumor annotation performed by experts [3, 24, 1].
The partially labeled problem [32, 88, 37] can impose
significant limitations on the performance of models trained
on existing public datasets, ultimately hindering their effectiveness for multi-organ segmentation and tumor detection.
However, despite this challenge, the potential of AI models
in these areas remains promising and largely unexplored.
This has motivated us to exploit the public datasets with partial labels, and demonstrate the clinical impact of AI framework, including model expansibility (i.e., adaptable to various network backbone), generalizability (i.e., robust to CT
scans from various hospitals) [43] and transferability (i.e.,
generic image representation that is transferable to multiple

