This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Instance-adaptive Inference for Federated Learning
Kai Yu1∗ Nian Liu2 Xinxing Xu1 * Salman Khan2,3 Wangmeng Zuo4
1
Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC),
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI), UAE
3
Australian National University, Canberra ACT, Australia
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China

Chun-Mei Feng1

fengcm.ai@gmail.com; yu kai@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg; xuxinx@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
https://github.com/chunmeifeng/FedIns

1. Introduction
The availability of large-scale data dramatically promotes the development of deep learning models. However, as these abundant data tend to be distributed across
* Corresponding author.

（a） Intra-client

（b）

Class ID
Client ID
0
1
2
3
4
5

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

（c）
80

60

（d）
80

Acc.%

Federated learning (FL) is a distributed learning
paradigm that enables multiple clients to learn a powerful
global model by aggregating local training. However, the
performance of the global model is often hampered by noni.i.d. distribution among the clients, requiring extensive
efforts to mitigate inter-client data heterogeneity. Going
beyond inter-client data heterogeneity, we note that intraclient heterogeneity can also be observed on complex realworld data and seriously deteriorate FL performance. In
this paper, we present a novel FL algorithm, i.e., FedIns, to
handle intra-client data heterogeneity by enabling instanceadaptive inference in the FL framework. Instead of huge
instance-adaptive models, we resort to a parameter-efficient
fine-tuning method, i.e., scale and shift deep features (SSF),
upon a pre-trained model. Specifically, we first train an
SSF pool for each client, and aggregate these SSF pools
on the server side, thus still maintaining a low communication cost. To enable instance-adaptive inference, for a given
instance, we dynamically find the best-matched SSF subsets
from the pool and aggregate them to generate an adaptive
SSF specified for the instance, thereby reducing the intraclient as well as the inter-client heterogeneity. Extensive
experiments show that our FedIns outperforms state-of-theart FL algorithms, e.g., a 6.64% improvement against the
top-performing method with less than 15% communication
cost on Tiny-ImageNet.

Inter-client

Acc.%

Abstract

FedAvg [25]
FedBN [22]
FedIns (Ours)

30

Inter-client

FedAvg [25]
FedBN [22]
FedIns (Ours)

Intra-client

Figure 1: Illustration of inter- and intra-client data heterogeneity
with t-SNE visualizations (see (a) and (b)) on DomainNet and their
effect on accuracy of different FL algorithms (see (c) and (d)).
Please refer to the Suppl. for details on the settings to increase
data heterogeneity. One can see that both inter- and intra-client
data heterogeneity degrades FL performance. While FedBN [27]
is able to alleviate the effect of inter-client data heterogeneity, both
FedAvg [30] and FedBN [27] are limited in handling intra-client
data heterogeneity.

many devices due to logistical and privacy concerns, decentralized training is often required to train the deep
neural network [1]. As a promising distributed learning
paradigm, federated learning (FL) can train global models in a distributed manner without sharing local private
data [25, 30, 29]. During this process, each client first trains
a local model on their private data and then sends the model
parameters to the server for aggregation and distribution
back to the client [30].
However, each client collects the local data in its own

23287

