This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mitigating Adversarial Vulnerability through Causal Parameter Estimation
by Adversarial Double Machine Learning
Byung-Kwan Lee*, Junho Kim*, Yong Man Ro†
Image and Video Systems Lab, School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
{leebk, arkimjh, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Adversarial examples derived from deliberately crafted
perturbations on visual inputs can easily harm decision process of deep neural networks. To prevent potential threats,
various adversarial training-based defense methods have
grown rapidly and become a de facto standard approach
for robustness. Despite recent competitive achievements,
we observe that adversarial vulnerability varies across targets and certain vulnerabilities remain prevalent. Intriguingly, such peculiar phenomenon cannot be relieved even
with deeper architectures and advanced defense methods.
To address this issue, in this paper, we introduce a causal
approach called Adversarial Double Machine Learning
(ADML), which allows us to quantify the degree of adversarial vulnerability for network predictions and capture the
effect of treatments on outcome of interests. ADML can
directly estimate causal parameter of adversarial perturbations per se and mitigate negative effects that can potentially damage robustness, bridging a causal perspective
into the adversarial vulnerability. Through extensive experiments on various CNN and Transformer architectures, we
corroborate that ADML improves adversarial robustness
with large margins and relieve the empirical observation.

1. Introduction
Along with the progressive developments of deep neural networks (DNNs) [17, 10, 2], an aspect of AI safety
comes into a prominence in various computer vision research [45, 64, 12, 19]. Especially, adversarial examples [50, 15, 30] are known as potential threats on AI systems. With deliberately crafted perturbations on the visual
inputs, adversarial examples are hardly distinguishable to
human observers, but they easily result in misleading decision process of DNNs. Such adversarial vulnerability provokes weak reliability of inference process of DNNs and
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

(a) Network Architectures

(b) Adversarial Defense Methods
Figure 1. The comparison of adversarial robustness along target
classes with respect to (a) Network Architectures and (b) Adversarial Defense Methods on CIFAR-10 [27]. Note that, the distribution of adversarial robustness is consistent along both criteria.

discourages AI adoption to the safety critical areas [54, 44].
In order to achieve robust and trustworthy DNNs from
adversarial perturbation, previous methods [33, 28, 3, 62,
55, 58, 8] have delved into developing various adversarial
attack and defense algorithms in the sense of cat-and-mouse
game. As a seminal work, Madry et al. [33] have paved the
way for obtaining robust network through adversarial training (AT) regarded as an ultimate augmentation training [52]
with respect to adversarial examples. Based on its effectiveness, various subsequent works [62, 55, 58, 63, 39, 25] have
investigated it to further enhance adversarial robustness.
Although several AT-based defense methods have become a de facto standard due to their competitive adversarial robustness, we found an intriguing property of the
current defense methods. As in Figure 1, we identify that
the adversarial robustness for the each target class significantly varies with a large gap, and this phenomenon equally
happens in the course of (a) network architectures and (b)

4499

