This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Retro-FPN: Retrospective Feature Pyramid Network for Point Cloud Semantic
Segmentation
Peng Xiang1 ,* Xin Wen2 ,* Yu-Shen Liu1†, Hui Zhang1†, Yi Fang3 , Zhizhong Han4
1
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
JD.com, Beijing, China 3 New York University Abu Dhabi 4 Wayne State University
xiangp23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn wenxin16@jd.com liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn
huizhang@tsinghua.edu.cn yfang@nyu.edu h312h@wayne.edu

Encoding

73.0

Decoding
...

...

...

...

retrospect

70.7

69.7

69.5

70.4

67.1
65.4

65.4

retrospect
MinkowskiNet

(a) Encoder-Decoder Architecture (b) Retrospective Feature Pyramid Network

KPConv
rigid

KPConv
deform

Point
Transformer

(c) Quantitative comparison with backbones

Figure 1. (a) Encoder-decoder architecture with an inherent feature pyramid in the decoding stage. Black points with thicker outlines
denote region features of larger local regions, green and purple points are the predicted semantic labels. (b) Retrospective Feature Pyramid
Network, the points with orange outlines denote point-level semantic features. The rectangular areas highlighted in black and red denote
local region feature learning and point-level semantic feature learning, respectively. In Retro-FPN, region information ﬂows into points at
all levels, and are retrospectively reﬁned to the lowest level. (c) mIoU on S3DIS Area 5 with and without Retro-FPN.

Abstract
Learning per-point semantic features from the hierarchical feature pyramid is essential for point cloud semantic segmentation. However, most previous methods suffered from ambiguous region features or failed to reﬁne
per-point features effectively, which leads to information
loss and ambiguous semantic identiﬁcation. To resolve this,
we propose Retro-FPN to model the per-point feature prediction as an explicit and retrospective reﬁning process,
which goes through all the pyramid layers to extract semantic features explicitly for each point. Its key novelty
is a retro-transformer for summarizing semantic contexts
from the previous layer and accordingly reﬁning the fea* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

This work was supported by National Key
R&D Program of China (2022YFC3800600), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62272263, 62072268), and in part by TsinghuaKuaishou Institute of Future Media Data.

17826

tures in the current stage. In this way, the categorization of each point is conditioned on its local semantic pattern. Speciﬁcally, the retro-transformer consists of a local
cross-attention block and a semantic gate unit. The crossattention serves to summarize the semantic pattern retrospectively from the previous layer. And the gate unit carefully incorporates the summarized contexts and reﬁnes the
current semantic features. Retro-FPN is a pluggable neural
network that applies to hierarchical decoders. By integrating Retro-FPN with three representative backbones, including both point-based and voxel-based methods, we show
that Retro-FPN can signiﬁcantly improve performance over
state-of-the-art backbones. Comprehensive experiments on
widely used benchmarks can justify the effectiveness of our
design. The source is available at https://github.
com/AllenXiangX/Retro-FPN .

1. Introduction
3D point cloud semantic segmentation [27, 5, 80, 32, 9,
55, 84, 63, 75], which aims to predict a unique category la-

