This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-shot Implicit Animatable Avatars with Model-based Priors
Yangyi Huang1,4* Hongwei Yi2* Weiyang Liu2,3 Haofan Wang4
Boxi Wu5 Wenxiao Wang5 Binbin Lin5,6† Debing Zhang4 Deng Cai1
1
State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 3 University of Cambridge
4
Xiaohongshu Inc. 5 School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University 6 Fullong Inc.
huangyangyi@zju.edu.cn

hongwei.yi@tuebingen.mpg.de

Figure 1: Our method creates free-viewpoint motion videos from a single image by constructing an animatable NeRF representation in one-shot learning.

Abstract
Existing neural rendering methods for creating human
avatars typically either require dense input signals such as
video or multi-view images, or leverage a learned prior
from large-scale specific 3D human datasets such that reconstruction can be performed with sparse-view inputs.
Most of these methods fail to achieve realistic reconstruction when only a single image is available. To enable the
data-efficient creation of realistic animatable 3D humans,
we propose ELICIT, a novel method for learning humanspecific neural radiance fields from a single image. Inspired by the fact that humans can effortlessly estimate the
body geometry and imagine full-body clothing from a single image, we leverage two priors in ELICIT: 3D geometry prior and visual semantic prior. Specifically, ELICIT
utilizes the 3D body shape geometry prior from a skinned
vertex-based template model (i.e., SMPL) and implements
the visual clothing semantic prior with the CLIP-based pretrained models. Both priors are used to jointly guide the
optimization for creating plausible content in the invisible
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

areas. Taking advantage of the CLIP models, ELICIT can
use text descriptions to generate text-conditioned unseen regions. In order to further improve visual details, we propose a segmentation-based sampling strategy that locally
refines different parts of the avatar. Comprehensive evaluations on multiple popular benchmarks, including ZJUMoCAP, Human3.6M, and DeepFashion, show that ELICIT
outperforms strong baseline methods of avatar creation
when only a single image is available. The code is public for research purposes at https://huangyangyi.
github.io/ELICIT

1. Introduction
Creating realistic 3D contents of animatable human
avatars from readily available camera inputs is of great significance for AR/VR applications, such as telepresence, virtual fitness, and so on. It is quite a challenging task and
requires disentangled reconstruction of 3D geometry, the
appearance of a clothed human, and accurate modeling of
complex body poses for animation.
Current human-specific neural rendering methods have
achieved promising performance when dense and well18974

