This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ELFNet: Evidential Local-global Fusion for Stereo Matching
Jieming Lou1,2 , Weide Liu1 , Zhuo Chen1 , Fayao Liu1 , and Jun Cheng* 1
1

Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR
2
National Univeristy of Singapore

Abstract
Although existing stereo matching models have achieved
continuous improvement, they often face issues related to
trustworthiness due to the absence of uncertainty estimation. Additionally, effectively leveraging multi-scale and
multi-view knowledge of stereo pairs remains unexplored.
In this paper, we introduce the Evidential Local-global
Fusion (ELF) framework for stereo matching, which endows both uncertainty estimation and confidence-aware fusion with trustworthy heads. Instead of predicting the
disparity map alone, our model estimates an evidentialbased disparity considering both aleatoric and epistemic
uncertainties. With the normal inverse-Gamma distribution as a bridge, the proposed framework realizes intra
evidential fusion of multi-level predictions and inter evidential fusion between cost-volume-based and transformerbased stereo matching. Extensive experimental results show
that the proposed framework exploits multi-view information effectively and achieves state-of-the-art overall performance both on accuracy and cross-domain generalization. The codes are available at https://github.
com/jimmy19991222/ELFNet.

1. Introduction
Stereo matching, which aims at estimating the dense disparity map given a pair of rectified images, is one of the
most fundamental problems in various applications, such as
3D reconstruction, autonomous driving, and robotics navigation [15]. Benefiting from the rapid development of convolutional neural networks, many stereo matching models
have achieved promising performance by constructing cost
volume and using 3D convolutions [14, 38–40]. Recently,
with the support of transformer, approaches have been proposed to utilize global information using self- and crossattention mechanisms, bringing an alternative way for the
* cheng jun@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

(a) Left image

(b) ELFNet (Ours)

(c) PCWNet (Cost-volume based)

(d) STTR (Transformer based)

Figure 1. Error map visualization and comparison of the proposed ELFNet, PCWNet (a cost-volume-based model) and STTR
(a transformer-based model) on a case of the Scene Flow [25].
The regions colored in blue indicate low error, while the regions
in white and red indicate relatively higher error. By fusing costvolume-based and transformer-based models reliably, our ELFNet
significantly reduces the error.

stereo matching [13, 19].
Despite the improved performance, quantifying uncertainty of the stereo matching results has been overlooked.
The frequently occurring overconfident predictions in the
existing stereo matching limit the deployment of the algorithms, especially in safety-critical applications. The deep
learning models are prone to be unreliable due to the lack of
interpretability, especially when facing out-of-domain, lowquality or perturbed samples. Things are even worse in the
field of stereo matching where the model is first pretrained
in a large scaled synthetic dataset [25] and fine-tuned in a
much smaller dataset from real-world scenes. This makes
uncertainty estimation an essential part of preventing potentially disastrous decisions based on stereo matching results.
In the meantime, multi-view complementary information widely exists in stereo matching, but it remains a challenge to harness them to improve accuracy effectively and

17784

