This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SynBody: Synthetic Dataset with Layered Human Models for
3D Human Perception and Modeling
Zhitao Yang1,∗ Zhongang Cai1,2,3,∗ Haiyi Mei1,∗ Shuai Liu2,∗ Zhaoxi Chen3,∗
Weiye Xiao1 Yukun Wei1 Zhongfei Qing1 Chen Wei1 Bo Dai2 Wayne Wu2
Chen Qian1 Dahua Lin4 Ziwei Liu3,† Lei Yang1,2,†
1
SenseTime Research 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
∗
Equal Contribution † Corresponding Author
https://synbody.github.io/

Figure 1: SynBody is a large-scale synthetic dataset with a massive number of subjects and high-quality annotations. It supports
various research topics, including human pose and shape estimation (HPS) and novel view synthesis for human (Human NeRF).

Abstract
Synthetic data has emerged as a promising source for
3D human research as it offers low-cost access to largescale human datasets. To advance the diversity and annotation quality of human models, we introduce a new synthetic dataset, SynBody, with three appealing features: 1)
a clothed parametric human model that can generate a diverse range of subjects; 2) the layered human representation that naturally offers high-quality 3D annotations to
support multiple tasks; 3) a scalable system for produc-

ing realistic data to facilitate real-world tasks. The dataset
comprises 1.2M images with corresponding accurate 3D
annotations, covering 10,000 human body models, 1,187
actions, and various viewpoints. The dataset includes two
subsets for human pose and shape estimation as well as
human neural rendering. Extensive experiments on SynBody indicate that it substantially enhances both SMPL and
SMPL-X estimation. Furthermore, the incorporation of layered annotations offers a valuable training resource for investigating the Human Neural Radiance Fields(NeRF).

20282

