This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What can Discriminator do? Towards Box-free Ownership Verification of
Generative Adversarial Networks
Ziheng Huang1† , Boheng Li1† , Yan Cai1 , Run Wang1∗ , Shangwei Guo2 ,
Liming Fang3 , Jing Chen1 , Lina Wang1
1
Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing,
Ministry of Education, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, China
2
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, China
†

Equal contribution ∗ Corresponding author. E-mail: wangrun@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent decades, Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) and its variants have achieved unprecedented success
in image synthesis. However, well-trained GANs are under
the threat of illegal steal or leakage. The prior studies on
remote ownership verification assume a black-box setting
where the defender can query the suspicious model with
specific inputs, which we identify is not enough for generation tasks. To this end, in this paper, we propose a novel IP
protection scheme for GANs where ownership verification
can be done by checking outputs only, without choosing
the inputs (i.e., box-free setting). Specifically, we make use
of the unexploited potential of the discriminator to learn a
hypersphere that captures the unique distribution learned by
the paired generator. Extensive evaluations on two popular
GAN tasks and more than 10 GAN architectures demonstrate
our proposed scheme to effectively verify the ownership.
Our proposed scheme shown to be immune to popular input-based removal attacks and robust against other
existing attacks. The source code and models are available at
https://github.com/AbstractTeen/gan_ownership_verification.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of GANs, we have witnessed
fruitful applications of GAN in many fields, such as realistic
facial images synthesis [45], fine-grained attribute editing
[55], etc. Unlike the classification model with specified label
prediction, the GANs learn a data distribution and output
the synthesized data sample within a certain distribution.
In GANs, the discriminator and generator are two essential
components, where the discriminator works as a judger to
discriminate whether the sample is produced by the genera-

Normal sample

Normal output

𝐺
hidden backdoor
activated

Verification sample

Output with watermark

Black-box Verification

box-free ownership verification
entire image synthesis /
image-to-image translation

𝐺
Source

𝐷

Stolen?

𝐺
Suspect

Generated images

Ours

Figure 1: Comparison of the verification process between previous blackbox watermark-based verification paradigm [37] and our box-free method.
In the black-box setting, carefully-crafted verification samples should be
fed to the suspicious model to activate a hidden backdoor in the model (the
red circle) and generate watermarked outputs. However, in box-free setting,
querying the model with deterministic inputs is not allowed. Ownership
verification should be done with only output images.

tor, the generator learns to generate more realistic samples to
confuse the discriminator [16, 7]. Usually, the discriminator
is discarded after training since the generator is the core asset
for synthesizing high-quality images.
Training a decent GAN requires a huge investment of
resources, such as computing resources, labeled/unlabeled
training dataset, time, and human labors [47, 31]. However,
well-trained generators are under the threat of unintentional
leakage and theft. The adversary may deploy the stolen
model on the Internet for profit and the owner (also the
defender) is only able to verify the ownership remotely by
querying the suspicious model [35, 37, 23, 14].
Most existing works on IP protection of DNN models as15009

