This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exemplar-Free Continual Transformer with Convolutions
Anurag Roy1

Vinay K. Verma2,† Sravan Voonna1 Kripabandhu Ghosh3 Saptarshi Ghosh1
1
IIT Kharagpur, 2 IML Amazon India, 3 IISER Kolkata

Abir Das1

{anurag_roy@,vg.sravan@,saptarshi@cse.,abir@cse.}iitkgp.ac.in, {vinayugc,kripa.ghosh}@gmail.com

Abstract
Continual Learning (CL) involves training a machine
learning model in a sequential manner to learn new information while retaining previously learned tasks without the
presence of previous training data. Although there has been
significant interest in CL, most recent CL approaches in
computer vision have focused on convolutional architectures
only. However, with the recent success of vision transformers,
there is a need to explore their potential for CL. Although
there have been some recent CL approaches for vision transformers, they either store training instances of previous tasks
or require a task identifier during test time, which can be limiting. This paper proposes a new exemplar-free approach for
class/task incremental learning called ConTraCon, which
does not require task-id to be explicitly present during inference and avoids the need for storing previous training
instances. The proposed approach leverages the transformer
architecture and involves re-weighting the key, query, and
value weights of the multi-head self-attention layers of a
transformer trained on a similar task. The re-weighting
is done using convolution, which enables the approach to
maintain low parameter requirements per task. Additionally,
an image augmentation-based entropic task identification
approach is used to predict tasks without requiring task-ids
during inference. Experiments on four benchmark datasets
demonstrate that the proposed approach outperforms several
competitive approaches while requiring fewer parameters.1

1. Introduction
Humans excel at solving newer tasks without forgetting
previous knowledge. Deep neural networks, however, face
the challenge of forgetting old knowledge when trained for a
novel task. This problem, known as Catastrophic Forgetting,
is a fundamental challenge if a model needs to learn when
data arrives in a sequence of non-overlapping tasks. Con† Work started before joining Amazon
1 Project
Page:
contracon

https://cvir.github.io/projects/

Figure 1: The proposed ConTraCon architecture. T1 represents
a transformer model trained on a previous task which is adapted
to a new task using only a few learnable parameters and temporal
skip-gating to a new transformer Tt on the Right.

tinual Learning [1, 21, 26, 37, 40, 41] aims to handle such
problems arising from non-stationary data to retain previously learned knowledge as well as acquire knowledge from
new data with limited or no access to previous data.
Although continual learning in computer vision has witnessed remarkable progress, most of the methods are tailored
for CNNs. Recently, vision transformers have shown promising results in big data regime [8, 15, 32]. However, data
hungry vision transformers and data-scarce continual learning do not seem to go hand in hand, and thus continual
learning in vision transformers has received relatively little
attention. Early continual learning approaches on ConvNets
relied on exemplar rehearsal which re-trains newer models
on previous data instances stored in a fixed size memory
buffer [2, 7, 9, 23, 33, 38, 40, 41]. Dytox [16] and LVT [52]
are contemporary works addressing continual learning on
vision transformers using such previously stored data. However, storing task samples in raw format may not always
be feasible, especially for tasks where long-term storage of
data is not permitted owing to privacy or data use legislation [24]. Dynamic architecture based methods, on the other
hand, grows an initial model dynamically or rearranges its
internal structure, [19, 44, 46, 58] with the arrival of new
tasks without the need for storing previous data.
The main focus of this paper is in modeling the new set of
parameters for new tasks with as low overhead as possible.
15897

