This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-Conditioned Sampling Framework for
Text-to-Image Generation with Masked Generative Models
Jaewoong Lee∗
KAIST
Republic of Korea

Sangwon Jang∗
Yonsei University
Republic of Korea

Jaehyeong Jo, Jaehong Yoon
KAIST
Republic of Korea

hello3196@kaist.ac.kr

agwmon@gmail.com

{harryjo97, jaehong.yoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Yunji Kim, Jin-Hwa Kim, Jung-Woo Ha
NAVER AI Lab
Republic of Korea

Sung Ju Hwang
KAIST
Republic of Korea

{yunji.kim, jinhwa.kim, jungwoo.ha}@navercorp.com

sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Token-based masked generative models are gaining popularity for their fast inference time with parallel decoding.
While recent token-based approaches achieve competitive
performance to diffusion-based models, their generation
performance is still suboptimal as they sample multiple tokens simultaneously without considering the dependence
among them. We empirically investigate this problem and
propose a learnable sampling model, Text-Conditioned Token Selection (TCTS), to select optimal tokens via localized
supervision with text information. TCTS improves not only
the image quality but also the semantic alignment of the
generated images with the given texts. To further improve
the image quality, we introduce a cohesive sampling strategy,
Frequency Adaptive Sampling (FAS), to each group of tokens
divided according to the self-attention maps. We validate the
efficacy of TCTS combined with FAS with various generative
tasks, demonstrating that it significantly outperforms the
baselines in image-text alignment and image quality. Our
text-conditioned sampling framework further reduces the
original inference time by more than 50 % without modifying
the original generative model.

1. Introduction
In the flood of generative AI systems for vision domains, text-conditional image generation [26, 33, 42] is
coming to the fore in recent years. Although many recent works have achieved success in synthesizing highquality images [19, 34] with plausible class-alignment in
class-conditional cases [4, 8], text-to-image (T2I) generation is more challenging since generating visual outputs

that are semantically aligned with input texts is a nontrivial
problem. We can roughly categorize the works on textto-image generation into transformer-based autoregressive
(AR) [12, 30, 33] and diffusion-based [18, 29] approaches.
Along with the advancement of language models, AR models
using transformers have shown impressive performance in
text-to-image generation. Despite their success, they suffer
from the problem of unidirectional bias, which is undesirable
for image generation, and crucially, the sampling process
requires over 10 times as much time compared to existing
models. Another line of work is diffusion-based methods
that aim to generate images by iteratively denoising noisy
samples. In particular, several continuous diffusion models
[10, 32] have achieved outstanding performance and reduced
computational cost. Yet, they require excessive sampling
steps to obtain high-quality images during the inference.
Recently, a new family of generative models, called tokenbased diffusion model [6, 23, 41], has emerged as an alternative to tackle the problem of text-to-image generation.
Token-based diffusion models quantize the latent features
into tokens and apply categorical corruption process in discrete state spaces [1], while conventional diffusion models
use Gaussian noise in continuous space. Among various
discrete diffusion methods, mask-based diffusion, similar
to the absorbing state diffusion used in [1], is mostly used.
Compared to existing AR models, this token-based approach
is advantageous for speeding up the generation process via
simultaneously sampling multiple tokens. Despite the limitation on the reconstruction capacity, these token-based
diffusion models significantly outperform the competitors in
terms of FID scores, even with fewer sampling steps compared to the continuous diffusion models [5, 37].

* Equal contribution.

However, sampling multiple tokens at once often leads

23252

