This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prototypes-oriented Transductive Few-shot Learning with Conditional Transport
Long Tian 1 , Jingyi Feng 1 , Xiaoqiang Chai 1 , Wenchao Chen 2, , Liming Wang 1 , Xiyang Liu 1 , Bo Chen 2
1
National Pilot School of Software Engineering, 2 National Key Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing
1, 2
Xidian University, Xi’an, Shanxi 710071, China
Email:

{tianlong, wcchen}_xidian@163.com

Abstract
Transductive Few-Shot Learning (TFSL) has recently attracted increasing attention since it typically outperforms
its inductive peer by leveraging statistics of query samples.
However, previous TFSL methods usually encode uniform
prior that all the classes within query samples are equally
likely, which is biased in imbalanced TFSL and causes severe performance degradation. Given this pivotal issue, in
this work, we propose a novel Conditional Transport (CT)
based imbalanced TFSL model called Prototypes-oriented
Unbiased Transfer Model (PUTM) to fully exploit unbiased
statistics of imbalanced query samples, which employs forward and backward navigators as transport matrices to balance the prior of query samples per class between uniform
and adaptive data-driven distributions. For efficiently transferring statistics learned by CT, we further derive a closed
form solution to refine prototypes based on MAP given the
learned navigators. The above two steps of discovering and
transferring unbiased statistics follow an iterative manner,
formulating our EM-based solver. Experimental results on
four standard benchmarks including miniImageNet, tieredImageNet, CUB, and CIFAR-FS demonstrate superiority of
our model in class-imbalanced generalization 1 .

1. Introduction
Deep learning based methods have gained a great success
in many real-world applications, such as image classification
[10, 25, 36], natural language processing [3, 32, 38], and so
on, thanks to its powerful nonlinear representation ability
[18, 24]. However, their outstanding performances heavily
rely on large-scale annotated training data [6, 16]. When
it comes to high cost of collecting and annotating a large
amount of data, a major research effort is being dedicated to
low data regimes, in which overfitting occurs in optimizing
deep learning architectures. Few-shot Learning (FSL) tackles these challenges and has triggered substantial interests
1 Our code is available at https://github.com/RashLog/PUTM

Figure 1: 5-way 1-shot image classification results with miniImageNet [22] dataset on 3000 tasks. Our model achieves
the best accuracy in a wide range of imbalanced coefficients
compared with PT-MAP [11] and α-TIM [29].

within the community [8, 20], it aims to train a model from
the base classes so as to generalize on the tasks sampled
from the novel classes that were never seen during training.
There are two major lines of works from the perspective of
inference paradigms, namely inductive methods [26, 4] and
their transductive counterparts [7, 23]. Both of them adopt
well trained models for evaluating new tasks sampled from
the novel classes. The former ones only utilize support samples in a supervised way while the later ones leverage both
support and query samples in a semi-supervised manner.
Transductive inference is widely used in FSL since it can
sufficiently discover statistics of query samples compared
with its inductive peer. As a representative example, Hu et
al. [11] propose PT-MAP for first employing Wide ResNet
(WRN) [36] trained with S2M2 [19] on base classes to extract features of new tasks, and then adjusting prototypes
from novel classes by aggregating similar query samples
per class with the help of transport matrix derived from
the Sinkhorn algorithm [5]. Setting marginal distributions
of prototypes as uniform encodes strong prior that all the
classes within query samples are equally likely, although, it
works pretty well in perfectly class-balanced query samples .
However, it is proven to be detrimental in class-imbalanced

16317

