This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP-Cluster: CLIP-Guided Attribute Hallucination for Face Clustering
Shuai Shen1,2 , Wanhua Li1,2 , Xiaobing Wang3 , Dafeng Zhang3 , Zhezhu Jin3 , Jie Zhou1,2 , Jiwen Lu1,2,∗
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
3
Samsung Research China-Beijing (SRC-B)
shens19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; wanhua016@gmail.com;
{x0106.wang, dfeng.zhang, zz777.jin}@samsung.com; {jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn;

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the remarkable success of
face clustering technology [5, 21, 45, 47, 49, 52, 63], due
to the progress in deep learning frameworks [17, 40, 41]
and more available large-scale training data [4, 13, 24, 64].
However, among the existing research, the influences of different face attributes on clustering have been poorly inves∗ Corresponding author.

Hard to cluster into the same class
(a) Hard Examples
Descriptions

CLIP

Expression

Age

Age
Expression
Pose

Attribute
Mix

Pose

One of the most important yet rarely studied challenges
for supervised face clustering is the large intra-class variance caused by different face attributes such as age, pose,
and expression. Images of the same identity but with different face attributes usually tend to be clustered into different sub-clusters. For the first time, we proposed an
attribute hallucination framework named CLIP-Cluster to
address this issue, which first hallucinates multiple representations for different attributes with the powerful CLIP
model and then pools them by learning neighbor-adaptive
attention. Specifically, CLIP-Cluster first introduces a textdriven attribute hallucination module, which allows one to
use natural language as the interface to hallucinate novel
attributes for a given face image based on the well-aligned
image-language CLIP space. Furthermore, we develop a
neighbor-aware proxy generator that fuses the features describing various attributes into a proxy feature to build a
bridge among different sub-clusters and reduce the intraclass variance. The proxy feature is generated by adaptively
attending to the hallucinated visual features and the source
one based on the local neighbor information. On this basis, a graph built with the proxy representations is used for
subsequent clustering operations. Extensive experiments
show our proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art
face clustering methods with high inference efficiency.

Large intra-class variance

(b) Face Attribute Hallucination

Figure 1. (a) shows paired hard examples, where aging brings significant appearance changes, and it is difficult for the network to
aggregate them into the same cluster. (b) visualizes the CLIPguided text-driven face attribute hallucination, which is the core
idea of the proposed CLIP-Cluster.

tigated. Since facial appearance changes dramatically under different factors like age, pose, and expression [14, 31],
how to minimize the effects of these facial variations for
more compact intra-cluster face embedding is still an open
challenge for face clustering.
Face clustering has received thorough attention in the
computer vision research area. More recently, the supervised face clustering methods are extensively studied [5,
27, 36, 47, 51, 57] and have achieved significant performance gain. While they put more attention on how to estimate vertice confidence [12, 51], construct neighbor linkage [45, 47], or mine graph structure [36, 53], few works
systematically study the impact of intra-cluster variance on
face clustering. Intra-class face variance is a common issue
in both collected face datasets and real-world photos, and its
impact on feature discrimination has actually been repeat-

20786

