This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Markov Game Video Augmentation for Action Segmentation
Nicolas Aziere
Oregon State University

Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University

azieren@oregonstate.edu

sinisa@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses data augmentation for action segmentation. Our key novelty is that we augment the original training videos in the deep feature space, not in the visual spatiotemporal domain as done by previous work. For
augmentation, we modify original deep features of video
frames such that the resulting embeddings fall closer to the
class decision boundaries. Also, we edit action sequences
of the original training videos (a.k.a. transcripts) by inserting, deleting, and replacing actions such that the resulting transcripts are close in edit distance to the ground-truth
ones. For our data augmentation we resort to reinforcement learning, instead of more common supervised learning, since we do not have access to reliable oracles which
would provide supervision about the optimal data modifications in the deep feature space. For modifying frame embeddings, we use a meta-model formulated as a Markov Game
with multiple self-interested agents. Also, new transcripts
are generated using a fast, parameter-free Monte Carlo tree
search. Our experiments show that the proposed data augmentation of the Breakfast, GTEA, and 50Salads datasets
leads to significant performance gains of several state of
the art action segmenters.

1. Introduction
This paper presents a new data augmentation framework for fully supervised action segmentation of untrimmed
videos. Action segmentation is a basic vision problem.
Despite recent tremendous advances in terms of new action segmenters and learning strategies, there is relatively
slow progress in increasing the size of existing benchmark
datasets. In comparison with peer datasets for action recognition or image classification, available benchmarks for action segmentation are significantly smaller. This presents
challenges in training of recent action segmenters which
show tendency to overfit on small datasets [11, 43, 40].
However, compiling large datasets is difficult, due to, in
part, high costs of manual annotation of action segments.
We propose to augment existing datasets with newly gen-

erated video sequences, such that the resulting data augmentation enables more robust training and hence improves
performance of action segmenters. Our approach is agnostic of a particular model for action segmentation, and expects that the segmenter has been pre-trained on the original
training dataset to predict action classes of video frames.
Augmentation of video data has been mostly considered
in the spatiotemporal, visual domain [38, 25, 19], where
a human expert would heuristically specify the amount and
type of data manipulation (e.g., subsampling, cropping, flipping of video frames) that are useful in training. While these
approaches show great success, it is hard to formalize them
in a principled manner. Others learn to generate new videos
[9, 8, 42, 41], but the results are not sufficiently realistic yet,
and hence would require domain adaptation if used for data
augmentation in action segmentation.
Our key novelty is that we augment the original training videos directly in the deep feature space, unlike most
previous work. As shown in Fig. 1 (top left), for augmentation, we modify original deep features of video frames
at the input, such that the resulting embeddings fall closer
to the class decision boundaries. Thus, by construction,
we enforce that the augmented features be more challenging for learning, and in this way subsequently enable
more robust training of the action segmenter. In addition,
Fig. 1 (top right) illustrates that we also edit action sequences of the original training videos (a.k.a. transcripts)
by inserting, deleting, and replacing actions, such that the
resulting transcripts are close in edit distance to the groundtruth ones. Since the generated transcripts are kept similar
to the originals, they are expected to be meaningful (i.e., legal) and provide a greater variety of legal action sequences
than seen in the original training set. This is especially
important for those application domains where some transcripts of interest are naturally rare and hence underrepresented in the original training dataset.
For the proposed augmentation of frame embeddings in
the deep feature space, we specify a deep residual metamodel, as shown in Fig. 1 (bottom left). The meta-model
takes deep features of frames at the input and predicts an
optimal amount of feature modifications – i.e., offset fea-

13505

