This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SHIFT3D: Synthesizing Hard Inputs For Tricking 3D Detectors
Hongge Chen* 1 , Zhao Chen1 , Gregory P. Meyer1 , Dennis Park1 ,
Carl Vondrick1 , Ashish Shrivastava1 , and Yuning Chai†1
1

Cruise LLC

Abstract
We present SHIFT3D, a differentiable pipeline for generating 3D shapes that are structurally plausible yet challenging to 3D object detectors. In safety-critical applications like autonomous driving, discovering such novel challenging objects can offer insight into unknown vulnerabilities of 3D detectors. By representing objects with a signed
distanced function (SDF), we show that gradient error signals allow us to smoothly deform the shape or pose of a
3D object in order to confuse a downstream 3D detector.
Importantly, the objects generated by SHIFT3D physically
differ from the baseline object yet retain a semantically recognizable shape. Our approach provides interpretable failure modes for modern 3D object detectors, and can aid in
preemptive discovery of potential safety risks within 3D perception systems before these risks become critical failures.

1. Introduction
As 3D computer vision models become ubiquitous in
real-world applications, their reliability becomes a critical
safety concern should they fail in undetected or unaddressed
ways. Autonomous vehicles, for example, rely heavily on
3D vision, and failures on the road within these systems can
lead to collisions and other dangerous events.
Like most statistical models, contemporary 3D detectors are typically susceptible to failure on rare or unknown
events encountered in the real world. Most solutions in the
ﬁeld tend to be reactive, with more data being collected a
posteriori [6, 10, 25] or models being ad-hoc retrained to
target speciﬁc already-labeled data [5, 16]. However, when
a single failure can lead to loss of life on the road, there
is an urgent need for detecting these failures in a proactive
way. Therein lies one of the central challenges of deploying
safe AI in practice: a model trained on a ﬁnite dataset can
* hongge.chen@getcruise.com
† yuning.chai@getcruise.com

Baseline Car

Challenging Car

SHIFT3D
Detected
(Score=0.91)

3D Scene (BEV)

Not Detected
(Score=0.04)

3D Scene (BEV)

Figure 1: SHIFT3D creates challenging 3D objects from a
baseline real object and inserts them with realistic occlusions into a point cloud scene. We also synthesize occlusion patterns, therefore the synthetic objects can be placed
in various locations in the scene.

perform poorly on data it has not seen, but by deﬁnition we
cannot just collect unknown data to better understand what
a model does not know.
In this paper, we propose SHIFT3D (Synthesizing Hard
Inputs for Tricking 3D Detectors), an approach to proactively synthesizing hard examples for 3D object detection
through generative modeling. SHIFT3D works by perturbing pre-existing objects into hard examples for 3D vision models, and as we demonstrate, works well in the autonomous driving setting. The perturbative approach provides multiple beneﬁts for us: we can explore new parts of
the input distribution which are not explicitly represented
by the training data, and the perturbation in the shape space
allows us to interpret precisely what changes in shape are
most salient in making the example challenging. Since interpretability is a key beneﬁt of this process, it is also important for these perturbations to be naturalistic, with changes
easily recognizable by the human eye. We use naturalistic

8493

