This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Testing of Computer Vision Models
Irena Gao
Stanford University∗

Gabriel Ilharco
University of Washington

irena@cs.stanford.edu

gamaga@cs.washington.edu

Scott Lundberg and Marco Tulio Ribeiro
Microsoft Research
{marcotcr, scott.lundberg}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Vision models often fail systematically on groups of
data that share common semantic characteristics (e.g.,
rare objects or unusual scenes), but identifying these
failure modes is a challenge. We introduce AdaVision, an interactive process for testing vision models which helps users identify and ﬁx coherent failure modes. Given a natural language description of
a coherent group, AdaVision retrieves relevant images from LAION-5B with CLIP. The user then labels
a small amount of data for model correctness, which is
used in successive retrieval rounds to hill-climb towards
high-error regions, reﬁning the group deﬁnition. Once
a group is saturated, AdaVision uses GPT-3 to suggest new group descriptions for the user to explore. We
demonstrate the usefulness and generality of AdaVision in user studies, where users ﬁnd major bugs in
state-of-the-art classiﬁcation, object detection, and image captioning models. These user-discovered groups
have failure rates 2-3x higher than those surfaced by
automatic error clustering methods. Finally, ﬁnetuning on examples found with AdaVision ﬁxes the discovered bugs when evaluated on unseen examples, without degrading in-distribution accuracy, and while also
improving performance on out-of-distribution datasets.

1. Introduction
Even when vision models attain high average performance, they still fail unexpectedly on subsets of images. When low-performing subsets are semantically
coherent (i.e. uniﬁed by a human-understandable concept), their identiﬁcation helps developers understand
how to intervene on the model (e.g. by targeted data
∗ Undertaken in part as an intern at Microsoft Research.

collection) and decide if models are safe and fair to deploy [12, 25]. For example, segmentation models for
autonomous driving fail in unusual weather. Because
we have identiﬁed this, we know to deploy such systems
with caution and design interventions that simulate diverse weather conditions [37, 47]. Identifying coherent
failure modes helps developers make such deployment
decisions and design interventions.
However, discovering coherent error groups is difﬁcult in practice, since most evaluation sets lack the
necessary visual or semantic annotations to group errors. Prior work clusters evaluation set errors in diﬀerent representation spaces [8, 12, 17, 36, 43], but these
methods often produce incoherent groups, such that
it is hard for humans to assess their impact or ﬁx
them. These methods are also limited by the coverage of small evaluation sets, which underestimate
out-of-distribution vulnerabilities [26, 30, 33], and become less useful as models approach near-perfect accuracy on benchmarks. An alternative approach for discovering failures is open-ended human-in-the-loop testing [13, 32, 33], which leverages interaction with users
to generate challenging data to test models on coherent
topics. While successful in NLP, there are no established frameworks for open-ended testing in vision.
In this work, we present Adaptive Testing for Vision Models (AdaVision), a process and tool for
human-in-the-loop testing of computer vision models.
As illustrated in Figure 1 (left), a user ﬁrst proposes a
coherent group of images to evaluate using natural language (e.g. stop sign). This description is used to retrieve images from a large unlabeled dataset (LAION5B) using CLIP embeddings [27]. After users label a
small number of the returned images for model correctness (pass / fail), the tool adapts to retrieve images
similar to the discovered failures (Figure 1C). AdaVision reduces the manual labor required for human-in14003

