This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Traj-MAE: Masked Autoencoders for Trajectory Prediction
Hao Chen1*

Jiaze Wang1* Kun Shao4 Furui Liu2 Jianye Hao4,6 Chenyong Guan5
Guangyong Chen2† Pheng-Ann Heng1,3
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Zhejiang Lab 3 Institute of Medical Intelligence and XR, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 5 Gudsen Technology Co. Ltd 6 Tianjin University

Abstract
Trajectory prediction has been a crucial task in building a reliable autonomous driving system by anticipating possible dangers. One key issue is to generate consistent trajectory predictions without colliding. To overcome the challenge, we propose an efficient masked autoencoder for trajectory prediction (Traj-MAE) that better
represents the complicated behaviors of agents in the driving environment. Specifically, our Traj-MAE employs diverse masking strategies to pre-train the trajectory encoder
and map encoder, allowing for the capture of social and
temporal information among agents while leveraging the
effect of environment from multiple granularities. To address the catastrophic forgetting problem that arises when
pre-training the network with multiple masking strategies,
we introduce a continual pre-training framework, which
can help Traj-MAE learn valuable and diverse information
from various strategies efficiently. Our experimental results
in both multi-agent and single-agent settings demonstrate
that Traj-MAE achieves competitive results with state-ofthe-art methods and significantly outperforms our baseline model. Project page: https://jiazewang.com/
projects/trajmae.html.

1. Introduction
The goal of trajectory prediction is to predict the future
trajectories of moving agents (e.g., pedestrians and vehicles), which is a crucial problem for building a safe, comfortable, and reliable autonomous driving system [32, 66,
37, 12, 51]. Many promising works [21, 7, 49, 26, 70, 60]
have been proposed with great interest and demand from
academia and industry. It has been demonstrated that modeling complex interactions between agents [47, 44, 46, 6,
27] is of great importance in trajectory prediction. On this
*Equal contribution
† Corresponding author: gychen@zhejianglab.com

Figure 1: An example of our masking and reconstruction strategy for trajectory prediction. A portion of the
historical trajectory and HD map is masked, the trajectory
autoencoder and the map autoencoder are separately trained
to recover the masked parts from the corrupted input. The
green curve denotes the ego agent, the blue curves denote
the surrounding agents, the same in the following figures in
this paper.
basis, to address the colliding prediction problem and generate consistent trajectory predictions, it is essential to model
social and temporal relations between agents and to have a
global understanding of maps [2]. In this paper, we investigate this issue using self-supervised learning.

8351

