This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Replay:
Multi-modal Multi-view Acted Videos for Casual Holography
Roman Shapovalov⇤
Yanir Kleiman⇤
Ignacio Rocco⇤
David Novotny
†
Andrea Vedaldi
Changan Chen
Filippos Kokkinos
Ben Graham
Natalia Neverova
†
⇤
Meta
UT Austin
equal contribution
https://replay-dataset.github.io/

Abstract
We introduce Replay, a collection of multi-view, multimodal videos of humans interacting socially. Each scene
is filmed in high production quality, from different viewpoints with several static cameras, as well as wearable
action cameras, and recorded with a large array of microphones at different positions in the room. Overall, the
dataset contains over 4000 minutes of footage and over 7
million timestamped high-resolution frames annotated with
camera poses and partially with foreground masks. The Replay dataset has many potential applications, such as novelview synthesis, 3D reconstruction, novel-view acoustic synthesis, human body and face analysis, and training generative models. We provide a benchmark for training and evaluating novel-view synthesis, with two scenarios of different
difficulty. Finally, we evaluate several baseline state-of-theart methods on the new benchmark.

1. Introduction
A staple of science fiction is to relive past events and
memories as holograms. With technological advances in
virtual, mixed and augmented reality, this vision is ever
closer to become a reality. We can now think of recording an event with a pair of AR glasses instead of a camera,
and relive it later as a 360 re-projection in a real or virtual space. However, there are still major technical hurdles
before this can be done reliably and with sufficient quality.
High-fidelity 3D reconstruction remains one of the primary obstacles. Given a casual recording from a single sensor like a pair of AR glasses, it is in general not possible to
reconstruct the content in 3D. Monocular data, or even data
collected from cameras with a short baseline, simply does
not contain sufficient information for 360 reconstruction.
For example, in such setup, it is not possible to observe simultaneously the front and back of an object. Furthermore,
reconstructing appearance is not enough: any engaging user
experience also requires to reconstruct sounds, so the problem is inherently multi-modal.

Consumer holography requires to compensate for the intrinsic limitations of a casual data capture setup via machine learning. However, despite the success of neural rendering [40], even the bests method struggle to reconstruct
complex, long dynamic content from a monocular sensor.
Furthermore, none of these approaches tackles multi-modal
reconstruction yet.
Here, we suggest that further progress in casual holography, and in general in the reconstruction and generation
of realistic 4D (3D + time) multi-modal content, is severely
hampered by the lack of suitable datasets. We address this
gap by introducing Replay, a new large dataset to study the
problem of multi-modal new-view synthesis for long captures of acted dynamic content. Replay contains long scenes
in a natural indoor environment (living room, dining room,
etc.), where multiple people are interacting with props and
with each other and performing a variety of activities such
as exercising, playing games, or chatting. Each scene is
several minutes long, and is filmed in 4K resolution with 8
static DSLR cameras and 3 head-mounted GoPro cameras
that capture the scene from all view points, allowing the
evaluation of scene reconstruction from the view points that
significantly differ from the source video. For each scene,
we also provide a semi-static fly-around sequence, where
the actors pause and remain still while the head-mounted
camera operators walk around them. In addition, the scene
is recorded with a large array of microphones to allow novel
view acoustic synthesis [9]. All sensors are temporally calibrated, and cameras are also color- and view-calibrated as
well. In addition, metadata such as foreground segmentation masks is provided for some of the scenes. The data is
collected with actors’ consent, addressing privacy concerns,
and will be public for non-commercial research.
This paper focuses on the visual component of Replay;
the audio part of the dataset is introduced and used for
novel-view acoustic synthesis by Chen et al. [9]. The Replay videos, in turn, constitute a notable step up compared
to existing datasets for static and dynamic novel view synthesis; so far methods have been evaluated on short sequences with a limited range of view points. For exam-

20338

