This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi3DRefer: Grounding Text Description to Multiple 3D Objects
Yiming Zhang1
Simon Fraser University1

ZeMing Gong1 Angel X. Chang1,2
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)2

{yza440, zmgong, angelx}@sfu.ca
https://3dlg-hcvc.github.io/multi3drefer/

Abstract
We introduce the task of localizing a flexible number of
objects in real-world 3D scenes using natural language descriptions. Existing 3D visual grounding tasks focus on
localizing a unique object given a text description. However, such a strict setting is unnatural as localizing potentially multiple objects is a common need in real-world scenarios and robotic tasks (e.g., visual navigation and object rearrangement). To address this setting we propose
Multi3DRefer, generalizing the ScanRefer dataset and task.
Our dataset contains 61926 descriptions of 11609 objects,
where zero, single or multiple target objects are referenced
by each description. We also introduce a new evaluation
metric and benchmark methods from prior work to enable
further investigation of multi-modal 3D scene understanding. Furthermore, we develop a better baseline leveraging
2D features from CLIP by rendering object proposals online with contrastive learning, which outperforms the state
of the art on the ScanRefer benchmark.

1. Introduction
There is growing interest in multi-modal methods that
connect language and vision, tackling tasks such as image captioning, visual question answering, text-to-image
retrieval, and generation. One fundamental task is visual
grounding where natural language text queries are linked to
regions of an image or 3D scene. While the problem of visual grounding has been well studied in 2D images, there
are fewer datasets and methods studying the problem in 3D
scenes. Being able to indicate the object that the text “the
first of four stools” references in a 3D scene is useful for applications in robotics, AR/VR, and online 3D environments
where we have access to not just a static image, but a 3D
scene. Work on 3D datasets for visual grounding [7, 4] has
spurred the development of methods for 3D visual grounding [41, 63, 60, 22, 21, 2, 58, 7] and the inverse task of
3D captioning [7], as well as unified methods that tackle
both [8, 6, 9].

ScanRefer

Multi3DRefer

This is a round stool. it is the first of four stools.

Figure 1: We introduce Multi3DRefer, a dataset and task
where there are potentially multiple target objects for a
given description. In ScanRefer [7] (left), the description corresponds to exactly one object (blue box), while in
Multi3DRefer (right), there are multiple target objects.

However, existing datasets and tasks [7, 4] are designed
with the assumption that there is a unique target object when
performing visual grounding in a 3D scene. This assumption makes ambiguous descriptions that may refer to multiple objects problematic (see Fig. 1). Furthermore, this explicitly discourages visual grounding methods from demonstrating generalization to similar object instances on the basis of common features of the objects (e.g., similar size,
color, texture) and spatial relations between objects (e.g.,
first in a row left-to-right or right-to-left).
We address these shortcomings with an enhanced dataset
and task that we call Multi3DRefer where a flexible number of target objects (zero, single or multiple) in a 3D scene
are localized given language descriptions. We modify and
enhance language data from ScanRefer [7] and propose
evaluation metrics to benchmark prior work and a CLIPbased method that we propose on the flexible number visual grounding task. In summary, we make the following
contributions: 1) generalize 3D visual grounding to a flexible number of target objects given natural language descriptions. 2) create an enhanced dataset based on ScanRefer [7]

15225

