This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeuS2: Fast Learning of Neural Implicit Surfaces for Multi-view Reconstruction
Yiming Wang*

Qin Han*

Marc Habermann

University of Pennsylvania, Peking University

Peking University

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

wym12416@pku.edu.cn

hanqin@pku.edu.cn

mhaberma@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Kostas Daniilidis

Christian Theobalt

University of Pennsylvania

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

kostas@cis.upenn.edu

theobalt@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Lingjie Liu
University of Pennsylvania, Max Planck Institute for Informatics
lingjie.liu@seas.upenn.edu

Static Scene Reconstruction

Abstract
Recent methods for neural surface representation and
rendering, for example NeuS [59], have demonstrated the
remarkably high-quality reconstruction of static scenes.
However, the training of NeuS takes an extremely long time
(8 hours), which makes it almost impossible to apply them
to dynamic scenes with thousands of frames. We propose a
fast neural surface reconstruction approach, called NeuS2,
which achieves two orders of magnitude improvement in
terms of acceleration without compromising reconstruction
quality. To accelerate the training process, we parameterize a neural surface representation by multi-resolution hash
encodings and present a novel lightweight calculation of
second-order derivatives tailored to our networks to leverage CUDA parallelism, achieving a factor two speed up. To
further stabilize and expedite training, a progressive learning strategy is proposed to optimize multi-resolution hash
encodings from coarse to fine. We extend our method for
fast training of dynamic scenes, with a proposed incremental training strategy and a novel global transformation prediction component, which allow our method to handle challenging long sequences with large movements and deformations. Our experiments on various datasets demonstrate
that NeuS2 significantly outperforms the state-of-the-arts
in both surface reconstruction accuracy and training speed
for both static and dynamic scenes. The code is available
at our website: https://vcai.mpi-inf.mpg.de/
projects/NeuS2/.

∗ Equal contribution

NeuS (8 hours)

NeuS2 (5 mins)
Dynamic Scene Reconstruction

Frame 0 (40s)

Frame 120 (20s)

Frame 400 (20s)

NeuS2

Figure 1. We present NeuS2, a fast neural scene reconstruction
method. Given a set of multi-view images, NeuS2 can accurately
reconstruct the scene geometry and appearance in the order of
minutes. This is in stark contrast to previous work [59], which
only recovers medium-scale details at significantly increased time
(about 8 hours). Moreover, we demonstrate that NeuS2 can also be
applied to dynamic scene reconstruction from multi-view videos,
where we recover per-frame reconstruction in about 20 seconds.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the dynamic 3D world from 2D images
is crucial for many Computer Vision and Graphics applications, such as AR/VR, 3D movies, games, telepresence,
and 3D printing. Classical stereo algorithms employ computer vision methods, e.g. feature matching, to capture the
geometry and appearance of 3D contents from multi-view
2D images. Despite great progress, these methods are still
comparably slow and struggle to reconstruct high-quality
results.

3295

