This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniT3D: A Unified Transformer for 3D Dense Captioning and Visual Grounding
Dave Zhenyu Chen1
1

Ronghang Hu2

Xinlei Chen2

Technical University of Munich

2

Meta AI

Matthias Nießner1
3

Angel X. Chang3

Simon Fraser University

Figure 1: We present UniT3D, a unified transformer for 3D dense captioning and visual grounding. UniT3D is pre-trained
with both bidirectional and seq-to-seq objectives on point-cloud-text pairs. Afterwards, it is further fine-tuned for 3D visual
grounding and dense captioning. We show that our proposed architecture and pre-training scheme largely improve the
performance on both downstream tasks.

Abstract

Performing 3D dense captioning and visual grounding
requires a common and shared understanding of the underlying multimodal relationships. However, despite some previous attempts on connecting these two related tasks with
highly task-specific neural modules, it remains understudied how to explicitly depict their shared nature to learn them
simultaneously. In this work, we propose UniT3D, a simple yet effective fully unified transformer-based architecture
for jointly solving 3D visual grounding and dense captioning. UniT3D enables learning a strong multimodal representation across the two tasks through a supervised joint
pre-training scheme with bidirectional and seq-to-seq objectives. With a generic architecture design, UniT3D allows
expanding the pre-training scope to more various training
sources such as the synthesized data from 2D prior knowledge to benefit 3D vision-language tasks. Extensive experiments and analysis demonstrate that UniT3D obtains significant gains for 3D dense captioning and visual grounding.

1. Introduction
The 3D vision-language field has been drawing increasing research interest in jointly understanding 3D scenes [11,
34, 26, 35, 17, 14, 36, 18, 9] and natural language [41, 13,
28, 46, 2], such as 3D visual grounding [5] and 3D dense
captioning [8]. The task of 3D visual grounding takes as
input a point-cloud-text pair and outputs a bounding box of
the referred object. As its sibling task, 3D dense captioning
expects a point cloud as input and densely generates object
bounding boxes and descriptions in the scene. Both tasks
enable applications such as assistive robots and natural language control in AR/VR systems.
Although these two 3D vision-language tasks are naturally complementary to each other, previous attempts to
connect them [6, 3] only exploit partly shared object spatial
information, leaving the joint nature between object relationships and textual semantics underdeveloped. More concretely, to localize the target object in the scene, 3D visual

18109

