This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video-FocalNets: Spatio-Temporal Focal Modulation for Video Action Recognition
Syed Talal Wasim1∗
Muhammad Uzair Khattak1∗ Muzammal Naseer1
Salman Khan1,2 Mubarak Shah4 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,3
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI 2 Australian National University
3
Linköping University 4 University of Central Florida
Video-FocalNet-B

Abstract

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art video recognition methods have been significantly influenced by Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) since the introduction of Alexnet [36]. Initially
2D [30, 48, 55] and later 3D [7, 19, 63] CNNs achieved
better performance on both small-scale [37, 57] and largescale [6, 20, 31] video recognition benchmarks. With their
* Joint first authors.

wasimtalal@gmail.com

Uniformer-B
MViTv2-B Video-Swin-B

83

Top-1 K400 Accuracy

Recent video recognition models utilize Transformer models for long-range spatio-temporal context modeling. Video
transformer designs are based on self-attention that can
model global context at a high computational cost. In
comparison, convolutional designs for videos offer an efficient alternative but lack long-range dependency modeling. Towards achieving the best of both designs, this
work proposes Video-FocalNet, an effective and efficient
architecture for video recognition that models both local
and global contexts. Video-FocalNet is based on a spatiotemporal focal modulation architecture that reverses the
interaction and aggregation steps of self-attention for better efficiency. Further, the aggregation step and the interaction step are both implemented using efficient convolution and element-wise multiplication operations that
are computationally less expensive than their self-attention
counterparts on video representations. We extensively explore the design space of focal modulation-based spatiotemporal context modeling and demonstrate our parallel
spatial and temporal encoding design to be the optimal
choice. Video-FocalNets perform favorably well against the
state-of-the-art transformer-based models for video recognition on five large-scale datasets (Kinetics-400, Kinetics600, SS-v2, Diving-48, and ActivityNet-1.3) at a lower
computational cost. Our code/models are released at
https://github.com/TalalWasim/Video-FocalNets.

82

MTV-B (320)

MTV-B

ViViT-L FE

Video-FocalNet-S

MoViNet-A6 MFormer-HR
MViTv1-B
Video-Swin-S

81

TimeSformer-L

80 Video-FocalNet-T
79

Video-Swin-T
100

200

300

400

957 963 969 2378

FLOPs (G/view)

2381 3978 3981

Figure 1: Accuracy vs Computational Complexity trade-off
comparison: We show the performance of Video-FocalNets
against recent methods for video action recognition. Accuracy is compared on the Kinetics-400 [31] dataset against
GFLOPs/view. Our Video-FocalNets perform favorably
compared to their counterparts across a range of model sizes
(Tiny, Small, and Base).

local connectivity and translational equivariance properties,
CNNs have a better inductive bias especially useful for learning on small datasets. However, CNNs are limited in their
ability to model long-range dependencies due to their limited receptive field. On the other hand, Vision Transformers (ViTs) [13] offer long-range context modeling and have
been quite effective for image classification [13, 45, 46]
and video recognition [2, 4, 47, 75]. ViTs are based on the
self-attention [65] mechanism originally proposed in Natural
Language Processing (NLP) that encodes minimal inductive
biases and can model both short- and long-range dependencies. This allows ViTs to better generalize to large datasets,
as shown by recent results on major video recognition benchmarks [6, 20, 31] where they have out-performed their CNN
counterparts. However, ViTs come at a high computational
and parameter cost [76].
Video recognition requires both short-range and long-

13778

