This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Automatic Animation of Hair Blowing in Still Portrait Photos
Wenpeng Xiao1 , Wentao Liu1 , Yitong Wang1 , Bernard Ghanem2 , Bing Li2,∗
1
ByteDance Intelligent Creation Lab
2
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
{xiaowenpeng.com, liuwentao.canon}@bytedance.com, wangyitong@pku.edu.cn, {Bernard.Ghanem, bing.li}@kaust.edu.sa

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Given a still portrait photo (a), our method automatically detects hair wisps and animates wisps (b), while converting
the photo into a cinemagraph (c).

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to animate human hair
in a still portrait photo. Existing work has largely studied the animation of fluid elements such as water and fire.
However, hair animation for a real image remains underexplored, which is a challenging problem, due to the
high complexity of hair structure and dynamics. Considering the complexity of hair structure, we innovatively treat
hair wisp extraction as an instance segmentation problem,
where a hair wisp is referred to as an instance. With advanced instance segmentation networks, our method extracts meaningful and natural hair wisps. Furthermore,
we propose a wisp-aware animation module that animates
hair wisps with pleasing motions without noticeable artifacts. The extensive experiments show the superiority of
our method. Our method provides the most pleasing and
compelling viewing experience in the qualitative experiments, and outperforms state-of-the-art still-image animation methods by a large margin in the quantitative evaluation. Project url: https://nevergiveu.github.
io/AutomaticHairBlowing/

1. Introduction
”His silvery hair was blowing in the wind,” George R.R.
Martin described. Hair is one of the most impressive parts
of the human body [61, 77], while its dynamics make a
deeper impression and make the scene vivid. The studies show that dynamics is more compelling and captivating
than a still image. Massive portrait photos are shared every
day on social media platforms such as TikTok and Instagram. People want their photos to be attractive and artistic. This motivates us to explore animating human hair in a
still image, so as to provide a vivid, pleasing and beautiful
viewing experience. Recent methods [19, 52, 26] have been
proposed to augment a still image with dynamics, which animates fluid elements such as water, smoke and fire in the
image. However, these methods haven’t taken human hair
into account for real photos.
To provide an artistic effect, we focus on animating human hair in a portrait photo, while translating the photo into
a cinemagraph [68, 1]. Cinemagraph is an innovative shortvideo format preferred by professional photographers, advertisers, and artists, and it is used in digital advertisements,
social media, landing pages, etc. The engaging nature of the

∗ Corresponding Author.

Celebrated novelist of ”Wild Cards”, ”A Game of Thrones”, etc. [75]

22963

