This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Active Neural Mapping
Zike Yan1,2
Haoxiang Yang1,2
Hongbin Zha1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
2
PKU-SenseTime Machine Vision Joint Lab
zike.yan@pku.edu.cn

yyyhhhxxx@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We address the problem of active mapping with a
continually-learned neural scene representation, namely
Active Neural Mapping. The key lies in actively finding
the target space to be explored with efficient agent movement, thus minimizing the map uncertainty on-the-fly within
a previously unseen environment. In this paper, we examine the weight space of the continually-learned neural field,
and show empirically that the neural variability, the prediction robustness against random weight perturbation, can be
directly utilized to measure the instant uncertainty of the
neural map. Together with the continuous geometric information inherited in the neural map, the agent can be
guided to find a traversable path to gradually gain knowledge of the environment. We present for the first time an online active mapping system with a coordinate-based implicit
neural representation. Experiments in the visually-realistic
Gibson and Matterport3D environment demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed method.

zha@cis.pku.edu.cn

Current frustum

Stored keyframes

Local horizon

Trajectory

Prediction error 0

0.3m

Target viewpoints

SDF value

-1

1m

Figure 1: An overview of the proposed active neural mapping system. Guided by the continually-updated neural map
(visualized as the SDF values through a forward pass), the
mobile agent explores the environment actively to minimize
the prediction uncertainty (visualized as the prediction error
given the truth surface points).

1. Introduction
How we represent a 3D environment accurately and efficiently is of tremendous importance for vision, robotics, and
graphics communities. Recent advances in implicit neural
representations (INRs) cast the issue as a low-dimensional
function regression problem. Parameterized by a single network θ, the quantity of interest y such as color, occupancy,
and semantics can be efficiently queried with the spatial
coordinates x through a feedforward pass y = f (x; θ).
Unlike traditional representations that discretize the entire
space and explicitly store a set of the input-output samples {xi , yi }N in manually-designed data structures such
as voxel grid, surfel, and triangle mesh, the implicit neural
representation is proved to have great capacity [67, 19, 77]
that recovers complex signals at a constant small size, guaranteeing high-fidelity view synthesis [42, 3, 41] and accurate geometry reconstruction [64, 36, 2]. Nonetheless,
the quality of the learned implicit neural representation is

highly data-dependent: as implicit neural representations
are trained through self-supervision given discrete training
samples, insufficient sampling frequency leads to geometric
and texturing artifacts [61, 76, 77, 60].
Unlike conventional methods that rely on passive data
acquisition, we address the problem of active neural mapping, where a 3D neural field is constructed on the fly
with an actively-exploring mobile agent to best represent
the scene. The target is to find efficient agent movement
within the previously-unknown environment to gradually
minimize the map uncertainty. Similar problems such as
autonomous exploration and next-best-view planning are
well-studied [12, 38, 73, 69, 50] by exploiting discretized
scene representations to achieve the best coverage and reconstruction accuracy (see Sec. 2 for a detailed discussion). Though the implicit neural representation has its
own merits, e.g. promising representation power and con-

10981

