This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-Aware Neural Body Fitting for Occlusion Robust 3D Human Pose Estimation
Yi Zhang1∗

Pengliang Ji2∗
Angtian Wang1
Jieru Mei1
Adam Kortylewski3,4
Alan Yuille1
1
2
Johns Hopkins University
Beihang University
3
4
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
University of Freiburg

Abstract
Regression-based methods for 3D human pose estimation directly predict the 3D pose parameters from a 2D image using deep networks. While achieving state-of-the-art
performance on standard benchmarks, their performance
degrades under occlusion. In contrast, optimization-based
methods fit a parametric body model to 2D features in an
iterative manner. The localized reconstruction loss can
potentially make them robust to occlusion, but they suffer
from the 2D-3D ambiguity. Motivated by the recent success of generative models in rigid object pose estimation,
we propose 3D-aware Neural Body Fitting (3DNBF) - an
approximate analysis-by-synthesis approach to 3D human
pose estimation with SOTA performance and occlusion robustness. In particular, we propose a generative model
of deep features based on a volumetric human representation with Gaussian ellipsoidal kernels emitting 3D posedependent feature vectors. The neural features are trained
with contrastive learning to become 3D-aware and hence
to overcome the 2D-3D ambiguity. Experiments show that
3DNBF outperforms other approaches on both occluded
and standard benchmarks. Code is available at https:
//github.com/edz-o/3DNBF

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D human pose estimation (HPE) is a longstanding problem of computer vision. Regression-based
methods [12, 24, 49, 53, 69, 71] directly regress the 3D pose
parameters of a human body model, such as SMPL [40],
and learn to overcome the inherent 2D-3D ambiguity of the
prediction task from the training data. However, the performance of regression-based methods degrades when humans
are partially occluded, as demonstrated by related work [26]
and in our experiments (Figure 1 (c)). Optimization-based
methods [4,27,51,77,79] fit a parametric body model to 2D
representations, such as keypoint detections [24, 28] or seg∗ Indicates equal contribution.

(a) Input Image

(b) GT

(c) HMR-EFT (d) HMR-EFT (e) HMR-EFT
+SMPLify
+3DNBF

Figure 1: 3D human pose estimation under occlusion. Performance of regression-based methods [22] degrades under occlusion (c). Traditional optimization-based methods
can be robust occlusion, but they suffer from the 2D-3D
ambiguity in monocular 3D HPE (d). Our generative approach resolves the 2D-3D ambiguity through analysis-bysynthesis in a 3D-aware feature space (e).

mentation maps [49, 53, 81], in an iterative manner. They
are relatively robust to occlusion but perform worse than
regression-based methods in 3D HPE particularly because
they suffer from the 2D-3D ambiguity (Figure 1(d)), even
when regularized with strong 3D priors [51], because the
manually designed 2D features lack 3D information.
Recently, generative models have been shown to be successful with improved robustness to occlusion in object
recognition [31] and rigid object pose estimation [73] for
certain object categories. The idea is to formulate vision
tasks as inverse graphics or analysis-by-synthesis [25, 80]
- searching for the parameters in a generative model (e.g.
computer graphics models) that best explain the observed
image while an outlier process can be introduced to explain occluded regions. However, performing analysis-bysynthesis in RGB pixel space is challenging due to the lack
of both good generative models and efficient algorithms to
inverse them. Instead, they perform approximate analysisby-synthesis in deep feature space. However, the generative
models used are 2D-based or simple cuboid-like 3D structures with features invariant to the 3D viewpoint, making
19399

