This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tetra-NeRF: Representing Neural Radiance Fields Using Tetrahedra
Jonas Kulhanek
Czech Technical University in Prague

Torsten Sattler
Czech Technical University in Prague

jonas.kulhanek@cvut.cz

torsten.sattler@cvut.cz

1) input: point cloud

3) barycetric interpolation of features

2) scene representation: dense tetrahedra

4) shallow MLP predicts
density and colour

Figure 1. The input to Tetra-NeRF is a point cloud which is triangulated to get a set of tetrahedra used to represent the radiance field.
Rays are sampled, and the field is queried. Barycentric interpolation is used to interpolate tetrahedra vertices, and the resulting features are
passed through a shallow MLP to get the density and colours for volumetric rendering.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) are a very recent and
very popular approach for the problems of novel view synthesis and 3D reconstruction. A popular scene representation used by NeRFs is to combine a uniform, voxel-based
subdivision of the scene with an MLP. Based on the observation that a (sparse) point cloud of the scene is often
available, this paper proposes to use an adaptive representation based on tetrahedra obtained by Delaunay triangulation instead of uniform subdivision or point-based representations. We show that such a representation enables efficient
training and leads to state-of-the-art results. Our approach
elegantly combines concepts from 3D geometry processing, triangle-based rendering, and modern neural radiance
fields. Compared to voxel-based representations, ours provides more detail around parts of the scene likely to be close
to the surface. Compared to point-based representations,
our approach achieves better performance. The source code
is publicly available at: https://jkulhanek.com/tetra-nerf.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D scenes from images and rendering
photo-realistic novel views is a key problem in computer
vision. Recently, NeRFs [3, 4, 39] became dominant in the
field for their superior photo-realistic results. Originally,

NeRFs used MLPs to represent the 3D scene as an implicit function. Given a set of posed images, NeRF randomly samples a batch of pixels, casts rays from the pixels into the 3D space, queries the implicit function at randomly sampled distances along the rays, and aggregates the
sampled values using volumetric rendering [37, 39]. While
the visual results of such methods are of high quality, the
problem is that querying large MLPs at millions of points
is costly. Also, once the network is trained, it is difficult to
make any changes to the represented radiance field as everything is baked into the MLPs parameters, and any change
has a non-local effect. Since then, there have been a lot
of proposed alternatives to the large MLP field representation [9, 17, 32, 41, 57, 70, 74]. These methods combine an
MLP with a voxel feature grid [41, 57], or in some cases
represent the radiance field directly as a tensor [9, 10, 17].
When querying these representations, first, the containing
voxel is found, and the features stored at the eight corner
points of the voxel are trilinearly interpolated. The result
is either passed through a shallow MLP [9, 10, 41, 57] or is
used directly as the density and colour [17, 32, 57].
Having a dense tensor represent the entire scene is very
inefficient, as we only need to represent a small space
around surfaces. Therefore, different methods propose different ways of tackling the issue. Instant-NGP [41], for example, uses a hash grid instead of a dense tensor, where it
relies on optimisation to resolve the hash collisions. How-

18458

