This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Muscles in Action
Mia Chiquier and Carl Vondrick
Columbia University
{mia.chiquier,vondrick}@cs.columbia.edu
Original
Recommended

Motion-to-Muscle Encoder

Muscle
Modification

Muscle-to-Motion Decoder

Quads.
Hams.
Lats.
Biceps

Limp

Amount of Exertion

Flexed

Figure 1: Bidirectional Mapping between Muscles and Motion. Visible human motion is created by, and constrained by,
our muscles. We learn to predict which muscle groups a person uses during motion (left column), as well as to reconstruct
motion from muscle activation (right column). We illustrate how these two mappings can be combined to recommend new
motions, similar to the input muscle, this time subject to particular muscle group goals (bottom row).

Abstract
Human motion is created by, and constrained by, our
muscles. We take a first step at building computer vision methods that represent the internal muscle activity that
causes motion. We present a new dataset, Muscles in Action (MIA), to learn to incorporate muscle activity into human motion representations. The dataset consists of 12.5
hours of synchronized video and surface electromyography
(sEMG) data of 10 subjects performing various exercises.
Using this dataset, we learn a bidirectional representation
that predicts muscle activation from video, and conversely,
reconstructs motion from muscle activation. We evaluate
our model on in-distribution subjects and exercises, as well

as on out-of-distribution subjects and exercises. We demonstrate how advances in modeling both modalities jointly can
serve as conditioning for muscularly consistent motion generation. Putting muscles into computer vision systems will
enable richer models of virtual humans, with applications
in sports, fitness, and AR/VR.

1. Introduction
The vision community has made great progress in modelling and analyzing human motion from video via tasks
such as pose estimation [33, 25, 62, 45, 7, 23, 7], action
recognition [47, 56, 27, 26, 59], motion transfer [8, 1, 31,
58] and more. However, motion understanding goes beyond

22091

