This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FDViT: Improve the Hierarchical Architecture of Vision Transformer
Yixing Xu, Chao Li, Dong Li, Xiao Sheng, Fan Jiang, Lu Tian, Ashish Sirasao
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., Beijing, China
{yixing.xu, chao.li, d.li, xsheng, f.jiang, lu.tian, ashish.sirasao}@amd.com

Abstract

FDViT-Ti
FDViT-S
FDViT-B
ViT-Ti
ViT-S
ViT-B

Despite the fact that transformer-based models have
yielded great success in computer vision tasks, they suffer
from the challenge of high computational costs that limits
their use on resource-constrained devices. One major reason is that vision transformers have redundant calculations
since the self-attention operation generates patches with
high similarity at a later stage in the network. Hierarchical
architectures have been proposed for vision transformers to
alleviate this challenge. However, by shrinking the spatial
dimensions to half of the originals with downsampling layers, the challenge is actually overcompensated, as too much
information is lost. In this paper, we propose FDViT to improve the hierarchical architecture of the vision transformer
by using a flexible downsampling layer that is not limited
to integer stride to smoothly reduce the sizes of the middle
feature maps. Furthermore, a masked auto-encoder architecture is used to facilitate the training of the proposed flexible downsampling layer and produces informative outputs.
Experimental results on benchmark datasets demonstrate
that the proposed method can reduce computational costs
while increasing classification performance and achieving
state-of-the-art results. For example, the proposed FDViTS model achieves a top-1 accuracy of 81.5%, which is 1.7
percent points higher than the ViT-S model and reduces 39%
FLOPs.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been the
first choice on computer vision (CV) tasks [25, 54, 56, 55,
19] in the past decade. Transformers with self-attention
mechanisms are another kind of neural networks that are
widely used in neural language processing (NLP) tasks and
have a great success (e.g., BERT [13], GPT-3 [2] and ChatGPT [1]). In order to utilize the power of transformers for
computer vision tasks, many researchers attempt to use the
self-attention mechanism. For example, DETR [3] applies
the transformer encoder-decoder architecture to object detection task, and iGPT [7] trains a sequence transformer for

Average Cosine Similarity

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
1

2

3

4

5

6 7
Layer

8

9

10 11 12

Figure 1. Cosine similarities between different patches in each
layer of ViT models and FDViT models. Patch similarities are
reduced in FDViTs.

image recognition task with a pre-training stage and finetuning stage.
Recently, ViT [15] mitigates the performance gap between transformer models and CNN models and achieves
a remarkable performance on the ImageNet dataset without using convolutional operation. Different from CNNs,
ViT divides the input image into 16 × 16 patches and treats
the patches as sequence input to the consequent transformer
blocks. After that DeiT [44] proposes a data-efficient image transformer with a distillation training method and further improves the performance of ViT by a large margin.
Since then, research into vision transformers has exploded
and several CV tasks such as image recognition [15, 44], object detection [16], image segmentation [42] and low-level
vision [6] have been studied.
Despite the success of the aforementioned vision transformers, they mostly share the network architecture of ViT
and have the same disadvantage that the models are cumbersome and have high computational costs. This is mainly because there are many redundant calculations in the transformer network and the similarity between patches becomes
higher as the network goes deeper [43, 39]. Because of this,

5950

