This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Fast Fourier Convolution in Image Inpainting
Tianyi Chu1 , Jiafu Chen1 , Jiakai Sun1 , Shuobin Lian1 , Zhizhong Wang1 , Zhiwen Zuo2,∗ ,
Lei Zhao1 , Wei Xing1 , Dongming Lu1
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou, China
{chutianyi, chenjiafu, csjk, lshuobin, endywon, cszhl, wxing, ldm}@zju.edu.cn
zzw@zjgsu.edu.cn

Masked Image

Ground Truth

ResBlock

FourierUnit

Unbiased FourierUnit

Figure 1: Inpainting results of ResBlock-based, FourierUnit-based [4] and Unbiased FourierUnit-based (Ours) frameworks.
ResBlock-based framework results blurry due to its limited receptive field. FourierUnit-based framework can capture texture
pattern but is prone to color shifting and artifacts due to its fundamental flaws (Sec. 3.2). Our method produces clean and
reasonable inpainting result. All frameworks are trained under the same setting.

Abstract
Recently proposed LaMa [25] introduce Fast Fourier
Convolution (FFC) [4] into image inpainting. FFC empowers the fully convolutional network to have a global receptive field in its early layers, and have the ability to produce
robust repeating texture. However, LaMa has difficulty in
generating clear and sharp complex content. In this paper,
we analyze the fundamental flaws of using FFC in image
inpainting, which are 1) spectrum shifting, 2) unexpected
spatial activation, and 3) limited frequency receptive field.
Such flaws make FFC-based inpainting framework difficult
in generating complicated texture and performing faithful
reconstruction. Based on the above analysis, we propose a
novel Unbiased Fast Fourier Convolution (UFFC) module.
UFFC is constructed by modifying the vanilla FFC module with 1) range transform and inverse transform, 2) absolute position embedding, 3) dynamic skip connection, and
4) adaptive clip, to overcome the above flaws. UFFC captures frequency information efficiently and realize reconstruction without introducing additional artifacts, achieving better inpainting results and more efficient training. In
*Corresponding author.

addition, we propose two novel perceptual losses for better
generation quality and more robust training. Extensive experiments on several benchmark datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method, outperforming the state-of-theart methods in both texture-capturing ability and expressiveness.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting (also known as image completion) is
a subtask of the low-level vision tasks that aims to recover
the masked missing/degraded area by referring to the content of the undegraded area. Traditional non-learning image
inpainting methods, such as diffusion [2], PatchMatch [1],
etc., use statistical information of the undegraded area to
infer the missing content. These methods can produce inpainting results with reasonable structure and texture when
the mask area is small, or the undegraded part shows welldefined geometry. However, these methods often perform
poorly when being required to recover semantics since they
lack image semantic priors.
Compared with the non-learning methods, learningbased models can obtain semantic priors for a certain class
1
23195

