This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized Sum Pooling for Metric Learning
Yeti Z. Gürbüz† Ozan Şener
RSiM, TU Berlin Intel Labs

Abstract
A common architectural choice for deep metric learning is a convolutional neural network followed by global
average pooling (GAP). Albeit simple, GAP is a highly
effective way to aggregate information. One possible
explanation for the effectiveness of GAP is considering
each feature vector as representing a different semantic entity and GAP as a convex combination of them.
Following this perspective, we generalize GAP and propose a learnable generalized sum pooling method (GSP).
GSP improves GAP with two distinct abilities: i) the
ability to choose a subset of semantic entities, effectively learning to ignore nuisance information, and ii)
learning the weights corresponding to the importance of
each entity. Formally, we propose an entropy-smoothed
optimal transport problem and show that it is a strict
generalization of GAP, i.e., a specific realization of the
problem gives back GAP. We show that this optimization
problem enjoys analytical gradients enabling us to use it
as a direct learnable replacement for GAP. We further
propose a zero-shot loss to ease the learning of GSP.
We show the effectiveness of our method with extensive
evaluations on 4 popular metric learning benchmarks.
Code is available at: GSP-DML Framework

1. Introduction
Distance metric learning (DML) addresses the problem of finding an embedding function such that the
semantically similar samples are embedded close to
each other while the dissimilar ones are placed relatively apart in the Euclidean sense. Although the
prolific and diverse literature of DML includes various
architectural designs [9, 24, 33], loss functions [39], and
data-augmentation techniques [47, 55], many of these
methods have a shared component: a convolutional neural network (CNN) followed by a global pooling layer,
mostly global average pooling (GAP) [39].
Common folklore to explain the effectiveness of GAP
† Affiliated with OGAM-METU during the research.

A. Aydın Alatan
OGAM and METU

is considering each pixel of the CNN feature map as
corresponding to a separate semantic entity [14]. For
example, spatial extent of one pixel can correspond to
a "tire" object making the resulting feature a representation for "tireness" of the image. If this explanation is
correct, the representation space defined via output of
GAP is a convex combination of semantically independent representations defined by each pixel in the feature
map. Although this folklore is later empirically studied
in [64,70,71, and references therein] and further verified
for classification in [13, 62], its algorithmic implications
are not clear. If each feature is truly representing a
different semantic entity, should we really average over
all of them? Surely, some classes belong to the background and should be discarded as nuisance variables.
Moreover, is uniform average of them the best choice?
Aren’t some classes more important than others? In
this paper, we try to answer these questions within
the context of metric learning. We propose a learnable
and generalized version of GAP which learns to choose
the subset of the semantic entities to utilize as well as
weights to assign them while averaging.
In order to generalize the GAP operator to be learnable, we re-define it as a solution of an optimization
problem. We let the solution space to include 0-weight
effectively enabling us to choose subset of the features
as well as carefully regularize it to discourage degenerate solution of using all the features. Crucially, we
rigorously show that the original GAP is a specific case
of our proposed optimization problem for a certain realization. Our proposed optimization problem closely
follows optimal transport based top-k operators [6] and
we utilize its literature to solve it. Moreover, we present
an algorithm for an efficient computation of the gradients over this optimization problem enabling learning.
A critical desiderata of such an operator is choosing subset of features which are discriminative and ignoring the
background classes corresponding to nuisance variables.
Although supervised metric learning losses provide guidance for seen classes, they carry no such information
to generalize the behavior to unseen classes. To enable
such a behavior, we adopt a zero-shot prediction loss

5462

