This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FS-DETR: Few-Shot DEtection TRansformer with prompting and without
re-training

1

Adrian Bulat1,2 , Ricardo Guerrero1 , Brais Martinez1 , Georgios Tzimiropoulos1,3
Samsung AI Cambridge 2 Technical University of Iasi 3 Queen Mary University of London

Abstract
This paper is on Few-Shot Object Detection (FSOD),
where given a few templates (examples) depicting a novel
class (not seen during training), the goal is to detect all
of its occurrences within a set of images. From a practical perspective, an FSOD system must fulfil the following
desiderata: (a) it must be used as is, without requiring any
fine-tuning at test time, (b) it must be able to process an arbitrary number of novel objects concurrently while supporting
an arbitrary number of examples from each class and (c) it
must achieve accuracy comparable to a closed system. Towards satisfying (a)-(c), in this work, we make the following
contributions: We introduce, for the first time, a simple, yet
powerful, few-shot detection transformer (FS-DETR) based
on visual prompting that can address both desiderata (a) and
(b). Our system builds upon the DETR framework, extending it based on two key ideas: (1) feed the provided visual
templates of the novel classes as visual prompts during test
time, and (2) “stamp” these prompts with pseudo-class embeddings (akin to soft prompting), which are then predicted
at the output of the decoder. Importantly, we show that
our system is not only more flexible than existing methods,
but also, it makes a step towards satisfying desideratum (c).
Specifically, it is significantly more accurate than all methods that do not require fine-tuning and even matches and
outperforms the current state-of-the-art fine-tuning based
methods on the most well-established benchmarks (PASCAL
VOC & MSCOCO).

1. Introduction
Thanks to the advent of deep learning, object detection
has witnessed tremendous progress over the last years. However, the standard setting of training and testing on a closed
set of classes has specific important limitations. Firstly, it’s
unfeasible to annotate all objects of relevance present in-thewild, thus, current systems are trained only on a small subset.
It does not seem straightforward to significantly scale up this
figure. Secondly, human perception operates mostly under
the open set recognition/detection setting. Humans can de-

tect/track new unseen objects on the fly, typically using a
single template, without requiring any “re-training” or “finetuning” of their “detection” skills, arguably a consequence
of the prior representation learned, an aspect we sought to
exploit here too. Finally, important applications in robotics,
where agents may interact with previously unseen objects,
might require their subsequent detection on the fly without
any re-training. Few-Shot Object Detection (FSOD) refers
to the problem of detecting a novel class not seen during
training and, hence, can potentially address many of the
aforementioned challenges.
There are still important desiderata that current FSOD
system must address in order to be practical and flexible
to use: (a) They must be used as is, not requiring any retraining (e.g. fine-tuning) at test time - a crucial component
for autonomous exploration [24]. However, many existing
state-of-the-art FSOD systems (e.g. [37, 44, 32]) rely on
re-training with the few available examples of the unseen
classes. While such systems are still useful, the requirement for re-training makes them significantly more difficult
to deploy on the fly and in real-time or on devices with
limited capabilities for training. (b) They must be able to
handle an arbitrary number of novel objects (and moreover
an arbitrary number of examples per novel class) simultaneously during test time, in a single forward pass without
requiring batching. This is akin to how closed systems work,
which are able to detect multiple objects concurrently. However, to our knowledge there is no FSOD system possessing
this property without requiring re-training. (c) They must
attain classification accuracy that is comparable to that of
closed systems. However, existing FSOD systems are far
from achieving such high accuracy, especially for difficult
datasets like MSCOCO.
This work aims to significantly advance the state-of-theart in all three above-mentioned challenges. To this end,
and building upon the DETR [3] framework, we propose a
system, called Few-Shot Detection Prompting (FS-DETR),
capable of detecting multiple novel classes at once, supporting a variable number of examples per class, and importantly,
without any extra re-training. In our system, the visual template(s) (i.e. prompts) from the new class(es) are used, dur11793

