This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Chupa: Carving 3D Clothed Humans from Skinned Shape Priors
using 2D Diffusion Probabilistic Models
Byungjun Kim1 *

Sookwan Han1
1

Kwangho Lee2

Patrick Kwon2 *

Myunggi Lee2

Daesik Kim2

Hanbyul Joo1

2

Naver Webtoon AI

Seoul National University

https://snuvclab.github.io/chupa/

girl, long hair, coat, pants, …

Random generation

SMPL-X

Text-guided generation

Figure 1. Generative Human Digital Avatars. We propose Chupa, a 3D human generation pipeline that combines the generative power of
diffusion models [61] and neural rendering techniques [39] to create diverse, and realistic 3D humans. Our pipeline can easily generalize to
unseen human poses and display realistic qualities.

Abstract
We propose a 3D generation pipeline that uses diffusion
models to generate realistic human digital avatars. Due to
the wide variety of human identities, poses, and stochastic
details, the generation of 3D human meshes has been a challenging problem. To address this, we decompose the problem
into 2D normal map generation and normal map-based 3D
reconstruction. Specifically, we first simultaneously generate
realistic normal maps for the front and backside of a clothed
human, dubbed dual normal maps, using a pose-conditional
diffusion model. For 3D reconstruction, we “carve” the prior
SMPL-X mesh to a detailed 3D mesh according to the normal maps through mesh optimization. To further enhance the
* Equal contribution

high-frequency details, we present a diffusion resampling
scheme on both body and facial regions, thus encouraging
the generation of realistic digital avatars. We also seamlessly
incorporate a recent text-to-image diffusion model to support text-based human identity control. Our method, namely,
Chupa, is capable of generating realistic 3D clothed humans
with better perceptual quality and identity variety.

1. Introduction
The creation of clothed 3D human characters, which we
refer to as “digital avatars”, has become an essential part
of many fields including gaming, animation, virtual/mixed
reality, and the 3D industry in general. These digital avatars
allow users to use their virtual representation for a range

15965

