This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Calibrating Panoramic Depth Estimation for
Practical Localization and Mapping
Junho Kim1 , Eun Sun Lee1 , and Young Min Kim1, 2
1
2

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University

Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence and INMC, Seoul National University
{82magnolia, eunsunlee, youngmin.kim}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
The absolute depth values of surrounding environments
provide crucial cues for various assistive technologies, such
as localization, navigation, and 3D structure estimation.
We propose that accurate depth estimated from panoramic
images can serve as a powerful and light-weight input for a
wide range of downstream tasks requiring 3D information.
While panoramic images can easily capture the surrounding context from commodity devices, the estimated depth
shares the limitations of conventional image-based depth
estimation; the performance deteriorates under large domain shifts and the absolute values are still ambiguous to
infer from 2D observations. By taking advantage of the
holistic view, we mitigate such effects in a self-supervised
way and fine-tune the network with geometric consistency
during the test phase. Specifically, we construct a 3D
point cloud from the current depth prediction and project
the point cloud at various viewpoints or apply stretches on
the current input image to generate synthetic panoramas.
Then we minimize the discrepancy of the 3D structure estimated from synthetic images without collecting additional
data. We empirically evaluate our method in robot navigation and map-free localization where our method shows
large performance enhancements. Our calibration method
can therefore widen the applicability under various external conditions, serving as a key component for practical
panorama-based machine vision systems.

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Motivation and overview of our approach. Panoramic
perception enables efficient navigation due to the large field of
view (top). Nevertheless, the performance drops due to the gaps
between the training dataset with upright cameras in mediumsized rooms and the deployment scenarios with limited data and
various domain shifts. The proposed solution suggests test-time
training using geometric consistency to mitigate the gap (bottom).

Acquiring depth maps of the surrounding environment
is a crucial step for AR/VR and robotics applications,
as the depth maps serve as building blocks for mapping
and localization. While dense LiDAR or RGB-D scanning [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] has been widely used for depth acquisition, the methods are often computationally expensive or require costly hardware. Panoramic depth estima-

tion [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13], on the other hand, enables
quick and cost-effective depth computation. It outputs a
dense depth map from a single neural network inference
given only 360◦ camera input, which is becoming more
widely accessible [14, 15]. Further, the large field of view

8830

