This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross Contrasting Feature Perturbation for Domain Generalization
Chenming Li1 Daoan Zhang1 Wenjian Huang1 Jianguo Zhang1,2, *
1
Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems and Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
12132339@mail.sustech.edu.cn, 12032503@mail.sustech.edu.cn, {huangwj, zhangjg}@sustech.edu.cn,

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) aims to learn a robust
model from source domains that generalize well on unseen target domains. Recent studies focus on generating
novel domain samples or features to diversify distributions
complementary to source domains. Yet, these approaches
can hardly deal with the restriction that the samples synthesized from various domains can cause semantic distortion. In this paper, we propose an online one-stage Cross
Contrasting Feature Perturbation (CCFP) framework to
simulate domain shift by generating perturbed features in
the latent space while regularizing the model prediction
against domain shift. Different from the previous fixed synthesizing strategy, we design modules with learnable feature perturbations and semantic consistency constraints.
In contrast to prior work, our method does not use any
generative-based models or domain labels. We conduct
extensive experiments on a standard DomainBed benchmark with a strict evaluation protocol for a fair comparison. Comprehensive experiments show that our method
outperforms the previous state-of-the-art, and quantitative
analyses illustrate that our approach can alleviate the domain shift problem in out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios.
https://github.com/hackmebroo/CCFP

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks have achieved remarkable success on a number of computer vision tasks[27, 65]. These
models rely on the i.i.d assumption[52], i.e., the training
data and testing data are identically and independently distributed. However, in real-world scenarios, the assumption
does not always hold due to the domain shif t problem[5].
For instance, it is hard for a model trained on photographs
to adapt to sketches.
Domain adaptation (DA) methods[13, 50, 61] can be em* Corresponding author.

ployed to handle the out-of-distribution (OOD) issue in the
settings where unlabeled target data is available. Although
DA can perform well on known target domains, it still fails
in practical situations where target domains are not accessible during training. Domain generalization (DG) [59] aims
to deal with such problems. The goal of domain generalization is to learn a generalized model from multiple different but related source domains (i.e. diverse training datasets
with the same label space) that can perform well on arbitrary unseen target domains. To realize this goal, most deep
learning models are trained to minimize the average loss
over the training set, which is known as the Empirical Risk
Minimization (ERM) principle[53]. However, ERM-based
network provably fails to OOD scenarios[38, 11, 21, 64].
One line of work[49, 45, 46] improves the generalization capability of a model by optimizing the worst-domain
risk over the set of possible domains, which are created by
perturbing samples in the image level or using generativebased model (i.e. VAE[25] or GAN[17]) to generate fictitious samples. Despite the performance promoted by creating samples in the image level on an offline basis to approximate the worst case over the entire family of domains, it is
hard to generate ”fictitious” samples in the input space without losing semantic discriminative information[43]. Moreover, the offline two-stage data perturbation training procedure is nontrivial since both training a generative-based
model and inferring them to obtain perturbed samples are
challenging tasks.
Another line of work perturbs features in the latent
space[55, 70] by tuning the scaling and shifting parameters
after instance normalization. Another study[32] extends it
and leverages the uncertainty associated with feature statistics perturbation. However, these methods all rely on a fixed
perturbation strategy (linear interpolation or random perturbation) which limits the domain transportation from synthesized features to original features. Besides, although the instance normalization-based feature perturbation can change
the information of intermediate features which is specific
to domains, they still fail to preserve the semantic invari-

1327

