This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Late Stopping: Avoiding Confidently Learning from Mislabeled Examples
Suqin Yuan1 Lei Feng2 * Tongliang Liu1 *
1
The University of Sydney 2 Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Sample selection is a prevalent method in learning with
noisy labels, where small-loss data are typically considered as correctly labeled data. However, this method
may not effectively identify clean hard examples with large
losses, which are critical for achieving the model’s closeto-optimal generalization performance. In this paper, we
propose a new framework, Late Stopping, which leverages
the intrinsic robust learning ability of DNNs through a prolonged training process. Specifically, Late Stopping gradually shrinks the noisy dataset by removing high-probability
mislabeled examples while retaining the majority of clean
hard examples in the training set throughout the learning
process. We empirically observe that mislabeled and clean
examples exhibit differences in the number of epochs required for them to be consistently and correctly classified,
and thus high-probability mislabeled examples can be removed. Experimental results on benchmark-simulated and
real-world noisy datasets demonstrate that the proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-art counterparts.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved outstanding success in various tasks, while the success largely relies on data with high-quality annotations [13, 55, 41, 19].
In many real-world scenarios, it would be quite difficult to
collect large-scale accurately labeled data, which could inevitably contain noisy labels. Unfortunately, previous studies [1, 56] showed that DNNs can easily overfit random labels, resulting in poor generalization performance. Therefore, an increasing number of methods have been proposed
for Learning with Noisy Labels (LNL).
One mainstream solution in existing methods of LNL
is to train the classifier with confident examples [20, 14,
46, 34, 36], which is based on the memorization effect
of DNNs, i.e., DNNs learn example with dominant patterns first and then overfit rare ones [1]. Given only noisy
data, to exploit the memorization effect, the typical strategy starts from a small confident clean dataset and then

gradually expands the dataset, which prevents DNNs from
over-fitting noisy data. In general, there are two primary
approaches to exploit confident examples in the learning
process. The first approach involves identifying examples
with high-probability clean labels and training the classifier based on these examples, which is commonly referred
to as the “small-loss trick” [20, 14, 12, 28, 52]. The second approach involves controlling the learning process of
the classifier to primarily learn high-probability clean examples in noisy datasets, which is commonly referred to as
“early stopping” [37, 42, 17, 25, 3].
Despite providing satisfactory performance, these approaches present an unintended consequence in their methods to prevent over-fitting noise. Specifically, to reduce the
impact of mislabeled examples, these approaches limit the
capability of the model to effectively learn clean hard examples (CHEs) in noisy datasets, where CHEs are defined
as clean examples that are close to the decision boundary,
and a significant proportion of CHEs are non-dominated
sub-population examples [9]. Identifying CHEs in noisy
data is quite challenging [2, 22], as both the CHEs and the
mislabeled examples are often characterized by large losses
[52, 11, 6], causing them to become entangled. To maintain the purity of the dataset of confident examples, existing
LNL methods [34, 2] normally try to eliminate potential examples that are likely to be mislabeled, which inevitably
contain many CHEs. However, it is necessary to consider
the positive impact of memorization effects on underrepresented sub-populations [10] (i.e., CHEs) when learning
from natural datasets, as this is crucial for achieving closeto-optimal generalization performance.
In this work, our goal is to enable the classifier to learn as
many useful non-dominated sub-population examples in the
training set as possible during the process of learning with
noisy labels. This entails selecting as many clean examples
as possible, particularly the clean hard examples, during the
sample selection process. In relation to this context, we introduce a novel concept termed First-time k-epoch Learning
(FkL), which is defined as the index of the epoch during the
training procedure where an example has been predicted to
its given label for consecutive k epochs for the first time, as
shown in Figure 1(a).

* Corresponding authors.

16079

