This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HyperDiffusion: Generating Implicit Neural Fields with Weight-Space Diffusion
Ziya Erkoç1

Fangchang Ma2
1

Qi Shan2

Matthias Nießner1

Angela Dai1

Technical University of Munich 2 Apple

https://ziyaerkoc.com/hyperdiffusion

Overﬁtting

3D Synthesis

4D Synthesis

Flatten

Overﬁt

Train

Diﬀusion

Sample

Unﬂatten

MC

Synthesis

Figure 1: HyperDiffusion enables a new paradigm in directly generating neural implicit fields by predicting their weight
parameters. We leverage implicit neural fields to optimize a set of MLPs that faithfully represent individual dataset instances
(“Overfitting,” top-left). Our network, based on a transformer architecture, then models a diffusion process directly on the
optimized MLP weights (“Diffusion,” bottom-left). This enables synthesis of new implicit fields (“Synthesis,” bottom-right).

Abstract
Implicit neural fields, typically encoded by a multilayer
perceptron (MLP) that maps from coordinates (e.g., xyz)
to signals (e.g., signed distances), have shown remarkable promise as a high-fidelity and compact representation.
However, the lack of a regular and explicit grid structure
also makes it challenging to apply generative modeling directly on implicit neural fields in order to synthesize new
data. To this end, we propose HyperDiffusion, a novel approach for unconditional generative modeling of implicit
neural fields. HyperDiffusion operates directly on MLP
weights and generates new neural implicit fields encoded
by synthesized MLP parameters. Specifically, a collection
of MLPs is first optimized to faithfully represent individual
data samples. Subsequently, a diffusion process is trained
in this MLP weight space to model the underlying distribution of neural implicit fields. HyperDiffusion enables diffusion modeling over a implicit, compact, and yet high-fidelity
representation of complex signals across 3D shapes and 4D
mesh animations within one single unified framework.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen profound development in implicit neural field models, demonstrating powerful representations, particularly 3D shape geometry [34, 6], neural radiance fields (NeRF) [31], and complex signals with
higher-order derivative constraints [46]. Typically, an implicit neural field1 maps an input coordinate location in ndimensional space to the target signal domain. For example,
an implicit surface representation
{x ∈ Rn |f (x, θ) = 0},
where f : Rn → R is typically characterized by a multilayer perceptron (MLP). Notably, such neural fields efficiently represent sparse high-dimensional data in a relatively low-dimensional MLP weight space. This continuous mapping enables sampling at arbitrary-resolution for
surface representations, eliminating explicit resolution constraints inherent to classical point, mesh, or voxel representations. One can then easily reconstruct the mesh underly1 Implicit neural fields are also referred to as coordinate fields or
coordinate-based networks. We use these terms interchangeably.

14300

