This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Skin Tone: A Multidimensional Measure of Apparent Skin Color
William Thong*
Sony AI

Przemyslaw Joniak†
The University of Tokyo

Alice Xiang
Sony AI

Abstract
This paper strives to measure apparent skin color in
computer vision, beyond a unidimensional scale on skin
tone. In their seminal paper Gender Shades, Buolamwini
and Gebru have shown how gender classification systems can be biased against women with darker skin tones.
Subsequently, fairness researchers and practitioners have
adopted the Fitzpatick skin type classification as a common
measure to assess skin color bias in computer vision systems. While effective, the Fitzpatick scale only focuses on
the skin tone ranging from light to dark. Towards a more
comprehensive measure of skin color, we introduce the hue
angle ranging from red to yellow. When applied to images,
the hue dimension reveals additional biases related to skin
color in both computer vision datasets and models. We then
recommend multidimensional skin color scales, relying on
both skin tone and hue, for fairness assessments.

1. Introduction
This paper focuses on measuring apparent skin color in
images for fairness benchmarking, and moves toward a multidimensional score beyond the skin tone depth. Adverse
decisions can arise in common computer vision models, as
strikingly identified by Buolamwini and Gebru [8]. This
has an impact on real-life applications, as models can produce wrong skin lesion diagnostics [15] or incorrect heart
rate measurements [5, 27, 62] for individuals with darker
skin tones. It is therefore critical to identify to what extent visual datasets and models are affected by changes in
skin color. To achieve this, it becomes necessary to develop
comprehensive skin color scores to characterize images of
individuals, otherwise a fairness evaluation based on skin
color would not be feasible.
Describing the apparent skin color remains an open challenge, as the final visual color perception results from a
complex physical and biological phenomenon [34]. The
skin is a multilayered structure, which varies among individuals: not every individual will have the same amount and
* Corresponding author: william.thong@sony.com
† Work done while an intern at Sony AI

Figure 1: Apparent skin color in images results from a
complex phenomenon, where it varies in tone from light to
dark (vertical axis) and hue from red to yellow (horizontal
axis). This figure depicts examples from CelebAMask-HQ.
In this paper, we introduce a measure of the skin hue, besides the commonly used skin tone, to quantify apparent
skin color variations.

distribution of carotene, hemoglobin, or melanin throughout
the different layers [6, 10]. Hence, modeling the intrinsic
skin color through the amount of reflected, scattered, or absorbed light for every individual is a difficult and complex
task in images [67]. Additionally, color perception from the
human visual system adds more complexity to the problem,
as colors can be differently perceived depending on their
context or people’s cultures [26]. Instead, it is simpler and
more appropriate to develop representative color scales to
capture the variations in apparent skin color.
The commonly accepted standard for skin color scale is
the Fitzpatrick skin type classification [24], which categorizes skin color into six different types based on skin tone,
ranging from light to dark. It has unsurprisingly become a
useful tool for fairness analysis [8,57] because skin tone annotations may serve as a proxy for race or ethnicity annotations. Indeed, such sensitive attributes are subject to significant data privacy protections [22], and are often unavailable
or inferred in visual datasets [2, 36], making the measure of

4903

