This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Monocular Depth Estimation under Challenging Conditions
Stefano Gasperini∗,1,2 Nils Morbitzer∗,1 HyunJun Jung1
Nassir Navab1 Federico Tombari1,3
Technical University of Munich

2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Estimating the depth of a scene is a fundamental task
for autonomous driving and robotics navigation. While
supervised monocular depth estimation approaches have
achieved remarkable results, they rely on ground truth data
which is expensive and time-consuming to produce [19, 12].
This requires costly 3D sensors (e.g., LiDAR) and significant additional data processing [19, 12].
To circumvent these issues, geometrical constraints on
stereo pairs or monocular videos have been widely explored
∗ The authors contributed equally.

Contact author: Stefano Gasperini (stefano.gasperini@tum.de).

Google

night - input image

Monodepth2

md4all [ours]

AdaBins

md4all (sup.) [ours]

fully-supervised

While state-of-the-art monocular depth estimation approaches achieve impressive results in ideal settings, they
are highly unreliable under challenging illumination and
weather conditions, such as at nighttime or in the presence
of rain. In this paper, we uncover these safety-critical issues and tackle them with md4all: a simple and effective
solution that works reliably under both adverse and ideal
conditions, as well as for different types of learning supervision. We achieve this by exploiting the efficacy of existing
methods under perfect settings. Therefore, we provide valid
training signals independently of what is in the input. First,
we generate a set of complex samples corresponding to the
normal training ones. Then, we train the model by guiding
its self- or full-supervision by feeding the generated samples and computing the standard losses on the corresponding original images. Doing so enables a single model to
recover information across diverse conditions without modifications at inference time. Extensive experiments on two
challenging public datasets, namely nuScenes and Oxford
RobotCar, demonstrate the effectiveness of our techniques,
outperforming prior works by a large margin in both standard and challenging conditions. Source code and data are
available at: https://md4all.github.io.

3

VisualAIs

self-supervised

1

rain - input image

Figure 1. Predictions in challenging settings [3] for self-supervised
[11] and supervised [1] methods. Standard approaches fail due to
training assumptions or sensor artifacts. Under both supervisions,
our md4all makes the same models robust in all conditions.

to learn depth estimation in a self-supervised manner [11,
25, 34, 7, 10]. Monocular training solutions are the most
inexpensive and rely on the smallest amount of assumptions
on the sensor setup, as they require only image sequences
captured by a single camera.
Self-supervised methods rely on photometric assumptions and pixel correspondences [11, 34]. State-of-the-art
approaches [11, 41, 32] deliver sharp and accurate estimates in standard conditions (i.e., sunny and cloudy), but
suffer from a variety of inherent issues, such as scale ambiguity and difficulties with dynamic objects. While prior
works have already proposed robust methods to address
these problems [12, 8], there is still a major issue preventing
the wide applicability of self-supervised depth estimators in
safety-critical settings, such as autonomous driving. Darkness and adverse weather conditions (e.g., night, rain, snow,
and fog) introduce noise in the pixel correspondences. As
displayed in Figure 1, this is detrimental to the effectiveness
of such methods, thereby requiring ad hoc solutions.
As shown in Figure 2, this problem is particularly severe at nighttime due to reflections (e.g., caused by streetlights and vehicle headlights), noise, and the general inability of the embedded cameras to capture details in dark areas. This leads to wrong depth estimates, which can be dangerous in safety-critical settings. A few pioneering works
have already explored this problem, albeit with highly-

8177

