This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Fairness-aware Adversarial Network Pruning
Lei Zhang
Zhejiang University

Zhibo Wang‡
Zhejiang University

Xiaowei Dong
Wuhan University

zl.leizhang@zju.edu.cn

zhibowang@zju.edu.cn

xwdong@whu.edu.cn

Yunhe Feng
University of North Texas

Xiaoyi Pang
Wuhan University

Zhifei Zhang
Adobe Research

Kui Ren
Zhejiang University

yunhe.feng@unt.edu

xypang@whu.edu.cn

zzhang@adobe.com

kuiren@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the massive growth of parameters in nowadays
deep models, pruning techniques [10, 8, 7] have achieved
appealing reductions in network memory footprint and time
complexity. However, they tend to overlook the bias hid‡ Corresponding author.

0.4

DEO

Network pruning aims to compress models while minimizing loss in accuracy. With the increasing focus on bias
in AI systems, the bias inheriting or even magnification
nature of traditional network pruning methods has raised
a new perspective towards fairness-aware network pruning. Straightforward pruning plus debias methods and recent designs for monitoring disparities of demographic attributes during pruning have endeavored to enhance fairness in pruning. However, neither simple assembling of
two tasks nor specifically designed pruning strategies could
achieve the optimal trade-off among pruning ratio, accuracy, and fairness. This paper proposes an end-to-end
learnable framework for fairness-aware network pruning,
which optimizes both pruning and debias tasks jointly by
adversarial training against those final evaluation metrics
like accuracy for pruning, and disparate impact (DI) and
equalized odds (DEO) for fairness. In other words, our
fairness-aware adversarial pruning method would learn to
prune without any handcraft rules. Therefore, our approach
could flexibly adapt to variate network structures. Exhaustive experimentation demonstrates the generalization capacity of our approach, as well as superior performance
on pruning and debias simultaneously. To highlight, the
proposed method could preserve the SOTA pruning performance while significantly improving fairness by around
50% as compared to traditional pruning methods.

SGDP

Fair-SGDP

0.5

Ours
0.3

95% Pruned
90% Pruned
80% Pruned
70% Pruned

Better
Model Fairness
Higher Accuracy

0.2
78

79

81

Accuracy (%)

82

Figure 1: Can existing pruning methods improve model
fairness while maintaining accuracy? We use the area of
a circle to represent the size of a model after pruning, i.e.,
the smaller the area, the more compact the model. Towards
the bottom-right corner of the figure, it represents a more
accurate and fair model. Please note that the SOTA network pruning method SGDP [28] (pink) achieves high accuracy while lagging far behind in fairness on CelebA [21]
dataset. Even with enhanced fairness via Adversarial Debiasing [42] before pruning, existing pruning methods (yellow) seriously degrade the fairness. Our method (green) significantly improves fairness and preserves a relatively high
accuracy even with a high pruning ratio.
den behind high-accuracy predictions [2, 27, 24]. Thus, it is
critical to improving fairness in network pruning for broad
and reliable applications of AI systems. Intuitively, fairness
could be considered as postprocessing after pruning, but it
would come to a suboptimal solution since disparate objectives of these two tasks. Therefore, optimizing fairness
during the pruning process would be a promising research
direction, which motivates our work toward this track.
Various pruning techniques have been proposed to minimize degradation in accuracy after network pruning [3, 7,

5168

