This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OxfordTVG-HIC: Can Machine Make Humorous Captions from Images?
Runjia Li1 * Shuyang Sun1 * Mohamed Elhoseiny2 Philip Torr1
1
Torr Vision Group, University of Oxford 2 KAUST
https://torrvision.com/tvghic/

OxfordTVG-HIC

COCO

1. Your parents when you get a
B+ on the blood test
2. When your ex-girlfriend says
happy 1 year anniversary to
her new boyfriend and you
broke up 10 months ago

1. A cat is sleeping at a
computer desk on a
keyboard.
2. A picture of a black and
white cat laying on top of
laptop keyboard.

Abstract
This paper presents OxfordTVG-HIC (Humorous Image Captions), a large-scale dataset for humour generation and understanding. Humour is an abstract, subjective, and context-dependent cognitive construct involving
several cognitive factors, making it a challenging task to
generate and interpret. Hence, humour generation and understanding can serve as a new task for evaluating the ability of deep-learning methods to process abstract and subjective information. Due to the scarcity of data, humourrelated generation tasks such as captioning remain underexplored. To address this gap, OxfordTVG-HIC offers approximately 2.9M image-text pairs with humour scores to
train a generalizable humour captioning model. Contrary
to existing captioning datasets, OxfordTVG-HIC features a
wide range of emotional and semantic diversity resulting in
out-of-context examples that are particularly conducive to
generating humour. Moreover, OxfordTVG-HIC is curated
devoid of offensive content. We also show how OxfordTVGHIC can be leveraged for evaluating the humour of a generated text. Through explainability analysis of the trained
models, we identify the visual and linguistic cues influential for evoking humour prediction (and generation). We
observe qualitatively that these cues are aligned with the
benign violation theory of humour in cognitive psychology.

1. Introduction
Humour has been recorded as a universal and high-level
cognitive perception since Sumerians wrote down the first
joke and remains a complicated concept due to its dependence on culture, visual and linguistic stimuli, as well as
fundamental affective factors. Generating humorous content poses a significant challenge. As the arousal-reduction
mechanism [31] suggests, the optimal level of novelty for
humour should be neither too low nor too high, so that
most audience can comprehend and appreciate it. Achieving this balance can be difficult. Another study from neu* These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence to
Shuyang Sun (kevinsun@robots.ox.ac.uk).

Figure 1: Image-text samples from OxfordTVGHIC and COCO [9]. In OxfordTVG-HIC , the captions
for a cat image do not describe the physical features of the
cat, but rather the situations that could elicit the cat’s facial expression. These situations create a humorous effect
with the expression, as they are not offensive and violate
the audience’s everyday-life expectations (Benign violation
theory [32]). On the other hand, the captions for a similar
cat image in COCO [9] explicitly describe the facts in the
image.

roscience [14] states: “successful jokes involve a cognitive
juxtaposition of mental sets, followed by an affective feeling of amusement”. Linguistically, semantic and phonological violations of mental sets interact to generate humour [32]. When multiple modalities such as vision and
language are involved, the complexity of juxtaposition will
significantly increase. Thus, Humour captioning, as a multimodal humour generation task, can be a useful task to investigate the upper limit of deep learning to handle high-level
abstraction and creativity.
The definition of humour captioning is not clear and the
task is under-explored. We argue that humour captioning
should be distinguished from conventional image captioning [9, 45, 51], which mainly describes the objects or
scenes in the image. The main goal of humour captioning should be to elicit a cognitive perception of humour

20293

