This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Advancing Example Exploitation Can Alleviate Critical Challenges
in Adversarial Training
Yao Ge1 Yun Li1 * Keji Han1 Junyi Zhu2 Xianzhong Long1
1
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications†
2
College of Arts & Sciences, Boston University
Abstract
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable results
across various tasks. However, they are susceptible to adversarial examples, which are generated by adding adversarial perturbations to original data. Adversarial training
(AT) is the most effective defense mechanism against adversarial examples and has received significant attention. Recent studies highlight the importance of example exploitation, where the model’s learning intensity is altered for
specific examples to extend classic AT approaches. However, the analysis methodologies employed by these studies are varied and contradictory, which may lead to confusion in future research. To address this issue, we provide a comprehensive summary of representative strategies
focusing on exploiting examples within a unified framework. Furthermore, we investigate the role of examples
in AT and find that examples which contribute primarily
to accuracy or robustness are distinct. Based on this finding, we propose a novel example-exploitation idea that can
further improve the performance of advanced AT methods. This new idea suggests that critical challenges in AT,
such as the accuracy-robustness trade-off, robust overfitting, and catastrophic overfitting, can be alleviated simultaneously from an example-exploitation perspective. The code
can be found in https://github.com/geyao1995/advancingexample-exploitation-in-adversarial-training.

1. Introduction
Adversarial examples, generated by adding adversarial
perturbations to original data, can easily deceive today’s
deep learning models [1]. Among numerous methods to
mitigate this vulnerability, adversarial training (AT) is the
most effective which takes adversarial examples into the
training process [2, 3, 4, 5]. However, AT is not without
* Corresponding author (liyun@njupt.edu.cn).
† This work was partially supported by National Natural Science Foun-

dation of China (No.61772284) and Graduate Research and Innovation
Projects of Jiangsu Province (No.KYCX21 0795).

limitations and confronts critical challenges, including: (1)
the trade-off between accuracy (classification success rate
for original samples) and robustness (classification success
rate for examples after adding adversarial perturbations),
where improving one metric comes at the expense of the
other [3]; (2) the phenomenon of robust overfitting (RO),
which is characterized by a gradual decline in robustness
during the later stage of training [6]; and (3) the occurrence of catastrophic overfitting (CO), which leads to a sudden drop in robustness after a particular epoch of training
[7]. To alleviate these challenges, numerous research efforts have explored diverse perspectives, such as modifying
model components [8, 9], refining weight optimization policies [10, 11], and generating supplementary training data
[12, 13]. In addition, example exploitation has emerged as
a promising perspective that has gained sustained attention.
It emphasizes the unequal contribution of examples to the
model during AT and is less computationally demanding
compared to other perspectives [14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. Moreover, it holds great potential to uncover the essence of adversarial examples.
To enhance AT, example-exploitation methods typically
aim to promote or discourage the learning of specific example features by the model. To prevent the model from
overfitting erroneous features, SAT dynamically adjusts the
one-hot label of each example in each training epoch [14].
MART prioritizes the impact of misclassified examples
on model robustness by incorporating a misclassificationaware term into its objective function [15]. FAT assigns
each example a different attack iteration to search for
friendly adversarial examples that can improve model accuracy [16]. GAIRAT reweights the loss function for each
example based on its geometry value, which approximates
the distance from the example to the class boundary [17].
The recent work TEAT integrates the temporal ensembling
approach to prevent excessive memorization of noisy adversarial examples [18]. Although these works offer various strategies for exploiting examples, their underlying insights are different and sometimes conflicting. For instance,
MART focuses on examples that FAT aims to avoid. To

145

