This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmnimatteRF: Robust Omnimatte with 3D Background Modeling
Geng Lin1
Chen Gao2
Jia-Bin Huang1,2
Changil Kim2
Yipeng Wang2
Matthias Zwicker1
Ayush Saraf2
1
2
University of Maryland, College Park
Meta
https://omnimatte-rf.github.io

Abstract
Video matting has broad applications, from adding interesting effects to casually captured movies to assisting
video production professionals. Matting with associated
effects such as shadows and reflections has also attracted
increasing research activity, and methods like Omnimatte
have been proposed to separate dynamic foreground objects of interest into their own layers. However, prior works
represent video backgrounds as 2D image layers, limiting
their capacity to express more complicated scenes, thus hindering application to real-world videos. In this paper, we
propose a novel video matting method, OmnimatteRF, that
combines dynamic 2D foreground layers and a 3D background model. The 2D layers preserve the details of the subjects, while the 3D background robustly reconstructs scenes
in real-world videos. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our method reconstructs scenes with better quality on
various videos.

1. Introduction
Video matting is the problem of separating a video into
multiple layers with associated alpha mattes such that the
layers are composited back to the original video. It has a
wide variety of applications in video editing as it allows
for substituting layers or processing them individually before compositing back, and thus has been studied well over
decades. In typical applications like rotoscoping in video
production and background blurring in online meetings, the
goal is to obtain the masks containing only the object of
interest. In many cases, however, it is often preferred to
be able to create video mattes that include not only the object of interest but also its associated effects, like shadow
and reflections. This could reduce the often-required, additional manual segmentation of secondary effects and help
increase realism in the resulting edited video. Being able
to factor out the related effects of foreground objects also
helps reconstruct a clean background, which is preferred in

(a) Omnimatte BG

(b) Omnimatte FG

(c) Our BG

(d) Our FG

Figure 1. Video with parallax effects. Limited by their 2D image representation (a), previous works such as Omnimatte fail to
handle videos with parallax effects in the background. Their foreground layer (b) has to capture (dis)occlusion effects to minimize
the reconstruction loss. In contrast, our method employs a 3D
background (c), enabling us to obtain clean foreground layers (d).

applications like object removal. Despite these benefits, this
problem is much more ill-posed and has been much less explored than the conventional matting problem.
The most promising attempt to tackle this problem is
Omnimatte [21]. Omnimattes are RGBA layers that capture dynamic foreground objects and their associated effects. Given a video and one or more coarse mask videos,
each corresponding to a foreground object of interest, the
method reconstructs an omnimatte for each object, in addition to a static background that is free from all of the objects of interest and their associated effects. While Omnimatte [21] works well for many videos, it is limited by
its use of homography to model backgrounds, which requires the background be planar or the video contains only
rotational motion. This is not the case as long as there exists parallax caused by camera motions and objects occlude
each other. This limitation hinders its application in many
real-world videos, as shown in Fig. 1.
D2 NeRF [36] attempts to address this issue using two

23471

