This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Image Harmonization with Globally Guided Feature Transformation and
Relation Distillation
Li Niu1 *, Linfeng Tan1 , Xinhao Tao1 , Junyan Cao1 , Fengjun Guo2 , Teng Long2 , Liqing Zhang1
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
INTSIG
{ustcnewly,tanlinfeng,taoxinhao,Joy C1}@sjtu.edu.cn, {fengjun guo,mike long}@intsig.net, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Given a composite image, image harmonization aims
to adjust the foreground illumination to be consistent with
background. Previous methods have explored transforming
foreground features to achieve competitive performance.
In this work, we show that using global information to
guide foreground feature transformation could achieve significant improvement. Besides, we propose to transfer the
foreground-background relation from real images to composite images, which can provide intermediate supervision
for the transformed encoder features. Additionally, considering the drawbacks of existing harmonization datasets,
we also contribute a ccHarmony dataset which simulates
the natural illumination variation. Extensive experiments
on iHarmony4 and our contributed dataset demonstrate
the superiority of our method. Our ccHarmony dataset is
released at https://github.com/bcmi/Image-HarmonizationDataset-ccHarmony.

1. Introduction
Image composition [31, 6] is an essential editing operation to combine regions from different images to produce
composite images, which has a variety of vision applications like advertisement propaganda and digital entertainment [34, 28]. Nevertheless, when pasting the foreground
extracted from one image on another background image, the
resultant composite image may have inconsistent illumination statistics. Image harmonization [10, 29] aims to adjust
the foreground illumination for visual consistency within
the composite image. In recent years, deep learning based
image harmonization methods [10, 36, 18, 29, 20, 15] have
sprouted out and achieved remarkable progress.
Existing methods [33, 49, 11, 34, 22] have developed
myriads of techniques to address the mismatch between
* Corresponding author.

foreground and background illumination. Among them,
some works [29, 11] revealed that specially transforming
the foreground features can enhance the performance, since
the main goal of image harmonization is adjusting the foreground. For example, [29, 17] transfer the feature statistics (e.g., mean, variance) from background to foreground.
[11, 36] process foreground and background features separately using different channel attentions. These methods
only leverage the information within the same feature map
to transform the foreground features, lacking the guidance
of global information. However, the global information of
the whole composite image is very likely to be beneficial
for foreground feature transformation.
In this work, we extract the bottleneck feature from encoder as the global feature, which is used to guide the transformation of foreground features in each feature map. Regarding the transformation manner, we opt for modulated
convolution kernel proposed in [21], and other transformation manners are also applicable. In particular, we use
global feature to obtain the modulated convolution kernel,
which is applied to the foreground features. We name our
method as GiftNet (globally guided feature transformation).
It is worth noting that our method shares similar spirit with
CDTNet [9]. CDTNet uses global feature to predict color
transformation, while our GiftNet uses global feature to
predict feature transformation.
In practice, we observe that globally guided feature
transformation is effective for decoder features, but ineffective for encoder features. We conjecture that one reason is the lack of intermediate supervision for encoder features. Specifically, most of previous harmonization methods [33, 49, 11, 34, 22] only use the ground-truth image
as the final supervision, without any intermediate supervision. In the auto-encoder based network, the encoder features may not be sufficiently harmonized, which could have
negative impact on the harmonization performance. To address the above issue, we provide useful guidance for en-

7723

