This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Yes, we CANN: Constrained Approximate Nearest Neighbors for local
feature-based visual localization
Dror Aiger

André Araujo

Simon Lynen

Google Research
{aigerd,andrearaujo,slynen}@google.com

Abstract
Large-scale visual localization systems continue to rely
on 3D point clouds built from image collections using
structure-from-motion. While the 3D points in these models
are represented using local image features, directly matching a query image’s local features against the point cloud is
challenging due to the scale of the nearest-neighbor search
problem. Many recent approaches to visual localization have
thus proposed a hybrid method, where first a global (per image) embedding is used to retrieve a small subset of database
images, and local features of the query are matched only
against those. It seems to have become common belief that
global embeddings are critical for said image-retrieval in
visual localization, despite the significant downside of having to compute two feature types for each query image. In
this paper, we take a step back from this assumption and propose Constrained Approximate Nearest Neighbors (CANN),
a joint solution of k-nearest-neighbors across both the geometry and appearance space using only local features. We
first derive the theoretical foundation for k-nearest-neighbor
retrieval across multiple metrics and then showcase how
CANN improves visual localization. Our experiments on
public localization benchmarks demonstrate that our method
significantly outperforms both state-of-the-art global featurebased retrieval and approaches using local feature aggregation schemes. Moreover, it is an order of magnitude faster in
both index and query time than feature aggregation schemes
for these datasets. Code will be released.

1. Introduction
In this paper we focus on the problem of image retrieval for
visual localization. Modern visual localization approaches
are predominantly based on 3D point clouds that represent the geometry and appearance of large scale scenes
[30, 19, 43, 31]. These 3D points are estimated from image
collections using Structure-from-Motion (SfM), where each
3D point has an associated descriptor derived from pixels.

Figure 1: The proposed Constrained Approximate Nearest Neighbor algorithm allows to find the best subset of 3D points that are
both close to query features in appearance space and that are consistently seen by the same camera, leading to high overlap with the
initially unknown query camera pose (shaded area). Jointly solving
for these two metrics in a single search algorithm is a long-known
open question in the community and CANN provides to the best of
our knowledge the first practical solution. Red points in the figure
show neighbors retrieved by an unconstrained search using the features from the query image (bottom right). Using CANN it’s more
likely to retrieve points that are inliers to geometric verification
(green) and less likely to fetch unrelated outlier points (yellow).

To localize a query image against such 3D models, a
set of local features is extracted from it and 2D-3D correspondences are estimated based on descriptor similarity.
In practice, this data association problem suffers from various challenges: visual aliasing, scene change, noise, etc.
Because the final localization solution is computed using
geometric inference from these 2D-3D correspondences, not
finding enough correct matches can lead the entire localization process to fail.
Simply establishing many more matches per query keypoint (red points in Fig. 1) however causes long runtime
in geometric verification [3]. It is thus important to find
13339

