This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

All4One: Symbiotic Neighbour Contrastive Learning
via Self-Attention and Redundancy Reduction
Imanol G. Estepa
Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain

Ignacio Sarasúa
NVIDIA
isarasua@nvidia.com

igonzaes42@alumnes.ub.edu

Bhalaji Nagarajan
Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain
bhalaji.nagarajan@ub.edu

Petia Radeva
Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain
Computer Vision Center,
Cerdanyola (Barcelona), Spain
petia.ivanova@ub.edu

Centroid
Contrast

Abstract
Nearest neighbour-based methods have proved to be
one of the most successful self-supervised learning (SSL)
approaches due to their high generalization capabilities.
However, their computational efficiency decreases when
more than one neighbour is used. In this paper, we propose
a novel contrastive SSL approach, which we call All4One,
that reduces the distance between neighbour representations using ”centroids” created through a self-attention
mechanism. We use a Centroid Contrasting objective along
with single Neighbour Contrasting and Feature Contrasting objectives. Centroids help in learning contextual information from multiple neighbours whereas the neighbour
contrast enables learning representations directly from the
neighbours and the feature contrast allows learning representations unique to the features. This combination enables
All4One to outperform popular instance discrimination approaches by more than 1% on linear classification evaluation for popular benchmark datasets and obtains state-ofthe-art (SoTA) results. Finally, we show that All4One is
robust towards embedding dimensionalities and augmentations, surpassing NNCLR and Barlow Twins by more than
5% on low dimensionality and weak augmentation settings.
Source code is available in https://github.com/
ImaGonEs/all4one.

1. Introduction
Deep learning (DL) models strongly depend on the availability of large and high-quality training datasets whose

Neighbour
Contrast
Feature
Contrast

Figure 1: Simplified architecture of All4One. All4One
uses three different objective functions that contrast different representations: Centroid objective contrasts the contextual information extracted from multiple neighbours while
the Neighbour objective assures diversity [14]. Additionally, the Feature contrast objective measures the correlation
of the generated features and increases their independence.

construction is very expensive [25]. Self-supervised learning (SSL) claims to allow the training of DL models without the need for large annotated data, which serves as a
milestone in speeding up the DL progression [25]. The

16243

