This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReMoDiffuse: Retrieval-Augmented Motion Diffusion Model
Mingyuan Zhang1 , Xinying Guo1 , Liang Pan1 , Zhongang Cai12 , Fangzhou Hong1 , Huirong Li1 ,
Lei Yang2 , Ziwei Liu1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Sensetime, China
{mingyuan001,XGUO012}@e.ntu.edu.sg, yanglei@sensetime.com, ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

…

Diffusion
Model
walks happily and
then stop
#60

Motion Database

Text Description

Generated Sequence

Figure 1: ReMoDiffuse is a retrieval-augmented 3D human motion diffusion model. Benefiting from the extra knowledge
from the retrieved samples, ReMoDiffuse is able to achieve high-fidelity on the given prompts.

Abstract
3D human motion generation is crucial for creative industry. Recent advances rely on generative models with domain
knowledge for text-driven motion generation, leading to
substantial progress in capturing common motions. However, the performance on more diverse motions remains
unsatisfactory. In this work, we propose ReMoDiffuse, a
diffusion-model-based motion generation framework that
integrates a retrieval mechanism to refine the denoising
process. ReMoDiffuse enhances the generalizability and
diversity of text-driven motion generation with three key
designs: 1) Hybrid Retrieval finds appropriate references
from the database in terms of both semantic and kinematic similarities. 2) Semantic-Modulated Transformer
selectively absorbs retrieval knowledge, adapting to the
difference between retrieved samples and the target motion
sequence. 3) Condition Mixture better utilizes the retrieval
database during inference, overcoming the scale sensitivity in classifier-free guidance. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that ReMoDiffuse outperforms state-of-the-art
methods by balancing both text-motion consistency and
motion quality, especially for more diverse motion generation. Project page: https://mingyuan-zhang.
Corresponding author.

github.io/projects/ReMoDiffuse.html

1. Introduction
Human motion generation has numerous practical applications in fields such as game production, film, and virtual
reality. This has led to a growing interest in generating
manipulable, plausible, diverse, and realistic human motion sequences. Traditional modeling processes are timeconsuming and require specialized equipment and a significant amount of domain knowledge. To address these challenges, generic human motion generation models have been
developed to enable the description, generation, and modification of motion sequences. Among all forms of humancomputer interaction, natural language, in the form of text,
provides rich semantic details and is a commonly used conditional signal in human motion generation.
Previous research has explored various generative models for text-driven motion generation. TEMOS uses a
Variational-Auto-Encoder (VAE) to synthesize detailed motions, utilizing the KIT Motion-Language dataset [17]. Guo
et al. [7] propose a two-stage auto-regressive approach for
generating motion sequences. More recently, diffusion
models have been applied to human motion generation due
to their strength and flexibility. MotionDiffuse [27] gener-

364

