This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Privacy-Preserving Face Recognition Using Random Frequency Components
Yuxi Mi1 * Yuge Huang2 * Jiazhen Ji2 Minyi Zhao1
Jiaxiang Wu2 Xingkun Xu2 Shouhong Ding2 Shuigeng Zhou1†
1
Fudan University 2 Tencent Youtu Lab
{yxmi20, zhaomy20, sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn
{yugehuang, royji, willjxwu, xingkunxu, ericshding}@tencent.com

Abstract
The ubiquitous use of face recognition has sparked increasing privacy concerns, as unauthorized access to sensitive face images could compromise the information of individuals. This paper presents an in-depth study of the
privacy protection of face images’ visual information and
against recovery. Drawing on the perceptual disparity between humans and models, we propose to conceal visual
information by pruning human-perceivable low-frequency
components. For impeding recovery, we first elucidate the
seeming paradox between reducing model-exploitable information and retaining high recognition accuracy. Based
on recent theoretical insights and our observation on model
attention, we propose a solution to the dilemma, by advocating for the training and inference of recognition models on randomly selected frequency components. We distill
our findings into a novel privacy-preserving face recognition method, PartialFace. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PartialFace effectively balances privacy protection goals and recognition accuracy. Code is available at:
https://github.com/Tencent/TFace.

1. Introduction
Face recognition (FR) is a landmark biometric technique that enables a person to be identified or verified by
face. It has seen remarkable methodological breakthroughs
and rising adoptions in recent years. Currently, considerable applications of face recognition are carried out online
to bypass local resource constraints and to attain high accuracy [19]: Face images are collected by local devices
such as cell phones or webcams, then outsourced to a
service provider, that uses large convolutional neural networks (CNN) to extract the faces’ identity-representative
templates and matches them with records in its database.
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

(a) pruning

accuracy

privacy

(b) vanilla

(c) PartialFace

Figure 1. Paradigm comparison among other frequency-based
methodologies and PartialFace. (a) Pruning low-frequency channels can conceal visual information but stop no recovery. (b) A
vanilla method that uses fixed channel subsets to impede recovery suffers downgraded accuracy. (c) PartialFace addresses the
dilemma by training and inferring from random channels.

During the process, the original face images are often considered sensitive data under regulatory demands
that are unwise to share without privacy protection. This
fosters the studies of privacy-preserving face recognition
(PPFR), where cryptographic [7,8,14,17,21,33,44,47] and
perturbation-based [3, 12, 18, 28–30, 46, 48] measures are
taken to prevent face images from unauthorized access of,
e.g., wiretapping third parties. Face images are converted
to protective representations that their visual information is
both concealed and cannot be easily recovered [2].
This paper advocates a novel PPFR scheme, to learn
face images from random combinations of their partial frequency components. Our proposed PartialFace can protect
face images’ visual information and prevent recovery while
maintaining the high distinguishability of their identities.
We start with the disparity in how humans and models
perceive images. Recent image classification studies suggest that models’ predictions are determined mainly by the
images’ high-frequency components [39, 45], which carry
negligible visual information and are barely picked up by
humans. We extend the theory to face recognition from a

19673

