This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Label-Free Event-based Object Recognition via Joint Learning with
Image Reconstruction from Events
Hoonhee Cho*, Hyeonseong Kim*, Yujeong Chae, and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
{gnsgnsgml,brian617,yujeong,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Input

Abstract

Output
Images

Recognizing objects from sparse and noisy events becomes extremely difﬁcult when paired images and category labels do not exist. In this paper, we study labelfree event-based object recognition where category labels
and paired images are not available. To this end, we propose a joint formulation of object recognition and image
reconstruction in a complementary manner. Our method
ﬁrst reconstructs images from events and performs object recognition through Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP), enabling better recognition through a rich
context of images. Since the category information is essential in reconstructing images, we propose categoryguided attraction loss and category-agnostic repulsion loss
to bridge the textual features of predicted categories and
the visual features of reconstructed images using CLIP.
Moreover, we introduce a reliable data sampling strategy
and local-global reconstruction consistency to boost joint
learning of two tasks. To enhance the accuracy of prediction and quality of reconstruction, we also propose a
prototype-based approach using unpaired images. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method
and its extensibility for zero-shot object recognition. Our
project code is available at https://github.com/
Chohoonhee/Ev-LaFOR.

1. Introduction
Event cameras are neuromorphic vision sensors that
asynchronously perceive per-pixel brightness changes with
high temporal resolution. They show advantages over conventional frame-based cameras, such as high dynamic range
(HDR) and low latency. However, despite the superiority of cameras, algorithms using events are still in their
infancy. Existing event-based object recognition methods [1, 4, 22, 24, 25, 26, 30, 32, 34, 36, 40, 53] have been
shown that object recognition is a crucial task for event feature learning [12, 29, 38] and endeavors have successfully
* The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally. In alphabetical order.

19866

Image
Reconstruction
Events
Category Labels

Object
Recognition

Paired Images

Dragonfly

Joshua Tree

Category Labels

Dragonfly
Dog
Airplanes

Optional
for
Visual
Quality

dog, dragonfly, ‫ڮ‬

Scissors

Category Set

Crawling Images from Web

Figure 1: We tackle label-free event-based object recognition where category labels and paired images are not
available. Our approach can simultaneously perform object recognition and image reconstruction through proposed
joint learning framework. Optionally, our method can leverage unpaired images to enhance object recognition performance and reconstructed image quality.

classiﬁed the object with events. However, they rely on supervision with category labels to achieve high performance.
Furthermore, the sparsity of events poses a challenge for
users to label them accurately when there are no paired images. Several unsupervised methods [25, 36] have been proposed for object recognition, however, their performances
remain subpar. Hence, there is a natural need for robust and
effective label-free event-based object recognition methods.
In this paper, we study label-free event-based object
recognition where category labels and paired images are not
available as in Fig. 1. To tackle this task, we focus on two
following facts. Firstly, as demonstrated in [45, 60], performing object recognition on reconstructed images with
spatially dense information and rich context shows better
performance than solely using events. Secondly, during reconstructing images from events, taking the categories into

