This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAMPLING: Scene-adaptive Hierarchical Multiplane Images Representation
for Novel View Synthesis from a Single Image
Xiaoyu Zhou1 Zhiwei Lin1 Xiaojun Shan1 * Yongtao Wang1 † Deqing Sun2 Ming-Hsuan Yang2,3
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Google Research 3 University of California, Merced

PixelSynth

MPI

MINE

Ours

Figure 1: Novel view synthesis result comparisons. Given a single image captured in an outdoor scene, our method
synthesizes novel views with fewer visual artifacts, geometric deformities, and blurs. Notably, our method models favorable
intricate details, such as tiny objects, symbols, and traffic signs, resulting in more photo-realistic views.

Abstract
Recent novel view synthesis methods obtain promising
results for relatively small scenes, e.g., indoor environments
and scenes with a few objects, but tend to fail for unbounded
outdoor scenes with a single image as input. In this paper,
we introduce SAMPLING, a Scene-adaptive Hierarchical
Multiplane Images Representation for Novel View Synthesis from a Single Image based on improved multiplane images (MPI). Observing that depth distribution varies significantly for unbounded outdoor scenes, we employ an
adaptive-bins strategy for MPI to arrange planes in accordance with each scene image. To represent intricate geometry and multi-scale details, we further introduce a hierarchical refinement branch, which results in high-quality
synthesized novel views. Our method demonstrates considerable performance gains in synthesizing large-scale unbounded outdoor scenes using a single image on the KITTI
dataset and generalizes well to the unseen Tanks and Tem* Work is done during the internship at Peking University.
† Corresponding author.

ples dataset. The code and models will be made available
at https://pkuvdig.github.io/SAMPLING/.

1. Introduction
Taking a photo and using it to synthesize photo-realistic
images at novel views is an important task with a wide range
of applications, such as generating realistic data for training
AI models (e.g., autonomous driving perception and robot
simulation). This task is challenging as it requires a precise understanding of 3D geometry, reasoning about occlusions, and rendering high-quality, spatially consistent novel
views from a single image. It becomes even more difficult
for large-scale unbounded outdoor scenes, which contain
complex geometric conditions, various objects, and diverse
depth distributions corresponding to different scenes.
Recently, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [1] based methods have gained much attention by synthesizing photorealistic images with dense multi-view inputs. By leveraging Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) layers, NeRF implic-

22830

