This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WDiscOOD: Out-of-Distribution Detection via Whitened Linear Discriminant
Analysis
Yiye Chen

Yunzhi Lin Ruinian Xu Patricio A. Vela
Georgia Institute of Technology

{yychen2019, yunzhi.lin, rnx94, pvela}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks are susceptible to generating
overconfident yet erroneous predictions when presented
with data beyond known concepts. This challenge underscores the importance of detecting out-of-distribution
(OOD) samples in the open world. In this work, we propose a novel feature-space OOD detection score based on
class-specific and class-agnostic information. Specifically,
the approach utilizes Whitened Linear Discriminant Analysis to project features into two subspaces - the discriminative and residual subspaces - for which the in-distribution
(ID) classes are maximally separated and closely clustered,
respectively. The OOD score is then determined by combining the deviation from the input data to the ID pattern in
both subspaces. The efficacy of our method, named WDiscOOD, is verified on the large-scale ImageNet-1k benchmark, with six OOD datasets that cover a variety of distribution shifts. WDiscOOD demonstrates superior performance on deep classifiers with diverse backbone architectures, including CNN and vision transformer. Furthermore, we also show that WDiscOOD more e↵ectively detects novel concepts in representation spaces trained with
contrastive objectives, including supervised contrastive loss
and multi-modality contrastive loss.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are typically designed with a
closed-world assumption [46], where test data is assumed
to be drawn from the same distribution as the training data.
Without any built-in mechanism to distinguish novel concepts, deep neural networks are prone to generate incorrect
answers with high confidence when presented with out-ofdistribution (OOD) data. Such a misleading decision could
result in catastrophic consequences in applications, which
makes the deep neural network hard to deploy in the open
world. To address this issue, significant research e↵orts
have been devoted to the problem of OOD detection, which

Figure 1: Performance on two OOD detection benchmarks.
We propose a novel OOD detection method based on Whitened
Linear Discriminant Analysis, wihch is highlighted with red star.
It outperforms baselines with both ResNet-50 (x-axis) and ViTB/16 (y-axis) model on ImageNet-1k benchmark. Blue dots and
yellow square denote classifier-based and feature-based methods,
respectively. The AUROCs are averaged over six OOD datasets,
for which the detailed results are tabulated in Tab. 1.

aims to establish a robust method for identifying when the
testing data is “unknown.”
Specifically, OOD detection requires establishing a scoring function to separate ID and OOD data. Designed for
deep visual classifiers, the majority of works examine activation patterns from the classification layer. For example,
a popular baseline is to leverage the maximum posterior
probability output of a softmax classifier to indicate ID-ness
[21], assuming that the network is more confident with its
decision for ID data. The idea is enhanced by neural network calibration techniques [17, 32, 24], which aim to align
network confidence with actual likelihood. The technique
has been shown to improve OOD detection performance.
Other classifier-based scores explore unnormalized posterior probabilities known as logits [20, 33], and norms of gradients backpropagated from the classification layer [25, 29].
Recently, ViM [44] argues that both class-dependent
and class-agnostic information can potentially facilitate the
OOD detection task. Based on the idea, it designs a scoring function by mapping the feature-space principle component residual to the logit space. Despite the great per-

5298

