This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Large-Scale Outdoor Multi-modal Dataset and Benchmark for
Novel View Synthesis and Implicit Scene Reconstruction
Chongshan Lu1 Fukun Yin1,2 Xin Chen2 Wen Liu2 Tao Chen1 * Gang Yu2 Jiayuan Fan3
1
School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University, China
2
Tencent PCG, China
3
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, China
Prompt annotation
Buildings at night in the background; two tall buildings in
the middle; roads among buildings; cars are passing on the road;
tall buildings decorated with blue and orange lights.
Camera trajectory
Calibrated image

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [24] has achieved impressive results in single object scene reconstruction and novel
view synthesis, as demonstrated on many single modality and
single object focused indoor scene datasets like DTU [14],
BMVS [42], and NeRF Synthetic [24]. However, the study
of NeRF on large-scale outdoor scene reconstruction is still
limited, as there is no unified outdoor scene dataset for largescale NeRF evaluation due to expensive data acquisition and
calibration costs. In this work, we propose a large-scale
outdoor multi-modal dataset, OMMO dataset, containing
complex objects and scenes with calibrated images, point
clouds and prompt annotations. A new benchmark for several outdoor NeRF-based tasks is established, such as novel
view synthesis, diverse 3D representation, and multi-modal
NeRF. To create the dataset, we capture and collect a large
number of real fly-view videos and select high-quality and
high-resolution clips from them. Then we design a quality
review module to refine images, remove low-quality frames
and fail-to-calibrate scenes through a learning-based automatic evaluation plus manual review. Finally, volunteers
are employed to label and review the prompt annotation for
each scene and keyframe. Compared with existing NeRF
datasets, our dataset contains abundant real-world urban
and natural scenes with various scales, camera trajectories,
and lighting conditions. Experiments show that our dataset
can benchmark most state-of-the-art NeRF methods on different tasks. The dataset can be found at the following link:
https://ommo.luchongshan.com/ .

1. Introduction
Recent advances in implicit neural representations have
achieved remarkable results in photo-realistic novel view
synthesis and high-fidelity surface reconstruction [44, 43].
Unfortunately, most of the existing methods focus on single
* Corresponding author.

More views

More scenes

Figure 1. A city scene example from our dataset captured with low
illuminance and circle-shaped camera trajectory. We show multiview calibrated images, the camera track, and text descriptions of
the scene. Some details in colored boxes are zoomed in to indicate
that our dataset can provide real-world high-fidelity texture details.

objects or indoor scenes [44, 43, 9, 15, 5], and their synthesis
performance will decrease drastically if migrated to outdoor
scenes. Although some very recent methods try to solve
this problem and are well-designed for large scenes [36, 40],
their performance is difficult to compare due to the lack of
large-scale outdoor scene datasets and uniform benchmarks.
At present, the existing outdoor scene datasets are either

7557

