This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BoMD: Bag of Multi-label Descriptors for Noisy Chest X-ray Classification
Yuanhong Chen 1 * Fengbei Liu 1 * Hu Wang 1
Chong Wang 1
Yuyuan Liu 1
Yu Tian2
Gustavo Carneiro3
1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
2
Harvard Medical School, Harvard University
3
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey
Abstract
Deep learning methods have shown outstanding classification accuracy in medical imaging problems, which is
largely attributed to the availability of large-scale datasets
manually annotated with clean labels. However, given the
high cost of such manual annotation, new medical imaging classification problems may need to rely on machinegenerated noisy labels extracted from radiology reports. Indeed, many Chest X-Ray (CXR) classifiers have been modelled from datasets with noisy labels, but their training procedure is in general not robust to noisy-label samples, leading to sub-optimal models. Furthermore, CXR datasets are
mostly multi-label, so current multi-class noisy-label learning methods cannot be easily adapted. In this paper, we
propose a new method designed for noisy multi-label CXR
learning, which detects and smoothly re-labels noisy samples from the dataset to be used in the training of common
multi-label classifiers. The proposed method optimises a
bag of multi-label descriptors (BoMD) to promote their similarity with the semantic descriptors produced by language
models from multi-label image annotations. Our experiments on noisy multi-label training sets and clean testing
sets show that our model has state-of-the-art accuracy and
robustness in many CXR multi-label classification benchmarks, including a new benchmark that we propose to systematically assess noisy multi-label methods. Code is available at https://github.com/cyh-0/BoMD.

1. Introduction
The promising results produced by deep neural networks
(DNN) in medical image analysis (MIA) problems [30] is
attributed to the availability of large-scale datasets with accurately annotated images. Given the high cost of acquiring such datasets, the field is considering more affordable
automatic annotation processes by Natural Language Processing (NLP) approaches that extract multiple labels (each
* First two authors contributed equally to this work.

Multi-class (Noisy-cleaning)
Feature
extractor

Classifier

Pseudo
Labelling

Classifier

Robust
Loss

Classifier

Trainsition
Matrix

Multi-class (Noisy-robust)
Feature
extractor
Multi-class (Transition matrix)
Feature
extractor
Multi-class (Graph based)
Feature
extractor
Multi-label (BoMD)

Sample
Graph
Descriptor
Subgraph

MID
Sample
Graph

Smoothly
Relabel

Figure 1: Comparison of multi-class LNL methods [1, 21,
28, 33] and our noisy multi-label approach, BoMD, where
the feature extractor returns a single descriptor v per image, D is the noisy training set, C is the clean set, and
D̃ is the re-labelled training set. BoMD has two components: 1) learning of a bag of multi-label image descriptors
(MID) {v1 , v2 , v3 } to represent the image, and 2) smooth
re-labelling of images driven by a graph structure based on
the fine-grained relationships between MID descriptors.
label representing a disease) from radiology reports [20,57].
However, mistakes made by NLP combined with uncertain radiological findings can introduce label noise [44, 45],
as can be found in NLP-annotated Chest X-ray (CXR)
datasets [20, 57] whose noisy multi-labels can mislead supervised training processes. Nevertheless, even without addressing this noisy multi-label problem, current CXR multilabel classifiers [3, 15, 39, 50] show promising results. Although these methods show encouraging multi-label classification accuracy, there is still potential for improvement

21284

