This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiFace: High-Fidelity 3D Face Reconstruction by
Learning Static and Dynamic Details
Tianyu He3
Xu Tan3† Tadas Baltrušaitis4
Zenghao Chai1,2 * Tianke Zhang2
5
5
5
HsiangTao Wu
Runnan Li
Sheng Zhao
Chun Yuan2
Jiang Bian3
1
3
National University of Singapore 2 Tsinghua University
Microsoft Research Asia
4
5
Microsoft Mixed Reality & AI Lab
Microsoft Cloud + AI
zenghaochai@gmail.com

ztk21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

{tianyuhe,xuta,tabaltru,musclewu,runnan.li,sheng.zhao,jiang.bian}@microsoft.com

Abstract
3D Morphable Models (3DMMs) demonstrate great potential for reconstructing faithful and animatable 3D facial surfaces from a single image. The facial surface is
influenced by the coarse shape, as well as the static detail (e.g., person-specific appearance) and dynamic detail
(e.g., expression-driven wrinkles). Previous work struggles
to decouple the static and dynamic details through imagelevel supervision, leading to reconstructions that are not
realistic. In this paper, we aim at high-fidelity 3D face
reconstruction and propose HiFace to explicitly model the
static and dynamic details. Specifically, the static detail is
modeled as the linear combination of a displacement basis, while the dynamic detail is modeled as the linear interpolation of two displacement maps with polarized expressions. We exploit several loss functions to jointly learn
the coarse shape and fine details with both synthetic and
real-world datasets, which enable HiFace to reconstruct
high-fidelity 3D shapes with animatable details. Extensive
quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate that
HiFace presents state-of-the-art reconstruction quality and
faithfully recovers both the static and dynamic details. Our
project page: https://project-hiface.github.io.

1. Introduction
The reconstruction of a 3D face from a single image
has drawn much attention recently [67, 21, 41, 81]. It
has tremendous potential applications like face recognition [11, 63, 4, 59], face animation [16, 75], virtual reality [7, 58, 31], etc. For example, the reconstructed 3D face
representation can be driven by an audio [16], or a video
from another person [38].
* Work done when the author was an intern at MSRA.
† Corresponding author: Xu Tan (xuta@microsoft.com).

Figure 1. We propose HiFace to reconstruct high-fidelity 3D face
with realistic and animatable details. Reconstruction: given a single image (1st-row), HiFace faithfully reconstructs a coarse shape
(2nd-row) with vivid details (3rd-row). Animation: given a source
face (yellow box), HiFace can animate the static (4th-row), dynamic (5th-row), or both (6th-row) details of the driving images
(green box). Images are taken from FFHQ [37] and CelebA [40].

To build a flexible and animatable facial representation, a popular way is to leverage the success of 3D Morphable Models (3DMMs) [5, 6, 10, 45, 65], which decouple the influence of shape, expression, albedo, and others by modeling them in separate coefficients. Typically

9087

