This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VLN-PETL: Parameter-Efﬁcient Transfer Learning for
Vision-and-Language Navigation
Yanyuan Qiao Zheng Yu Qi Wu*
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide
{yanyuan.qiao,zheng.yu,qi.wu01}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

Instruction

The performance of the Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) tasks has witnessed rapid progress recently
thanks to the use of large pre-trained vision-and-language
models. However, full ﬁne-tuning the pre-trained model
for every downstream VLN task is becoming costly due to
the considerable model size. Recent research hotspot of
Parameter-Efﬁcient Transfer Learning (PETL) shows great
potential in efﬁciently tuning large pre-trained models for
the common CV and NLP tasks, which exploits the most
of the representation knowledge implied in the pre-trained
model while only tunes a minimal set of parameters. However, simply utilizing existing PETL methods for the more
challenging VLN tasks may bring non-trivial degeneration
to the performance. Therefore, we present the ﬁrst study to
explore PETL methods for VLN tasks and propose a VLNspeciﬁc PETL method named VLN-PETL. Speciﬁcally, we
design two PETL modules: Historical Interaction Booster
(HIB) and Cross-modal Interaction Booster (CIB). Then
we combine these two modules with several existing PETL
methods as the integrated VLN-PETL. Extensive experimental results on four mainstream VLN tasks (R2R, REVERIE,
NDH, RxR) demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
VLN-PETL, where VLN-PETL achieves comparable or even
better performance to full ﬁne-tuning and outperforms
other PETL methods with promising margins. The source
code is available at https://github.com/YanyuanQiao/VLNPETL

1. Introduction
Large-scale pre-trained models have shown remarkable
success in both computer vision (CV) and natural language
processing (NLP) domains, and have largely improved the
performance of a variety of visio-linguistic tasks [17, 32,
44]. These models follow a standard pretrain-and-ﬁnetune
paradigm, which ﬁrst pretrains the model on large-scale un* Corresponding author

15443

“Go straight past the bed and
the fireplace. Exit the room
using the door on the left of the
fireplace. Wait there. ”
Next action?

Full fine-tuning

PETL training (Ours)

VLN agent

VLN agent

Success Rate (R2R):
64.2%
Updated Param:
100%

Success Rate (R2R):
65.5%
Updated Param:
2.82%

VLN-PETL

VLN-PETL

濉濤濘濕濨濙濘

澺濦濣濮濙濢

Figure 1: Comparison of full ﬁne-tuning and our proposed
PETL training for VLN tasks. By updating only a small
subset of parameters, our proposed VLN-PETL can achieve
a comparative performance compared to full ﬁne-tuning
labeled data and then ﬁnetunes it on each downstream task.
Since the size of such models is growing rapidly [4, 39],
even fully ﬁnetuning and storing a copy of the entire pretrained model for each downstream becomes costly.
To alleviate this problem, Parameter-Efﬁcient Transfer
Learning (PETL) has been proposed as an alternative training strategy [3, 10, 14, 15, 28, 29] and initially achieved
great progress in NLP community. These methods aim to
exploit the representation knowledge in the large pretrained
models by freezing most parameters of the model and only
tuning a small set of parameters, which can achieve comparable or even better performance to full ﬁne-tuning. Several
approaches have attempted to apply PETL techniques to CV
and V&L domains [11, 33, 40, 43] and achieved promising results on various downstream tasks. Recent works
[9, 31, 45] ﬁnd that different PETL methods have different
characteristics and performance on the same downstream
task and thus combining multiple PETL techniques may be
more effective in improving the performance.
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN), which deals
with visual, linguistic and robotic action inputs simultaneously, could beneﬁt from the pre-trained large models
while suffering from the considerable model size during
the downstream tasks ﬁne-tuning. Considering downstream
VLN agents are complex enough, full ﬁnetuning them with
the large pre-trained models for each downstream VLN task
becomes expensively, in which case the technique of PETL

