This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distribution-Aligned Diffusion for Human Mesh Recovery
Lin Geng Foo1 Jia Gong1 Hossein Rahmani2 Jun Liu1†
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design 2 Lancaster University
{lingeng foo,jia gong}@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, h.rahmani@lancaster.ac.uk, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Recovering a 3D human mesh from a single RGB image is a challenging task due to depth ambiguity and selfocclusion, resulting in a high degree of uncertainty. Meanwhile, diffusion models have recently seen much success
in generating high-quality outputs by progressively denoising noisy inputs. Inspired by their capability, we explore
a diffusion-based approach for human mesh recovery, and
propose a Human Mesh Diffusion (HMDiff) framework
which frames mesh recovery as a reverse diffusion process.
We also propose a Distribution Alignment Technique (DAT)
that injects input-specific distribution information into the
diffusion process, and provides useful prior knowledge to
simplify the mesh recovery task. Our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on three widely used datasets.
Project page: https://gongjia0208.github.io/HMDiff/.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D human mesh recovery, where the 3D
mesh vertex locations of a human are predicted from a
single RGB image, is an important task with applications
across virtual reality [17], sports motion analysis [1], and
healthcare [54]. The field has received a lot of attention in
recent years [6, 7, 32, 33, 8, 22], which has led to significant progress, but monocular 3D human mesh estimation
still remains very challenging. Human body shapes are not
only complex and contain many fine details, but also inherently exhibit depth ambiguity (when recovering 3D information from single 2D images) and self-occlusion (where
body parts can be occluded by other body parts) [25, 6, 53].
In particular, the depth ambiguity and self-occlusion in this
task often bring much uncertainty to the recovery of 3D
mesh vertices, and places a huge burden on the model to
handle this inherent uncertainty [30, 39, 8, 22].
At the same time, denoising diffusion probabilistic models (diffusion models) [16, 49] have recently seen much success in generative tasks, such as image [36], video [48] and
† Corresponding author

text [31] generation, where they have been capable of producing highly realistic and good-quality samples. Specifically, diffusion models [16, 49] progressively “denoise” a
noisy input – which is uncertain – into a high-quality output from the desired data distribution (e.g., natural images),
through estimating the gradients of the data distribution [52]
(also known as the score function). This progressive denoising helps break down the large gap between distributions (i.e., from a highly uncertain and noisy distribution to
a desired target distribution), into smaller intermediate steps
[52], which assists the model in converging towards generating the target data distribution smoothly. This gives diffusion models a strong ability to recover high-quality outputs
from uncertain and noisy input data.
For the monocular 3D mesh recovery task, we also seek
to recover a high-quality mesh prediction from uncertain
and noisy input data, and so we leverage diffusion models to
effectively tackle this task. To this end, we propose a novel
diffusion-based framework for monocular 3D human mesh
recovery, called Human Mesh Diffusion (HMDiff), where
we frame the mesh recovery task as a reverse diffusion process which recovers a high-quality mesh by progressively
denoising noisy and uncertain inputs.
Intuitively, in our HMDiff’s approach, we can regard
the mesh vertices as particles in the context of thermodynamics. At the start, the particles (representing the ground
truth mesh vertices) are systematically arranged to form
a high-quality human mesh, then these particles stochastically disperse throughout the space and eventually degrade
into noise, leading to high uncertainty. This process (i.e.,
particles becoming more dispersed and noisy) is the forward
diffusion process. Conversely, for human mesh recovery, we
aim to perform the opposite of this process, i.e., the reverse
diffusion process. Starting from a noisy and uncertain input
distribution, we want to progressively denoise and reduce
the uncertainty of the input to obtain a target human mesh
distribution containing high-quality samples.
Correspondingly, our HMDiff framework consists of
both the forward process and the reverse process. Specifically, the forward process is performed during training to
generate samples of intermediate distributions that are used

9221

