This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient View Synthesis with Neural Radiance Distribution Field
Yushuang Wu1,2∗

Xiao Li3† Jinglu Wang3 Xiaoguang Han2,1† Shuguang Cui2,1
1
FNii, CUHKSZ 2 SSE, CUHKSZ 3 Microsoft Research Asia

Yan Lu3

yushuangwu@link.cuhk.edu.cn {xili11, jinglwa, yanlu}@microsoft.com
{shuguangcui, hanxiaoguang}@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent work on Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) has
demonstrated significant advances in high-quality view synthesis. A major limitation of NeRF is its low rendering efficiency due to the need for multiple network forwardings to
render a single pixel. Existing methods to improve NeRF either reduce the number of required samples or optimize the
implementation to accelerate the network forwarding. Despite these efforts, the problem of multiple sampling persists
due to the intrinsic representation of radiance fields. In contrast, Neural Light Fields (NeLF) reduce the computation
cost of NeRF by querying only one single network forwarding per pixel. To achieve a close visual quality to NeRF,
existing NeLF methods require significantly larger network
capacities which limits their rendering efficiency in practice. In this work, we propose a new representation called
Neural Radiance Distribution Field (NeRDF) that targets
efficient view synthesis in real-time. Specifically, we use a
small network similar to NeRF while preserving the rendering speed with a single network forwarding per pixel as
in NeLF. The key is to model the radiance distribution along
each ray with frequency basis and predict frequency weights
using the network. Pixel values are then computed via volume rendering on radiance distributions. Experiments show
that our proposed method offers a better trade-off among
speed, quality, and network size than existing methods: we
achieve a ∼254× speed-up over NeRF with similar network
size, with only a marginal performance decline. Our project
page is at yushuang-wu.github.io/NeRDF.

1. Introduction
The problem of digitally representing a 3D scene for
novel view synthesis from arbitrary directions is an important research topic with many applications, ranging
from immersive conferencing to augmented reality. The
∗ This work was done when Yushuang Wu was an intern at MSRA.
† Corresponding author.

breakthroughs made by the pioneering work of NeRF [23]
demonstrate considerable advancements in the view synthesis field, as it represents 3D scenes using implicit radiance
fields modeled via neural networks. Despite these advances,
a significant drawback of NeRF is its computationally intensive nature, requiring hundreds of network evaluations
per pixel, resulting in slow rendering speed (e.g. ∼0.2 FPS
on a high-end GPU). Subsequent research has aimed to enhance the rendering speed by improving importance sampling strategies, reducing the number of samples, or optimizing the code implementation. However, these do not
address the fundamental problem of multiple sampling inherent in radiance fields, which limits the extent to which
rendering speed can be improved (usually 5-30 FPS contingent on implementation) at the cost of increased memory requirements and additional implementation efforts. To
achieve efficient view synthesis, the research community
is exploring alternative representations such as neural light
fields (NeLF) [38, 22, 41, 35, 1]. A NeLF maps rays directly into the RGB space, predicting pixel color based on
the ray parameters (e.g. the origin and direction), thereby
reducing the intrinsic computational complexity to one single network forwarding per pixel. Recent advances have indicated that the synthesis quality of NeLF can be comparable to that of NeRF. However, this usually comes at the cost
of much larger networks - for instance, R2L [41] utilizes an
88-layer MLP network that is 11× larger than NeRF. The
increased size of networks used in NeLF methods results
in significantly higher computational and memory costs, as
well as limited rendering efficiency in practice.
In this paper, we examine the challenge of achieving efficient view synthesis in practical settings, which requires
a careful balance among multiple considerations including
perceptual quality (measured by PSNR), computational efficiency (measured by FPS), and memory requirements (e.g.
model size). To achieve this goal, we start from a key observation: previous NeLF methods have no explicit perception
to the 3D geometry information. As known, NeRF attends
to the radiance information at spatial locations along each
camera ray as illustrated in Fig. 1, which enables NeRF

18506

