This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamTeacher: Pretraining Image Backbones with Deep Generative Models
⇤

⇤

Daiqing Li 1
Huan Ling1,2,3
Amlan Kar1,2,3
David Acuna1,2,3
Seung Wook Kim1,2,3 Karsten Kreis1 Antonio Torralba4 Sanja Fidler1,2,3
1

NVIDIA

2

University of Toronto

3

Vector Institute

4

MIT

Project page: https://research.nvidia.com/labs/toronto-ai/DreamTeacher/

1

Train a Generative Model of Choice

Score-based Generative Model

2

3

Distill Knowledge from
the Generative Model
Teacher

Student

Generative
Network

Image
Backbone

Train Image Backbone on Downstream Tasks

Generative Adversarial Networks

Figure 1. We propose DreamTeacher, a framework for distilling knowledge from a pre-trained generative network onto a target image
backbone, as a generic pre-training mechanism that doesn’t require labels. We investigate feature distillation, and optionally label distillation
(when task-specific labels are available). Our DreamTeacher outperforms existing self-supervised methods on a variety of benchmarks.

Abstract
In this work, we introduce a self-supervised feature representation learning framework DreamTeacher that utilizes
generative networks for pre-training downstream image
backbones. We propose to distill knowledge from a trained
generative model into standard image backbones that have
been well engineered for specific perception tasks. We investigate two types of knowledge distillation: 1) distilling learned
generative features onto target image backbones as an alternative to pretraining these backbones on large labeled
datasets such as ImageNet, and 2) distilling labels obtained
from generative networks with task heads onto logits of target
backbones. We perform extensive analyses on multiple generative models, dense prediction benchmarks, and several pretraining regimes. We empirically find that our DreamTeacher
significantly outperforms existing self-supervised representation learning approaches across the board. Unsupervised
ImageNet pre-training with DreamTeacher leads to significant improvements over ImageNet classification pre-training
on downstream datasets, showcasing generative models, and
diffusion generative models specifically, as a promising approach to representation learning on large, diverse datasets
without requiring manual annotation.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised representation learning is becoming an effective way of pre-training vision backbones [7,12,13,27,29].
⇤ Equal Contribution.

The premise of this line of work is to leverage large unlabeled datasets as additional source of training data in order
to boost performance of downstream networks, and to reduce the need for large labeled target datasets. Recent works
have shown that self-supervised pre-training on ImageNet
can now come close to supervised pre-training, even outperforming it on some downstream datasets and tasks such as
pixelwise semantic and instance segmentation [13, 29, 63].
One of the dominant approaches to self-supervised representation learning are variants of contrastive learning, where
the target backbone is trained to map transformed views
of an image closer in latent space than images randomly
drawn from the dataset [12]. Improvements to this paradigm
include introducing spatial losses [63, 70, 71, 73], and improving training stability with fewer or no negative examples [13, 14, 27, 29].
Another line of work pursues reconstruction losses for
supervision, where certain regions get masked from an input
image, and backbones get trained to reconstruct them [21,
28, 64, 72], also known as Masked Image Modeling (MIM).
This task is mostly treated as deterministic, ie supervising a
single explanation for the masked region. This line of work
typically investigates masking strategies, architecture design
and training recipes to train better backbones. These methods
have achieved state-of-the-art (SoTA) performance when
applied to Vision Transformer-based backbones; however,
recently sparse CNN-based image backbones [58] have been
shown to be as performant.
In this paper, we argue for generative models as representation learners: for the simplicity of the objective – to
1
16698

