This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Contrastive Loss for Text-Guided Diffusion Image Style Transfer
Serin Yang

Hyunmin Hwang

Jong Chul Ye

{yangsr, hyunmin hwang, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)

Figure 1. Our style transfer method produces impressive results when applied to a range of artistic styles. The method preserves the
underlying structure of the source images while transforming them into the desired styles.

Abstract

Diffusion models have shown great promise in textguided image style transfer, but there is a trade-off between
style transformation and content preservation due to their
stochastic nature. Existing methods require computationally expensive fine-tuning of diffusion models or additional
neural network. To address this, here we propose a zeroshot contrastive loss for diffusion models that doesn’t require additional fine-tuning or auxiliary networks. By leveraging patch-wise contrastive loss between generated samples and original image embeddings in the pre-trained diffusion model, our method can generate images with the same
semantic content as the source image in a zero-shot manner.
Our approach outperforms existing methods while preserving content and requiring no additional training, not only
for image style transfer but also for image-to-image translation and manipulation. Our experimental results validate
the effectiveness of our proposed method. Code is available
at https://github.com/YSerin/ZeCon.

1. Introduction
Style transfer is the task that converts the style of a
given image into another style while preserving its content. Over the past few years, GAN-based methods
such as pix2pix [19], cycleGAN [42], and contrastive unpaired image-to-image translation (CUT) have been developed [28]. Recently, joint use of a pretrained image
generator and image-text encoder enabled text-guided image editing which requires little or no training of the networks [31, 6, 30, 14, 25].
Inspired by the success of diffusion models for image
generation [16, 35], image editing [27], in-painting [1],
super-resolution [5], etc., many researchers have recently
investigated the application of the diffusion models for
image-to-image style transfer [33, 36]. For example, [33,
34] proposed conditional diffusion models that require
paired dataset for image-to-image style transfer. One of the
limitations of these approaches is that the diffusion models need to be trained with paired data set with matched
source and target styles. As collecting matched source and
target domain data is impractical, many recent researchers
have focused on unconditional diffusion models. Uncondi-

22873

