This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Communication-Efficient Vertical Federated Learning
with Limited Overlapping Samples
Jingwei Sun1 , Ziyue Xu2 , Dong Yang2 , Vishwesh Nath2 , Wenqi Li2 , Can Zhao2 ,
Daguang Xu2 , Yiran Chen1 , Holger R. Roth2
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
2
NVIDIA
1
2

{jingwei.sun, yiran.chen}@duke.edu,

{ziyuex, dongy, vnath, wenqil, canz, daguangx, hroth}@nvidia.com

Features

Abstract
Federated learning is a popular collaborative learning
approach that enables clients to train a global model without
sharing their local data. Vertical federated learning (VFL)
deals with scenarios in which the data on clients have different feature spaces but share some overlapping samples.
Existing VFL approaches suffer from high communication
costs and cannot deal efficiently with limited overlapping
samples commonly seen in the real world. We propose a practical VFL framework called one-shot VFL that can solve the
communication bottleneck and the problem of limited overlapping samples simultaneously based on semi-supervised
learning. We also propose few-shot VFL to improve the
accuracy further with just one more communication round
between the server and the clients. In our proposed framework, the clients only need to communicate with the server
once or only a few times. We evaluate the proposed VFL
framework on both image and tabular datasets. Our methods
can improve the accuracy by more than 46.5% and reduce
the communication cost by more than 330× compared with
state-of-the-art VFL methods when evaluated on CIFAR-10.
Our code is available at https://nvidia.github.
io/NVFlare/research/one-shot-vfl.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed learning method
that enables multiple parties to collaboratively train a model
without centralizing their raw data. Therefore, the clients
can retain control over their own data assets. FL has received
significant attention and has become a major research topic
due to its capability to build real-world applications where
datasets are isolated across different organizations/devices
while preserving data governance and privacy [18, 14].
Existing approaches primarily focus on horizontal feder-

Unaligned
samples
Overlapping
samples
Unaligned
samples

𝑿𝑿𝟏𝟏𝒖𝒖
𝑿𝑿𝟏𝟏𝒐𝒐

Client 1

Features

𝑿𝑿𝟐𝟐𝒐𝒐

𝒀𝒀𝒐𝒐

Client 2

Server

𝑿𝑿𝟐𝟐𝒖𝒖

Figure 1. An example of data splitting in a two-client VFL setting.

ated learning (HFL), where the data from different clients
share the same feature space but have different samples [32].
One application of HFL is that smartphone users collaboratively train a next-word prediction model for the smart
keyboard [10]. In HFL, the clients are expected to learn
common knowledge from heterogeneous data distributions
and produce a global model by aggregating the updates of
local models. Hence, the main challenge of HFL is data
distribution heterogeneity and under cross-device scenarios,
limited computation resources.
Vertical federated learning (VFL), on the other hand,
focuses on scenarios in which the data on clients have
different feature spaces but share some overlapping samples [32]. In addition, the true labels can reside on a thirdparty server [25] as shown in Fig. 1. For example, a credit
bureau collaborates with an e-commerce company and a
bank to train a model to estimate a user’s credit score. In
this case, only the credit bureau has the credit score of the
users which will not be shared with the e-commerce company and the bank. VFL is mostly deployed in cross-silo
scenarios, and the computation power is usually not a major
concern [14]. However, VFL faces two unique challenges.
First, VFL requires the clients to communicate with the
server for each iteration (rather than after several epochs
under HFL) of training, which introduces extremely high

5203

