This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Simple Recipe to Meta-Learn Forward and Backward Transfer
Edoardo Cetin
King’s College London
Department of Engineering

Antonio Carta
University of Pisa
Department of Computer Science

Oya Celiktutan
King’s College London
Department of Engineering

edoardo.cetin@kcl.ac.uk

antonio.carta@unipi.it

oya.celiktutan@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
Meta-learning holds the potential to provide a general and explicit solution to tackle interference and forgetting in continual learning. However, many popular algorithms introduce expensive and unstable optimization processes with new key hyper-parameters and requirements,
hindering their applicability. We propose a new, general,
and simple meta-learning algorithm for continual learning
(SiM4C) that explicitly optimizes to minimize forgetting and
facilitate forward transfer. We show our method is stable,
introduces only minimal computational overhead, and can
be integrated with any memory-based continual learning algorithm in only a few lines of code. SiM4C meta-learns
how to effectively continually learn even on very long task
sequences, largely outperforming prior meta-approaches.
Naively integrating with existing memory-based algorithms,
we also record universal performance benefits and state-ofthe-art results across different visual classification benchmarks without introducing new hyper-parameters.

1. Introduction
Continual learning considers the problem of appropriately updating and consolidating knowledge when learning
from data with a continual distribution shift. This problem
setting is extremely relevant to achieving lifelong learning
systems where an agent is expected to encounter drifts both
across and within learning environments, due to the nonstationary nature of the real-world [31]. An ideal continual
learning system would re-use prior knowledge to facilitate
learning new problems (forward transfer), and new data to
refine its prior predictions (backward transfer). However,
deep supervised learning algorithms struggle to even retain
learned information when trained with non-stationary sequences of data, a problem known as catastrophic forgetting [14, 15, 36]. In classical computer vision applications,
prior work is still far from addressing this issue [11], which
would be crucial to bringing the generality and applicability
of deep learning closer to its natural analogue [18, 27].

Traditional algorithms for continual learning can be generally classified into (i) replay methods, (ii) regularizationbased methods, and (iii) parameter isolation methods [11].
These approaches entail hand-designed strategies involving
(i) storing a small buffer of samples from all prior tasks,
(ii) introducing auxiliary regularization terms to consolidate knowledge, and (iii) defining modular architectures to
separate task-specific knowledge into independent modules.
Given its relevance, most methods only optimize to mitigate
forgetting, ignoring other potentially desirable properties of
continual learning [12]. Furthermore, they rely on heuristics
and strong assumptions about the types of drifts, limiting
their applicability to specific settings [48]. A fourth category of methods has recently found success, based on utilizing meta-learning to emergently recover many of the wanted
properties of an effective continual learning agent [7].
The general principle behind these prior meta-learning
approaches has been to emulate the non i.i.d. continual
learning optimization within an outer meta-optimization
to improve the agent’s stability (knowledge retention) and
plasticity (knowledge acquisition) [16]. However, optimizing these meta-objectives often requires high computational
cost [41] and even access to a separate meta pre-training
phase where the constraints of continual learning are essentially lifted [23]. Furthermore, different recent advances
have focused on aligning the meta and continual optimizations by increasing the number of steps, adding new models,
and introducing new parameters to meta-train [4, 17]. The
underlying complexity of this line of work comes with nontrivial implications hindering applicability, efficiency, and
also introducing the need of heuristic approximations to the
meta-objectives for tractability [3, 38].
In this work, we propose a new simple meta-learner for
continual learning (SiM4C) that takes a different approach
than prior work. In particular, we propose to purposefully use a lightweight single-step inner-loop in the metaoptimization and preserve large amounts of ‘unseen’ data
for each task which can be interpreted as potential future
data. Then, using both this future data and past stored experiences in the outer meta-loss, we explicitly optimize the

18732

