This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic-Aware Dynamic Parameter for Video Inpainting Transformer
Eunhye Lee1* , Jinsu Yoo2* , Yunjeong Yang2 , Sungyong Baik2,3 , Tae Hyun Kim1†
{dldms1345, jinsuyoo, yunjeongyang, dsybaik, taehyunkim}@hanyang.ac.kr
1

Dept. of Computer Science, 2 Dept. of Artificial Intelligence, 3 Dept. of Data Science, Hanyang University

Abstract
Recent learning-based video inpainting approaches have
achieved considerable progress. However, they still cannot
fully utilize semantic information within the video frames
and predict improper scene layout, failing to restore clear
object boundaries for mixed scenes. To mitigate this problem, we introduce a new transformer-based video inpainting technique that can exploit semantic information within
the input and considerably improve reconstruction quality. In this study, we use the mixture-of-experts scheme
and train multiple experts to handle mixed scenes, including various semantics. We leverage these multiple experts
and produce locally (token-wise) different network parameters to achieve semantic-aware inpainting results. Extensive experiments on YouTube-VOS and DAVIS benchmark
datasets demonstrate that, compared with existing conventional video inpainting approaches, the proposed method
has superior performance in synthesizing visually pleasing
videos with much clearer semantic structures and textures.

1. Introduction
A constant increase in demand for video content in our
daily lives (e.g., YouTube or TikTok) has led to the development of video inpainting methods, which aim to complete a
missing region or erase unwanted areas such as watermarks
and captions from a given input video. In particular, recent
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for video inpainting
tasks have shown promising results [34, 15, 2, 43, 37, 9].
In addition, transformer-based inpainting networks [39, 26,
23, 29] significantly escalate the quality of inpainting results through their large network capacity and superior local/global connectivity based on attention mechanisms.
However, conventional approaches are unable to fully
utilize the semantic information within the input video or
distinguish the class-specific characteristics of objects with
different semantics. As a result, they frequently fail to
recover proper object structure, texture, and scene layout.
Several studies [32, 24, 19, 25] have suggested that utiliz∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

ing semantic information can lead to better results and produce visually more plausible images when filling missing
regions. However, research on video inpainting has yet to
explore the potential of incorporating semantic maps.
Video inpainting is a challenging task that requires to
render temporally consistent video frames. To address this
issue, optical flow has been extensively explored, although
it is computationally intensive [15, 37, 9, 23, 41, 40, 13].
In this study, we demonstrate that semantic information can
also be used to enforce temporal consistency, and we introduce a new technique that further facilitates the use of
semantic cues in a video by dynamically mixing multiple
class-specific experts to handle objects with distinct semantics adaptively.
Although previous semantic-guided inpainting networks
used the predicted segmentation map as additional input [32] or developed a dedicated semantic-aware inference module [24] to learn semantic-aware parameters, the
restoration performance is limited, given the use of shared
network parameters for the different semantics. This problem has been addressed in a recent study [25] by using a
semantic-aware attention module that enables the features
to attend solely to regions with identical semantic labels.
However, the computational cost increases proportionally
to the number of classes because the attention mechanism
is separately carried out for each category.
To mitigate these problems, we propose a novel
semantic-aware dynamic parameter selection approach that
effectively utilizes the semantic information within input
video frames while retaining the number of operations during the inference phase. Specifically, inspired by CondConv [38], we introduce conditionally parameterized linear operations to learn semantic-aware experts, and produce locally varying (dynamic) parameters by leveraging
the given semantic cues based on the notion of mixture-ofexperts [31, 30, 38]. Our linear operations with dynamically
determined parameters replace the standard feed-forward
operation within a conventional transformer block. Notably, we can keep the number of parameters for inference
by mixing the expert parameters before performing linear
operations rather than aggregating the output features cal-

12949

