This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MasQCLIP for Open-Vocabulary Universal Image Segmentation
Xin Xu1* , Tianyi Xiong2* , Zheng Ding3 , and Zhuowen Tu3
1

Peking University
Tsinghua University
3
University of California, San Diego
2

instance

Abstract
We present a new method for open-vocabulary universal image segmentation, which is capable of performing instance, semantic, and panoptic segmentation under a unified framework. Our approach, called MasQCLIP, seamlessly integrates with a pre-trained CLIP model by utilizing
its dense features, thereby circumventing the need for extensive parameter training. MasQCLIP emphasizes two new
aspects when building an image segmentation method with
a CLIP model: 1) a student-teacher module to deal with
masks of the novel (unseen) classes by distilling information from the base (seen) classes; 2) a fine-tuning process
to update model parameters for the queries Q within the
CLIP model. Thanks to these two simple and intuitive designs, MasQCLIP is able to achieve state-of-the-art performances with a substantial gain over the competing methods
by a large margin across all three tasks, including openvocabulary instance, semantic, and panoptic segmentation.
Project page is at https://masqclip.github.io/.

1. Introduction
By being universal and open-world, the traditional image segmentation methods that have been mainly trained in
a supervised manner can be made less specific and more
powerful. When an image segmentation method is openworld, it means that it can handle new concepts with novel
classes or categories that are not labeled in its supervised
training data. However, this is not something that can be
achieved by the algorithm alone, as information about the
novel classes that go beyond supervised labels cannot be
generated out of thin air. Fortunately, the CLIP models [31]
are trained on millions of image-text pairs, which provides
a rich source of combinatorial object/scene information by
mapping images and texts into the same semantic space.
* Equal Contribution.

51.0

36.3

31.9

23.3

30.4

46.0

41.5

panoptic

semantic

23.7

21.1

15.1

21.6

Base

Novel

All

Mask AP50 on COCO Split

MasQCLIP

mIoU on ADE20k

MaskCLIP

PQ on ADE20k

Model Architecture
MasQCLIP

MaskCLIP

OpenSeg

XPM

Figure 1: We present the visualization and quantitative results
of MasQCLIP on open-vocabulary segmentation with a universal
model architecture. As shown, we achieve state-of-the-art performances across three segmentation tasks.

As CLIP models are trained contrastively at the global
image-text level, they do not directly output segmentation
maps at the pixel or region level. Recent works [9, 13, 55]
demonstrate the feasibility of adopting and locking a pretrained CLIP model for open-vocabulary image segmentation by adopting a two-stage approach, which first generates
class-agnostic mask proposals and subsequently classifies
each mask region based on a CLIP model.
This decoupled two-stage design, involving localization and then classification, is considered advantageous for
open-vocabulary universal segmentation. First, it does not
depend on any task specificity. Recent works [7, 8] have attempted to unify instance, semantic, and panoptic segmentation through Transformer-based architectures [6], and the
CLIP-based region classification module itself is directly
applicable to different types of masks (instance/semantic).
Second, it is a natural choice to utilize CLIP models exclusively for object/scene classification rather than localization. The reason is that the dense features within a CLIP
visual encoder only carry semantic information, but can-

887

