This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniVTG: Towards Unified Video-Language Temporal Grounding
Kevin Qinghong Lin1 , Pengchuan Zhang2 , Joya Chen1 , Shraman Pramanick3 ,
Difei Gao1 , Alex Jinpeng Wang1 , Rui Yan1 , Mike Zheng Shou1B
1

2

Show Lab, National University of Singapore

Meta AI

Abstract
Video Temporal Grounding (VTG), which aims to ground
target clips from videos (such as consecutive intervals or
disjoint shots) according to custom language queries (e.g.,
sentences or words), is key for video browsing on social media. Most methods in this direction develop taskspecific models that are trained with type-specific labels,
such as moment retrieval (time interval) and highlight detection (worthiness curve), which limits their abilities to
generalize to various VTG tasks and labels. In this paper, we propose to Unify the diverse VTG labels and tasks,
dubbed UniVTG, along three directions: Firstly, we revisit
a wide range of VTG labels and tasks and define a unified formulation. Based on this, we develop data annotation schemes to create scalable pseudo supervision. Secondly, we develop an effective and flexible grounding model
capable of addressing each task and making full use of
each label. Lastly, thanks to the unified framework, we
are able to unlock temporal grounding pretraining from
large-scale diverse labels and develop stronger grounding
abilities e.g., zero-shot grounding. Extensive experiments
on three tasks (moment retrieval, highlight detection and
video summarization) across seven datasets (QVHighlights,
Charades-STA, TACoS, Ego4D, YouTube Highlights, TVSum, and QFVS) demonstrate the effectiveness and flexibility of our proposed framework. The codes are available
at https://github.com/showlab/UniVTG.

1. Introduction
With the increasing interest in sharing daily lives, video
has emerged as the most informative yet diverse visual form
on social media. These videos are collected in a variety
of settings, including untrimmed instructional videos [28],
and well-edited vlogs [18]. With massive scales and diverse video forms, automatically identifying relevant moments based on user queries has become a critical capability
in the industry for efficient video browsing.
This significant demand has given rise to a number of
video understanding tasks, including moment retrieval [66,
63, 30], highlight detection [52, 16, 56], and video summarization [14, 45, 42]. As depicted in Fig. 1, moB: Corresponding Author.

3

Johns Hopkins University

When do the
kids dancing?

A 10 min long video

User

Moment Retrieval
Highlight of this
birthday video?
Summary this
video by ‘food’?

User Intent

UniVTG

Highlight Detection

Video Summarization

Figure 1: Given a video and a specific user query, UniVTG serves
as a general video browsing helper that assists users by returning
different scale target clips to support various VTG tasks.

ment retrieval tends to localize consecutive temporal windows (interval-level) by giving natural sentences; highlight
detection aims to pick out the key segment with highest
worthiness (curve-level) that best reflects the video gist;
video summarization collects a set of disjoint shots (pointlevel) to summarize the video, with general or user-specific
queries. Despite task-specific datasets [10, 5, 46, 45] and
models [66, 63, 56] have been developed, these tasks are
typically studied separately. In general, these tasks share a
common objective of grounding various scale clips based on
customized user queries, which we refer to as Video Temporal Grounding (VTG).
Though these tasks are closely related, their relationship
has not been explicitly studied until recently. [20] introduces the first unified benchmark QVHighlights for moment retrieval and highlight detection, and presents the first
model Moment-DETR for jointly learning. On this basis,
UMT [26] expands audio inputs, and QD-DETR [29] develops negative-pairs and saliency tokens. Nevertheless, these
studies solely focus on designing models that intersect two
subtasks and learn grounding capabilities rely on specific
labels. This means that they lack the ability to generalize the VTG across diverse temporal labels, such as unique
point-level narrations in Ego4D [13]. Furthermore, we have
witnessed promising progress in Vision-Language Pretraining (VLP). One notable work is GLIP [23, 64], which develops a unified model via joint utilizing large-scale diverse
image annotations such as image captions and bounding
boxes for spatial grounding. However, we do not observe
similar progress in video-language pretraining. Most works
in this area are designed for video-level tasks such as videotext retrieval [54, 47] rather than temporal grounding. This

2794

