This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VQ3D: Learning a 3D-Aware Generative Model on ImageNet
Jing Yu Koh2 * Han Zhang3 Huiwen Chang4 * Charles Herrmann3
Pratul Srinivasan3 Jiajun Wu1 Deqing Sun3
1
Stanford University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Google Research 4 OpenAI

Kyle Sargent1

Abstract
Recent work has shown the possibility of training generative models of 3D content from 2D image collections on
small datasets corresponding to a single object class, such as
human faces, animal faces, or cars. However, these models
struggle on larger, more complex datasets. To model diverse
and unconstrained image collections such as ImageNet, we
present VQ3D, which introduces a NeRF-based decoder into
a two-stage vector-quantized autoencoder. Our Stage 1 allows for the reconstruction of an input image and the ability
to change the camera position around the image, and our
Stage 2 allows for the generation of new 3D scenes. VQ3D is
capable of generating and reconstructing 3D-aware images
from the 1000-class ImageNet dataset of 1.2 million training
images, and achieves a competitive ImageNet generation
FID score of 16.8. Our project webpage is at this url.

1. Introduction
3D assets are an important part of popular media formats such as video games, movies, and computer graphics.
Since 3D content can be time-consuming to create by hand,
automatically generating 3D content using machine learning is an active area of research. While machine learning
techniques benefit from training on large amounts of data,
existing 3D datasets have noisy labels and are orders of
magnitude smaller than those of 2D images.
To circumvent the limitations of 3D datasets, recent
GAN-based methods have explored learning generative models of 3D scenes from images with limited or no 3D labels [26, 6, 18, 25]. These GAN-based approaches demonstrate the promise of learning 3D representations from 2D
data. However, GANs are unstable and challenging to scale
to large diverse datasets [3, 35]. Because of these issues, recent 3D-aware GANs mostly focus on single-class datasets,
such as human faces [20], animal faces [8], or cars [48].
In order to move beyond single-class generation, we draw
inspiration from recent advances in 2D image generation,
* Work completed at Google Research.

Figure 1: 3D-aware images generated by VQ3D on ImageNet. Please see supplemental materials for video results.
where other formulations such as text-to-image generation
models [51, 33, 28] and two-stage image models [14, 50]
have begun to achieve impressive results on very large and
diverse image collections. The most recent state-of-the-art
2D generative models leverage diffusion or vector quantization rather than GANs to scale well to large datasets. In
particular, the two-stage vector quantization approach, being
a likelihood method, can model more diverse modes and is
more stable during training. This motivates us to explore vector quantization as an alternative to the popular GAN-based
methods for 3D-aware generative models.
In this paper, we propose VQ3D, a strong 3D-aware generative model that can be learnt from large and diverse 2D
image collections, such as ImageNet [9]. To encourage
stability and higher reconstruction quality, we forgo GANbased [16] approaches [25, 5, 6, 26, 18], in favor of the
two-stage autoencoder formulation of VQGAN [14] and ViTVQGAN [50]. We build on this formulation with several
novel architectural components and losses, and show through
ablations that they are necessary for good performance and
3D-awareness. We learn 3D geometry by introducing a conditional NeRF decoder and modified triplane representation
which can handle unbounded scenes, and training with a
novel loss formulation which encourages high-quality geom-

4240

