This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhanced Meta Label Correction for Coping with Label Corruption
Mitchell Keren Taraday
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

Chaim Baskin
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

mitchell@campus.technion.ac.il

chaimbaskin@technion.ac.il

Traditional methods for learning with the presence of
noisy labels have successfully handled datasets with artificially injected noise but still fall short of adequately
handling real-world noise. With the increasing use of
meta-learning in the diverse fields of machine learning, researchers leveraged auxiliary small clean datasets to metacorrect the training labels. Nonetheless, existing meta-label
correction approaches are not fully exploiting their potential. In this study, we propose an Enhanced Meta Label
Correction approach abbreviated as EMLC for the learning
with noisy labels (LNL) problem. We re-examine the metalearning process and introduce faster and more accurate
meta-gradient derivations. We propose a novel teacher architecture tailored explicitly to the LNL problem, equipped
with novel training objectives. EMLC outperforms prior
approaches and achieves state-of-the-art results in all standard benchmarks. Notably, EMLC enhances the previous
art on the noisy real-world dataset Clothing1M by 1.52%
while requiring ×0.5 the time per epoch and with much
faster convergence of the meta-objective when compared to
the baseline approach. 1

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) for visual classification tasks is predominantly due
to the availability of massive labeled datasets. In many practical applications, obtaining the required amounts of reliable labeled data is intractable. As a result, numerous works
over the past decade have sought ways to reduce the amount
of labeled data required for classification tasks. Notably,
semi-supervised learning exploits unlabeled data [32, 23],
transfer learning exploits prior knowledge obtained from
different tasks [7, 38], and self-supervised learning exploits
data augmentations for label agnostic representation learning [3, 11]. Nonetheless, for many applications, the quality
of the labeled data can be sacrificed for the sake of its quan1 Project
page:
emlc-paper.

https://sites.google.com/view/

Recovery %

Abstract

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

2

4

EMLC label recovery
EMLC cleaned noise

6

8
Epoch

MLC label recovery
MLC cleaned noise

10

12

14

MLC+SSL label recovery
MLC+SSL cleaned noise

Figure 1: Comparison of the training labels recovery (solid
line) and the wrong labels recovery (dashed line) over training epochs on the CIFAR-10 dataset with 90% symmetric
noise. EMLC (ours) is comapred to MLC [40] and to MLC
[40] with self-supervised pretraining.

tity. A prominent example is the process of crawling search
engines and online websites as demonstrated by [17, 31].
The crawling process is often easy to automate however results in significant amounts of label noise with complicated
patterns. A fundamental problem with such data, however,
is that classical learning methodologies tend to fail when
significant label noise is present [35]. Therefore, designing
learning frameworks that are able to cope with label corruption is a task of great importance.
While traditional methods for learning with noisy labels
(LNL) are capable of handling data with immense artificial,
injected noise, their ability to handle real-world noise remains highly limited. Thus, noisy labeled datasets alone
limit the capability of learning from real-world noisy labeled datasets. Luckily, in many real-world applications,
while obtaining large amounts of labeled data is infeasible,
obtaining small amounts of labeled data is usually attainable. Thus, the paramount objective is to find methods that
can incorporate both large amounts of noisy labeled data
and small amounts of clean data. A natural choice is to
adopt a meta-learning framework, a popular design regularly used for solving various tasks. Consequently, recent

16295

