This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DomainAdaptor: A Novel Approach to Test-time Adaptation
Jian Zhang1,2 Lei Qi3,∗ Yinghuan Shi1,2,∗ Yang Gao1,2
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
National Institute of Healthcare Data Science, Nanjing University
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
zhangjian7369@smail.nju.edu.cn, qilei@seu.edu.cn, syh@nju.edu.cn, gaoy@nju.edu.cn

To overcome the domain shift (i.e., training source and
test target data come from distinct domains, for deep learning models), previous studies (e.g., unsupervised domain
adaptation [32] or domain generalization [30]) have mainly
focused on designing sophisticated models in the training
stage. Despite their efforts, when a large domain gap exists
in the test stage, they still inevitably suffer drastic performance degeneration. Given that abundant information exists in the unlabeled unseen data during the test, which is ne* Corresponding authors: Yinghuan Shi and Lei Qi.

Test

Data

Network

Batch Norm

1. Introduction

...

Conv

To deal with the domain shift between training and test
samples, current methods have primarily focused on learning generalizable features during training and ignore the
specificity of unseen samples that are also critical during
the test. In this paper, we investigate a more challenging
task that aims to adapt a trained CNN model to unseen domains during the test. To maximumly mine the information
in the test data, we propose a unified method called DomainAdaptor for the test-time adaptation, which consists
of an AdaMixBN module and a Generalized Entropy Minimization (GEM) loss. Specifically, AdaMixBN addresses the
domain shift by adaptively fusing training and test statistics in the normalization layer via a dynamic mixture coefficient and a statistic transformation operation. To further enhance the adaptation ability of AdaMixBN, we design a GEM loss that extends the Entropy Minimization loss
to better exploit the information in the test data. Extensive
experiments show that DomainAdaptor consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on four benchmarks.
Furthermore, our method brings more remarkable improvement against existing methods on the few-data unseen domain. The code is available at https://github.com/
koncle/DomainAdaptor.

Pretrain

Target statistics

1.0
0.99

Estimated statistics

Inaccurate statistic estimation

Problem (1)

Confidence

Abstract

High confident
Small loss

Entropy Minimization Loss

Loss

Problem (2)

Figure 1: Illustration of the problem of (1) inaccurate statistics estimation in BN and (2) small loss produced by entropy minimization for the test-time adaptation methods.
glected when solely considering generalization in the training phase, a more practical approach is to adapt a trained
model to the unlabeled unseen data by incorporating this
information during the test (i.e., test-time adaptation [43]).
Incorporating both source data and unlabeled target data
can improve adaptation and enable a model to handle unseen domains in real-world scenarios. However, this approach is infeasible in practice due to the high computational cost of processing these data during the test. Besides, data privacy is paramount in many real-world scenarios where only model weights are accessible (e.g., clinical
data [19, 41] or commercial data [43]). These restrictions
remind us to consider a more practical problem: adapt a
trained CNN model to an arbitrarily unseen domain in the
test time without access to the source data, namely fully
test-time adaptation [43], to expand the generalization ability of a trained model without bearing retraining costs.
Several methods [37, 43, 2] have been developed recently for fully test-time adaptation. One of the widely employed adaptation paradigm [43, 31, 10, 1] to exploit the
information of unseen samples is to finetune the Batch Normalization [16] layers in a trained model with an unsupervised loss, which is both simple and computationally efficient. However, most of these methods only show their effectiveness on artificially corrupted datasets (e.g., CIFAR10-C [14]), which is different from the real-world scene
with diverse cross-domain styles in the domain generalization task. For instance, when we adapt the model trained by

18971

