This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Center-Based Decoupled Point Cloud Registration for 6D Object Pose Estimation
Haobo Jiang1 , Zheng Dang2 , Shuo Gu1 , Jin Xie∗1 , Mathieu Salzmann2 , and Jian Yang∗1
1

PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
{jiang.hao.bo, shuogu, csjxie, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn
{zheng.dang, mathieu.salzmann}@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel center-based decoupled point cloud registration framework for robust 6D object pose estimation in real-world scenarios. Our method
decouples the translation from the entire transformation by
predicting the object center and estimating the rotation in a
center-aware manner. This center offset-based translation
estimation is correspondence-free, freeing us from the difficulty of constructing correspondences in challenging scenarios, thus improving robustness. To obtain reliable center
predictions, we use a multi-view (bird’s eye view and front
view) object shape description of the source-point features,
with both views jointly voting for the object center. Additionally, we propose an effective shape embedding module
to augment the source features, largely completing the missing shape information due to partial scanning, thus facilitating the center prediction. With the center-aligned source
and model point clouds, the rotation predictor utilizes feature similarity to establish putative correspondences for
SVD-based rotation estimation. In particular, we introduce a center-aware hybrid feature descriptor with a normal correction technique to extract discriminative, partaware features for high-quality correspondence construction. Our experiments show that our method outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods by a large margin on realworld datasets such as TUD-L, LINEMOD, and OccludedLINEMOD. Code is available at https://github.com/JiangHB/CenterReg.

∗ Corresponding authors

Haobo Jiang, Shuo Gu, Jin Xie, and Jian Yang are with PCA Lab,
Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and
Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China.

1. Introduction
Accurate 6D object pose estimation (position and orientation in 3D space) is a crucial task in many real-world
applications, such as robotics grasping [13, 59, 73], augmented reality [43, 44], and autonomous navigation [8, 22,
62]. While great progress has been made when exploiting
RGB or RGB-D data as input [34, 54, 51, 59, 49, 69, 58], the
advances in 3D sensors and deep point-cloud learning architectures have led to the development of increasingly accurate point cloud registration algorithms [61, 67, 32, 19, 14].
Nevertheless, the current state-of-the-art object-level 3D
registration methods [56, 67, 19] prioritize achieving high
performance on synthetic data, and yet still struggle with
the challenges present in real-world data [25, 24, 6], such as
full-range transformations, natural noise interference, and
severe occlusions. A promising direction to alleviate this
consists of decoupling the rotation and translation solutions,
so as to reduce their interference. This was first investigated
in [41, 42, 57] via the use of handcrafted rotation-invariant
and translation-invariant feature descriptors. More recently,
this idea was translated to the deep learning realm by aiming
to learn representations that disentangle rotation and translation [10].
In this paper, we introduce a drastically different approach to decoupled registration for robust 6D object pose
estimation in real-world scenarios. We advocate using the
center offset between the source and model point clouds to
decouple the translation from the entire transformation. In
contrast to common correspondence-based translation estimation [61, 67, 14], our method is correspondence-free. It
just requires regressing the independent center of the point
cloud itself, freeing us from the difficulty of correspondence
construction in challenging scenarios and thus significantly
enhancing robustness. As the model point cloud can always
be centered at the referential origin, our translation decoupling can be further simplified to only predicting the position of the center in the source point cloud. We therefore

3427

