This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LiDAR-UDA: Self-ensembling Through Time for Unsupervised LiDAR Domain
Adaptation
Amirreza Shaban* JoonHo Lee∗ Sanghun Jung∗ Xiangyun Meng
University of Washington

Abstract
We introduce LiDAR-UDA, a novel two-stage selftraining-based Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA)
method for LiDAR segmentation. Existing self-training
methods use a model trained on labeled source data to
generate pseudo labels for target data and refine the predictions via fine-tuning the network on the pseudo labels.
These methods suffer from domain shifts caused by different LiDAR sensor configurations in the source and target domains. We propose two techniques to reduce sensor discrepancy and improve pseudo label quality: 1) LiDAR beam subsampling, which simulates different LiDAR
scanning patterns by randomly dropping beams; 2) crossframe ensembling, which exploits temporal consistency of
consecutive frames to generate more reliable pseudo labels. Our method is simple, generalizable, and does not
incur any extra inference cost. We evaluate our method
on several public LiDAR datasets and show that it outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by more than 3.9% mIoU
on average for all scenarios. Code will be available at
https://github.com/JHLee0513/lidar_uda.

1. Introduction
Modern approaches to perception for robotics and autonomous driving rely on supervised LiDAR segmentation
methods that can accurately identify objects and scenes
from 3D point clouds. These methods have advanced significantly thanks to large public datasets [2, 5, 35, 29] that
enable the development of efficient and powerful deep neural networks [47, 8, 43], and they have inspired applications
in other domains such as off-road navigation [25, 34], locomotion navigation [13], and construction site mapping [14].
However, supervised LiDAR segmentation often struggles
to adapt to new domains (i.e., domains that the model is not
trained on) due to distributional shifts [32] between source
and target datasets. LiDAR perception poses a unique challenge in this regard because different sensor configurations
* Equal Contribution.

Byron Boots

(e.g., beam patterns, reflectivity estimates, mounting position, etc.) introduce significant distributional shifts [39].
To mitigate such concerns, several Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) approaches [21, 17, 44, 4] have been
proposed, transferring the knowledge of a model trained on
one domain to another without requiring additional labels.
UDA plays an essential role in LiDAR segmentation since
it relieves the necessity of an expensive and labor-intensive
labeling process.
Domain adaptation methods based on self-training,
which work by iteratively generating pseudo labels on target data and retraining the model with these labels, have
achieved great success in reducing covariate shift in imagebased semantic segmentation tasks [26, 48, 12, 1]. These
self-training methods operate under the assumption that a
model trained on source data yields mostly accurate predictions on at least a subset of the target dataset, enabling the
model to adapt and refine its predictions iteratively through
fine-tuning over the pseudo labels. However, in the case of
LiDAR segmentation, the beam pattern gap between different LiDAR sensors hampers the source model from predicting reasonably good pseudo labels in the target domain for
initializing the self-training approach.
To overcome this gap between the source and target
datasets, we propose a simple yet effective structured point
cloud subsampling method that simulates different LiDAR
beam patterns. Specifically, we randomly subsample rows
in the range image [27] of a high-beam LiDAR sensor to
simulate low-beam LiDAR sensors. Additionally, we propose cross-frame ensembling, a temporal ensembling module, to ensure consistency of pseudo labels across LiDAR
scans within each sequence. Cross-frame ensembling aggregates predictions from multiple scans and uses nearest
neighbors to refine the pseudo labels. While we could simply calculate the average with uniform weights, this method
ignores the temporal (i.e., time from the reference scan) and
spatial variations (i.e., distance to sensor origin for each
scan) of points captured by the LiDAR sensor when aggregating multiple scans. We address this issue by training a
Learned Aggregation Model (LAM) that resembles graph
convolution [38, 40]. LAM learns how to aggregate pseudo

19784

