This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-modal Orthogonal High-rank Augmentation
for RGB-Event Transformer-trackers
Zhiyu Zhu, Junhui Hou*, and Dapeng Oliver Wu
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
zhiyuzhu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk; jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk; dapengwu@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of cross-modal object tracking from RGB videos and event data. Rather than
constructing a complex cross-modal fusion network, we explore the great potential of a pre-trained vision Transformer
(ViT). Particularly, we delicately investigate plug-and-play
training augmentations that encourage the ViT to bridge
the vast distribution gap between the two modalities, enabling comprehensive cross-modal information interaction
and thus enhancing its ability. Specifically, we propose
a mask modeling strategy that randomly masks a specific
modality of some tokens to enforce the interaction between
tokens from different modalities interacting proactively. To
mitigate network oscillations resulting from the masking
strategy and further amplify its positive effect, we then theoretically propose an orthogonal high-rank loss to regularize the attention matrix. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our plug-and-play training augmentation techniques
can significantly boost state-of-the-art one-stream and twostream trackers to a large extent in terms of both tracking
precision and success rate. Our new perspective and findings will potentially bring insights to the field of leveraging
powerful pre-trained ViTs to model cross-modal data. The
code is publicly available at https://github.com/
ZHU-Zhiyu/High-Rank_RGB-Event_Tracker.

1. Introduction
Event cameras asynchronously capture pixel intensity
fluctuations with an ultra-high temporal resolution, low latency, and high dynamic range, making it gain increasing
attention recently [38, 42, 15]. Owing to such admirable
advantages, event cameras have been widely adopted in various applications, such as object detection [38, 30, 39, 42,
11] and depth/optical flow estimation [16, 63]. Particularly,
* Corresponding author: Junhui Hou. This work was supported in part
by the Hong Kong Research Grants Council under Grant 11218121 and
Grant 11202320, and in part by the Hong Kong Innovation and Technology
Fund under Grant MHP/117/21.

the distinctive sensing mechanism makes event cameras to
be a promising choice for object tracking [45, 26, 60, 64,
18, 19].
Despite many advantages of event-based object tracking under special environments, e.g., low-light, high-speed
motion, and over-exposed, event data lack sufficient visual
cues, such as color, texture, and complete contextual appearance that can be easily captured by RGB data, resulting in only event-based vision still suffering from relatively
inferior performance in practice. Thus, a more promising direction is to investigate cross-modal object tracking
from both RGB and event data, where the merits of the
two modalities can be well leveraged for pursuing higher
performance. However, the vast distribution gap between
RGB and event data poses significant challenges in designing algorithms for modeling cross-modal information. Most
existing pioneering cross-modal trackers heavily engage in
robust cross-modal fusion modules, which is cumbersome
to use advanced embedding backbones for boosting performance.
In view of the success of Transformer-based tracking algorithms [31, 59, 54, 7, 62], where the multi-head attention
naturally models the indispensable correlation relationship
between template and search regions, we plan to investigate
the potential of pre-trained powerful vision Transformers
(ViTs) in cross-modal object tracking from both RGB and
event data. However, those pre-trained Transformers with
RGB data may not be able to fully model the essential feature interaction across RGB and event data, due to the distribution gap between the two modalities. To this end, we
study plug-and-play training techniques for augmenting the
pre-trained Transformer used as the embedding backbone
of our RGB-event object tracking framework.
To be specific, to promote the learning of the attention
layer across two modalities, we propose a cross-modal mask
modeling strategy, which randomly masks/pops out the
multi-modal tokens. We anticipate that, in reaction to the
absence of a particular modality at certain locations, the network would proactively enhance interactions on the remaining cross-modal tokens. Nevertheless, randomly masking

22045

