This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Positional Encoding for Bundle-Adjusting Neural Radiance Fields
Zelin Gao1 , Weichen Dai3 , and Yu Zhang * 1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
2 Key Laboratory of Collaborative Sensing and Autonomous Unmanned Systems of Zhejiang Province
3 Key Laboratory of Brain Machine Collaborative Intelligence of Zhejiang Province and School of Computer Science, Hangzhou Dianzi University

Regression + Improper frequencies

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields have shown great potential to
synthesize novel views with only a few discrete image observations of the world. However, the requirement of accurate camera parameters to learn scene representations
limits its further application. In this paper, we present
adaptive positional encoding (APE) for bundle-adjusting
neural radiance fields to reconstruct the neural radiance
fields from unknown camera poses (or even intrinsics). Inspired by Fourier series regression, we investigate its relationship with the positional encoding method and therefore propose APE where all frequency bands are trainable.
Furthermore, we introduce period-activated multilayer perceptrons (PMLPs) to construct the implicit network for the
high-order scene representations and fine-grained gradients during backpropagation. Experimental results on public datasets demonstrate that the proposed method with APE
and PMLPs can outperform the state-of-the-art methods in
accurate camera poses and high-fidelity view synthesis.

1. Introduction
Simultaneously localizing from the given camera frames
and reconstructing the scene from multi-view 2D images is
one of the crucial tasks in computer vision, which can carry
out self-localization as well as sense surroundings through
visual information as human beings do. Most classic methods, such as Structure from Motion (SfM) [35, 1] and Simultaneously Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [30, 10,
11], leverage the similarity of texture patterns to find the
correspondences. Then, all states are estimated, including
camera parameters (intrinsic and extrinsic parameters) and
a map in conventional representations (e.g., sparse 3D point
cloud [17]). However, the quality of the created map representations depends on the correspondences, and the sparse
* Corresponding author

T
Tb

Regression + Proper frequencies

Figure 1. Fourier Series Regression. Fitting 1D signal (blue
curve, duration T , period Tb ) requires a Fourier series with proper
frequencies (bottom, green curve). Conversely, Fourier series regression with improper frequencies (top, red curve) cannot fit well.

nature of common 3D point clouds limits downstream vision tasks that require dense geometric reasoning.
Different from explicitly reconstructing scenes from images, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [28] present a continuous function to parameterize the scene through an implicit
neural network [38, 25] mapping 3D point positions and direction to color and volume density. By volume rendering
theorem [43, 19], NeRF can realize high-fidelity dense representation results with a few observed images of the scene.
Although many follow-up works [2, 15, 26, 18, 32, 47, 49]
have improved the performance of NeRF in various aspects,
most require pre-provided accurate camera parameters, typically obtained through off-the-shelf SfM tools, limiting this
technique to realize simultaneous localization and reconstruction in more practice scenarios.
There are some methods [6, 22, 40] jointly optimizing
implicit network parameters, camera poses (extrinsic parameters), and even camera intrinsic parameters to address
the solution of training radiance field representations with-

3284

