This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Action Segmentation
Daochang Liu1 , Qiyue Li2,4 , Anh-Dung Dinh1 , Tingting Jiang2 , Mubarak Shah3 , Chang Xu1
1
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
2
NERCVT, NKLMIP, School of Computer Science, 4 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
{daochang.liu, c.xu}@sydney.edu.au

Action Segmentation via
Multi-Stage Model (Previous)

Abstract
Temporal action segmentation is crucial for understanding long-form videos. Previous works on this task commonly adopt an iterative refinement paradigm by using
multi-stage models. We propose a novel framework via
denoising diffusion models, which nonetheless shares the
same inherent spirit of such iterative refinement. In this
framework, action predictions are iteratively generated
from random noise with input video features as conditions.
To enhance the modeling of three striking characteristics
of human actions, including the position prior, the boundary ambiguity, and the relational dependency, we devise
a unified masking strategy for the conditioning inputs in
更换为PDF
our framework. Extensive experiments
on three benchmark datasets, i.e., GTEA, 50Salads, and Breakfast, are
performed and the proposed method achieves superior or
comparable results to state-of-the-art methods, showing the
effectiveness of a generative approach for action segmentation. Code is at tinyurl.com/DiffAct.

1. Introduction
Temporal action segmentation is a key task for understanding and analyzing human activities in complex long
videos, with a wide range of applications from video
surveillance [62], video summarization [3] to skill assessment [43]. The goal of temporal action segmentation is to
take as input an untrimmed video and output an action sequence indicating the class label for each frame.
This task has witnessed remarkable progresses in recent
years with the development of multi-stage models [20, 41,
68, 72]. The core idea of multi-stage models is to stack several stages where the first stage produces an initial prediction and later stages adjust the prediction from the preceding
stage. Researchers have actively explored various architectures to implement the multi-stage model, such as the MSTCN [20, 41] relying on dilated temporal convolutional lay-

shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Stage 4

Stage 3

Stage 2

Stage 1

Video

Refine

Refine

Refine
Predict

Action Segmentation via
Diffusion Model (Ours)
Step 0

Step s2

Step s1

Denoise

Denoise

Denoise

Step S (Fully Random Noise)

Condition

Video

Figure 1. Multi-stage model vs. diffusion model for action segmentation. They both follow an iterative refinement paradigm.
Left: Many previous methods utilize a multi-stage framework to
refine the initial prediction. Right: We formulate action segmentation as a frame-wise action sequence generation problem and obtain the refined prediction by an iterative denoising process. Colors in the barcodes represent different actions.

ers and the ASFormer [72] with attention mechanisms. The
success of multi-stage models could be largely attributed to
the underlying iterative refinement paradigm that properly
captures temporal dynamics of actions and significantly reduces over-segmentation errors [15].
In this paper, we propose an action segmentation method
following the same philosophy of iterative refinement but
in an essentially new generative approach, which incorporates the denoising diffusion model. Favored for its simple training recipe and high generation quality, the diffusion
model [13, 54, 14, 26] has become a rapidly emerging category of generative models. A forward process in the diffusion model corrupts the data by gradually adding noise,
while a corresponding reverse process removes the noise
step by step so that new samples can be generated from the
data distribution starting from fully random noise. Such iterative denoising in the reverse process coincides with the
iterative refinement paradigm for action segmentation. This

10139

