This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GEDepth: Ground Embedding for Monocular Depth Estimation
Xiaodong Yang∗

Zhuang Ma∗
QCraft

Zhiyu Ji∗

Zhe Ren

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation is an ill-posed problem as
the same 2D image can be projected from infinite 3D scenes.
Although the leading algorithms in this field have reported
significant improvement, they are essentially geared to the
particular compound of pictorial observations and camera
parameters (i.e., intrinsics and extrinsics), strongly limiting their generalizability in real-world scenarios. To cope
with this challenge, this paper proposes a novel ground
embedding module to decouple camera parameters from
pictorial cues, thus promoting the generalization capability. Given camera parameters, the proposed module generates the ground depth, which is stacked with the input image and referenced in the final depth prediction. A ground
attention is designed in the module to optimally combine
ground depth with residual depth. Our ground embedding
is highly flexible and lightweight, leading to a plug-in module that is amenable to be integrated into various depth estimation networks. Experiments reveal that our approach
achieves the state-of-the-art results on popular benchmarks,
and more importantly, renders significant generalization
improvement on a wide range of cross-domain tests.

Figure 1. Illustration of the ground depth produced by our ground
embedding. Due to different camera parameters, (a) and (b) show
one object with the same scale and depth is mapped to different
images, while (b) and (c) show objects with different scales and
depths generate the same image. In each case, the ground depth
encodes the corresponding camera parameters and can be used to
resolve the ill-posed problem in monocular depth estimation.

1. Introduction
Accurate depth acquisition is crucial for many robotics
applications [23, 24, 30, 32] as depth provides pivotal information for onboard tasks ranging from perception [17], prediction [31] to planning [18]. Although range sensors (e.g.,
LiDAR) are widely used to produce precise depth measurements, there has been fast growing attention to camera based depth estimation from both academia and industry due to its portability and cost-effectiveness [3, 5, 6, 35].
A typical monocular depth estimation network adopts an
encoder-decoder architecture, which can be trained in a supervised [5, 6] or self-supervised manner [9, 25, 36]. Most
of the existing works in this field focus on designing more
advanced network architectures [3, 20] or engineering more
effective loss functions [6, 22]. Another line of research estimates depth by exploiting stereo imagery [2, 14], which
* Authors contributed equally

however requires multiple calibrated cameras and is relatively more expensive and complicated. Compared with its
stereo counterpart, the monocular depth estimation hinging
on single cameras is more amenable for real-world deployment such as autonomous driving [19, 26].
However, monocular depth estimation is inherently illposed or ambiguous. According to the classic pinhole camera model, an image captured by a camera is determined
by the camera parameters (i.e., intrinsics and extrinsics),
object scale, and object depth with respect to the camera
optical center. Therefore, objects with different scales and
depths captured by a camera could generate the same image; on the contrary, one object with the same depth captured by cameras with different intrinsics and or extrinsics
could generate different images. As a result, one image may
correspond to multiple plausible depths, and one depth can
be mapped to various images, as illustrated in Figure 1. Re-

12719

