This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Evaluation of Diffusion-Based Adversarial Purification
Minjong Lee
CSED POSTECH

Dongwoo Kim
CSED, GSAI POSTECH

minjong.lee@postech.ac.kr

dongwoo.kim@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We question the current evaluation practice on diffusionbased purification methods. Diffusion-based purification
methods aim to remove adversarial effects from an input
data point at test time. The approach gains increasing attention as an alternative to adversarial training due to the
disentangling between training and testing. Well-known
white-box attacks are often employed to measure the robustness of the purification. However, it is unknown whether
these attacks are the most effective for the diffusion-based
purification since the attacks are often tailored for adversarial training. We analyze the current practices and provide a new guideline for measuring the robustness of purification methods against adversarial attacks. Based on our
analysis, we further propose a new purification strategy improving robustness compared to the current diffusion-based
purification methods.

1. Introduction
Adversarial attacks [21, 6] can cause deep neural networks (DNNs) to produce incorrect outputs by adding imperceptible perturbations to inputs. While various adversarial defenses have been proposed, adversarial training
[41, 13] has shown promising results in building robust
DNNs. Since adversarial training feeds the model both
normal and adversarial examples during training time, one
needs to pre-determine which attack method is used to generate the adversarial examples. On the other hand, adaptive
test-time defense [19, 16] has recently gained increasing attention since it adaptively removes the adversarial effect at
test time without adversarial training. Adversarial purification [31, 24], one of the adaptive test-time defenses, uses
generative models to restore the clean examples from the
adversarial examples.
Diffusion-based generative models [17, 35] has been
suggested as a potential solution for adversarial purification [24, 36]. Diffusion models learn transformations from
data distributions to well-known simple distributions such
as the Gaussian and vice versa through forward and reverse

processes, respectively. When applied to the purification,
the forward process gradually adds noise to the input, and
the reverse process gradually removes the noises to uncover
the original image without imperceptible adversarial noise.
With a theoretical guarantee, the recent success of DiffPure [24] against many adversarial training methods shows
the potential of using diffusion processes for improving the
robustness against adversarial attacks.
Evaluating the robustness of adaptive test-time defenses
is, however, known to be difficult due to their complex defense algorithms and properties. Croce et al. [8] shows that
finding worse-case perturbation is important to measure the
robustness of the defenses. Randomness and iterative calls
of adaptive test-time defenses, however, make their gradients obfuscated. Therefore, the gradient-based attack methods [21, 6] might be inappropriate for measuring the robustness under such obfuscation. New algorithms, such as
Backward Pass Differentiable Approximation (BPDA) [3],
and additional recommendations [8] have been proposed to
evaluate their robustness accurately. However, it is unclear
whether these algorithms and recommendations can still be
used to evaluate diffusion-based purification.
In the first part of this work, we analyze the existing
evaluation methods for diffusion-based purification. We
find that the adjoint method, often used to compute a full
gradient of the iterative process, relies on the performance
of an underlying numerical solver. Tailored to the diffusion models, we propose a surrogate process, an alternative method to approximate the gradient from the iterative
procedure and show the strong robustness in recent work
can be weaker than claimed with the surrogate process. We
then compare two gradient-based attack methods, AutoAttack [6] and PGD [21], with the surrogate process and find
that PGD is more effective for the diffusion-based purification. To this end, we propose a practical recommendation
to evaluate the robustness of diffusion-based purification.
In the second part of this work, we analyze the importance of the hyperparameter for successive defenses with
purification. The diffusion models are trained without adversarial examples. Thus, proper validation of hyperparameters is impossible in general. Instead, we empirically an-

134

