This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RPG-Palm: Realistic Pseudo-data Generation for Palmprint Recognition
Lei Shen∗
Youtu Lab, Tencent
Shanghai, China

Jianlong Jin∗
Hefei University of Technology
Hefei, China

Ruixin Zhang
Youtu Lab, Tencent
Shanghai, China

shenlei1996@gmail.com

2022111048@mail.hfut.edu.cn

ruixinzhang@tencent.com

Huaen Li
Hefei University of Technology
Hefei, China

Kai Zhao
UCLA
California, USA

Yingyi Zhang
Youtu Lab, Tencent
Shanghai, China

huaenli@mail.hfut.edu.cn

kz@kaizhao.net

sherlyzhang@tencent.com

Jingyun Zhang
WeChat Pay Lab33, Tencent
Shenzhen, China

Shouhong Ding†
Youtu Lab, Tencent
Shanghai, China

Yang Zhao†
Hefei University of Technology
Hefei, China

naskyzhang@tencent.com

ericshding@tencent.com

YZhao@hfut.edu.cn

†

Wei Jia
Hefei University of Technology
Hefei, China
jiawei@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract
Palmprint recently shows great potential in recognition
applications as it is a privacy-friendly and stable biometric. However, the lack of large-scale public palmprint
datasets limits further research and development of palmprint recognition. In this paper, we propose a novel realistic pseudo-palmprint generation (RPG) model to synthesize palmprints with massive identities. We first introduce
a conditional modulation generator to improve the intraclass diversity. Then an identity-aware loss is proposed to
ensure identity consistency against unpaired training. We
further improve the Bézier palm creases generation strategy
to guarantee identity independence. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate that synthetic pretraining significantly
boosts the recognition model performance. For example,
our model improves the state-of-the-art BézierPalm by more
than 5% and 14% in terms of TAR@FAR=1e-6 under the
1 : 1 and 1 : 3 Open-set protocol. When accessing only
10% of the real training data, our method still outperforms
ArcFace with 100% real training data, indicating that we
are closer to real-data-free palmprint recognition.

∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

1. Introduction
Palmprint is an excellent biometric in terms of privacy,
willingness, convenience, and security. Since the palmprint
locates on the inner side of the palm, obtaining the palmprint without one’s permission is nearly impossible, which
is more privacy-friendliness over the face. Compared to
iris and fingerprints, palmprint has fewer usage restrictions,
which makes palmprint more user-friendly. Furthermore,
Palmprints and palm veins can be collected simultaneously
to form a highly secure dual-modal system.
Due to these advantages, big companies such as Amazon [1] and Tencent [69] begin to apply palmprint recognition in their payment services. However, for the same reason, palmprints are rare in public and expensive to collect.
To our best knowledge, publicly available datasets [2, 21,
29, 30, 36, 41, 52, 57, 68] only contain thousands of identities and tens of thousands of images in total. Meanwhile,
face recognition has several million-level publicly available
datasets [4, 9, 27, 38, 44, 62] that contain tens to hundreds
of thousands of identities. The lack of large-scale public
dataset seriously inhibits the research on palmprint recognition.
To solve this problem, one way is to collect a largescale palmprint dataset. However, this way is very time-

19605

