This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DDIT: Semantic Scene Completion via Deformable Deep Implicit Templates
Haoang Li1,2,∗ Jinhu Dong3,∗ Binghui Wen1,∗ Ming Gao1,2,∗
Tianyu Huang3 Yun-Hui Liu3 Daniel Cremers1,2,4
1
Technical University of Munich 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 University of Oxford
{haoang.li, ming.gao, bh.wen, cremers}@tum.de

{jhdong, tyhuang, yhliu}@mae.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Scene reconstructions are often incomplete due to occlusions and limited viewpoints. There have been efforts to
use semantic information for scene completion. However,
the completed shapes may be rough and imprecise&
since respective methods rely on 3D convolution and/or lack effective shape constraints. To overcome these limitations, we
propose a semantic scene completion method based on deformable deep implicit templates (DDIT). Specifically, we
complete each segmented instance in a scene by deforming a template with a latent code. Such a template is expressed by a deep implicit function in the canonical frame.
It abstracts the shape prior of a category, and thus can provide constraints on the overall shape of an instance. Latent code controls the deformation of template to guarantee
fine details of an instance. For code prediction, we design a
neural network that leverages both intra- and inter-instance
information. We also introduce an algorithm to transform
instances between the world and canonical frames based
on geometric constraints and a hierarchical tree. To further improve accuracy, we jointly optimize the latent code
and transformation by enforcing the zero-valued isosurface
constraint. In addition, we establish a new dataset to solve
different problems of existing datasets. Experiments showed
that our DDIT outperforms state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
3D scene reconstruction has been widely studied in the
past decades. However, in practice, reconstructed scenes
are often incomplete due to occlusions and limited viewpoints. Missing structures affect various practical applications [32, 45, 43, 22, 23, 6, 41]. To complete a scene, several
methods have been proposed. Some of them [17, 30, 10]
only consider geometric information and are prone to result
in noisy results. Recent work [15, 27] demonstrated that se∗ Haoang Li, Jinhu Dong, Binghui Wen and Ming Gao contributed
equally to this work.

Deformation
Latent code
Incomplete instance
(in canonical frame)

Complete instance
Deep implicit template

Figure 1. We complete a point set of an instance by deforming a
deep implicit template with a latent code.

mantic information can improve the completion quality. In
this paper, we investigate semantic scene completion.
Existing semantic scene completion methods can be
roughly classified into two main categories, i.e., scenelevel [35, 40, 11, 31] and instance-level [26, 15, 27, 4, 16].
The scene-level methods directly complete the whole environment, while the instance-level approaches separately
complete each detected/segmented instance. The instancelevel approaches are typically more accurate than the scenelevel methods since per-instance completion can better handle different structures of instances. However, existing
instance-level approaches still have some limitations. They
may generate rough and unreasonable meshes since they
rely on 3D convolution and/or lack effective shape constraints. To overcome these limitations, we propose an
instance-level method by deforming deep implicit templates
with latent codes. As shown in Fig. 1, such a template abstracts the shape prior of a category, and thus can provide
constraints on the overall shape of an instance. Latent code
controls the deformation of template to guarantee fine details of an instance.
As shown in Fig. 2, given an incomplete point cloud of a
scene in the world frame, we first conduct instance segmentation. Then we transform each segmented point set from
the world frame to the canonical frame. Our transformation estimation is based on geometric constraints and a latent code-based hierarchical tree. It is more reliable and/or
efficient than existing algorithms [27, 1, 2]. In the canonical frame, as mentioned above, we complete each point set
by deforming a deep implicit template [46] with a latent

21894

