This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LivePose: Online 3D Reconstruction from Monocular Video with Dynamic
Camera Poses
Noah Stier1,2 Baptiste Angles1 Liang Yang1 Yajie Yan1 Alex Colburn1 Ming Chuang1
1

Apple

2

University of California, Santa Barbara

Figure 1. In online 3D reconstruction, poses obtained from a SLAM system (a, b) may be updated (c, red→green). Ignoring these updates
leads to inconsistent geometry, while our pose update handling strategy produces accurate and globally consistent reconstructions.

Abstract
Dense 3D reconstruction from RGB images traditionally assumes static camera pose estimates. This assumption has endured, even as recent works have increasingly
focused on real-time methods for mobile devices. However, the assumption of a fixed pose for each image does
not hold for online execution: poses from real-time SLAM
are dynamic and may be updated following events such as
bundle adjustment and loop closure. This has been addressed in the RGB-D setting, by de-integrating past views
and re-integrating them with updated poses, but it remains
largely untreated in the RGB-only setting. We formalize this
problem to define the new task of dense online reconstruction from dynamically-posed images. To support further research, we introduce a dataset called LivePose 1 containing
the dynamic poses from a SLAM system running on ScanNet [6]. We select three recent reconstruction systems and
apply a framework based on de-integration to adapt each
one to the dynamic-pose setting. In addition, we propose
a novel, non-linear de-integration module that learns to remove stale scene content. We show that responding to pose
updates is critical for high-quality reconstruction, and that
our de-integration framework is an effective solution.

1 https://github.com/apple/ml-live-pose

1. Introduction
RGB-only reconstruction using a monocular camera has
seen great progress using learned priors to address the difficulties associated with low-texture regions and the inherent ambiguity of image-based reconstruction. In particular,
there has been strong interest in methods that are practical
for real-time execution, a key component required for interactive applications on mobile devices. However, there
is an additional requirement that has not been addressed in
recent state-of-the-art reconstruction systems: a successful
method must not only be real-time but also online.
Online operation implies that an algorithm must produce
accurate incremental reconstructions at the time of image
acquisition, using only past and present observations at each
time point. This problem setting violates a key assumption
made by existing works: the availability of an accurate,
fully-optimized pose estimate for each view. Instead, in a
real-world scanning scenario, a Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping (SLAM) system suffers pose drift, resulting
in a stream of dynamic pose estimates, where past poses are
updated due to events such as pose graph optimization and
loop closure. As detailed in Section 5, such pose updates
from SLAM are ubiquitous in online scanning. It is critical
for the reconstruction to stay in agreement with the SLAM
system by respecting these updates, as we have illustrated
in Figure 1.

7921

