This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Focus the Discrepancy: Intra- and Inter-Correlation Learning for Image
Anomaly Detection
Xincheng Yao1 , Ruoqi Li1 , Zefeng Qian1 , Yan Luo1 , Chongyang Zhang1,2 *
1
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{i-Dover, nilponi, zefeng qian, luoyan bb, sunny zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn1

Abstract

GroundTruth

MKD

Patch-wise
Discrepancy

+IntraCorrelation

+InterCorrelation (Ours)

Contamination

Input Image

Misplaced

Flipped

Bent wire

Humans recognize anomalies through two aspects:
larger patch-wise representation discrepancies and weaker
patch-to-normal-patch correlations. However, the previous AD methods didn’t sufﬁciently combine the two complementary aspects to design AD models. To this end,
we ﬁnd that Transformer can ideally satisfy the two aspects as its great power in the uniﬁed modeling of patchwise representations and patch-to-patch correlations. In
this paper, we propose a novel AD framework: FOcusthe-Discrepancy (FOD), which can simultaneously spot the
patch-wise, intra- and inter-discrepancies of anomalies.
The major characteristic of our method is that we renovate the self-attention maps in transformers to Intra-InterCorrelation (I2Correlation). The I2Correlation contains
a two-branch structure to ﬁrst explicitly establish intraand inter-image correlations, and then fuses the features of
two-branch to spotlight the abnormal patterns. To learn
the intra- and inter-correlations adaptively, we propose the
RBF-kernel-based target-correlations as learning targets
for self-supervised learning. Besides, we introduce an entropy constraint strategy to solve the mode collapse issue
in optimization and further amplify the normal-abnormal
distinguishability. Extensive experiments on three unsupervised real-world AD benchmarks show the superior performance of our approach. Code will be available at https:
//github.com/xcyao00/FOD.

Figure 1. Anomaly detection examples on MVTecAD [3]. Multiresolution Knowledge Distillation (MKD) [41] adopts the conventional patch-wise representation discrepancies. Row 1 shows
the hard global anomalies (i.e, they are not signiﬁcantly different
from normal visuals). Rows 3 and 4 show the logical anomalies
(i.e. they may be easily recognized as normal if only from the
patch-wise discrepancy).

ples accessible. The core idea of most unsupervised AD
methods is to compare with normal samples to distinguish
anomalies [46, 35, 60, 11, 28, 58]. Even for humans, we
also recognize anomalies in this way, speciﬁcally through
three discrepancies, i.e., 1. patch patterns that differentiate
from the normal visuals; 2. image regions that destroy textures or structures; 3. novel appearances that deviate from
our accumulated knowledge of normality. Namely, anomalous patches usually have three characteristics: their patchwise representations are different from the normal visuals; they are different from most patches within one image;
they deviate from our accumulated knowledge of normality.
These views intrinsically reveal that humans’ recognition of
anomalies depends on two aspects: patch-wise representations (1) and intra- and inter-image correlations (2, 3).
Previous methods mainly follow the former aspect to
learn distinguishable representations or reconstructions,

1. Introduction
The goal of anomaly detection (AD) is to distinguish
an instance containing anomalous patterns from those normal samples and further localize those anomalous regions.
Anomalies are deﬁned as opposite to normal samples and
are usually rare, which means that we need to tackle AD
tasks under the unsupervised setting with only normal sam* Corresponding Author.

6803

