This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CC3D: Layout-Conditioned Generation of Compositional 3D Scenes
Sherwin Bahmani⇤1 Jeong Joon Park⇤2 Despoina Paschalidou2 Xingguang Yan4
Gordon Wetzstein2 Leonidas Guibas2 Andrea Tagliasacchi1,3,4
1

University of Toronto

2

Stanford University 3 Google Research

4

Simon Fraser University

Figure 1. Compositional 3D Scene Generation – We introduce CC3D, a 3D compositional GAN capable of synthesizing view-consistent
renderings of multi-object scenes conditioned on a semantic layout, describing the scene structure. Video results can be viewed on our
website: https://sherwinbahmani.github.io/cc3d.

Abstract
In this work, we introduce CC3D, a conditional generative model that synthesizes complex 3D scenes conditioned
on 2D semantic scene layouts, trained using single-view images. Different from most existing 3D GANs that limit their
applicability to aligned single objects, we focus on generating complex scenes with multiple objects, by modeling the
compositional nature of 3D scenes. By devising a 2D layoutbased approach for 3D synthesis and implementing a new
3D field representation with a stronger geometric inductive
bias, we have created a 3D GAN that is both efficient and of
high quality, while allowing for a more controllable generation process. Our evaluations on synthetic 3D-FRONT and
real-world KITTI-360 datasets demonstrate that our model
generates scenes of improved visual and geometric quality
in comparison to previous works.

1. Introduction
Recently, we have witnessed impressive progress in 3D
generative technologies, including generative adversarial net* Equal contribution

works (GANs) [20] that have emerged as a powerful tool
for automatically creating realistic 3D content. Despite their
impressive capabilities, existing 3D GAN-based approaches
have two major limitations. First, they typically generate
the entire scene from a single latent code, ignoring the compositional nature of multi-object scenes, thus struggling to
synthesize scenes with multiple objects, as shown in Fig. 2.
Second, their generation process remains largely uncontrollable, making it non-trivial to enable user control. While
some works [6, 31] allow conditioning the generation of
input images via GAN inversion, this optimization process
can be time-consuming and prone to local minima.
In this work, we introduce a Compositional and
Conditional 3D generative model (CC3D), that generates
plausible 3D-consistent scenes with multiple objects, while
also enabling more control over the scene generation process
by conditioning on semantic instance layout images, indicating the scene structure (see Fig. 1). Our approach rhymes
with the 2D image-to-image translation works [24, 16] that
conditionally generate images from user inputs: CC3D generates 3D scenes from 2D user inputs (i.e. scene layouts).
To train CC3D we use a set of single-view images and top-

7171

