This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-event Video-Text Retrieval
Gengyuan Zhang 1,2 Jisen Ren 1 Jindong Gu 3 * Volker Tresp 1,2
1
LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
2
Munich Center for Machine Learning, Munich, Germany
3
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
zhang@dbs.ifi.lmu.de

Abstract
Video-Text Retrieval (VTR) is a crucial multi-modal
task in an era of massive video-text data on the Internet.
A plethora of work characterized by using a two-stream
Vision-Language model architecture that learns a joint representation of video-text pairs has become a prominent approach for the VTR task. However, these models operate under the assumption of bijective video-text correspondences
and neglect a more practical scenario where video content usually encompasses multiple events, while texts like
user queries or webpage metadata tend to be specific and
correspond to single events. This establishes a gap between the previous training objective and real-world applications, leading to the potential performance degradation
of earlier models during inference. In this study, we introduce the Multi-event Video-Text Retrieval (MeVTR) task,
addressing scenarios in which each video contains multiple different events, as a niche scenario of the conventional
Video-Text Retrieval Task. We present a simple model, MeRetriever, which incorporates key event video representation and a new MeVTR loss for the MeVTR task. Comprehensive experiments show that this straightforward framework outperforms other models in the Video-to-Text and
Text-to-Video tasks, effectively establishing a robust baseline for the MeVTR task. We believe this work serves as a
strong foundation for future studies. Code is available at
https://github.com/gengyuanmax/MeVTR.

1. Introduction
With the proliferation of multimedia data on the Internet every day, Video-Text Retrieval (VTR) task gains increasing importance in searching for desired items from
the opposite modality given a video or text query. Over
the past years, numerous efforts [49, 33, 9, 14, 31, 3, 7,
30, 16, 12, 51, 17] have been undertaken to improve the
* Corresponding author

jindong.gu@outlook.com

multi-modal retrieval performance on both Video-to-Text
and Text-to-Video retrieval tasks. Along with the popularity
of powerful vision foundation models like CLIP [36] and
ALIGN [23] that align the image-text pairs in a joint feature space, two-stream video-text models [30, 16] targeting
to learn video-text correspondences have further become a
mainstream method for the Video-Text Retrieval task.
However, this paradigm neglects that videos usually contain more than a single event, while a single textual caption
can only capture a fragment of the entire video content. As
depicted in Fig. 1, the example video spans a sequence of
unrelated and discontinuous events, and each single textual
caption merely corresponds to a video segment. This congruity undoubtedly contradicts the fundamental of the traditional VTR task, which aims to establish a mapping between video-text pair.
This fact presents a prevalent scenario in Video-Text
Retrieval: videos are intricate, often containing multiple
events, whereas texts (typically like search queries or webpage metadata) tend to be specific and fragmentary. Consequently, this dichotomy leads to divergent semantic meanings for a given video-text pair. Such divergence contradicts
the conventional training objective of aligning representations for video-text pairs in VTR models, that video features
are aligned with the corresponding text feature.
In this study, we formally introduce a new and realistic VTR setting involving multi-event videos, dubbed as
Multi-event Video-Text Retrieval (MeVTR). In the introduced MeVTR task, a text describes a single event within
a video item, whereas a video corresponds to multiple relevant textual captions, each detailing different events.
We assess the performance of previous VTR models
trained under standard VTR settings that learn a bijective
video-text correspondence on the MeVTR task without retraining. Our evaluation reveals distinct levels of performance degradation, as illustrated in Table 1. This observation confirms the presence of a performance gap between
training within the conventional VTR framework and realworld MeVTR inference scenarios.

22113

