This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fine-grained Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Gait Recognition
Kang Ma1 , Ying Fu1 *, Dezhi Zheng1 *, Yunjie Peng2 , Chunshui Cao3 , Yongzhen Huang3,4 *
1
Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 Beihang University, 3 WATRIX.AI, 4 Beijing Normal University
kangx.ma@gmail.com, {fuying, zhengdezhi}@bit.edu.cn, YunjiePeng@buaa.edu.cn
chunshui.cao@watrix.ai, huangyongzhen@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Gait recognition has emerged as a promising technique
for the long-range retrieval of pedestrians, providing numerous advantages such as accurate identification in challenging conditions and non-intrusiveness, making it highly
desirable for improving public safety and security. However, the high cost of labeling datasets, which is a prerequisite for most existing fully supervised approaches, poses
a significant obstacle to the development of gait recognition. Recently, some unsupervised methods for gait recognition have shown promising results. However, these methods mainly rely on a fine-tuning approach that does not
sufficiently consider the relationship between source and
target domains, leading to the catastrophic forgetting of
source domain knowledge. This paper presents a novel perspective that adjacent-view sequences exhibit overlapping
views, which can be leveraged by the network to gradually attain cross-view and cross-dressing capabilities without pre-training on the labeled source domain. Specifically,
we propose a fine-grained Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) framework that iteratively alternates between
two stages. The initial stage involves offline clustering,
which transfers knowledge from the labeled source domain
to the unlabeled target domain and adaptively generates
pseudo-labels according to the expressiveness of each part.
Subsequently, the second stage encompasses online training, which further achieves cross-dressing capabilities by
continuously learning to distinguish numerous features of
source and target domains. The effectiveness of the proposed method is demonstrated through extensive experiments conducted on widely-used public gait datasets.

1. Introduction
Gait recognition, a biometric technology [37, 41, 15] that
identifies individuals based on their unique walking patterns, has gained significant attention for its ability to recog* Corresponding Authors

(a) Relationships with adjacent-view
same view

walking direction

Camera

same view

(b) The Fine-grained UDA Framework
Online training stage
Update

Offline clustering stage

Labeled
source domain

Outlier
feature

Unlabeled
target domain
Absent
feature

UDA

Sample data
Target
domain
data

Source
domain
data

Cross-views/clothes
features with the same label

Cross-views/clothes

Transfer cross-views/clothes features with the same
knowledge
pseudo-labels

Select data with pseudo labels

Figure 1. (a) The prior knowledge of the existence of angle overlap
between adjacent-view. (b) The proposed Fine-grained Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) framework for gait recognition.

nize people at long distances, regardless of their attire. The
applications [6, 31, 12] of gait recognition have been greatly
facilitated by advances in deep learning and the availability
of vast amounts of labeled data. However, accurately annotating large amounts of data remains a daunting challenge,
especially under long-distance cameras, where critical information such as the human face is often blurred, making it
difficult to label gait sequences of the same person in different clothing, views, and carrying conditions. As a solution,
we propose a fine-grained Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) framework that transfers knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain.
In the gait recognition task, an essential prior knowledge
is the existence of overlapping angles in adjacent-view sequences as shown in Fig. 1 (a), which enables networks to
build cross-view capabilities through a chain-like approach.
Leveraging this premise, the UDA framework for gait recognition can gradually learn cross-dressing capabilities in the
target domain through knowledge transfer and clustering,
without the need for pre-training the network. We aim to
reveal it by addressing the following aspects:
(i) Offline clustering stage. In the offline clustering phase,

11313

