This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sparse Point Guided 3D Lane Detection
Chengtang Yao1,3 , Lidong Yu3 , Yuwei Wu1 ,* Yunde Jia2
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing,
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, China
3
Autonomous Driving Algorithm, DeepRoute
yao.c.t@bit.edu.cn, yvlidong@gmail.com, jiayunde@bit.edu.cn, wuyuwei@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
3D lane detection usually builds a dense correspondence
between the front-view space and the BEV space to estimate
lane points in the 3D space. 3D lanes only occupy a small
ratio of the dense correspondence, while most correspondence belongs to the redundant background. This sparsity
phenomenon bottlenecks valuable computation and raises
the computation cost of building a high-resolution correspondence for accurate results. In this paper, we propose a
sparse point-guided 3D lane detection, focusing on points
related to 3D lanes. Our method runs in a coarse-to-fine
manner, including coarse-level lane detection and iterative
fine-level sparse point refinements. In coarse-level lane detection, we build a dense but efficient correspondence between the front view and BEV space at a very low resolution
to compute coarse lanes. Then in fine-level sparse point
refinement, we sample sparse points around coarse lanes
to extract local features from the high-resolution front-view
feature map. The high-resolution local information brought
by sparse points refines 3D lanes in the BEV space hierarchically from low resolution to high resolution. The sparse
point guides a more effective information flow and greatly
promotes the SOTA result by 3 points on the overall F1score and 6 points on several hard situations while reducing
almost half memory cost and speeding up 2 times.

1. Introduction
3D lane detection is an indispensable part of the advanced driver assistance system, supporting functionalities such as automated lane centering and lane departure
warning. It relies on building a dense correspondence between the front view space and BEV space to localize lane
points in 3D space. Previous methods build a dense correspondence by directly projecting the 2D image or 2D fea* Corresponding author.

𝑌

𝑋

BEV

(a) Dense Correspondence

𝑌

𝑋

BEV

(b) Sparse Correspondence

Figure 1: The visualization of dense correspondence (a) and
sparse correspondence (b) between font view and BEV. The
green grids represent areas near lanes, while blue grids are
redundant areas far from lanes.
ture map into 3D space using Inverse Perspective Mapping
(IPM) [18, 38], but this kind of correspondence is hard to
handle the complex road conditions (e.g., uphill and downhill). Recently, some methods [3, 21] build a dense correspondence using a learnable transformer to resolve this
problem. The transformer-based correspondence builds a
more effective information flow from the front view space
to the BEV space, which results in better performance in
extreme scenes.
Building such dense correspondence is actually redundant for 3D lane detection. As shown in Figure 1, even
among a local window near the lane, only 2/5 correspondences are beneficial for 3D lane detection, while the others are redundant. Among the dense correspondence, 3D
lanes only occupy a small ratio, while most correspondences are built for the background. This redundant problem becomes more severe at high resolution, where both
the high-resolution front-view and BEV feature maps are
necessary for high-quality lane detection in most methods
[6, 7, 18, 10, 38, 15]. To this end, we propose to construct
a sparse correspondence only focusing on a limited num-

8363

