This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multiple Planar Object Tracking
https://zzcheng.top/MPOT
Zhicheng Zhang
Shengzhe Liu
Jufeng Yang†
VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
gloryzzc6@sina.com, nkuliusz@163.com, yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Tracking both location and pose of multiple planar objects (MPOT) is of great significance to numerous realworld applications. The greater degree-of-freedom of planar objects compared with common objects makes MPOT
far more challenging than well-studied object tracking, especially when occlusion occurs. To address this challenging task, we are inspired by amodal perception that humans
jointly track visible and invisible parts of the target, and
propose a tracking framework that unifies appearance perception and occlusion reasoning. Specifically, we present a
dual-branch network to track the visible part of planar objects, including vertexes and mask. Then, we develop an occlusion area localization strategy to infer the invisible part,
i.e., the occluded region, followed by a two-stream attention
network finally refining the prediction. To alleviate the lack
of data in this field, we build the first large-scale benchmark
dataset, namely MPOT-3K. It consists of 3,717 planar objects from 356 videos and contains 148,896 frames together
with 687,417 annotations. The collected planar objects
have 9 motion patterns and the videos are shot in 6 types of
indoor and outdoor scenes. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method on the newly
developed MPOT-3K as well as other two popular single
planar object tracking datasets. The code and MPOT-3K
dataset are released on https://zzcheng.top/MPOT.

1. Introduction
Tracking multiple planar objects (MPOT) is a fundamental task in computer vision. It aims to explore the motion of planar objects, tracking both the location and pose of
multiple targets simultaneously [40, 43, 56]. The planar object is defined as a plane belonging to a specific body [28]
(e.g., box, building, or wall) in the form of four ordered
vertexes [43, 70]. With the help of MPOT, we can track targets when multiple planar objects exist, e.g., different sur† Corresponding author.

Pixel
Correspondence

POT

(a) Image of ith frame
x1 y1
x2 y2
x3 y3
x4 y4

POT

mask h

VOS

w

VOT

w

xy 
wh h

VOS
xy
wh



RVOT

VOT/RVOT
(b) Different tracking tasks
(c) Tracking j th frame
Figure 1: Comparison with other vision tasks. Given an im(DoF=8)

(N/A)

(DoF=4)

(DoF=5)

age (a), we present the ground truth for different tasks in (b). The
corresponding Degree-of-Freedom (DoF) is reported at the bottom
and the details are listed on the right side of each task. In (c), we
show the tracking results for box-based tasks (e.g., VOT, RVOT),
mask-based tasks (e.g., VOS), and POT, which can find the occluded regions (marked by the red line area) and provide pixel-topixel matching correspondence (colored points across frames).

faces of an object [1] or planes from various objects [27].
It has attracted more and more attention attributed to various applications in augmented reality [57, 104], video editing [4, 20, 30], and robot navigation [92].
MPOT is closely related to well-known computer vision
tasks in RGB tracking [32] (see Tab. 1). Both tasks involve
tracking the target across subsequent frames of a video using the ground truth provided in the initial frame. However,
it is more challenging in two aspects. 1) Tracking planar objects is of greater Degree-of-Freedom (DoF). As shown in
Fig. 1(b), MPOT tracks both the pose and location of the target, which is described by an arbitrary quadrangle (i.e., four
independent vertexes (x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 , x3 , y3 , x4 , y4 ), whose
DoF is 8 [44]). In contrast, it only needs to predict the
position and size of an object (x, y, w, h) in video object
tracking (VOT), and Rotated VOT (RVOT) additionally requires the rotation angle. Even compared with video object

23460

