This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RepQ-ViT: Scale Reparameterization for Post-Training Quantization of
Vision Transformers
Zhikai Li1,2 , Junrui Xiao1,2 , Lianwei Yang1,2 , and Qingyi Gu1, *
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{lizhikai2020, xiaojunrui2020, yanglianwei2021, qingyi.gu}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Post-training quantization (PTQ), which only requires a
tiny dataset for calibration without end-to-end retraining,
is a light and practical model compression technique. Recently, several PTQ schemes for vision transformers (ViTs)
have been presented; unfortunately, they typically suffer
from non-trivial accuracy degradation, especially in lowbit cases. In this paper, we propose RepQ-ViT, a novel PTQ
framework for ViTs based on quantization scale reparameterization, to address the above issues. RepQ-ViT decouples
the quantization and inference processes, where the former
employs complex quantizers and the latter employs scalereparameterized simplified quantizers. This ensures both
accurate quantization and efficient inference, which distinguishes it from existing approaches that sacrifice quantization performance to meet the target hardware. More
specifically, we focus on two components with extreme distributions: post-LayerNorm activations with severe interchannel variation and post-Softmax activations with powerlaw features,
and initially apply channel-wise quantization
√
and log 2 quantization, respectively. Then, we reparameterize the scales to hardware-friendly layer-wise quantization and log2 quantization for inference, with only slight
accuracy or computational costs. Extensive experiments
are conducted on multiple vision tasks with different model
variants, proving that RepQ-ViT, without hyperparameters
and expensive reconstruction procedures, can outperform
existing strong baselines and encouragingly improve the accuracy of 4-bit PTQ of ViTs to a usable level. Code is available at https://github.com/zkkli/RepQ-ViT.

1. Introduction
With the powerful representational capabilities of the
self-attention mechanism, vision transformers (ViTs) have
recently demonstrated surprising potential in a range of vi* Corresponding author.

sion applications, including image classification [5, 23], object detection [2, 38], semantic segmentation [28], etc., and
are thus being widely investigated as new vision backbones
[8]. However, ViTs rely on heavy and intensive computations, resulting in intolerable memory footprint, power consumption, and inference latency, which hinders their deployment on resource-constrained edge devices [10, 29].
Consequently, compression techniques for ViTs are essential in real-world applications, particularly where low-cost
deployment and real-time inference are desired.
Model quantization, which reduces model complexity by
decreasing the representation precision of weights and activations, is an effective and prevalent compression approach
[7, 12]. A notable research line is based on quantizationaware training (QAT) [3, 6], which relies on end-to-end retraining to compensate for the accuracy of the quantized
model. Despite the good performance, such retraining requires gradient backpropagation and parameter updates on
the entire training dataset, which brings undesirably large
time and resource costs [20, 33]. Fortunately, another family of methods, referred to as post-training quantization
(PTQ), can overcome the above challenges [32, 16, 26]. It
simply takes a tiny unlabeled dataset to calibrate the quantization parameters without retraining and thus is regarded
as a promising and practical solution.
Although various PTQ methods for convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been proposed in previous works
with good performance, they produce disappointing results
on ViTs, with more than 1% accuracy drop even in 8-bit
quantization [35]. To this end, several efforts identify the
key components that limit the quantization performance of
ViTs, such as LayerNorm, Softmax, and GELU, and propose PTQ schemes accordingly [22, 24]. Nevertheless,
when performing ultra-low-bit (e.g., 4-bit) quantization, the
performance of these schemes is still far from satisfactory
[4]. The core reason for their low performance is that they
invariably follow the traditional quantization paradigm, in
which the initial design of the quantizers must account for
the future inference overhead. This forces previous meth-

17227

