This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Social Diffusion: Long-term Multiple Human Motion Anticipation
Julian Tanke* 1 , Linguang Zhang2 , Amy Zhao2 , Chengcheng Tang2 , Yujun Cai2 , Lezi Wang2 , Po-Chen
Wu2 , Juergen Gall1,3 , and Cem Keskin2
1

University of Bonn 2 Reality Labs Research
3
Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence
{tanke,gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de
{linguang,xamyzhao,chengcheng.tang,yujuncai,wanglezi,pochenwu,cemkeskin}@meta.com

Abstract
We propose Social Diffusion, a novel method for shortterm and long-term forecasting of the motion of multiple
persons as well as their social interactions. Jointly forecasting motions for multiple persons involved in social activities is inherently a challenging problem due to the interdependencies between individuals. In this work, we leverage a diffusion model conditioned on motion histories and
causal temporal convolutional networks to forecast individually and contextually plausible motions for all participants. The contextual plausibility is achieved via an orderinvariant aggregation function. As a second contribution,
we design a new evaluation protocol that measures the plausibility of social interactions which we evaluate on the Haggling dataset, which features a challenging social activity
where people are actively taking turns to talk and switching
their attention. We evaluate our approach on four datasets
for multi-person forecasting where our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art in terms of motion realism and
contextual plausibility.

1. Introduction
Understanding and anticipating social interactions in
groups of people is a challenging and highly relevant
topic [35, 9, 32, 45, 47, 5, 34]. For instance, it is essential for socially-compliant robots [44], but it is also relevant
for neuroscience and social sciences since it allows to develop computational models on how the behavior of other
persons is perceived and how it changes the own behavior.
Forecasting realistic social interactions, however, is very
challenging for two reasons. First, social interactions tend
to last for tens of seconds [33] or even minutes - much
longer than the prediction from most of the existing human
* Work done partially while Julian was at Reality Labs Research.

motion anticipation models [23, 69, 3, 22, 27, 42, 49, 11, 25,
37, 4, 14, 41, 40]. Second, social interactions consist of interdependent motions [54, 36], which requires modeling the
relationships among all individuals. For example, in conversational turn-taking, a person’s turn to talk highly depends
on the start/end of the others’ speaking. While multi-person
motion anticipation has emerged as a new topic, current approaches [23, 69, 3] do not pay much attention on complex
social interactions. For instance, they do not preserve the
social role of individuals in a group such that the interactions become socially implausible over time.
To address the limitations of existing models, we propose Social Diffusion to predict motions of multiple people and ensure contextually plausible interactions, as shown
in Fig. 1. To this end, we learn the distribution of human
motion by leveraging a diffusion model [39, 28, 52, 58,
24, 59, 62, 73]. To enforce information exchange among
people, which is critical to predicting contextually plausible interactions, we introduce an order-invariant aggregation function to aggregate motion features from all people.
For inference, we feed back the input sequence to the signal
during the reverse-diffusion steps to condition the motion
generation on the past motion. Our method is fully convolutional which allows us to generate sequences of arbitrary
size. This allows us to not just forecast the next few seconds
of an input motion but also to forecast social interactions
that last longer. Furthermore, our approach is very flexible in the sense that the number of persons during training
and inference can differ. To the best of our knowledge, our
approach represents the first diffusion model that produces
multi-person motions at the same time.
As a second contribution, we propose a new evaluation
protocol for social interactions based on Symbolic Social
Cues, which measures whether the forecast motion is socially plausible. Our key observation is that the probabilities
of transitions between social interaction states are highly

9601

