This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding Hessian Alignment for Domain Generalization
Sobhan Hemati∗

Guojun Zhang∗
Amir Estiri
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Xi Chen

{sobhan.hemati, guojun.zhang, amir.hossein.estiri1, xi.chen4}@huawei.com

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization is a critical
ability for deep learning models in many real-world scenarios including healthcare and autonomous vehicles. Recently,
different techniques have been proposed to improve OOD
generalization. Among these methods, gradient-based regularizers have shown promising performance compared with
other competitors. Despite this success, our understanding
of the role of Hessian and gradient alignment in domain
generalization is still limited. To address this shortcoming,
we analyze the role of the classifier’s head Hessian matrix
and gradient in domain generalization using recent OOD
theory of transferability. Theoretically, we show that spectral norm between the classifier’s head Hessian matrices
across domains is an upper bound of the transfer measure, a
notion of distance between target and source domains. Furthermore, we analyze all the attributes that get aligned when
we encourage similarity between Hessians and gradients.
Our analysis explains the success of many regularizers like
CORAL, IRM, V-REx, Fish, IGA, and Fishr as they regularize
part of the classifier’s head Hessian and/or gradient. Finally,
we propose two simple yet effective methods to match the
classifier’s head Hessians and gradients in an efficient way,
based on the Hessian Gradient Product (HGP) and Hutchinson’s method (Hutchinson), and without directly calculating
Hessians. We validate the OOD generalization ability of
proposed methods in different scenarios, including transferability, severe correlation shift, label shift and diversity shift.
Our results show that Hessian alignment methods achieve
promising performance on various OOD benchmarks. The
code is available here.

1. Introduction
A typical assumption in the design of current supervised
deep learning algorithms is identical distributions of test
and training data. Unfortunately, in real-world problems,
this assumption is not always true (Koyama and Yamaguchi,
* Equal contribution.

2021) and the distribution gap between test and training data
degrades the performance of deep learning models (Wang
et al., 2022). In practice, not only is there a distribution
shift between test and training data, but also the training
data does not follow the i.i.d. assumption but contains data
from multiple domains. Histopathology medical datasets are
a concrete example where each hospital is using different
types of staining procedures and/or scanners (Chang et al.,
2021). In such a scenario, a deep learning model often fails
to generalize its knowledge to unseen domains. Arjovsky
et al. (2019) argue that the main reason behind poor OOD
generalization is the tendency of deep learning models to
capture simple spurious correlations instead of real causal
information. In order to improve OOD generalization, the
learning algorithm has to learn from invariant mechanisms.
The problem setup in domain generalization (DG) assumes the training set contains data from multiple sources
(domains) where the task remains the same across different data sources (Muandet et al., 2013). Furthermore, we
assume there is a causal mechanism that remains invariant
across different domains and hopefully for OOD data. Although many learning algorithms have been proposed to
capture invariance, a recent work by Gulrajani and LopezPaz (2020) shows that given a standard experimental setting,
the classic Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) algorithm
(Vapnik, 1999), which minimizes the average of losses across
different training domains, outperforms many recently proposed domain generalization methods. This suggests that
many current algorithms may not be successful in capturing
the invariance in data.
Out of the effective DG algorithms, one recent and
promising line of research is gradient-based methods which
try to capture invariance in gradient space (Parascandolo
et al., 2020; Koyama and Yamaguchi, 2021; Shi et al., 2021;
Rame et al., 2022). One fast and simple explanation for this
success can be derived from the seminal work by Jaakkola
and Haussler (1998). According to this work, given a generative model, the gradient with respect to each parameter
quantifies the role of that parameter in the generation of a
data point. With this intuition, encouraging the similarity
between gradients across environments can be translated as

19004

