This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ClothPose: A Real-world Benchmark for Visual Analysis of Garment Pose via
An Indirect Recording Solution
Wenqiang Xu* 1, 2 , Wenxin Du* 1 , Han Xue1 , Yutong Li1 , Ruolin Ye3 , Yan-Feng Wang1 , Cewu Lu§ 1, 2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi institute 3 Cornell University
1

{vinjohn, mnkmYuki, xiaoxiaoxh, davidliyutong, wangyanfeng, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn
3

ry273@cornell.edu

Abstract
Garments are important and pervasive in daily life.
However, visual analysis on them for pose estimation is
challenging because it requires recovering the complete
configurations of garments, which is difficult, if not impossible, to annotate in the real world. In this work, we propose a recording system, GarmentTwin, which can track
garment poses in dynamic settings such as manipulation.
GarmentTwin first collects garment models and RGB-D manipulation videos from the real world and then replays the
manipulation process using physics-based animation. This
way, we can obtain deformed garments with poses coarsely
aligned with real-world observations. Finally, we adopt
an optimization-based approach to fit the pose with realworld observations. We verify the fitting results quantitatively and qualitatively. With GarmentTwin, we construct
a large-scale dataset named ClothPose, which consists of
30K RGB-D frames from 2400 video clips on 600 garments
of 10 categories. We benchmark two tasks on the proposed
ClothPose: non-rigid reconstruction and pose estimation.
The experiments show that previous baseline methods struggle with highly large non-rigid deformation of manipulated
garments. Therefore, we hope that the recording system and
the dataset can facilitate research on pose estimation tasks
on non-rigid objects. Datasets, models, and codes will be
made publicly available.

1. Introduction
We manipulate garments every day: we fold our T-shirts,
flatten our suits, and perform other tasks that involve interacting with garments. A vision system to reconstruct the
complete configuration of the garment can be beneficial for
* indicates equal contributions.
§ Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, the member of Qing Yuan
Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China and Shanghai Qi Zhi institute.

downstream tasks such as object understanding, VR/AR,
and robotic manipulation. The problem of reconstructing
the garment configuration is defined as garment pose estimation in GarmentNets [9]. However, problems arise when
dealing with real-world data. Given that a garment has
a near-infinite degree of freedom, it is extremely hard to
record its pose in the real world. Real-world garments can
easily undergo large non-rigid deformation, making them
hard to annotate. As a result, previous works are limited to
annotate key points [6, 46] or feature lines [4] when using
real-world data. Such simplifications hinder the development of research on visual garment understanding. A question still haunts the community: Is it really impossible to
measure the garment pose in the real world?
Taking the lessons from capturing poses of rigid or articulated objects in the real world [18, 33], passive sensors
such as QR-like fiducials or reflective markers are commonly used. These markers are particularly effective for
rigid object parts, as they share the same pose transformation for all the vertices. With such rigid constraints, the
pose of markers in occluded regions can be inferred from
visible regions in observation. However, for deformable objects such as garments, these rigid constraints do not apply,
making it challenging to infer the pose from visible regions.
Thus, the passive sensors cannot be applied to garments.
As for active sensors, their accuracy is often insufficient
to meet the requirement of having an error range smaller
than the thickness of a garment. A typical garment has a
thickness of 0.05 ∼ 1cm. Therefore, an active measuring
sensor should have an error of at least 1cm to prevent one
side of the garment from penetrating the other. However,
even magnetic sensors, one of the most accurate localization techniques available, only have an accuracy of 2.6cm
within a 30cm × 30cm × 30cm region [7]. For a more indepth discussion of active sensors, please refer to Sec. 2.
As the sensor technology seems to need a long time to
catch up with the necessary accuracy, we turn to an indirect method to measure garment poses. Instead of directly
measuring the garment pose from a static state, our method
1 58

