This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

P1AC: Revisiting Absolute Pose From a Single Affine Correspondence
Jonathan Ventura1 Zuzana Kukelova2 Torsten Sattler3 Dániel Baráth4
1
Department of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo
2
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
3
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague
4
Computer Vision and Geometry Group, ETH Zürich

Abstract
Affine correspondences have traditionally been used to
improve feature matching over wide baselines. While recent
work has successfully used affine correspondences to solve
various relative camera pose estimation problems, less attention has been given to their use in absolute pose estimation. We introduce the first general solution to the problem of estimating the pose of a calibrated camera given a
single observation of an oriented point and an affine correspondence. The advantage of our approach (P1AC) is
that it requires only a single correspondence, in comparison to the traditional point-based approach (P3P), significantly reducing the combinatorics in robust estimation.
P1AC provides a general solution that removes restrictive assumptions made in prior work and is applicable to
large-scale image-based localization. We propose a minimal solution to the P1AC problem and evaluate our novel
solver on synthetic data, showing its numerical stability and
performance under various types of noise. On standard
image-based localization benchmarks we show that P1AC
achieves more accurate results than the widely used P3P
algorithm. Code for our method is available at https:
//github.com/jonathanventura/P1AC/.

1. Introduction
Image-based localization is the process of determining
the pose of a query image in a reference coordinate system from pre-registered images in a database. Image-based
localization is an important technology for many applications including robotics [41], self-driving cars [20] and augmented reality [51]. It also forms an essential component of
large-scale structure-from-motion pipelines [48].
The dominant method for image-based localization is to
estimate the camera pose from correspondences between
2D features in the query image and known 3D points in
the scene. Since these correspondences are likely to contain mismatches, a best-fit model is found through Random

Figure 1:
Overview of the perspective-one-affinecorrespondence (P1AC) problem. Our goal is to estimate
the pose of a query image based on a single 2D observation
of a known oriented 3D point and an affine correspondence
to a reference image with known pose.

Sample Consensus (RANSAC) [17] or one of its derivatives
[12, 32, 5], where camera pose hypotheses are estimated
from minimal samples of three point correspondences (PCs)
using a perspective-three-point (P3P) algorithm [44].
In cases of very wide-baseline matching or with extreme differences in viewing angle, affine-covariant features increase match reliability in comparison to traditional
difference-of-Gaussian detectors such as SIFT [35]. A
match between affine-covariant features, which we will call
an affine correspondence (AC), estimates a 2 × 2 affine
transformation matrix between the local regions around the
corresponding points in the two images.
Recently, several authors have developed a theory of
the constraints induced by ACs on two-view geometry
[9, 45, 16], and minimal solvers for relative pose estimation from ACs [16, 15]. However, relatively little attention has been given to absolute pose estimation from
ACs. We revisit the problem of estimating absolute camera
pose from a single affine correspondence, and refer to this

19751

