This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Visual Scenes from Touch
Fengyu Yang

Jiacheng Zhang

Andrew Owens

University of Michigan

Input Touch

Input Touch
Input Image

Generated Image

Reference

Input Touch
Restyled Image

Reference

(a) Touch-to-Image Generation

Reconstructed Image

Reflectance

(b) Tactile-driven Image Stylization

(c) Tactile-driven Shading Estimation

Figure 1: Generating and manipulating images via touch. We propose a model based on latent diffusion that translates between touch
and images (and vice versa), unifying many previous visuo-tactile image synthesis tasks and enabling new ones. (a) We generate an image
of a scene given a tactile signal. (b) We perform tactile-driven image stylization, e.g. restyling a rough rock to match the smoother texture
of a brick. (c) We propose the novel task of tactile-driven shading estimation: predicting an image from its reflectance and tactile signal.
To aid visualization, we show reference images next to the touch signal. We present a circular crop from the touch signal to emphasize the
part of the signal that is in contact with the object.

Abstract
An emerging line of work has sought to generate plausible imagery from touch. Existing approaches, however,
tackle only narrow aspects of the visuo-tactile synthesis
problem, and lag significantly behind the quality of crossmodal synthesis methods in other domains. We draw on recent advances in latent diffusion to create a model for synthesizing images from tactile signals (and vice versa) and
apply it to a number of visuo-tactile synthesis tasks. Using
this model, we significantly outperform prior work on the
tactile-driven stylization problem, i.e., manipulating an image to match a touch signal, and we are the first to successfully generate images from touch without additional sources
of information about the scene. We also successfully use
our model to address two novel synthesis problems: generating images that do not contain the touch sensor or
the hand holding it, and estimating an image’s shading
from its reflectance and touch. Project Page: https://
fredfyyang.github.io/vision-from-touch/

1. Introduction
Humans rely crucially on cross-modal associations between sight and touch to physically interact with the

world [57]. For example, our sense of sight tells us how
the ground in front of us will feel when we place our feet on
it, while our sense of touch conveys the likely visual appearance of an unseen object in our hand. Translating between
these modalities requires an understanding of physical and
material properties. Models trained to solve this problem
must, for instance, learn to associate rapid changes in visual shading with rough microgeometry, and smooth visual
textures with soft surfaces.
Touch is arguably the most important sensory modality for humans [47, 42, 39], due to its role in basic survival [39, 9, 22] and physical interaction. Yet touch sensing has received comparably little attention in multimodal
learning. An emerging line of work has addressed the problem of translating touch to sight, such as by learning joint
embeddings [63, 38], manipulating visual styles to match
a tactile signal [63], or adding a plausible imagery of a
robotic arm to an existing photo of a scene [37]. While these
tasks each capture important parts of the cross-modal prediction problem, each currently requires a separate, specialpurpose method. Existing methods also lag significantly behind those of other areas of multimodal perception, which
provide general-purpose methods for cross-modal synthe-

22070

