This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gram-based Attentive Neural Ordinary Differential Equations Network for
Video Nystagmography Classification
Xihe Qiu1 *, Shaojie Shi1∗ , Xiaoyu Tan2∗†, Chao Qu2 , Zhijun Fang3 ,
Hailing Wang1 , Yongbin Gao1†, Peixia Wu4 , Huawei Li4
1
Shanghai University of Engineering Science, Shanghai, China
2
INF Technology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. Shanghai, China
3
Donghua University, Shanghai, China
4
Eye & ENT Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China
yulin.txy@inftech.ai, gaoyongbin@sues.edu.cn

Abstract
Video nystagmography (VNG) is the diagnostic gold
standard of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV),
which requires medical professionals to examine the direction, frequency, intensity, duration, and variation in the
strength of nystagmus on a VNG video. This is a tedious process heavily influenced by the doctor’s experience,
which is error-prone. Recent automatic VNG classification methods approach this problem from the perspective
of video analysis without considering medical prior knowledge, resulting in unsatisfactory accuracy and limited diagnostic capability for nystagmographic types, thereby preventing their clinical application. In this paper, we propose
an end-to-end data-driven novel BPPV diagnosis framework (TC-BPPV) by considering this problem as an eye
trajectory classification problem due to the disease’s symptoms and experts’ prior knowledge. In this framework,
we utilize an eye movement tracking system to capture the
eye trajectory and propose the Gram-based attentive neural ordinary differential equations network (Gram-AODE)
to perform classification. We validate our framework using the VNG dataset provided by the collaborative university hospital and achieve state-of-the-art performance. We
also evaluate Gram-AODE on multiple open-source benchmarks to demonstrate its effectiveness in trajectory classification. Code is available at https://github.com/
XiheQiu/Gram-AODE.

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) is a classic type of otogenic vertigo, which is transitory dizziness
caused by head movements to a certain position with high
prevalence (i.e, the lifetime prevalence of 2.4%) [46]. The
characterization of nystagmus in individuals with BPPV is
crucial for the diagnosis of BPPV. In clinical practice, information on nystagmus is typically obtained through positional testing and the type of BPPV condition can be determined by irregular rhythmic eye movements, consisting of
nystagmus and eye-twisting movements [44]. Video Nystagmography (VNG) can significantly improve the detection rate of BPPV nystagmus [27]. According to the type of
nystagmus movement, medical professionals might classify
BPPV into different types of therapy. However, distinguishing the different disorders can be a challenging task. During
diagnosis, the medical professional must examine the VNG
video for nystagmus features such as direction, frequency,
intensity, duration, and intensity variation, which is timeconsuming and error-prone.
Recent research has demonstrated the success of using
deep learning to comprehend human behavior in the video,
and automatically classify VNG for BPPV analysis based
on relevant image [29, 3] or time-series features [18]. However, these models are proposed from the perspective of
video analysis without explicitly considering the disease
symptoms and pathology, which provide sufficient classification types in clinical practice.
Therefore, we propose a novel end-to-end data-driven
framework to perform BPPV diagnosis by considering this
problem as an eye Trajectory Classification (TC-BPPV)
problem due to the disease’s symptoms and experts’ prior
knowledge. This framework can classify the BPPV into
ten classes which are commonly recognized in clinical practice. In this framework, we first simplify the complex video

21339

