This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Physically-plausible illumination distribution estimation
Egor Ershov1

Vasily Tesalin1,2,3
1

IITP RAS

2

MIPT

Ivan Ermakov1,2
3

Skoltech

Abstract

1

2

3

Correction using three diﬀerent white points
1

2

3

1. Introduction
Illumination estimation (IE) is the core operation performed by a camera’s auto white balance (AWB) module.
IE algorithms estimate the sensor’s response to scene illumination directly from an image in order to remove the
color cast caused by the illumination. White balance correction is performed by scaling the image’s color channels
such that the estimated illumination value becomes achromatic (i.e., R=G=B). Because the white balance correction procedure results in the estimated illumination being
mapped to the achromatic color line, the estimated illuminant is often called the “white point” of the image. White
balance correction simulates the mechanism of color constancy in the human visual system [17] to achieve realistic
and aesthetically pleasing images.
IE algorithms operate under the assumption that a sin-

York University

b / (r+b+g)

A camera’s auto-white-balance (AWB) module operates
under the assumption that there is a single dominant illumination in a captured scene. AWB methods estimate an image’s dominant illumination and use it as the target “white
point” for correction. However, in natural scenes, there
are often many light sources present. We performed a user
study that revealed that non-dominant illuminations often
produce visually pleasing white-balanced images and, in
some cases, are even preferred over the dominant illumination. Motivated by this observation, we revisit AWB to
predict a distribution of plausible illuminations for use in
white balance. As part of this effort, we extend the Cube++
illumination estimation dataset [12] to provide ground truth
illumination distributions per image. Using this new ground
truth data, we describe how to train a lightweight neural
network method to predict the scene’s illumination distribution. We describe how our idea can be used with existing
image formats by embedding the estimated distribution in
the RAW image to enable users to generate visually plausible white-balance images.

4

Michael S. Brown4

r / (r+b+g)

Figure 1. This figure shows the illumination distribution captured
by the chrome ball on the SpyderCube calibration tool as described
in Sec. 3. The distribution is plotted in the sensor’s chromaticity
plane. Three different visually plausible white-balance corrections
are shown based on illuminations (i.e., white points) sampled from
the distribution.

gle light source serves as the dominant illumination in the
scene. Most IE datasets for benchmarking and training have
only a ground truth illumination label per image. This is
achieved by placing an achromatic calibration object (e.g.,
a grey patch, grey ball, or grey cube) in the scene and measuring the average color recorded by the camera sensor of
the calibration object.

12928

