This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized Few-Shot Point Cloud Segmentation Via Geometric Words
Gim Hee Lee1
Yating Xu1
Conghui Hu1
Na Zhao2 *
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
2
Singapore University of Technology and Design
xu.yating@u.nus.edu

conghui@nus.edu.sg

na zhao@sutd.edu.sg

gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Existing fully-supervised point cloud segmentation methods suffer in the dynamic testing environment with emerging new classes. Few-shot point cloud segmentation algorithms address this problem by learning to adapt to new
classes at the sacrifice of segmentation accuracy for the
base classes, which severely impedes its practicality. This
largely motivates us to present the first attempt at a more
practical paradigm of generalized few-shot point cloud segmentation, which requires the model to generalize to new
categories with only a few support point clouds and simultaneously retain the capability to segment base classes.
We propose the geometric words to represent geometric
components shared between the base and novel classes,
and incorporate them into a novel geometric-aware semantic representation to facilitate better generalization to the
new classes without forgetting the old ones. Moreover, we
introduce geometric prototypes to guide the segmentation
with geometric prior knowledge. Extensive experiments on
S3DIS and ScanNet consistently illustrate the superior performance of our method over baseline methods. Our code
is available at: https://github.com/Pixie8888/
GFS-3DSeg_GWs.

1. Introduction
Point cloud segmentation aims at predicting the category of each point in the 3D scenes represented by the
point cloud, and has wide applications in autonomous driving, robotics, etc. Although fully-supervised point cloud
segmentation methods (Full-3DSeg) [19, 20, 28, 11, 9, 29]
have achieved impressive performance, they heavily require
large-scale annotated training data and rely on the closed
set assumption that the class distribution of the testing point
cloud remains the same as the training dataset. However, the
closed set assumption is unrealistic in the open world where
* Na Zhao was concurrently a visiting professor at the National University of Singapore when this work was done.

Input Point Cloud

Activated Point Cloud

Figure 1. Visualization of the geometric words (GWs) on
S3DIS. The left figure shows the original point cloud and the right
figure shows the activated point cloud to a geometric word. The
activated points are colored green. It shows the horizontal planes
of the sofa, table and chair are all activated to the same GW due to
similar geometric structure.

new classes arise continuously. The Full-3DSeg in this challenging open-world setting thus requires large amounts of
annotated data for new classes, which are time-consuming
and expensive to collect.
The few-shot point cloud segmentation (FS-3DSeg) [35,
14, 8] algorithms are designed to ameliorate the lack of data
for novel class adaptation. Generally, FS-3DSeg first trains
a model with abundant training samples of the base classes,
and then targets at segmenting the new classes by learning from only a small number of samples from the corresponding new classes. By adopting episodic training [26]
to mimic the testing environment and specific designs for
feature extraction [35], FS-3DSeg achieves promising novel
class segmentation results for the query point clouds. However, in the task of point cloud segmentation, base and novel
classes often appear together in one scene (see Figure 5 as
examples). An ideal segmentor in practice is expected to
give each point in the scene a semantic label. As a result, the
FS-3DSeg setting that only segments points of novel classes
while ignoring the base classes suffers limited practicality.
In view of the impracticality of FS-3DSeg, we introduce
the generalized few-shot point cloud segmentation (GFS3DSeg) task. As shown in Tab. 1, given the model originally
trained on base classes, the objective of GFS-3DSeg is to
segment both base and novel classes using merely a limited

21506

