This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging Spatio-Temporal Dependency for Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Jungho Lee1 , Minhyeok Lee1 , Suhwan Cho1 , Sungmin Woo1 , Sungjun Jang1 , Sangyoun Lee1,2
1

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University,
2
Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)

{2015142131, hydragon516, chosuhwan, smw3250, jeu2250, syleee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Skeleton-based action recognition has attracted considerable attention due to its compact representation of the
human body’s skeletal sructure. Many recent methods
have achieved remarkable performance using graph convolutional networks (GCNs) and convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which extract spatial and temporal features, respectively. Although spatial and temporal dependencies in the human skeleton have been explored separately, spatio-temporal dependency is rarely considered.
In this paper, we propose the Spatio-Temporal Curve Network (STC-Net) to effectively leverage the spatio-temporal
dependency of the human skeleton. Our proposed network consists of two novel elements: 1) The SpatioTemporal Curve (STC) module; and 2) Dilated Kernels
for Graph Convolution (DK-GC). The STC module dynamically adjusts the receptive field by identifying meaningful node connections between every adjacent frame and
generating spatio-temporal curves based on the identified
node connections, providing an adaptive spatio-temporal
coverage. In addition, we propose DK-GC to consider
long-range dependencies, which results in a large receptive field without any additional parameters by applying
an extended kernel to the given adjacency matrices of
the graph. Our STC-Net combines these two modules
and achieves state-of-the-art performance on four skeletonbased action recognition benchmarks. Code is available at
https://github.com/Jho-Yonsei/STC-Net.

1. Introduction
Action recognition is one of the most important video
understanding tasks used in various applications such as
virtual reality and human–computer interaction. Recent
studies on action recognition are divided into two methods,
RGB-based [33, 31] and skeleton-based methods [36, 26,
27, 2, 4, 16]. Action recognition using the skeleton modality

(a) Spatio-Temporal GCN

(b) Spatio-Temporal Curve Network

Figure 1. Comparison of temporal flows of spatio-temporal GCN
(a) and STC module of our model (b). (b)’s curves have adaptive
spatio-temporal receptive field by aggregating different nodes for
different frames, whereas (a) treats the temporal features of each
node independently.

receives a video sequence with the three-dimensional coordinates of major human joints as its input. Skeleton-based
action recognition has the advantage of being able to create a lightweight model with low computational complexity
by compactly compressing the structure of the human body.
In addition, it has the benefit of robustness in that it is not
affected by background noise, weather, and lighting conditions unlike RGB-based methods.
Earlier approaches [7, 8, 38, 14, 23] extract features by
dealing with every joint independently, which means that
they do not consider information between structurally correlated human joints. However, the connections between
human joints are identified as a graph structure after Yan et
al. [36] has proposed spatio-temporal graph convolutional
networks (GCNs) for the skeleton modality. Recent approaches [27, 4, 2, 6] adopt the GCNs as their baseline and
attempt to enlarge the receptive field on the spatial domain.
However, methods based on Yan et al.’s GCNs have several limitations. (1) When a person performs an action, the
movement of their body parts occurs in both space and time,
and these two aspects of the movement are inherently in-

10255

