This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GECCO: Geometrically-Conditioned Point Diffusion Models
Michał J. Tyszkiewicz1
Pascal Fua1
1
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
michal.tyszkiewicz@epfl.ch

Eduard Trulls2
2
Google Research, Zurich

pascal.fua@epfl.ch

Abstract

DDM (t2)

INPUT
IMAGE

…

Given the popularity of depth sensors and laser scanners,
point clouds have become ubiquitous, with applications to
robotics, autonomous driving, and augmented reality. Furthermore, they do not suffer from the precision/complexity
trade-off inherent to voxel grids, and scale better and more
generally than graph-based representations such as meshes.
As a result, they have been extensively used for analytical
tasks such as classification [46, 47, 60, 70, 48] and segmentation [46, 47, 16, 60, 12, 70, 72]. Recent work has turned
to point cloud synthesis and its many applications to 3D
content creation. However, this remains an emerging field
and state of the art methods [66, 4, 25, 38, 71, 68] operate
on small datasets that feature only a handful of object types
[5]. More importantly, the generated shapes are typically
not anchored in any prior and are thus difficult to control.
We present a novel approach that can mitigate these issues, taking our inspiration from generative methods that
perturb samples with a diffusion process [58, 21] and de-

DDM (t1)

;

;

…

1. Introduction

CNN

…

Diffusion models generating images conditionally on
text, such as Dall-E 2 [51] and Stable Diffusion[53], have
recently made a splash far beyond the computer vision community. Here, we tackle the related problem of generating
point clouds, both unconditionally, and conditionally with
images. For the latter, we introduce a novel geometricallymotivated conditioning scheme based on projecting sparse
image features into the point cloud and attaching them to
each individual point, at every step in the denoising process.
This approach improves geometric consistency and yields
greater fidelity than current methods relying on unstructured, global latent codes. Additionally, we show how to apply recent continuous-time diffusion schemes [59, 21]. Our
method performs on par or above the state of art on conditional and unconditional experiments on synthetic data,
while being faster, lighter, and delivering tractable likelihoods. We show it can also scale to diverse indoors scenes.

trulls@google.com

POINT CONDITIONING
INPUT NOISE CONDITIONING
(XYZ)
FEATURES (t1) CLOUD (t2) FEATURES (t2)

DDM (tN)
OUTPUT
POINT CLOUD

Figure 1: Our generative approach is based on denoising
diffusion models (DDMs) and can be conditioned on images. At each denoising step we project the point cloud to
the image, sample sparse features, and concatenate them to
the locations, thus guiding the denoising process and yielding point clouds consistent with the images.

noise them with a deep network, which can later be used
to synthesize new samples by iteratively denoising a signal. Specifically, most denoising-based approaches generate novel samples from pure noise. But to mirror the success of text-based image synthesis [51, 53, 54], a generative
approach must be able to not only produce samples of sufficient quality and diversity, but also ground them in contextual information. Applying this generic idea to point clouds
is, however, not straightforward. We show how to achieve
this by conditioning the network with sparse image features.
Unlike previous works relying on unstructured, global
embeddings, we do so in a geometrically-principled way,
by projecting the point cloud into an image, sampling sparse
features at those locations, and feeding them to the network
along with the point location, at each denoising step, as illustrated in Fig. 1. This allows us to render 3D objects
geometrically and semantically consistent with the image
content, while controlling the viewpoint. Unlike regression
models, such as monocular depth, our method can generate plausible hypotheses for occluded regions. This work
is thus a first step towards unlocking the applicability of
denoising diffusion models to practical scenarios such as
3D content creation, generating priors for automotive or

2128

