This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MIMO-NeRF: Fast Neural Rendering
with Multi-input Multi-output Neural Radiance Fields
Takuhiro Kaneko
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) have shown impressive
results for novel view synthesis. However, they depend on
the repetitive use of a single-input single-output multilayer
perceptron (SISO MLP) that maps 3D coordinates and view
direction to the color and volume density in a sample-wise
manner, which slows the rendering. We propose a multiinput multi-output NeRF (MIMO-NeRF) that reduces the
number of MLPs running by replacing the SISO MLP with
a MIMO MLP and conducting mappings in a group-wise
manner. One notable challenge with this approach is that
the color and volume density of each point can differ according to a choice of input coordinates in a group, which
can lead to some notable ambiguity. We also propose a
self-supervised learning method that regularizes the MIMO
MLP with multiple fast reformulated MLPs to alleviate this
ambiguity without using pretrained models. The results of
a comprehensive experimental evaluation including comparative and ablation studies are presented to show that
MIMO-NeRF obtains a good trade-off between speed and
quality with a reasonable training time. We then demonstrate that MIMO-NeRF is compatible with and complementary to previous advancements in NeRFs by applying it
to two representative fast NeRFs, i.e., a NeRF with a sampling network (DONeRF) and a NeRF with alternative representations (TensoRF).1

1. Introduction
Images are two-dimensional (2D) projections of threedimensional (3D) scenes. Solving the inverse problem, that
is, learning 3D representations from 2D images and synthesizing novel views, is a fundamental concern in computer
vision and graphics and has been extensively studied for
various applications such as photo editing, content creation,
virtual reality, and environmental understanding.
With the advent of implicit neural representations
1 The project page is available at https://www.kecl.ntt.co.
jp/people/kaneko.takuhiro/projects/mimo-nerf/.

(xj , d)

SISO MLP

(cj , σj )

(xj , d)

(cj , σj )

SISO MLP
MIMO MLP
SISO MLP
(xi , d)

SISO MLP

(ci , σi )

(xi , d)

d

(ci , σi )
d

o

o

(a) NeRF

(b) MIMO-NeRF (proposed)

Figure 1. Comparison between NeRF and MIMO-NeRF (proposed). (a) A typical NeRF uses a SISO MLP that maps 3D coordinates and view direction to the color and volume density in a
sample-wise manner. (b) In contrast, the proposed MIMO-NeRF
uses a MIMO MLP that performs mappings in a group-wise manner. This change reduces the number of MLPs running and improves the rendering speed, but also requires addressing ambiguity in the color and volume density caused by the fact that these
values are determined in a non-unique manner by a set of input
coordinates that vary by viewpoint, grouping, and sampling. The
main technical contribution of the present work is that of providing
methods to mitigate this challenge. We demonstrate the impact of
the proposed technique in Figure 2.

(e.g., [56, 44, 39, 28, 69, 71, 55]), substantial advancements
have been made towards addressing this problem. Neural
radiance fields (NeRFs) [39] have been noted as a successful approach. A NeRF represents a scene using a continuous
function that maps 3D coordinates and view direction to the
color and volume density and renders a pixel by integrating the outputs on a ray using volume rendering [34]. This
formulation enables NeRF to learn to synthesize geometrically consistent and high-fidelity novel views with only 2D
supervision.
Despite this advantage, a typical NeRF suffers from
slow rendering because it uses a single-input single-output
(SISO) MLP that calculates the RGB color and volume
density in a sample-wise manner (Figure 1(a)). Although
this architecture ensures the independent representation of
each point, which is useful, for example, for learning
view-independent volume density, its computational cost
increases in proportion to the number of samples for each

3273

