This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Full-Body Articulated Human-Object Interaction
Nan Jiang1,2 ‹ : , Tengyu Liu2 ‹ , Zhexuan Cao3 : , Jieming Cui1,2,: , Zhiyuan Zhang2,3,: ,
Yixin Chen2 , He Wang4 , Yixin Zhu5 , Siyuan Huang2
https://jnnan.github.io/project/chairs/
‹

Equal contributors
2
4

:

Work done during an internship at BIGAI

Beijing Institute of General Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BIGAI)

Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University

yixin.zhu@pku.edu.cn, syhuang@bigai.ai
1
3
5

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peking University

Figure 1: Examples of the proposed Capturing Human and Articulated-object InteRactionS (CHAIRS) dataset. It contains ﬁne-grained
interactions between 46 participants and 81 sittable objects with drastically different kinematic structures, providing multi-view RGB-D
sequences and ground-truth 3D mesh of humans and articulated objects for over 17.3 hours of recordings.

Abstract

tion to address articulated object pose and shape estimation
within whole-body interactions. Given an image and an estimated human pose, our model reconstructs the object’s pose
and shape, reﬁning the reconstruction based on a learned interaction prior. Across two evaluation scenarios, our model
signiﬁcantly outperforms baseline methods. Additionally, we
showcase the signiﬁcance of CHAIRS in a downstream task
involving human pose generation conditioned on interacting
with articulated objects. We anticipate that the availability
of CHAIRS will advance the community’s understanding of
ﬁner-grained interactions.

Fine-grained capture of 3D Human-Object Interactions
(HOIs) enhances human activity comprehension and supports various downstream visual tasks. However, previous
models often assume that humans interact with rigid objects
using only a few body parts, constraining their applicability.
In this paper, we address the intricate challenge of Full-Body
Articulated Human-Object Interaction (f-AHOI), where complete human bodies interact with articulated objects having
interconnected movable joints. We introduce CHAIRS, an
extensive motion-captured f-AHOI dataset comprising 17.3
hours of diverse interactions involving 46 participants and
81 articulated as well as rigid sittable objects. The CHAIRS
provides 3D meshes of both humans and articulated objects throughout the interactive sequences, offering realistic
and physically plausible full-body interactions. We demonstrate the utility of CHAIRS through object pose estimation.
Leveraging the geometric relationships inherent in HOI, we
propose a pioneering model that employs human pose estima-

1. Introduction
In the realm of computer vision and robotics, the
fundamental comprehension of Human-Object Interaction
(HOI) [30, 31, 64, 62] lies at the core of dissecting intricate human activities. This paper embarks on unraveling the
complex challenge of Full-Body Articulated Human-Object
1
9365

