This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dancing in the Dark: A Benchmark towards General Low-light Video
Enhancement
Huiyuan Fu1 , Wenkai Zheng1 , Xicong Wang1 , Jiaxuan Wang1 , Heng Zhang2 , Huadong Ma1
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 2 Xiaomi
{fhy, ciki, wangxc, 2018213169, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn, zhangheng8@xiaomi.com

Abstract
Low-light video enhancement is a challenging task with
broad applications. However, current research in this area
is limited by the lack of high-quality benchmark datasets. To
address this issue, we design a camera system and collect
a high-quality low-light video dataset with multiple exposures and cameras. Our dataset provides dynamic video
pairs with pronounced camera motion and strict spatial
alignment. To achieve general low-light video enhancement, we also propose a novel Retinex-based method named
Light Adjustable Network (LAN). LAN iteratively reﬁnes
the illumination and adaptively adjusts it under varying
lighting conditions, leading to visually appealing results
even in diverse real-world scenarios. The extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our low-light video
dataset and enhancement method. Our dataset is available
at https://github.com/ciki000/DID.

1. Introduction
Low-light video enhancement is a crucial task in computer vision with a wide range of applications, such as
surveillance, self-driving cars, and consumer electronics. It
aims to improve the visibility and visual quality of videos
captured in low-light conditions, which typically suffer
from low brightness, low contrast, severe noise, and blur.
Despite signiﬁcant advances in this area, low-light video enhancement remains a challenging problem due to the complex and variable nature of low-light environments.
Recent advances in deep learning methods [14, 2, 9,
20, 4] have shown promising results in low-light video enhancement. However, the performance of deep learningbased methods heavily relies on the quality of the training dataset. Capturing high-quality spatially-aligned video
pairs of dynamic scenes is particularly challenging, as it requires the camera to capture a low-light video and a normallight video of the same scene with identical motion. As a
result, existing low-light video datasets have certain limi-

SDSDNet [20] with SDSD

LAN with SDSD

SDSDNet [20] with DID

LAN with DID

Figure 1: Visual comparison on a low-light video captured
by an iPhone 14 Pro.
tations. For instance, SIDGAN [19] is a synthetic dataset
that lacks real-world variability, and SMID [2] is a static
video dataset. While SDSD [20] collected paired low-light
videos of real-world scenes, the dataset has some limitations, including a restricted range of camera motion, suboptimal spatial alignment, and inconsistent frames across
some scenes. Therefore, building a high-quality low-light
video dataset is still a challenging task.
To collect a high-quality low-light video dataset, we design a camera system to capture spatially aligned dynamic
video pairs. We build a large-scale paired low-light video
dataset named DID, which means “Dancing in the Dark”.
Compared to previous low-light video datasets, our dataset
contains a more diverse set of real-world scenes, larger camera motion, and more accurate spatial alignment. Moreover,
our dataset is captured by multiple cameras under varying
lighting conditions, which enhances its generalizability.
We propose a Light Adjustable Network (LAN) based
on the Retinex theory [10] for general low-light video enhancement. LAN iteratively reﬁnes the illumination components to generate enhanced results of different luminance.
Our method adapts to different scenes by adaptively selecting the magnitude of the light enhancement and can also
be manually adjusted to change the illumination of the results. Thus, our method exhibits good generalization and

12877

