This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

To Adapt or Not to Adapt?
Real-Time Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation
Marc Botet Colomer∗ 1,2
Pier Luigi Dovesi∗ 3 †
4
Theodoros Panagiotakopoulos
Joao Frederico Carvalho1
Linus Härenstam-Nielsen5,6
Hossein Azizpour2
Hedvig Kjellström2,3
Daniel Cremers5,6,7
Matteo Poggi8
1

2
3
Univrses
KTH
Silo AI
6
Munich Center for Machine Learning

4

5
King
Technical University of Munich
7
8
University of Oxford
University of Bologna

https://marcbotet.github.io/hamlet-web/

RGB heavy rain (200mm)

CoTTA

OnDA

CoTTA real-time

HAMLET

No Adaptation

0.6 FPS

1.3 FPS

27 FPS

29 FPS

48 FPS

Figure 1. Real-time adaptation with HAMLET. Online adaptation to continuous and unforeseeable domain shifts is hard and computationally expensive. HAMLET can deal with it at almost 30FPS outperforming much slower online methods – e.g. OnDA and CoTTA.

Abstract

75 (F)

50 (F)

CoTTA

100 (F)

The goal of Online Domain Adaptation for semantic segmentation is to handle unforeseeable domain changes that
occur during deployment, like sudden weather events. However, the high computational costs associated with bruteforce adaptation make this paradigm unfeasible for realworld applications. In this paper we propose HAMLET, a
Hardware-Aware Modular Least Expensive Training framework for real-time domain adaptation. Our approach includes a hardware-aware back-propagation orchestration
agent (HAMT) and a dedicated domain-shift detector that
enables active control over when and how the model is
adapted (LT). Thanks to these advancements, our approach
is capable of performing semantic segmentation while simultaneously adapting at more than 29FPS on a single
consumer-grade GPU. Our framework’s encouraging accuracy and speed trade-off is demonstrated on OnDA and
SHIFT benchmarks through experimental results.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims at classifying an image
at a pixel level, based on the local and global context,
to enable a higher level of understanding of the depicted

Tent
25 (F)

MiT-B1 (no adapt)
Ours

200 (F)

30

40

50

60

70

clear (F)
80

100 (B)
clear (B)
75 (B)
50 (B)

25 (B)

Figure 2: Online adaptation methods on the Increasing
Storm. We plot mIoUs achieved on single domains. Colors
from colder to warmer encode slower to faster methods.
Loading [MathJax]/extensions/MathMenu.js

scene. In recent years, deep learning has become the dominant paradigm to tackle this task effectively employing
CNNs [5, 69, 4] or, more recently, transformers [65], at the
expense of requiring large quantities of annotated images
for training. Specifically, annotating for this task needs perpixel labeling, which is an expensive and time-consuming
task, severely limiting the availability of training data.
The use of simulations and graphics engines [42] to
generate annotated frames enabled a marked decrease in
the time and cost necessary to gather labeled data thanks
∗ Joint first authorship

16548

† Part of the work done while at Univrses

