This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SLAN: Self-Locator Aided Network for Vision-Language Understanding
Jiang-Tian Zhai1 * Qi Zhang2 * Tong Wu2 Xing-Yu Chen2 Jiang-Jiang Liu1† Ming-Ming Cheng1†
1
2
VCIP, CS, Nankai University
Tencent Youtu Lab
{jtzhai30,j04.liu}@gmail.com, townswu@tencent.com, cmm@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning fine-grained interplay between vision and language contributes to a more accurate understanding for
Vision-Language tasks. However, it remains challenging to
extract key image regions according to the texts for semantic
alignments. Most existing works are either limited by textagnostic and redundant regions obtained with the frozen region proposal module, or failing to scale further due to their
heavy reliance on scarce grounding (gold) data to pre-train
detectors. To solve these problems, we propose Self-Locator
Aided Network (SLAN) for vision-language understanding
tasks without any extra gold data. SLAN consists of a region filter and a region adaptor to localize regions of interest conditioned on different texts. By aggregating visionlanguage information, the region filter selects key regions
and the region adaptor updates their coordinates with text
guidance. With detailed region-word alignments, SLAN can
be easily generalized to many downstream tasks. It achieves
fairly competitive results on five vision-language understanding tasks (e.g., 85.7% and 69.2% on COCO image-totext and text-to-image retrieval, surpassing previous SOTA
methods). SLAN also demonstrates strong zero-shot and
fine-tuned transferability to two localization tasks. The
code is available at https://github.com/scok30/
SLAN .

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed growing interest in exploring relationships between vision and language modalities. A wide range of applications have been boosted
by its rapid development, such as multi-modal search engines [3, 7, 12] and recommender systems [6, 34, 35]. It motivates researchers to find semantic correspondence between
two modalities and bridging their visual-semantic discrepancy. Some earlier works [14,16,24,31] focused on learning
joint embeddings for the two modalities, while more recent
* Indicates equal contributions. This work was done when J.T. Zhai and
J.J. Liu were interning at Tencent Youtu Lab.
† J.J. Liu and M.M. Cheng are the corresponding authors.

A person is flying in the air.

(a) Image-text Retrieval

A teddy bear
on top of a
phone.

(b) Image Caption
A person in green cloth is on a
bike.

(c) Object Detection
(d) Phrase Grounding
Figure 1. Visualization on four different tasks. We visualize the
activation map for text-to-image retrieval task in (a). As for the
caption task in (b), we visualize regions selected by our model.
Besides vision-language understanding task, SLAN can transfer to
localization tasks, shown in (c) and (d), and we list the confidence
score for each region.

ones [17,25,47,48] have turned to considering latent visionlanguage alignments at the level of regions and words.
In order to achieve fine-grained vision-language alignments, some works [20, 21, 26] use object detectors to extract key regions in images. Treated as black boxes, the detectors only support for fixed vocabulary object detection.
Meanwhile, the extracted regions cannot adapt to different
text information due to the freezing parameters of the detectors. To alleviates the problem, VinVL [47] applies a
pre-trained object detector with more than 2000 classes and
attributes to enrich local visual representations. However,
the extended label set still limits the perceptive capability
of object detectors for vision-language understanding compared to free-form text from real-world scenes.
Recently, more works have attempted to apply learnable region locators for vision-language tasks, which extract regions of interest conditioned on different texts.

21949

