This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MixSpeech: Cross-Modality Self-Learning with Audio-Visual Stream Mixup
for Visual Speech Translation and Recognition
Xize Cheng*, Tao Jin* , Rongjie Huang* , Linjun Li
Wang Lin , Zehan Wang , Ye Wang , Huadai Liu , Aoxiong Yin , Zhou Zhao†
Zhejiang University
{chengxize,jint zju,rongjiehuang,zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-media communications facilitate global interaction among people. However, despite researchers exploring
cross-lingual translation techniques such as machine translation and audio speech translation to overcome language
barriers, there is still a shortage of cross-lingual studies on
visual speech. This lack of research is mainly due to the absence of datasets containing visual speech and translated
text pairs. In this paper, we present AVMuST-TED, the first
dataset for Audio-Visual Multilingual Speech Translation,
derived from TED talks. Nonetheless, visual speech is not
as distinguishable as audio speech, making it difficult to develop a mapping from source speech phonemes to the target
language text. To address this issue, we propose MixSpeech,
a cross-modality self-learning framework that utilizes audio speech to regularize the training of visual speech tasks.
To further minimize the cross-modality gap and its impact
on knowledge transfer, we suggest adopting mixed speech,
which is created by interpolating audio and visual streams,
along with a curriculum learning strategy to adjust the mixing ratio as needed. MixSpeech enhances speech translation in noisy environments, improving BLEU scores for four
languages on AVMuST-TED by +1.4 to +4.2. Moreover,
it achieves state-of-the-art performance in lip reading on
CMLR (11.1%), LRS2 (25.5%), and LRS3 (28.0%).

1. Introduction
Multi-media techniques, including Audio-Visual Speech
Recognition (AVSR) [4, 1, 2, 53], Audio-Visual Speech
Translation (AVST) [8, 38, 61], and Audio-Visual Speech
Generation (AVSG) [48, 32, 24], are commonly employed
in various online communication scenarios, such as conferences, education, and healthcare. As a tool for ultra-remote
communication, many online interactions involve multiple
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Diagram of speech tasks. Audio speech and visual
speech are paired parallel speech streams which can be employed
for speech recognition and speech translation. However, only LipTranslation remains unexplored.

languages, prompting the need for addressing cross-lingual
challenges. Several works have attempted to tackle these
challenges, including Machine Translation (MT) [9, 37, 15]
for text utterance, Speech Translation (ST) [58, 19] for
audio utterance, and Speech-to-Speech Translation (S2ST)
[58, 19, 17, 33, 29] for simultaneous interpretation. However, research on cross-lingual visual speech is still limited, as illustrated in Figure 1. As an essential component of multi-media speech, visual speech can be combined
with audio to enhance the recognition and understanding of
speech content as audio-visual speech [1, 2, 54], and is the
unique resource for speech content understanding in audiodisabled scenarios [36].
Visual speech translation has never been studied, mainly
for the lack of visual speech datasets with translated texts in
different languages. The few remaining works [57, 60, 44]
also cannot be quantitatively verified for this reason, making them unconvincing. The available visual speech corpus
is often very scarce compared to audio speech owing to the
high demands of visual speech for model training, which requires mostly-frontal and high-resolution videos with a sufficiently high frame rate, such that motions around the lip
area are clearly captured [23]. In this paper, we propose the

15735

