This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-Supervised Learning via Weight-aware Distillation under Class
Distribution Mismatch
Pan Du1,2 , Suyun Zhao1,2,* , Zisen Sheng1, 2 , Cuiping Li1,2 , Hong Chen1,2
Key Lab of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering of MOE Renmin University of China1
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China2
{du pan,shengzisen}@163.com, {zhaosuyun, zisen, licuiping, chong}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) under class distribution mismatch aims to tackle a challenging problem wherein
unlabeled data contain lots of unknown categories unseen
in the labeled ones. In such mismatch scenarios, traditional SSL suffers severe performance damage due to the
harmful invasion of the instances with unknown categories
into the target classifier. In this study, by strict mathematical reasoning, we reveal that the SSL error under class
distribution mismatch is composed of pseudo-labeling error and invasion error, both of which jointly bound the
SSL population risk. To alleviate the SSL error, we propose a robust SSL framework called Weight-Aware Distillation (WAD) that, by weights, selectively transfers knowledge beneficial to the target task from unsupervised contrastive representation to the target classifier. Specifically,
WAD captures adaptive weights and high-quality pseudolabels to target instances by exploring point mutual information (PMI) in representation space to maximize the role
of unlabeled data and filter unknown categories. Theoretically, we prove that WAD has a tight upper bound of
population risk under class distribution mismatch. Experimentally, extensive results demonstrate that WAD outperforms five state-of-the-art SSL approaches and one standard baseline on two benchmark datasets, CIFAR10 and
CIFAR100, and an artificial cross-dataset. The code is
available at https://github.com/RUC-DWBI-ML/
research/tree/main/WAD-master.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success in fully-supervised learning tasks. However,
sufficient labeled data are usually unavailable in real applications due to the expensive annotation cost or even
domain-specific knowledge required [8, 11, 12, 13]. Semi*Corresponding Author

Labeled data

Unlabeled data

cat

target categories

dog

unknown categories

Figure 1. Example of class distribution mismatch. The unlabeled
data contains categories that are unseen in labeled ones.

supervised learning (SSL), as a powerful weakly-supervised
technique, provides an effective way to improve DNNs by
exploiting massive unlabeled data, and then it weakens the
demand for human annotation [9, 14, 24, 34]. Generally,
traditional SSL approaches assume that the labeled and unlabeled instances share the same class distribution, i.e., they
come from identical categories. However, in real scenarios,
this assumption hardly holds as unlabeled data inevitably
contains lots of categories unseen in labeled ones. For
instance, if unlabeled data are collected from the internet
using keywords “cat” and “dog” (target categories), they
may contain instances unrelated to these categories, such
as “deer,” “horse,” or “airplane”(unknown categories), as
shown in Figure 1. Similar scenarios occur in medical diagnoses [11, 15] and house annotations of remote-sensing
images [12, 13]. SSL in such mismatch scenarios is called
SSL under class distribution mismatch [12, 15].
Under class distribution mismatch, some SSL approaches [8, 11, 15, 19, 37] have been proposed. Usually,
most of them exploit pseudo-labeling or consistency regularization to expand the labeled pool, as well as filter instances with unknown categories by weights, just as shown
in Figure 2. UASD [11] and T2T [19] filter out the instances
with unknown categories by leveraging a hard weight, i.e., a

16410

