This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DLGSANet: Lightweight Dynamic Local and Global Self-Attention Network
for Image Super-Resolution
Xiang Li, Jiangxin Dong, Jinhui Tang*, and Jinshan Pan∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Abstract

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to find a solution to the issue of reconstructing a high-resolution image
from a low-resolution one so that the high-resolution image
can be better displayed on high-definition devices. In order
to produce high-resolution images, classical approaches,
e.g., bicubic and bilinear, employ interpolation processes
* Corresponding author

27.2
27.1

PSNR (dB)

We propose an effective lightweight dynamic local and
global self-attention network (DLGSANet) to solve image
super-resolution. Our method explores the properties of
Transformers while having low computational costs. Motivated by the network designs of Transformers, we develop a
simple yet effective multi-head dynamic local self-attention
(MHDLSA) module to extract local features efficiently. In
addition, we note that existing Transformers usually explore
all similarities of the tokens between the queries and keys
for the feature aggregation. However, using all the similarities does not effectively facilitate the high-resolution image reconstruction as not all the tokens from the queries
are relevant to those in keys. To overcome this problem, we
develop a sparse global self-attention (SparseGSA) module
to select the most useful similarity values so that the most
useful global features can be better utilized for image reconstruction. We develop a hybrid dynamic-Transformer
block (HDTB) that integrates the MHDLSA and SparseGSA
for both local and global feature exploration. To ease the
network training, we formulate the HDTBs into a residual
hybrid dynamic-Transformer group (RHDTG). By embedding the RHDTGs into an end-to-end trainable network, we
show that the proposed method has fewer network parameters and lower computational costs while achieving competitive performance against state-of-the-art ones in terms
of accuracy. More information is available at https:
//neonleexiang.github.io/DLGSANet/.

27.3

27.0
26.9
26.8
26.7
26.6
26.50

PSNR vs. FLOPs vs. Params
DLGSANet (Ours)
ELAN
SwinIR
NLSA

RCAN

OISR

SAN
RDN

HAN

EDSR

500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500

FLOPs (G)

Figure 1. Image super-resolution comparisons (×4) in terms of accuracy, network parameters, and floating point operations (FLOPs)
from the Urban100 dataset. The area of each circle denotes the
number of network parameters. Our model (DLGSANet) achieves
comparable performance while having fewer network parameters
(< 5M) and lower FLOPs.

to complement the surrounding pixel values. Convolutional neural network (CNN)-based approaches such as
[7, 8, 15, 21, 33] tackle the image super-resolution challenge, generating better super-resolved images than those
of conventional approaches. These CNN-based approaches
have greatly advanced the progress of SISR.
Furthermore, several follow-up studies, such as [26, 27,
11], progressively start to develop larger and deeper CNN
models for better learning capacity. Although the quality
of the super-resolved images is largely improved, the computational costs of those approaches is quite expensive due
to the large number of network parameters and calculations
(e.g., more than 60M in network parameters and 3000G in
FLOPs), which limits their real-world applications. Thus,
there is a great need to develop a lightweight and efficient
model to solve SISR.
As Vision Transformers (ViTs) [9] can model global
contexts while having fewer network parameters, a recent
method [4] applies them to SISR and achieves better results
12792

