This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NerfAcc: Efficient Sampling Accelerates NeRFs
Ruilong Li
UC Berkeley

Hang Gao
UC Berkeley

Matthew Tancik
UC Berkeley

Angjoo Kanazawa
UC Berkeley

ruilongli@berkeley.edu

hangg@berkeley.edu

tancik@berkeley.edu

kanazawa@berkeley.edu

Efficient Sampling
pip install nerfacc
Training Speedup

NeRF

TensoRF

Static NeRFs

Instant-NGP

T-NeRF

TiNeuVox

Dynamic NeRFs

K-Planes

BARF

Cam Opt. NeRFs

Figure 1: NerfAcc Toolbox. Our proposed toolbox, NerfAcc, integrates advanced efficient sampling techniques that lead to
significant speedups in training various recent NeRF papers with minimal modifications to existing codebases.

Abstract
Optimizing and rendering Neural Radiance Fields
is computationally expensive due to the vast number of
samples required by volume rendering. Recent works
have included alternative sampling approaches to help
accelerate their methods, however, they are often not
the focus of the work. In this paper, we investigate and
compare multiple sampling approaches and demonstrate
that improved sampling is generally applicable across NeRF
variants under an unified concept of transmittance estimator.
To facilitate future experiments, we develop NerfAcc, a
Python toolbox that provides flexible APIs for incorporating
advanced sampling methods into NeRF related methods. We
demonstrate its flexibility by showing that it can reduce the
training time of several recent NeRF methods by 1.5× to
20× with minimal modifications to the existing codebase.
Additionally, highly customized NeRFs, such as Instant-NGP,
can be implemented in native PyTorch using NerfAcc. Our
code are open-sourced at https://www.nerfacc.com.

1. Introduction
Neural volume rendering has revolutionized the inverse rendering problem, with the Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF) [16] being a key innovation. The continuous radiance field representation allows for rendering novel views of
a scene from any camera position. However, the optimization of a NeRF can be computationally expensive due to the
neural representation of radiance field and the large number
of samples required by volume rendering. These challenges
have limited practical applications of NeRF-based optimization and rendering.
Several recent works have successfully reduced the computational cost of neural volume rendering by proposing
more efficient radiance field representations [17, 35, 36, 4,
24, 7]. While there are differences in the specific radiance
field representations and their applications, most of these
methods share a similar volume rendering pipeline which
involves creating samples along the ray and accumulating
them through alpha-composition.
However, compared to the considerable efforts focused on
developing efficient radiance field representations, there has

18537

