This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WaveNeRF: Wavelet-based Generalizable Neural Radiance Fields
Muyu Xu1 Fangneng Zhan2 Jiahui Zhang1 Yingchen Yu1
Xiaoqin Zhang3 Christian Theobalt2 Ling Shao4 Shijian Lu1
1

Nanyang Technological University
3

Wenzhou University

4

2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

UCAS-Terminus AI Lab, UCAS

Abstract
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has shown impressive
performance in novel view synthesis via implicit scene representation. However, it usually suffers from poor scalability as requiring densely sampled images for each new
scene. Several studies have attempted to mitigate this
problem by integrating Multi-View Stereo (MVS) technique
into NeRF while they still entail a cumbersome ﬁne-tuning
process for new scenes. Notably, the rendering quality will drop severely without this ﬁne-tuning process and
the errors mainly appear around the high-frequency features. In the light of this observation, we design WaveNeRF, which integrates wavelet frequency decomposition into
MVS and NeRF to achieve generalizable yet high-quality
synthesis without any per-scene optimization. To preserve high-frequency information when generating 3D feature volumes, WaveNeRF builds Multi-View Stereo in the
Wavelet domain by integrating the discrete wavelet transform into the classical cascade MVS, which disentangles
high-frequency information explicitly. With that, disentangled frequency features can be injected into classic NeRF
via a novel hybrid neural renderer to yield faithful highfrequency details, and an intuitive frequency-guided sampling strategy can be designed to suppress artifacts around
high-frequency regions. Extensive experiments over three
widely studied benchmarks show that WaveNeRF achieves
superior generalizable radiance ﬁeld modeling when only
given three images as input.

1. Introduction
Rendering novel views from a set of posed scene images has been studied for years in the ﬁelds of computer
vision and graphics. With the emergence of implicit neural representation, neural radiance ﬁeld (NeRF)[25] and its
variants[21, 23] have recently achieved very impressive performance in novel view synthesis with superb multi-view
* Shijian Lu is the corresponding author.

18195

consistency. However, most existing works fall short in
model scalability by requiring a per-scene optimization process with densely sampled multi-view images for training.
To avoid the cumbersome process of training from
scratch for new scenes, a popular line of generalizable
NeRF [3, 37, 32, 34, 13] introduces a pipeline that ﬁrst
trains a base model on the training data and then conducts
ﬁne-tuning for each new scene, which improves the scalability and shortens the per-scene training process. Their
base models often extract features from the source views
and then inject the features into a neural radiance ﬁeld. Several previous studies [37, 32] directly use CNN networks
to extract features while recent generalizable NeRF models [3, 34, 13] resort to Multi-View Stereo (MVS) technique
to warp 2D source feature maps into 3D features planes,
yielding better performance than merely using CNN networks. However, per-scene ﬁne-tuning still entails a fair
number of posed training images that are often challenging
to collect in various real-world tasks. On the other hand,
removing the per-scene ﬁne-tuning will incur a signiﬁcant
performance drop with undesired artifacts and poor detail.
Notably, we intriguingly observe that the rendering error
mainly lies around image regions with rich high-frequency
information as illustrated in Fig. 1. The phenomenon of losing high-frequency detail is largely attributed to the fact that
most existing generalizable NeRFs conduct down-sampling
operations at the feature extraction stage of their pipeline,
i.e., the CNN networks adopted in [37, 32] or the MVS
module adopted in [3, 34, 13].
In the light of the aforementioned observation,
we present Wavelets-based Neural Radiance Fields
(WaveNeRF) which incorporates explicit high-frequency
information into the training process and thus obviates the
per-scene ﬁne-tuning under the generalizable and few-shot
setting. Speciﬁcally, with MVS technique to construct 3D
feature volumes which are converted to model NeRF in
the spatial domain, we further design a Wavelet MultiView Stereo (WMVS) to incorporate scene wavelet coefﬁcients into the MVS to achieve frequency-domain modeling. Distinct from other frequency transformations like

