This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalizing Event-Based Motion Deblurring in Real-World Scenarios
Xiang Zhang1 , Lei Yu1B , Wen Yang1 , Jianzhuang Liu2 , Gui-Song Xia1
1
Wuhan University 2 Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology
{xiangz, ly.wd, yangwen, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn, jz.liu@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Event-based motion deblurring has shown promising results by exploiting low-latency events. However, current
approaches are limited in their practical usage, as they assume the same spatial resolution of inputs and specific blurriness distributions. This work addresses these limitations
and aims to generalize the performance of event-based deblurring in real-world scenarios. We propose a scale-aware
network that allows flexible input spatial scales and enables learning from different temporal scales of motion blur.
A two-stage self-supervised learning scheme is then developed to fit real-world data distribution. By utilizing the relativity of blurriness, our approach efficiently ensures the restored brightness and structure of latent images and further
generalizes deblurring performance to handle varying spatial and temporal scales of motion blur in a self-distillation
manner. Our method is extensively evaluated, demonstrating remarkable performance, and we also introduce a realworld dataset consisting of multi-scale blurry frames and
events to facilitate research in event-based deblurring.

Multimedia Material
The Multi-Scale Real-world Blurry Dataset (MS-RBD)
and our Pytorch implementation are available at: https:
//github.com/XiangZ-0/GEM.

1. Introduction
Due to the fixed exposure time of frame-based cameras, motion blur often occurs in scenes with dynamic targets or camera ego-motion, degrading the quality of the acquired images [15, 33]. Conventional motion deblurring approaches attempt to resolve this by exploiting deconvolution
and blur kernel estimation techniques [30, 16], and recent
research further improves the deblurring performance with
the advanced deep-learning methods [12, 36]. However, traB Corresponding author

The research was partially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grants 62271354 and 61871297.

Figure 1: An illustrative example of motion deblurring via
the state-of-the-art algorithm Motion-ETR [36] and our proposed method, which is trained on HR blurry frames and LR
events in a self-supervised manner and can generalize to the
inputs at different temporal and spatial scales.

ditional frame-based methods usually assume specific motion patterns, e.g., linear or quadratic motion trajectory, for
blurry images and thus often face challenges in real-world
scenarios with complex non-uniform motions. In addition,
due to the motion ambiguity and texture erasure issues in
blurry images [29, 35], frame-based approaches often struggle to extract the precise motion and restore the accurate
latent images from severely blurred frames.
The advent of event cameras poses a paradigm shift in
visual perception and information acquisition, benefiting a
wide variety of applications [17, 6, 22, 34, 10, 37, 32, 7,
31]. For motion deblurring tasks, the microsecond-level
low latency of events enables almost continuous observation of dynamic scenes and alleviates the motion ambiguity in blurry frames [21, 26]. Moreover, the brightness

10734

