This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The effectiveness of MAE pre-pretraining for billion-scale pretraining
Mannat Singh∗,† Quentin Duval∗ Kalyan Vasudev Alwala∗ Haoqi Fan
Vaibhav Aggarwal Aaron Adcock Armand Joulin Piotr Dollár
Christoph Feichtenhofer Ross Girshick Rohit Girdhar Ishan Misra
Meta AI

Abstract

SSv2
Accuracy

K400
Accuracy
75

This paper revisits the standard pretrain-then-ﬁnetune
paradigm used in computer vision for visual recognition
tasks. Typically, state-of-the-art foundation models are
pretrained using large scale (weakly) supervised datasets
with billions of images. We introduce an additional prepretraining stage that is simple and uses the self-supervised
MAE technique to initialize the model. While MAE has only
been shown to scale with the size of models, we ﬁnd that it
scales with the size of the training dataset as well. Thus, our
MAE-based pre-pretraining scales with both model and data
size making it applicable for training foundation models.
Pre-pretraining consistently improves both the model convergence and the downstream transfer performance across
a range of model scales (millions to billions of parameters),
and dataset sizes (millions to billions of images). We measure the effectiveness of pre-pretraining on 10 different visual
recognition tasks spanning image classiﬁcation, video recognition, object detection, low-shot classiﬁcation and zero-shot
recognition. Our largest model achieves new state-of-theart results on iNaturalist-18 (91.3%), 1-shot ImageNet-1k
(62.1%), and zero-shot transfer on Food-101 (96.2%). Our
study reveals that model initialization plays a signiﬁcant role,
even for web-scale pretraining with billions of images.

1. Introduction
The pretrain-then-ﬁnetune paradigm in visual recognition has enabled high performance visual recognition
models across a range of tasks such as image classiﬁcation [52, 59, 70], video action recognition [25, 27, 28], object
detection [11, 89], 3D etc. Typically, pretraining consists of
training a model using a pretraining task on large scale data.
The resulting pretrained models learn general purpose visual
representations that can be used for a range of target tasks,
often with limited labeled data, by transfer learning.
In this paper, we show that an initial stage of pre∗ Equal technical contribution. † Project Lead.

COCO
APbox

58

86

71

89

82

54

LVIS 50
APbox

85
50
42
58

46

67 78

71 71

81
81
78

85

62

iNat18
5-Shot

89

IN1k
Accuracy

82
75

66

79

IN1k
5-Shot

iNat18
Accuracy

75

86

79

IN1k
Zero Shot

IN1k
Linear
MAE→WSP
WSP
MAE

Figure 1: MAE pre-pretraining improves performance. Transfer performance of a ViT-L architecture trained with self-supervised
pretraining (MAE), weakly supervised pretraining on billions of images (WSP), and our pre-pretraining (MAE→WSP) that initializes
the model with MAE and then pretrains with WSP. Pre-pretraining
consistently improves performance.

pretraining before the standard pretraining task can improve vision models across a variety of different tasks. Our
method combines two common pretraining tasks in vision:
(1) weakly supervised pretraining that uses weak, often noisy,
signals such as text or image hashtags as supervision, and
(2) self-supervised pretraining that only uses the data without additional supervision. Both forms of pretraining start
training with a randomly initialized model and have proven
effective at learning general purpose vision models. While
there have been attempts to combine both these forms of
pretraining [54, 69], they are typically used independently in
the pretrain-then-ﬁnetune two stage paradigm [23, 70, 84].
In this work we explore the combination of self- and
weakly-supervised learning in a simple pre-pretraining
framework, as follows. We ﬁrst begin with the Masked
Autoencoder (MAE) [33] self-supervised learning technique
to pre-pretrain vision models without using any labels. After

5484

