This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distributed bundle adjustment with block-based sparse matrix compression for
super large scale datasets
Maoteng Zheng
China University of Geosciences(Wuhan)

Nengcheng Chen
China University of Geosciences(Wuhan)

zhengmaoteng@cug.edu.cn

chennengcheng@cug.edu.cn

Junfeng Zhu
Mirauge3D Technology

Xiaoru Zeng
Mirauge3D Technology

Huanbin Qiu
Jiantong Surveying

jf zhu@smartmappingtek.com

xr zeng@smartmappingtek.com

mrqq18@hotmail.com

Yuyao Jiang
China University of Geosciences(Wuhan)

Xingyue Lu
China University of Geosciences(Wuhan)

yuyaojiang@cug.edu.cn

xingyuelu@cug.edu.cn

Hao Qu
Mirauge3D Technology Inc.
quhao@smartmappingtek.com

Abstract
We propose a distributed bundle adjustment (DBA)
method using the exact Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) algorithm for super large-scale datasets. Most of the existing
methods partition the global map to small ones and conduct
bundle adjustment in the submaps. In order to fit the parallel framework, they use approximate solutions instead of
the LM algorithm. However, those methods often give suboptimal results. Different from them, we utilize the exact LM
algorithm to conduct global bundle adjustment where the
formation of the reduced camera system (RCS) is actually
parallelized and executed in a distributed way. To store the
large RCS, we compress it with a block-based sparse matrix
compression format (BSMC), which fully exploits its block
feature. The BSMC format also enables the distributed storage and updating of the global RCS. The proposed method
is extensively evaluated and compared with the state-of-theart pipelines using both synthetic and real datasets. Preliminary results demonstrate the efficient memory usage and
vast scalability of the proposed method compared with the
baselines. For the first time, we conducted parallel bundle
adjustment using LM algorithm on a real datasets with 1.18
million images and a synthetic dataset with 10 million images (about 500 times that of the state-of-the-art LM-based
BA) on a distributed computing system.

1. Introduction
Bundle adjustment (BA) is a significant step for 3D reconstruction in both computer vision and photogrammetry
communities. Its main objective is to recover the camera
poses as well as the 3D points by minimizing the square sum
of the reprojection errors. This nonlinear optimization problem is an ancient subject, having been studied for decades.
Classic solutions such as Steepest descent, Gauss-Newton,
and Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) [16, 19] have been proposed and widely applied, and plenty of libraries have been
open sourced, such as Ceres [26], g2o [11], SBA [17], PBA
[27], MegBA [22], and so on. Among them, the LM algorithm is most widely supported. In a bundle adjustment,
the nonlinear system is firstly linearized at an initial guess,
which is a given prior, and then solved via direct inversion,
Cholesky decomposition, or preconditioned conjugate gradient (PCG) [5, 6].
The Hessian matrix in a linear system is usually reduced
by the Shur complement trick, forming a Reduced Camera
System (RCS) that is much smaller than the Hessian. As the
number of images increases, even the memory requirement
for an RCS is a challenging issue. The formation, storage
and inversion of the RCS gradually become the bottleneck
of the bundle adjustment for large-scale datasets. Some
scholars argue that BA is indivisible and hard to fit for parallel computing [30]. To solve this problem, they have turned
to finding approximate methods that are more suitable for

18152

