This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-View Active Fine-Grained Visual Recognition
Ruoyi Du1 , Wenqing Yu1 , Heqing Wang1 , Ting-En Lin2 , Dongliang Chang1 ,* Zhanyu Ma1
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
1
{duruoyi, yuwenqing, wangheqing, changdongliang, mazhanyu}@bupt.edu.cn,
2

sss950123@gmail.com

Abstract
Despite the remarkable progress of Fine-grained visual
classification (FGVC) with years of history, it is still limited
to recognizing 2D images. Recognizing objects in the physical world (i.e., 3D environment) poses a unique challenge
– discriminative information is not only present in visible
local regions but also in other unseen views. Therefore, in
addition to finding the distinguishable part from the current view, efficient and accurate recognition requires inferring the critical perspective with minimal glances. E.g., a
person might recognize a “Ford sedan” with a glance at
its side and then know that looking at the front can help
tell which model it is. In this paper, towards FGVC in
the real physical world, we put forward the problem of
multi-view active fine-grained visual recognition (MAFR)
and complete this study in three steps: (i) a multi-view, finegrained vehicle dataset is collected as the testbed, (ii) a
pilot experiment is designed to validate the need and research value of MAFR, (iii) a policy-gradient-based framework along with a dynamic exiting strategy is proposed
to achieve efficient recognition with active view selection.
Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms previous multi-view recognition
works and can extend existing state-of-the-art FGVC methods and advanced neural networks to become “FGVC experts” in the 3D environment. Our code is available at
https://github.com/PRIS-CV/MAFR.

1. Introduction
In the past two decades, fine-grained visual classification (FGVC) has made significant progress in recognizing
sub-categories of objects belonging to the same class. This
progress has been demonstrated in various domains, such
as recognizing cars [32, 57], aircraft [36], birds [50, 48],
and foods [39], with extensive outstanding works surpassing human experts in many application scenarios [34, 56,
* indicates the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Conventional FGVC versus Multi-view Active FGVC.
Conventional FGVC takes a single static image for inference,
which may omit the discriminative information. In contrast, Multiview FGVC takes a step further by predicting the potential discriminative view and fusing a sequence of visual information for
the final decision.

19, 53, 13, 4, 5, 16, 14]. However, the previous efforts
on FGVC have remained mainly limited to a single-viewbased paradigm, where only the visual content within a single static image is considered. This paradigm may be sufficient for coarse-grained classification where inter-class differences are easily captured, such as distinguishing a coupe
from other vehicles by its streamlined body, seductive engine, or headlamps. However, fine-grained classification
presents a different challenge where discriminative clues are
rare and often found in subtle structural differences that are
not easily captured by a single static view. For instance, to
distinguish between different Ford sedans, one can only rely
on subtle differences in the design of car headlights. Predictably, for single-view-based approaches, an image/view
without discriminative clues is completely indistinguishable
at the fine-grained level, fundamentally limiting the model’s
theoretical performance.
Factually, visual recognition is never limited to observing 2D environments and processing static images. Vision algorithms equipped by portal devices (e.g., smartphone, smart glasses, etc.) or embodied AI agents [18]
(e.g., intelligent robots) play the core roles during machine-

1568

