This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Source-free Depth for Object Pop-out
Zongwei Wu1,2,3
1 CVL, ETH Zurich

Danda Pani Paudel1,4 Deng-Ping Fan1 * Jingjing Wang5
Cédric Demonceaux2,6 Radu Timofte3 Luc Van Gool1,4

2 University of Burgundy, CNRS, ICB
4 INSAIT, Sofia University

5 AUST

3 Computer Vision Lab, CAIDAS & IFI, University of Wurzburg
6 University of Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, Loria

Abstract
Depth cues are known to be useful for visual perception. However, direct measurement of depth is often impracticable. Fortunately, though, modern learning-based
methods offer promising depth maps by inference in the
wild. In this work, we adapt such depth inference models
for object segmentation using the objects’ “pop-out” prior
in 3D. The “pop-out” is a simple composition prior that
assumes objects reside on the background surface. Such
compositional prior allows us to reason about objects in
the 3D space. More specifically, we adapt the inferred
depth maps such that objects can be localized using only
3D information. Such separation, however, requires knowledge about contact surface which we learn using the weak
supervision of the segmentation mask. Our intermediate
representation of contact surface, and thereby reasoning
about objects purely in 3D, allows us to better transfer
the depth knowledge into semantics. The proposed adaptation method uses only the depth model without needing the
source data used for training, making the learning process
efficient and practical. Our experiments on eight datasets
of two challenging tasks, namely salient object detection
and camouflaged object detection, consistently demonstrate
the benefit of our method in terms of both performance and
generalizability. The source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Zongwei97/PopNet.

1. Introduction
The 3D knowledge of the scene is long known to be
complementary to the task of visual perception [12, 16,
56, 67, 91]. Often in practice, though, visual perception
needs to be carried out using only 2D images. Given multiple images, 3D geometry may be recovered using the
structure-from-motion techniques [26, 41, 55, 86]. Such inversion, however, is not compatible when only a single image is available. Under such circumstances, image inversion
* Corresponding Author: Deng-Ping Fan (dengpfan@gmail.com)

Shuo Wang1

𝐂𝐨𝐧𝐭𝐚𝐜𝐭 𝐒𝐮𝐫𝐟𝐚𝐜𝐞

𝐎𝐛𝐣𝐞𝐜𝐭 𝐏𝐨𝐩-𝐨𝐮𝐭

𝐑𝐆𝐁 & 𝐒𝐨𝐮𝐫𝐜𝐞-𝐟𝐫𝐞𝐞 𝐃𝐞𝐩𝐭𝐡

𝐏𝐬𝐞𝐮𝐝𝐨 𝐒𝐞𝐦𝐚𝐧𝐭𝐢𝐜𝐬

Figure 1. Depth to semantics conversion using the object pop-out
prior. For input RGB and source-free depth pair, we learn contact
surface. The obtained contact surface is then used to separate objects and backgrounds to derive pseudo semantics for supervision.

to depth map is usually done using learning-based methods [13, 45, 50, 51, 65], which have shown unparalleled success in the recent years. Unfortunately, the learning-based
methods may not offer high-quality depth maps due to the
generalization deficiency across domains [68, 73].
Despite poor generalization, the knowledge gained in
one domain is shown to be useful in other close-by domains.
This utility is harnessed by performing the so-called domain
adaptation (DA) [2,3,6,53,61,89]. In fact, it has been shown
recently that DA methods can efficiently transfer knowledge
using only the prediction models, i.e., without requiring access to the data where the model is trained – also known as
the source-free domain adaptation (SDA) [25,28,39,71,77].
The SDA methods are of gripping interest due to their efficiency and privacy promises.
The most existing SDA methods make one or both of
these implicit assumptions: (a) a similar (as that of the
source) supervising task at the target [28, 75, 77]; (b) task
of discrete (and known) label space [27, 29, 36, 71]. The
former assumption not only makes the source and target
domains easier to compare but also potentially keeps the
two domains closer. The latter assumption allows performing SDA by self-training where the discrete labels facilitate
reasoning about the model’s confidence. The self-training
is then performed by boosting the confidence at the target
for some picked reliable examples.
11032

