This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Re:PolyWorld - A Graph Neural Network for Polygonal Scene Parsing
Stefano Zorzi
Graz University of Technology

Friedrich Fraundorfer
Graz University of Technology

stefano.zorzi@icg.tugraz.at

fraundorfer@icg.tugraz.at

Figure 1: PolyWorld Remastered (Re:PolyWorld) extracts local vertex and edge features from an intensity image, and embeds
global information about the scene by using an Edge-aware GNN. The connections between vertices are generated by solving
a differentiable optimal transport problem. By redefining the representation of the polygonal scene, this method becomes a
generalized approach that can be applied to a variety of tasks and problem settings.

Abstract
While most state-of-the-art instance segmentation methods produce pixel-wise segmentation masks, numerous applications demand precise vector polygons of detected objects instead of rasterized output. This paper proposes
Re:PolyWorld as a remastered and improved version of
PolyWorld, a neural network that extracts object vertices
from an image and connects them optimally to generate precise polygons. The objective of this work was to overcome
weaknesses and shortcomings of the original model, as well
as introducing an improved polygonal representation to obtain a general-purpose method for polygon extraction in images. The architecture has been redesigned to not only exploit vertex features, but to also make use of the visual appearance of edges. To this end, an edge-aware Graph Neural Network predicts the connection strength between each
pair of vertices, which is further used to compute the assignment by solving a differentiable optimal transport problem.
The proposed redefinition of the polygonal scene turns the
method into a powerful generalized approach that can be
applied to a large variety of tasks and problem settings,
such as building extraction, floorplan reconstruction and
even wireframe parsing. Re:PolyWorld not only outperforms the original model on building extraction in aerial
images, thanks to the proposed joint analysis of vertices and
edges, but also beats the state-of-the-art in multiple other
domains.

1. Introduction
The detection of polygonal objects and the generation of
vector annotations is an important topic in numerous computer vision applications, such as building extraction in airborne imagery, floorplan reconstruction, scene understanding, as well as wireframe parsing. In all these applications,
the visual quality of the final polygonization is a highly desired feature that modern machine learning approaches aim
to achieve. On one hand, vector annotations with redundant vertices often appear irregular, and exhibit artifacts or
curved corners. On the other hand, oversimplified polygons
are often not able to capture geometric details of the object.
In this paper, we propose Re:PolyWorld (Figure 1) as a
remastered version of PolyWorld [30], a neural network for
building detection and polygonization in airborne imagery.
The original model extracts positions and visual descriptors
of building corners using a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) and generates polygons by evaluating which connections between vertices are valid. This procedure identifies the optimal pairing of detected vertex descriptors, requiring each corner to be linked with its respective subsequent vertex in the polygon. Connections between polygon vertices can be represented by a permutation matrix
obtained as the solution of a linear sum assignment problem. PolyWorld is fast, accurate, end-to-end trained, and
generates high quality building polygons ready to be used
in cartographic applications. However, the permutational
representation of the scene is not applicable to other problem settings and applications, and the model only reasons

16762

