This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rosetta Neurons: Mining the Common Units in a Model Zoo
Amil Dravid∗
Northwestern

Yossi Gandelsman∗
UC Berkeley

Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

Assaf Shocher
UC Berkeley, Google

StyleGAN2

ResNet50

CLIP-RN

DINO-RN

DINO-ViT

MAE

Layer 9, Unit 9

Layer 1, Unit 46

Layer 2, Unit 655

Layer 2, Unit 297

Layer 0, Unit 131

Layer 1, Unit 2949

Layer 6, Unit 419

Layer 2, Unit 707

Layer 2, Unit 992

Layer 2, Unit 36

Layer 6, Unit 2006

Layer 7, Unit 725

Layer 5, Unit 56

Layer 2, Unit 156

Layer 2, Unit 984

Layer 2, Unit 560

Layer 8, Unit 1524

Layer 11, Unit 2126

Layer 6, Unit 117

Layer 2, Unit 986

Layer 2, Unit 7

Layer 2, Unit 218

Layer 10, Unit 2099

Layer 9, Unit 591

Activation Inversions

#1

#2

#3
Example Image

#4

Figure 1: Mining for “Rosetta Neurons.” Our findings demonstrate the existence of matching neurons across different models that
express a shared concept (such as object contours, object parts, and colors). These concepts emerge without any supervision or manual
annotations. We visualize the concepts with heatmaps and a novel inversion technique (two right columns).

Abstract
Do different neural networks, trained for various vision
tasks, share some common representations? In this paper,
we demonstrate the existence of common features we call
“Rosetta Neurons” across a range of models with different architectures, different tasks (generative and discriminative), and different types of supervision (class-supervised,
text-supervised, self-supervised). We present an algorithm
for mining a dictionary of Rosetta Neurons across several popular vision models: Class Supervised-ResNet50,
DINO-ResNet50, DINO-ViT, MAE, CLIP-ResNet50, BigGAN, StyleGAN-2, StyleGAN-XL. Our findings suggest that
certain visual concepts and structures are inherently embedded in the natural world and can be learned by different models regardless of the specific task or architecture,
and without the use of semantic labels. We can visualize
shared concepts directly due to generative models included
in our analysis. The Rosetta Neurons facilitate model-tomodel translation enabling various inversion-based manipulations, including cross-class alignments, shifting, zooming, and more, without the need for specialized training.
* Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
One of the key realizations of modern machine learning is that models trained on one task end up being useful
for many other, often unrelated, tasks. This is evidenced
by the success of backbone pretrained networks and selfsupervised training regimes. In computer vision, the prevailing theory is that neural network models trained for various vision tasks tend to share the same concepts and structures because they are inherently present in the visual world.
However, the precise nature of these shared elements and
the technical mechanisms that enable their transfer remain
unclear.
In this paper, we seek to identify and match units that
express similar concepts across different models. We call
them Rosetta 1 Neurons (see fig. 1). How do we find them,
considering it is likely that each model would express them
differently? Additionally, neural networks are usually overparameterized, which suggests that multiple neurons can
Project page, code and models: https://yossigandelsman.
github.io/rosetta_neurons
1 The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact, a large stone inscribed with the same text in three different languages. It was the key to
deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphic script. The original stone is on public
display at the British Museum in London.

1934

