This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DETRs with Collaborative Hybrid Assignments Training
Zhuofan Zong Guanglu Song
SenseTime Research

Yu Liu*

{zongzhuofan,liuyuisanai}@gmail.com
songguanglu@sensetime.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision, which requires us to localize the object and classify
its category. The seminal R-CNN families [11, 27, 14] and
* Corresponding author.

52
50

AP

In this paper, we provide the observation that too few
queries assigned as positive samples in DETR with oneto-one set matching leads to sparse supervision on the encoder’s output which considerably hurt the discriminative
feature learning of the encoder and vice visa for attention
learning in the decoder. To alleviate this, we present a novel
collaborative hybrid assignments training scheme, namely
Co-DETR, to learn more efficient and effective DETR-based
detectors from versatile label assignment manners. This
new training scheme can easily enhance the encoder’s
learning ability in end-to-end detectors by training the multiple parallel auxiliary heads supervised by one-to-many label assignments such as ATSS and Faster RCNN. In addition, we conduct extra customized positive queries by extracting the positive coordinates from these auxiliary heads
to improve the training efficiency of positive samples in the
decoder. In inference, these auxiliary heads are discarded
and thus our method introduces no additional parameters
and computational cost to the original detector while requiring no hand-crafted non-maximum suppression (NMS).
We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed approach on DETR variants, including
DAB-DETR, Deformable-DETR, and DINO-DeformableDETR. The state-of-the-art DINO-Deformable-DETR with
Swin-L can be improved from 58.5% to 59.5% AP on COCO
val. Surprisingly, incorporated with ViT-L backbone, we
achieve 66.0% AP on COCO test-dev and 67.9% AP on
LVIS val, outperforming previous methods by clear margins with much fewer model sizes. Codes are available at
https://github.com/Sense-X/Co-DETR.

Co-DETR
DINO-Deformable-DETR
H-Deformable-DETR
Deformable-DETR
DAB-DETR
DN-DETR
Faster-RCNN
HTC

54

48
46
44
42
0

20

40

60

Epoch

80

100

120

Figure 1: Co-DETR outperforms other methods with the
same ResNet-50 backbone by large margins on COCO val.
a series of variants [30, 43, 36] such as ATSS [40], RetinaNet [21], FCOS [31], and PAA [17] lead to the significant
breakthrough of object detection task. One-to-many label
assignment is the core scheme of them, where each groundtruth box is assigned to multiple coordinates in the detector’s output as the supervised target cooperated with proposals [11, 27], anchors [21] or window centers [31]. Despite
their promising performance, these detectors heavily rely
on many hand-designed components like a non-maximum
suppression procedure or anchor generation [1]. To conduct a more flexible end-to-end detector, DEtection TRansformer (DETR) [1] is proposed to view the object detection
as a set prediction problem and introduce the one-to-one set
matching scheme based on a transformer encoder-decoder
architecture. In this manner, each ground-truth box will
only be assigned to one specific query, and multiple handdesigned components that encode prior knowledge are no
longer needed. This approach introduces a flexible detection pipeline and encourages many DETR variants to further improve it. However, the performance of the vanilla
end-to-end object detector is still inferior to the traditional
detectors with one-to-many label assignments.

6748

