This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MUter: Machine Unlearning on Adversarially Trained Models
Junxu Liu1, *, Mingsheng Xue2, * , Jian Lou3,6,†, Xiaoyu Zhang4 , Li Xiong5 , Zhan Qin3,6
1

4

Renmin University of China 2 Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University 3 Zhejiang University
Xidian University 5 Emory University 6 ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center
junxu_liu@ruc.edu.cn

xuemingsheng@stu.xidian.edu.cn

xiaoyuzhang@xidian.edu.cn

lxiong@emory.edu

Abstract
Machine unlearning is an emerging task of removing
the influence of selected training datapoints from a trained
model upon data deletion requests, which echoes the widely
enforced data regulations mandating the Right to be Forgotten. Many unlearning methods have been proposed recently,
achieving significant efficiency gains over the naive baseline
of retraining from scratch. However, existing methods focus
exclusively on unlearning from standard training models and
do not apply to adversarial training models (ATMs) despite
their popularity as effective defenses against adversarial
examples. During adversarial training, the training data are
involved in not only an outer loop for minimizing the training
loss, but also an inner loop for generating the adversarial
perturbation. Such bi-level optimization greatly complicates
the influence measure for the data to be deleted and renders the unlearning more challenging than standard model
training with single-level optimization. This paper proposes
a new approach called MUter for unlearning from ATMs.
We derive a closed-form unlearning step underpinned by a
total Hessian-related data influence measure, while existing
methods can mis-capture the data influence associated with
the indirect Hessian part. We further alleviate the computational cost by introducing a series of approximations and
conversions to avoid the most computationally demanding
parts of Hessian inversions. The efficiency and effectiveness
of MUter have been validated through experiments on four
datasets using both linear and neural network models.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) models are increasingly applied
to a broad range of applications, accompanied by growing
concerns about their privacy and robustness issues. Both
issues are actively studied in recent years [45]. On the
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

4892

jian.lou@zju.edu.cn

qinzhan@zju.edu.cn

privacy side, model inversion attack [16] and membership
inference attack [51] reveal that the trained ML model contains sensitive information of its training data, which can
cause privacy loss for individuals contributing their data for
model training. On the robustness side, adversarial example attack is one of the most well-recognized robustness
attacks [24, 30, 39, 62]. It can easily fool an undefended
model, e.g., standard training model (STM), to misclassify
by a small adversarial perturbation on the input [9, 24, 39].
Many works focus either on the privacy [1, 35, 37, 42, 51]
or on the robustness aspect [9, 33, 38, 53–56, 66], few works
studied both. Yet, it is critical to consider privacy and robustness jointly [20, 27, 36, 41, 47, 48, 52] to build ML models
to simultaneously meet data privacy regulations and ensure
robustness against adversarial threats.
In this paper, we target a new joint privacy-robustness
problem to simultaneously meet emerging privacy regulations and ensure adversarial robustness of the model, which
has not been examined before: how to efficiently and effectively remove the influence of a training datapoint from an
adversarially trained model upon data deletion request?
The privacy need is driven by the widely enacted user
data regulations that enforce the Right to be Forgotten, for
example, the European Union’s GDPR [17], the California
Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), and Canada’s proposed Consumer Privacy Protection Act (CPPA). These regulations
mandate the deletion of personal data upon user requests and
can even include the deletion of models and algorithms derived from the user data, e.g., the Federal Trade Commission
[15]. Machine unlearning [5, 8] aims to obtain an updated
model with the influence of the target datapoint removed in
an effective and efficient way. That is, the updated model
should be similar to the model obtained by the computationally expensive retraining-from-scratch approach, while consuming less computation [21–23,26,31,43,44,58,60,61,65].
The robustness is achieved by the adversarial training
model (ATM) [3, 24, 30, 39, 59], which is a popular and effective defense for enhancing the model robustness against
adversarial examples by creating and incorporating adver-

