This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LU-NeRF: Scene and Pose Estimation by Synchronizing Local Unposed NeRFs
Zezhou Cheng1,2 * Carlos Esteves2 Varun Jampani2 Abhishek Kar2
Subhransu Maji1 Ameesh Makadia2
1
University of Massachusetts, Amherst 2 Google Research

Abstract
A critical obstacle preventing NeRF models from being
deployed broadly in the wild is their reliance on accurate
camera poses. Consequently, there is growing interest in
extending NeRF models to jointly optimize camera poses
and scene representation, which offers an alternative to offthe-shelf SfM pipelines which have well-understood failure
modes. Existing approaches for unposed NeRF operate under limiting assumptions, such as a prior pose distribution
or coarse pose initialization, making them less effective in a
general setting. In this work, we propose a novel approach,
LU-NeRF, that jointly estimates camera poses and neural
radiance fields with relaxed assumptions on pose configuration. Our approach operates in a local-to-global manner, where we first optimize over local subsets of the data,
dubbed “mini-scenes.” LU-NeRF estimates local pose and
geometry for this challenging few-shot task. The mini-scene
poses are brought into a global reference frame through a
robust pose synchronization step, where a final global optimization of pose and scene can be performed. We show
our LU-NeRF pipeline outperforms prior attempts at unposed NeRF without making restrictive assumptions on the
pose prior. This allows us to operate in the general SE(3)
pose setting, unlike the baselines. Our results also indicate our model can be complementary to feature-based SfM
pipelines as it compares favorably to COLMAP on lowtexture and low-resolution images.

1. Introduction
NeRF [34] was introduced as a powerful method to
tackle the problem of learning neural scene representations
and photorealistic view synthesis, and subsequent research
has focused on addressing its limitations to extend its applicability to a wider range of use cases (see [54, 59] for
surveys). One of the few remaining hurdles for view synthesis in the wild is the need for accurate localization. As
images captured in the wild have unknown poses, these ap* Work done during an internship at Google.

Website: https://zezhoucheng.github.io/lu-nerf/

proaches often use structure-from-motion (SfM) [48, 40] to
determine the camera poses. There is often no recourse
when SfM fails (see Fig. 7 for an example), and in fact,
even small inaccuracies in camera pose estimation can have
a dramatic impact on photorealism.
Few prior attempts have been made to reduce the reliance
on SfM by integrating pose estimation directly within the
NeRF framework. However, the problem is severely underconstrained (see Fig. 1) and current approaches make
additional assumptions to make the problem tractable.
For example, NeRf−− [56] focuses on pose estimation
in forward-facing configurations, BARF [29] initialization
must be close to the true poses, and GNeRF [32] assumes a
2D camera model (upright cameras on a hemisphere).
We propose an approach for jointly estimating the camera pose and scene representation from images from a single
scene while allowing for a more general camera configuration than previously possible. Conceptually, our approach
is organized in a local-to-global learning framework using
NeRFs. In the local processing stage we partition the scene
into overlapping subsets, each containing only a few images
(we call these subsets mini-scenes). Knowing images in a
mini-scene are mostly nearby is what makes the joint estimation of pose and scene better conditioned than performing the same task globally. In the global stage, the overlapping mini-scenes are registered in a common reference
frame through pose synchronization, followed by jointly refining all poses and learning the global scene representation.
This organization into mini-scenes requires learning
from a few local unposed images. Although methods exist
for few-shot novel view synthesis [60, 27, 38, 20, 12, 11],
and separately for optimizing unknown poses [29, 32, 56],
the combined setting presents new challenges. Our model
must reconcile the ambiguities prevalent in the local unposed setting – in particular the mirror symmetry ambiguity [39], where two distinct 3D scenes and camera configurations produce similar images under affine projection.
We introduce a Local Unposed NeRF (LU-NeRF) model
to address these challenges in a principled way. The information from the LU-NeRFs (estimated poses, confidences,
and mirror symmetry analysis) is used to register all cam-

18312

