This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MatrixCity: A Large-scale City Dataset
for City-scale Neural Rendering and Beyond
Yixuan Li1∗ , Lihan Jiang2∗ , Linning Xu1 , Yuanbo Xiangli1
Zhenzhi Wang1 , Dahua Lin1,2 , Bo Dai2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
ly122@ie.cuhk.edu.hk jianglihan@pjlab.org.cn
{xl020,xy019,wz122,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk daibo@pjlab.org.cn

(a)
(b)

(c)

Dynamic: Light, Weather and Human&Car Crowds

Multiple Properties: RGB, Depth, Normal, Diffuse, etc

Figure 1: An illustration of MatrixCity dataset’s small city. a) We collected high-quality large-scale city scene images for
a city-scale neural rendering benchmark from Unreal Engine 5, capturing various city environments from multiple viewing
angles. b) Our flexible environment control can collect data under dynamic environmental factors such as varying lighting
and weather conditions. c) Our developed platform also facilitates the extraction of additional properties, including depth
maps and normal maps. These features open a wide range of opportunities for future research in city-scale neural rendering.

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) and its subsequent variants have led to remarkable progress in neural rendering. While most of recent neural rendering works focus
on objects and small-scale scenes, developing neural rendering methods for city-scale scenes is of great potential
in many real-world applications. However, this line of research is impeded by the absence of a comprehensive and
high-quality dataset, yet collecting such a dataset over real
city-scale scenes is costly, sensitive, and technically infeasible. To this end, we build a large-scale, comprehensive, and
high-quality synthetic dataset for city-scale neural rendering researches. Leveraging the Unreal Engine 5 City Sample project, we developed a pipeline to easily collect aerial

and street city views, accompanied by ground-truth camera
poses and a range of additional data modalities. Flexible
controls on environmental factors like light, weather, human
and car crowd are also available in our pipeline, supporting the need of various tasks covering city-scale neural rendering and beyond. The resulting pilot dataset, MatrixCity,
contains 67k aerial images and 452k street images from two
city maps of total size 28km2 . On top of MatrixCity, a thorough benchmark is also conducted, which not only reveals
unique challenges of the task of city-scale neural rendering, but also highlights potential improvements for future
works. The dataset and code will be publicly available at
the project page: https://city-super.github.io/matrixcity/.

3205

