This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vision Transformer Adapters for Generalizable Multitask Learning
Deblina Bhattacharjee, Sabine Süsstrunk and Mathieu Salzmann
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Switzerland
{deblina.bhattacharjee, sabine.susstrunk, mathieu.salzmann}@epfl.ch

Abstract
We introduce the first multitasking vision transformer
adapters that learn generalizable task affinities which can
be applied to novel tasks and domains. Integrated into
an off-the-shelf vision transformer backbone, our adapters
can simultaneously solve multiple dense vision tasks in
a parameter-efficient manner, unlike existing multitasking
transformers that are parametrically expensive. In contrast to concurrent methods, we do not require retraining
or fine-tuning whenever a new task or domain is added.
We introduce a task-adapted attention mechanism within
our adapter framework that combines gradient-based task
similarities with attention-based ones. The learned task
affinities generalize to the following settings: zero-shot task
transfer, unsupervised domain adaptation, and generalization without fine-tuning to novel domains. We demonstrate
that our approach outperforms not only the existing convolutional neural network-based multitasking methods but
also the vision transformer-based ones. Our project page is
at https://ivrl.github.io/VTAGML.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, vision transformers [5, 15, 16,
26, 30, 57] have grown in popularity at an incredible pace.
They have now achieved state-of-the-art results, outperforming Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based methods not only in image classification [22, 23, 26] but also
in many dense prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation [11, 47, 59, 68], monocular depth estimation [40, 61],
and surface normal prediction [24, 62]. Therefore, utilizing the power of vision transformers in a unified framework
to simultaneously solve multiple tasks seems a natural way
forward. Nevertheless, only a few works [3, 7, 21, 35, 44]
have attempted this so far, and all of them rely on handcrafted transformer architecture designs. Specifically, IPT
and ST-MTL [7, 35] exploit a multi-head multi-tail architecture tailored to solve specific tasks; MulT [3] leverages a pairwise task attention strategy handcrafted to utilize surface normal prediction as reference task for dense

Figure 1: Motivation of our work. Unlike existing MTL
methods, our vision transformer adapters generalize to
novel tasks and domains.
predictions; and UniT [21] as well as Vid-MTL [44] use
a multimodal transformer architecture to achieve multiple pairwise task predictions across different modalities.
While these multitasking vision transformer-based methods [7, 3, 21, 35, 44] outperform their multitasking CNNbased counterparts [29, 31, 34, 45, 48, 52, 53, 58, 65, 66],
none of the existing vision transformer-based or CNNbased MTL methods can adapt to new tasks as well as to
novel domains. In fact, it was observed in the seminal work
of [66] and confirmed in subsequent MTL studies [3, 45, 65]
that the multitask affinities learned by existing MTL frameworks are not transferable or generalizable.
This raises the following question: Is there a way we can
learn transferable and generalizable task affinities such that
multitask affinities transfer to novel tasks and generalize
to novel domains, thereby allowing us to reuse an existing
network? To answer this, we introduce vision transformer
adapters for generalizable multitask learning and propose
an automated framework that can learn transferable and
generalizable task affinities which can adapt to new tasks
or domain representations in a parameter-efficient manner.
Additionally, unlike existing transformer-based handcrafted
MTL methods [7, 3, 21] that learn task affinities in a pairwise manner, our vision transformer adapters learn task
affinities in an automated way and across all the tasks.
To achieve this, we equip our vision adapters with three

19015

