This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Strivec: Sparse Tri-Vector Radiance Fields
Quankai Gao∗1
Qiangeng Xu∗1
1
University of Southern California

Hao Su2
Ulrich Neumann1
Zexiang Xu3
2
3
UC San Diego
Adobe Research

{quankaig,qiangenx,uneumann}@usc.edu

haosu@ucsd.edu

zexu@adobe.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Representing 3D scenes as radiance fields [22] has enabled photo-realistic rendering quality and emerged as a
popular design choice in 3D vision and graphics applications. While many methods [27, 42, 3] (following
NeRF [22]) purely use MLPs to represent neural fields, recent works, like TensoRF [6] and Instant-NGP [23], have
demonstrated the advantages of using shared global feature
encoding for radiance field modeling, in terms of speed,
compactness, and quality. However, these methods share
and assign neural features uniformly in a scene (with tensor factors or hash tables), assuming the scene content is
∗ Equal contribution.
Code and results: https://github.com/Zerg-Overmind/Strivec

TensoRF-VM-192

Reference

Ours-48

INGP

34

Ours-48
Ours-24
33

PSNR(dB)

We propose Strivec, a novel neural representation that
models a 3D scene as a radiance field with sparsely distributed and compactly factorized local tensor feature grids.
Our approach leverages tensor decomposition, following
the recent work TensoRF [6], to model the tensor grids. In
contrast to TensoRF which uses a global tensor and focuses
on their vector-matrix decomposition, we propose to utilize a cloud of local tensors and apply the classic CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition [4] to factorize each
tensor into triple vectors that express local feature distributions along spatial axes and compactly encode a local neural field. We also apply multi-scale tensor grids to discover
the geometry and appearance commonalities and exploit
spatial coherence with the tri-vector factorization at multiple local scales. The final radiance field properties are regressed by aggregating neural features from multiple local
tensors across all scales. Our tri-vector tensors are sparsely
distributed around the actual scene surface, discovered by a
fast coarse reconstruction, leveraging the sparsity of a 3D
scene. We demonstrate that our model can achieve better
rendering quality while using significantly fewer parameters than previous methods, including TensoRF and InstantNGP [23].

TensoRF-VM-96
TensoRF-VM-48

TensoRF-VM-192

Point-NeRF

INGP

32

TensoRF-CP-384
31
0

NeRF
5

10

15

20

25

30

Number of Parameters

Figure 1: We compare with previous methods in terms of
rendering quality (PSNR) and model capacity (number of
parameters) on the NeRF Synthetic dataset on the bottom.
Our method and TensoRF are shown with different model
sizes. Our approach consistently achieve better rendering
quality with fewer model parameters than TensoRF, as well
as other methods like iNGP. On the top, we show one example of visual comparisons of the mic scene that has challenging fine-grained geometric structures, where our approach captures most of the details and is the closest to
the reference. Note that the results of NeRF and PointNeRF use 200k optimization steps while the rest use only
30k steps.

equally complex over the entire space, which can be inefficient (requiring high model capacity) to accurately model
intricate local scene details (see Fig.1).
We aim to accurately and compactly model a 3D scene
and reproduce the complex local details. To this end, we
propose Strivec, a novel neural scene representation that
utilizes sparsely distributed and compactly factorized local
tensor grids to model a volumetric radiance field for high-

17569

