This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CASSPR: Cross Attention Single Scan Place Recognition
Yan Xia∗1,2,3

†

Mariia Gladkova∗1,5 Rui Wang4 Qianyun Li1 Uwe Stilla1 João F. Henriques3 Daniel Cremers1,2,3,5
1
Technical University of Munich 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
3
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford 4 Microsoft Zurich 5 Munich Data Science Institute
{yan.xia, mariia.gladkova, stilla, cremers}@tum.de, qianyunli0@outlook.com, joao@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D place recognition and localization in a city-scale map
is a fundamental challenge in allowing autonomous agents
to operate effectively in realistic applications, such as autonomous driving [20, 21, 32, 33, 47, 30] and sidewalk or
indoor robot navigation [17, 40, 49, 10, 29, 28].
While GPS signals can provide reliable geo-location under optimal conditions, they require external satellite information and are bound to fail when there is no direct line† Corresponding author. * Equal contribution.
1 https://github.com/Yan-Xia/CASSPR

Lost points

100

Average Recall @N (%)

Place recognition based on point clouds (LiDAR) is an
important component for autonomous robots or self-driving
vehicles. Current SOTA performance is achieved on accumulated LiDAR submaps using either point-based or voxelbased structures. While voxel-based approaches nicely integrate spatial context across multiple scales, they do not
exhibit the local precision of point-based methods. As a
result, existing methods struggle with fine-grained matching of subtle geometric features in sparse single-shot LiDAR scans. To overcome these limitations, we propose
CASSPR as a method to fuse point-based and voxel-based
approaches using cross attention transformers. CASSPR
leverages a sparse voxel branch for extracting and aggregating information at lower resolution and a pointwise branch for obtaining fine-grained local information.
CASSPR uses queries from one branch to try to match
structures in the other branch, ensuring that both extract
self-contained descriptors of the point cloud (rather than
one branch dominating), but using both to inform the output global descriptor of the point cloud. Extensive experiments show that CASSPR surpasses the state-of-the-art
by a large margin on several datasets (Oxford RobotCar,
TUM, USyd). For instance, it achieves AR@1 of 85.6% on
the TUM dataset, surpassing the strongest prior model by
∼15%. Our code is publicly available.1

Kept points

90
80
PN_VLAD
PCAN
SOE-Net
MinkLoc3D
MinkLoc3D-S

70
60

CASSPR(Ours)

0

5

10

15

Number of top retrievals

20

25

Figure 1. (Top) Voxelization, which is necessary for sparse 3D
convolutions [59], loses a large amount of geometric detail (visualized in red). In this example, 64% of the points are lost.
(Bottom) Place recognition performance on the TUM dataset. The
proposed CASSPR delivers consistently better performance across
all top retrieval numbers. Notably, at top 1 retrieval, it outperforms
the best baseline by ∼15%.

of-sight and the signal is absent, such as in tunnels, parking
garages, or among tall buildings and vegetation [4]. It is
therefore important to develop the capability to perform localization from the on-board sensors only.
Calibrated depth sensors such as LiDAR (producing
point clouds) can be used to localize the currently-observed
scene by matching it against a pre-built point cloud
database. Being focused on the geometry of the scene, point
cloud recognition sidesteps several factors that make pure

8461

