This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantics Meets Temporal Correspondence: Self-supervised
Object-centric Learning in Videos

1

Rui Qian1 Shuangrui Ding1 Xian Liu1 Dahua Lin1,2 *
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{qr021,ds023,lx021,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Self-supervised methods have shown remarkable
progress in learning high-level semantics and low-level
temporal correspondence.
Building on these results,
we take one step further and explore the possibility of
integrating these two features to enhance object-centric
representations. Our preliminary experiments indicate
that query slot attention can extract different semantic
components from the RGB feature map, while random
sampling based slot attention can exploit temporal correspondence cues between frames to assist instance
identification. Motivated by this, we propose a novel
semantic-aware masked slot attention on top of the fused
semantic features and correspondence maps. It comprises
two slot attention stages with a set of shared learnable
Gaussian distributions. In the first stage, we use the
mean vectors as slot initialization to decompose potential
semantics and generate semantic segmentation masks
through iterative attention. In the second stage, for each
semantics, we randomly sample slots from the corresponding Gaussian distribution and perform masked feature
aggregation within the semantic area to exploit temporal
correspondence patterns for instance identification. We
adopt semantic- and instance-level temporal consistency as
self-supervision to encourage temporally coherent objectcentric representations. Our model effectively identifies
multiple object instances with semantic structure, reaching
promising results on unsupervised video object discovery.
Furthermore, we achieve state-of-the-art performance
on dense label propagation tasks, demonstrating the
potential for object-centric analysis. The code is released
at https://github.com/shvdiwnkozbw/SMTC.

1. Introduction
As one of the fundamental cognitive capabilities, human
beings easily distinguish different objects, establish visual
* Corresponding author. Email: dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk.

(a) Query slot attention on semantic feature.

(b) Random sampling slot attention on correspondence map.

Figure 1. Fig. 1(a) presents the results of query slot attention on
top of the RGB feature map. It successfully decomposes different
semantics, e.g., camels and fence. Fig. 1(b) visualizes the correspondence map after PCA dimensionality reduction, showing that
different instances have different correspondence patterns. And
the slot attention with random sampling coarsely distinguishes two
camels with some redundant borders. Best viewed in color.

correspondence and perform object-centric analysis from
temporally continuous observations. This ability can be attributed to two indispensable visual mechanisms: high-level
semantic discrimination as well as low-level temporal correspondence, which enable humans to effectively understand
and interact with the world.
Motivated by this, computer vision researchers equip
machines with these capacities to enhance object-centric
perception [79, 60, 34]. To achieve this goal, early works
rely on human annotations or weak supervision to perceive object semantics [60, 63, 13], identify geometric positions [39, 71, 31, 91], and establish temporal correspondence [41, 79, 75, 77], but their generalization ability is
limited. Recently, there emerge a host of fully unsupervised methods to learn robust representations for semantic discrimination [14, 38, 33, 70, 29, 37, 12] or spatiotemporal correspondence [44, 81, 86, 55, 52, 43], which
achieve promising performance. Given this encouraging re-

16675

