This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Practical Membership Inference Attacks Against Large-Scale Multi-Modal
Models: A Pilot Study
Myeongseob Ko1

Ming Jin1

1

2

Virginia Tech

Chenguang Wang2

Ruoxi Jia1

Washington University in St. Louis

{myeongseob, jinming, ruoxijia}@vt.edu, chenguangwang@wustl.edu

Abstract

Membership inference attacks (MIAs) aim to infer
whether a data point has been used to train a machine
learning model. These attacks can be employed to identify potential privacy vulnerabilities and detect unauthorized use of personal data. While MIAs have been traditionally studied for simple classification models, recent advancements in multi-modal pre-training, such as CLIP, have
demonstrated remarkable zero-shot performance across a
range of computer vision tasks. However, the sheer scale
of data and models presents significant computational challenges for performing the attacks.

This paper takes a first step towards developing practical MIAs against large-scale multi-modal models. We introduce a simple baseline strategy by thresholding the cosine
similarity between text and image features of a target point
and propose further enhancing the baseline by aggregating
cosine similarity across transformations of the target. We
also present a new weakly supervised attack method that
leverages ground-truth non-members (e.g., obtained by using the publication date of a target model and the timestamps of the open data) to further enhance the attack. Our
evaluation shows that CLIP models are susceptible to our
attack strategies, with our simple baseline achieving over
75% membership identification accuracy. Furthermore, our
enhanced attacks outperform the baseline across multiple
models and datasets, with the weakly supervised attack
demonstrating an average-case performance improvement
of 17% and being at least 7X more effective at low falsepositive rates. These findings highlight the importance of
protecting the privacy of multi-modal foundational models, which were previously assumed to be less susceptible
to MIAs due to less overfitting. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ruoxi-jia-group/CLIP-MIA.

1. Introduction
Membership inference attack (MIA) is a type of privacy
attack that attempts to determine if a specific data point was
used to train a machine learning model [14]. This type of attack can compromise the privacy of individuals whose data
was used to train the models [14], but can be also used to
identify vulnerabilities, privacy leakage, and unauthorized
use of personal data in machine learning models [21, 31].
Moreover, the rise of a foundational model trained on
vast amounts of open data has highlighted the potential
breach of contextual integrity, a fundamental principle in
legal discussions of privacy [22]. MIA can, therefore, be
used as an effective tool for individuals to check if companies store their personal information and request its deletion
to comply with the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).
Existing MIAs that achieve advanced performance rely
on the idea of shadow training [4, 35]. The shadow models are usually at a scale of hundreds [4] and are with the
same or similar architecture as the target model. The training algorithm needs to be the same as the one that trains the
target model. The difference between shadow models that
contain a certain sample and those that do not is then utilized to learn proper features to identify the membership of
an individual sample. However, reliance on shadow training
forecloses its application to large-scale models. As a concrete example, training Contrastive Language-Image PreTraining (CLIP) [23], a cutting-edge multi-modal learning
paradigm, takes 18 days even with hundreds of advanced
GPUs [10]. This makes shadow training to attack CLIP
prohibitively expensive. In addition, obtaining full details
of the training algorithm performed by these state-of-the-art
models is often difficult, as they are considered intellectual
property and are not published.
This paper is a pilot study of practical MIAs against
large-scale multi-modal models. The proposed techniques
bypass the shadow training and work with only black-box
access. We use CLIP as an example for the extensive
evaluation, due to the following reasons: First, CLIP is

4871

