This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-interactive Feature Learning and a Full-time Multi-modality Benchmark
for Image Fusion and Segmentation
Jinyuan Liu† , Zhu Liu‡ , Guanyao Wu‡ , Long Ma‡ , Risheng Liu‡§ , Wei Zhong‡ , Zhongxuan Luo‡ , Xin Fan‡ *
†

‡

School of Mechanical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
International School of Information Science Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
§
Peng Cheng Laboratory

atlantis918@hotmail.com, liuzhu@mail.dlut.edu.cn, xin.fan@dlut.edu.cn

Figure 1: The chord diagram on the left shows the association and relative number of various labels in the proposed FMB
dataset. Its branches display part of the well registered targets, which are extraordinarily affluent and manifold. The zoomedin regions on the right show the segmentation comparison in cyan circles and fusion comparison in orange circles. It is
obvious that the proposed method is superior to SOTA methods on both visual effects and mIoU.

Abstract
Multi-modality image fusion and segmentation play a
vital role in autonomous driving and robotic operation.
Early efforts focus on boosting the performance for only
one task, e.g., fusion or segmentation, making it hard to
reach ‘Best of Both Worlds’. To overcome this issue, in
this paper, we propose a Multi-interactive Feature learning architecture for image fusion and Segmentation, namely
SegMiF, and exploit dual-task correlation to promote the
performance of both tasks. The SegMiF is of a cascade
structure, containing a fusion sub-network and a commonly
used segmentation sub-network. By slickly bridging intermediate features between two components, the knowledge
learned from the segmentation task can effectively assist
the fusion task. Also, the benefited fusion network supports the segmentation one to perform more pretentiously.
Besides, a hierarchical interactive attention block is established to ensure fine-grained mapping of all the vital information between two tasks, so that the modality/semantic
features can be fully mutual-interactive. In addition, a dy-

namic weight factor is introduced to automatically adjust
the corresponding weights of each task, which can balance
the interactive feature correspondence and break through
the limitation of laborious tuning. Furthermore, we construct a smart multi-wave binocular imaging system and
collect a full-time multi-modality benchmark with 15 annotated pixel-level categories for image fusion and segmentation. Extensive experiments on several public datasets and
our benchmark demonstrate that the proposed method outputs visually appealing fused images and perform averagely
7.66% higher segmentation mIoU in the real-world scene
than the state-of-the-art approaches. The source code and
benchmark are available at https://github.com/
JinyuanLiu-CV/SegMiF.

1. Introduction
Accurate and robust scene parsing[1, 2] is a fundamental technology for autonomous driving. However, in complex environments, e.g., inclement weather, only using visi-

8115

