This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Victim and The Beneficiary: Exploiting a Poisoned Model to Train a Clean
Model on Poisoned Data
Zixuan Zhu, Rui Wang*, Cong Zou, Lihua Jing
SKLOIS, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{zhuzixuan, wangrui, zoucong, jinglihua}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently, backdoor attacks have posed a serious security threat to the training process of deep neural networks
(DNNs). The attacked model behaves normally on benign
samples but outputs a specific result when the trigger is
present. However, compared with the rocketing progress of
backdoor attacks, existing defenses are difficult to deal with
these threats effectively or require benign samples to work,
which may be unavailable in real scenarios. In this paper,
we find that the poisoned samples and benign samples can
be distinguished with prediction entropy. This inspires us to
propose a novel dual-network training framework: The Victim and The Beneficiary (V&B), which exploits a poisoned
model to train a clean model without extra benign samples.
Firstly, we sacrifice the Victim network to be a powerful
poisoned sample detector by training on suspicious samples. Secondly, we train the Beneficiary network on the
credible samples selected by the Victim to inhibit backdoor
injection. Thirdly, a semi-supervised suppression strategy
is adopted for erasing potential backdoors and improving
model performance. Furthermore, to better inhibit missed
poisoned samples, we propose a strong data augmentation
method, AttentionMix, which works well with our proposed
V&B framework. Extensive experiments on two widely used
datasets against 6 state-of-the-art attacks demonstrate that
our framework is effective in preventing backdoor injection and robust to various attacks while maintaining the
performance on benign samples. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Zixuan-Zhu/VaB.

1. Introduction
Large amounts of training data and powerful computing
resources are two key factors for the success of deep neural
networks (DNNs). While in practical applications, obtaining enough samples for training is laborious, and training
is likely to be resource-constrained. As a result, more and
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. The average prediction entropy of benign samples versus poisoned samples crafted by 6 backdoor attacks. We conduct
the experiment on CIFAR-10 with ResNet-18 under poisoning rate
10%, where our special training strategy (described in section 3.3)
was adopted.

more third-party data (e.g. data released on the Internet) and
training platforms (e.g. Google Colab) are adopted to reduce the overhead, which brings new security risks.
Backdoor attacks [5, 11, 24] pose a serious security
threat to the training process of DNNs and can be easily
executed through data poisoning. Specifically, attackers
[7, 10, 22] inject the designed trigger (e.g. a small patch
or random noise) to a few benign samples selected from the
training set and change their labels to the attacker-defined
target label. These poisoned samples will force models to
learn the correlation between the trigger and the target label. In the reference process, the attacked model will behave normally on benign samples but output the target label when the trigger is present. Deploying attacked models
can lead to severe consequences, even life-threatening in
some scenarios (e.g. autonomous driving). Hence, a secure
training framework is needed when using third-party data
or training platforms.
Many researchers have devoted themselves to this topic
and proposed feasible defenses. Li et al. [18] utilize local
benign samples to erase existing backdoors in DNNs, and

155

