This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GIFD: A Generative Gradient Inversion Method with Feature Domain
Optimization
Hao Fang1,2

Bin Chen1,3,4 * Xuan Wang1,3,4 Zhi Wang2,3 Shu-Tao Xia2
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies
190110304@stu.hit.edu.cn, chenbin2021@hit.edu.cn, wangxuan@cs.hit.edu.cn

Federated Learning (FL) has recently emerged as a
promising distributed machine learning framework to preserve clients’ privacy, by allowing multiple clients to upload the gradients calculated from their local data to a central server. Recent studies find that the exchanged gradients also take the risk of privacy leakage, e.g., an attacker
can invert the shared gradients and recover sensitive data
against an FL system by leveraging pre-trained generative
adversarial networks (GAN) as prior knowledge. However,
performing gradient inversion attacks in the latent space of
the GAN model limits their expression ability and generalizability. To tackle these challenges, we propose Gradient
Inversion over Feature Domains (GIFD), which disassembles the GAN model and searches the feature domains of
the intermediate layers. Instead of optimizing only over
the initial latent code, we progressively change the optimized layer, from the initial latent space to intermediate
layers closer to the output images. In addition, we design
a regularizer to avoid unreal image generation by adding a
small l1 ball constraint to the searching range. We also extend GIFD to the out-of-distribution (OOD) setting, which
weakens the assumption that the training sets of GANs and
FL tasks obey the same data distribution. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method can achieve pixel-level
reconstruction and is superior to the existing methods. Notably, GIFD also shows great generalizability under different defense strategy settings and batch sizes.

1. Introduction
Federated learning [21, 35] is an increasingly popular
distributed machine learning framework, which has been
* Corresponding Author

FFHQ

Abstract

ImageNet

{wangzhi, xiast}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Dummy Input Latent Space

GIFD

Ground Truth

Figure 1: The reconstructed results of our proposed GIFD
on ImageNet[6] and FFHQ[17]. The first column contains
the randomly initialized images generated by generators.
The next two columns show the reconstruction samples of
the latent space search and our proposed GIFD,

applied in many privacy-sensitive scenarios [19, 33], such
as financial services, medical analysis, and recommendation systems.
It allows multiple clients to participate in collaborative
learning under the coordination of the central server. The
central server aggregates the uploaded gradients calculated
from the local data by the end users, rather than the private data. This mechanism resolves the data silos problem
and brings privacy benefits to distributed learning. However, a series of recent studies have shown that even the
gradients uploaded in FL take the risk of privacy leakage.
Zhu et al. [40] first formulate it as an optimization problem and design an optimization-based algorithm that reconstructs private data by best matching the dummy gradients
with the real gradients. Zhao et al. [38] further improve the
attack with an extra label restoration step. Geiping et al.
[9] first achieve ImageNet-level recovery through a welldesigned loss function that adds a new regularization and

4967

