This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Hierarchical Features with Joint Latent Space Energy-Based Prior
Jiali Cui1 , Ying Nian Wu2 , Tian Han1
1
Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology
2
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles
{jcui7,than6}@stevens.edu, ywu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the fundamental problem of multilayer generator models in learning hierarchical representations. The multi-layer generator model that consists of
multiple layers of latent variables organized in a top-down
architecture tends to learn multiple levels of data abstraction. However, such multi-layer latent variables are typically parameterized to be Gaussian, which can be less informative in capturing complex abstractions, resulting in
limited success in hierarchical representation learning. On
the other hand, the energy-based (EBM) prior is known to
be expressive in capturing the data regularities, but it often
lacks the hierarchical structure to capture different levels of
hierarchical representations. In this paper, we propose a
joint latent space EBM prior model with multi-layer latent
variables for effective hierarchical representation learning.
We develop a variational joint learning scheme that seamlessly integrates an inference model for efficient inference.
Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed joint EBM
prior is effective and expressive in capturing hierarchical
representations and modelling data distribution.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep generative models have achieved
remarkable success in generating high-quality images [36,
31], texts [40, 13], and videos [28, 35]. However, learning generative models that incorporate hierarchical structures still remains a challenge. Such hierarchical generative
models can play a critical role in enabling explainable artificial intelligence, thus representing an important area of
ongoing research.
To tackle this challenge, various methods of learning hierarchical representations have been explored [30, 42, 21,
3, 30]. These methods learn generative models with multiple layers of latent variables organized in a top-down arOur project page is available at https://jcui1224.github.
io/hierarchical-representation-ebm-proj/.

chitecture, which have shown the capability of learning increasingly abstract representations (e.g., general structures,
classes) at the top layers while capturing low-level data features (e.g., colors, background) at the bottom layers. In general, one could categorize these methods into two classes:
(i) conditional hierarchy and (ii) architectural hierarchy.
The conditional hierarchies [30, 12, 25, 21, 3] employ
stacked generative models layered on top of one another
and assume conditional Gaussian distributions at different
layers, while the architectural hierarchies [42, 20] instead
leverage network architecture to place high-level representations at the top layers of latent variables and low-level representations at the bottom layers. However, they typically
assume conditional Gaussian distribution or isotropic Gaussian as the prior, which could have limited expressivity [26].
Learning a more expressive and informative prior model for
multiple layers of latent variables is thus needed.
The energy-based models (EBMs) [19, 39, 7, 24, 26, 4],
on the other hand, are shown to be expressive and proved
to be powerful in capturing data regularities. Notably, [26]
studies the EBM in the latent space, where the energy function is considered as a correction of the non-informative
prior and tilts the non-informative prior to a more expressive prior distribution. The low dimensionality of the latent
space makes EBM more effective in capturing regularities
in the data. However, prior methods often rely on expensive MCMC methods for posterior sampling of the latent
variables, and more importantly, the latent variables are not
hierarchically organized, making it difficult to capture data
variations at different levels.
In this paper, we propose to combine the strengths of
latent space EBM and the multi-layer generator model for
effective hierarchical representation learning. In particular,
we build the EBM on the latent variables across different
layers of the generator model, where the latent variables at
different layers are concatenated and modelled jointly. The
latent variables at different layers capture different levels of
information from the data via the hierarchy of the generative
model, and their inter-relations are further tightened up and
better captured through EBM in joint latent space.

2218

