This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Total-Recon: Deformable Scene Reconstruction for Embodied View Synthesis
Chonghyuk Song Gengshan Yang Kangle Deng Jun-Yan Zhu Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University

3D
Reconstruction

Pet’s
Point of View

3rd-Pet
Follow

3D
Filter

Human & Dog

RGBD
Video

Figure 1: Embodied View Synthesis. Given a long video of deformable objects captured by a handheld RGBD sensor, Total-Recon renders
the scene from novel camera trajectories derived from the in-scene motion of actors: (1) egocentric cameras that simulate the point-of-view
of a target actor (such as the pet) and (2) 3rd-person (or pet) cameras that follow the actor from behind. Our method also enables (3) 3D
video filters that attach virtual 3D assets to the actor. Total-Recon achieves this by reconstructing the geometry, appearance, root-bodyand articulated motion of each deformable object in the scene and the background.

Abstract
We explore the task of embodied view synthesis from
monocular videos of deformable scenes. Given a minutelong RGBD video of people interacting with their pets, we
render the scene from novel camera trajectories derived
from the in-scene motion of actors: (1) egocentric cameras that simulate the point of view of a target actor and
(2) 3rd-person cameras that follow the actor. Building such
a system requires reconstructing the root-body and articulated motion of every actor, as well as a scene representation that supports free-viewpoint synthesis. Longer videos
are more likely to capture the scene from diverse viewpoints
(which helps reconstruction) but are also more likely to contain larger motions (which complicates reconstruction). To
address these challenges, we present Total-Recon, the first
method to photorealistically reconstruct deformable scenes
from long monocular RGBD videos. Crucially, to scale
to long videos, our method hierarchically decomposes the
scene into the background and objects, whose motion is decomposed into carefully initialized root-body motion and
local articulations. To quantify such “in-the-wild” reconstruction and view synthesis, we collect ground-truth data
from a specialized stereo RGBD capture rig for 11 challenging videos, significantly outperforming prior methods.

1. Introduction
We explore embodied view synthesis, a new class of
novel-view synthesis tasks that renders deformable scenes
from novel 6-DOF trajectories reconstructed from the inscene motion of actors: egocentric cameras [45, 7] that simulate the point-of-view of moving actors and 3rd-personfollow cameras [54, 7] that track a moving actor from behind (Figure 1). We focus on everyday scenes of people
interacting with their pets, producing renderings from the
point-of-view of the person and pet (Figure 1). While such
camera trajectories could be manually constructed (e.g., by
artists via keyframing), building an automated system is
an interesting problem of its own: spatial cognition theory [57] suggests that the ability to visualize behavior from
another actor’s perspective is necessary for action learning
and imitation; in the context of gaming and virtual reality [7, 45], egocentric cameras offer high levels of user immersion, while 3rd-person-follow cameras provide a large
field of view that is useful for exploring a user’s environment.
Challenges. Building a system for embodied view synthesis is challenging for many reasons. First, to reconstruct
everyday-but-interesting content, it needs to process long,
monocular captures of multiple interacting actors. How-

17671

