This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Spiking Transformer
Ziqing Wang1, 2 * Yuetong Fang1 * Jiahang Cao1
1

Qiang Zhang1 Zhongrui Wang3, 4† Renjing Xu1†

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3

The University of Hong Kong

4

2

North Carolina State University

ACCESS - AI Chip Center for Emerging Smart Systems

zwang247@ncsu.edu, {yfang870, jcao248, qzhang749}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
zrwang@eee.hku.hk, renjingxu@ust.hk

Abstract
The combination of Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs)
and Transformers has attracted significant attention due
to their potential for high energy efficiency and highperformance nature. However, existing works on this topic
typically rely on direct training, which can lead to suboptimal performance. To address this issue, we propose to
leverage the benefits of the ANN-to-SNN conversion method
to combine SNNs and Transformers, resulting in significantly improved performance over existing state-of-the-art
SNN models. Furthermore, inspired by the quantal synaptic failures observed in the nervous system, which reduce
the number of spikes transmitted across synapses, we introduce a novel Masked Spiking Transformer (MST) framework. This incorporates a Random Spike Masking (RSM)
method to prune redundant spikes and reduce energy consumption without sacrificing performance. Our experimental results demonstrate that the proposed MST model
achieves a significant reduction of 26.8% in power consumption when the masking ratio is 75% while maintaining
the same level of performance as the unmasked model. The
code is available at: https://github.com/bic-L/
Masked-Spiking-Transformer.

1. Introduction
Spiking neural networks (SNNs), considered as the next
generation neural networks [30], are brain-inspired neural
networks based on the dynamic characteristics of biological
neurons [31, 17]. SNNs have attracted significant attention
due to their unique properties in handling sparse data, which
can yield great energy efficiency benefits on neuromorphic
hardware. Due to their specialties, they have been widely
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Performance of MST and other SOTA SNN models regarding top-1 accuracy and time steps. The markers, represented
by circles and star shapes, denote the direct training (DT) and
the ANN-to-SNN (A2S) conversion method, respectively, where
the marker size corresponds to the model size. Results show that
the proposed MST model achieves higher accuracy than the other
SNN models.

utilized in various fields, such as classification [32, 18],
object detection [3] and tracking [51], etc. Nevertheless,
SNNs currently can hardly realize a comparable performance to that of artificial neural networks (ANNs), especially for complex tasks such as ImageNet [40].
In order to improve the performance of SNNs, various
training methods have been proposed, broadly categorized
as the direct training method and the ANN-to-SNN conversion method. Direct training methods leverage a continuous relaxation of the non-smooth spiking mechanism to
enable backpropagation with a surrogate gradient function
for handling non-differentiability [36], but this can lead to
unstable gradient propagation and relatively low accuracy

1761

