This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAFA: Class-Aware Feature Alignment for Test-Time Adaptation
Sanghun Jung1 Jungsoo Lee2 Nanhee Kim3 Amirreza Shaban1 Byron Boots1 Jaegul Choo2
1
University of Washington, 2 KAIST AI, 3 Enssel Inc.

Abstract
Despite recent advancements in deep learning, deep neural networks continue to suffer from performance degradation when applied to new data that differs from training data. Test-time adaptation (TTA) aims to address this
challenge by adapting a model to unlabeled data at test
time. TTA can be applied to pretrained networks without
modifying their training procedures, enabling them to utilize a well-formed source distribution for adaptation. One
possible approach is to align the representation space of
test samples to the source distribution (i.e., feature alignment). However, performing feature alignment in TTA is
especially challenging in that access to labeled source data
is restricted during adaptation. That is, a model does not
have a chance to learn test data in a class-discriminative
manner, which was feasible in other adaptation tasks (e.g.,
unsupervised domain adaptation) via supervised losses on
the source data. Based on this observation, we propose a
simple yet effective feature alignment loss, termed as ClassAware Feature Alignment (CAFA), which simultaneously 1)
encourages a model to learn target representations in a
class-discriminative manner and 2) effectively mitigates the
distribution shifts at test time. Our method does not require
any hyper-parameters or additional losses, which are required in previous approaches. We conduct extensive experiments on 6 different datasets and show our proposed
method consistently outperforms existing baselines.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements [17, 51, 11, 10] in machine learning are effective in solving diverse problems, achieving remarkable performance enhancements on benchmark
datasets. However, these methods can suffer from significant performance degradation when applied to test data
with different properties from the training data (i.e., source
data), such as corruption [18], changing lighting conditions [8], or adverse weather [53, 6]. Sensitivity to distribution shifts [41] hampers deep networks from performing
well in practical scenarios where test samples may differ
from training data [26]. Thus, adapting deep models to the
test samples is crucial when distribution shifts exist.
Various adaptation methods [3, 15, 36, 14, 48, 13, 55, 21]

have been proposed to alleviate this problem. However,
most of these methods require either access to the source
data during adaptation [48, 14, 19] or modification of the
training procedure [33, 32, 49], which limits their applicability. Therefore, we seek to design an adaptation method
that 1) is applicable to existing deep networks without modification and 2) does not require access to the source data
during adaptation. Satisfying such conditions, previous
studies perform adaptation at test time while making predictions simultaneously, which is referred to as test-time adaptation (TTA).
One widely adopted approach to address distribution
shifts is to align the source (i.e., training data) and target
(i.e., test data) distributions [14, 48, 34, 47, 13, 50]. For example, DANN [14] directly reduces the H-divergence between the source and target distributions, and CORAL [48]
minimizes the difference in the second-order statistics between the source and target data. Despite their demonstrated effectiveness in the unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) task, applying those alignments to TTA has
the following limitation. Alignments are generally performed along with supervised losses on the source data,
which encourages a model to learn target distributions in
a class-discriminative manner [48]. However, access to the
source data is prohibited during adaptation in TTA, precluding learning class discriminability.
With this issue in mind, we conduct an analysis of the
effects of feature alignments in TTA by using two distances
in the representation space: intra-class distance and interclass distance. As shown in Fig. 1 (c), intra-class distance
(dotted arrow) is defined as the distance between a sample and its ground-truth source class distribution, and interclass distance (solid arrow) denotes the averaged distance
between the sample and the other source class distributions. Achieving low intra-class distance and high interclass distance is crucial for improving classification accuracy [30, 4, 31, 42, 56].
For analysis, we first adopt a feature alignment that reduces the domain-level discrepancy between source and target domains, which is a commonly adopted paradigm in
UDA studies [14, 48, 47]. One straightforward approach
to achieve this is to align the mean and covariance of the

19060

