This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TopoSeg: Topology-Aware Nuclear Instance Segmentation
Hongliang He1,2 * B Jun Wang1∗ Pengxu Wei3 Fan Xu4
Xiangyang Ji5 Chang Liu5 B Jie Chen1,4 B
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China
3
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
5
Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

fig1_topolossgood

hehl@pku.edu.cn, junw@stu.pku.edu.cn, weipx3@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
{xuf01,chenj}@pcl.ac.cn, {xyji,liuchang2022}@tsinghua.edu.cn

loss gradient

Abstract
Nuclear instance segmentation has been critical for
pathology image analysis in medical science, e.g., cancer diagnosis. Current methods typically adopt pixel-wise
optimization for nuclei boundary exploration, where rich
structural information could be lost for subsequent quantitative morphology assessment. To address this issue, we
develop a topology-aware segmentation approach, termed
TopoSeg, which exploits topological structure information
to keep the predictions rational, especially in common situations with densely touching and overlapping nucleus instances. Concretely, TopoSeg builds on a topology-aware
module (TAM), which encodes dynamic changes of different
topology structures within the three-class probability maps
(inside, boundary, and background) of the nuclei to persistence barcodes and makes the topology-aware loss function. To efficiently focus on regions with high topological
errors, we propose an adaptive topology-aware selection
(ATS) strategy to enhance the topology-aware optimization
procedure further. Experiments on three nuclear instance
segmentation datasets justify the superiority of TopoSeg,
which achieves state-of-the-art performance. The code is
available at https://github.com/hhlisme/toposeg.

1. Introduction
Pathological image analysis is considered the gold standard for cancer diagnosis, treatment, and prevention, where
nuclear instance segmentation serves as the core step. It
is because the morphology of nuclei including the shape,
appearance, and distribution within pathology images provides interpretable features of diagnostic and prognostic
* Equal contribution

B Corresponding Author

image

prob map

pixel-wise loss

probability trend

pixel error: 18
topo error: 2

probability trend

pixel error: 33
topo error: 0

topo-aware loss
groundtruth

instance map
pixel error: 24
topo error: 2

Original prediction

loss gradient

Final prediction

Figure 1. The schematic illustration of pixel-wise loss and
topology-aware loss. (Left) A patch in the image and its corresponding boundary ground truth, as well as the original boundary
segmentation probability map and its corresponding instance prediction. (Top-right) The gradient map was obtained by pixel-wise
loss, the 3D map of the boundary probability map and the optimization trend, as well as the final instance prediction. (Bottomright) The gradient map obtained from topology-aware loss, the
3D image of the boundary probability map and the optimization
trend, as well as the final instance prediction.

cancer indicators[22].
Compared to general image object segmentation, nuclear instance segmentation faces with some particular challenges: (i) the crowded nuclei distribution leads to clustered
overlapping instances. (ii) The blurry boundaries between
touching or overlapping nuclei increase the difficulty of distinguishing individual instances. (iii) Large variability in
size, shape, texture and intensity of nuclei between different
images requires more robust annotation and prediction [18].
To cope with these challenges, several studies have focused on exploring innovative network architectures [12,
23, 25] and incorporating distance maps [3, 9, 19, 21] to enhance segmentation performance. However, existing works
typically rely on pixel-wise losses, such as CE/Dice loss,

21307

