This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Poincaré ResNet
Max van Spengler1 , Erwin Berkhout2 , Pascal Mettes1
1

2

VIS Lab, Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam,
Department of Oral Radiology, Academic Center for Dentistry, University of Amsterdam & VU Amsterdam

Abstract
This paper introduces an end-to-end residual network
that operates entirely on the Poincaré ball model of hyperbolic space. Hyperbolic learning has recently shown great
potential for visual understanding, but is currently only performed in the penultimate layer(s) of deep networks. All
visual representations are still learned through standard
Euclidean networks. In this paper we investigate how to
learn hyperbolic representations of visual data directly from
the pixel-level. We propose Poincaré ResNet, a hyperbolic
counterpart of the celebrated residual network, starting
from Poincaré 2D convolutions up to Poincaré residual connections. We identify three roadblocks for training convolutional networks entirely in hyperbolic space and propose a
solution for each: (i) Current hyperbolic network initializations collapse to the origin, limiting their applicability
in deeper networks. We provide an identity-based initialization that preserves norms over many layers. (ii) Residual networks rely heavily on batch normalization, which
comes with expensive Fréchet mean calculations in hyperbolic space. We introduce Poincaré midpoint batch normalization as a faster and equally effective alternative. (iii) Due
to the many intermediate operations in Poincaré layers, the
computation graphs of deep learning libraries blow up, limiting our ability to train on deep hyperbolic networks. We
provide manual backward derivations of core hyperbolic
operations to maintain manageable computation graphs.

1. Introduction
Deep learning in hyperbolic space has gained traction
in recent years empowered by their inherent ability to embed hierarchical data with arbitrarily low distortion [45]
and by being more compact and dense [5, 42, 47]. These
promising characteristics have led to rapid developments
in hyperbolic representation learning for tree-like structures
[1, 4, 15, 27, 42, 44], graphs [5, 9, 29, 60], text [7, 11, 49],
action skeletons [14], biological structures [26], and more.

Recently, hyperbolic learning has also been investigated
for visual understanding. Hyperbolic embeddings of images
and videos have been shown to improve few-shot learning
[13, 17, 20, 35, 57], hierarchical recognition [10, 18, 32,
33, 56], segmentation [6, 19] and metric learning [12, 59]
amongst others. While promising, the use of hyperbolic geometry in computer vision has been limited to the classifier
space, with visual representations being learned on conventional networks that operate in Euclidean space.
This paper explores learning visual representations entirely in hyperbolic space. The ability to learn hyperbolic
representations directly from the pixel-level will allow us
to unlock the broad potential of hyperbolic geometry for
vision, such as capturing latent hierarchical visual representations [25], training compact network architectures
[5, 42, 47], and creating networks that better mimic visual
representation learning in the brain [58]. Empowered by
successful implementations of non-visual layers [16, 47],
the time is ripe for visual hyperbolic feature learning.
As a step towards fully hyperbolic visual learning, we
start from the highly celebrated ResNet [22] and rebuild its
architecture in hyperbolic space; from 2D convolutions to
residual connections. Optimizing a ResNet in the Poincaré
ball model comes with several challenges. First, we find
that existing network initializations in hyperbolic space lead
to vanishing signals, which derail learning over many convolutional layers. We provide an identity-based network
initialization that preserves the output norm over many layers. Second, ResNets rely extensively on batch normalization, but its generalization to hyperbolic space requires
expensive Fréchet mean calculations [34]. We introduce
Poincaré midpoint batch normalization, which allows us to
compute approximate means at a fraction of the computational cost. Third, the basic gyrovector operations in the
Poincaré ball model consist of many intermediate calculations. In modern deep learning libraries, all these calculations are stored for automatic differentiation, blowing up
the computation graph. We have derived and implemented
the backward pass of core hyperbolic gyrovector operations

5419

