This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lens Parameter Estimation for Realistic Depth of Field Modeling
Dominique Piché-Meunier1,2 , Yannick Hold-Geoffroy2 , Jianming Zhang2 , Jean-François Lalonde1
1
Université Laval, 2 Adobe
https://lvsn.github.io/inversedof/

Input image

Abstract
We present a method to estimate the depth of field effect
from a single image. Most existing methods related to this
task provide either a per-pixel estimation of blur and/or
depth. Instead, we go further and propose to use a lensbased representation that models the depth of field using two
parameters: the blur factor and focus disparity. Those two
parameters, along with the signed defocus representation,
result in a more intuitive and linear representation which we
solve using a novel weighting network. Furthermore, our
method explicitly enforces consistency between the estimated
defocus blur, the lens parameters, and the depth map. Finally, we train our deep-learning-based model on a mix of
real images with synthetic depth of field and fully synthetic
images. These improvements result in a more robust and
accurate method, as demonstrated by our state-of-the-art results. In particular, our lens parametrization enables several
applications, such as 3D staging for AR environments and
seamless object compositing.

1. Introduction
Modern cameras are equipped with sophisticated compound lenses whose task is to focus light on the sensor. The
lens aperture (or f-number) determines, along with the exposure time, the amount of light captured in a photograph. Adjusting the aperture however has another side effect: a larger
aperture (lower f-number) induces a depth-dependent blur,
leaving only parts of the image in focus. This depth of field
(DoF) effect is often sought by photographers to guide the
viewers attention to the subject (e.g., macro shots), or create
an artistic look (e.g., tilt-shift photography). Even when not
exacerbated by an experienced photographer, some amount
of depth-dependent defocus blur is bound to be present in
images due to non-zero apertures.
The vast majority of computer vision algorithms ignore
this DoF blur and make the simplifying (pinhole) assumption that the image is entirely in focus. While this may be
acceptable in some cases, this may create unwanted effects.
Consider for example the case of virtual 3D object insertion

Estimated
disparity

Estimated
defocus

Estimated
weight

Lens parameters
Naive object insertion

Lens-aware object insertion

Figure 1: Naively inserting 3D objects in images results
in unreasonable compositions in the presence of depth of
field blur (bottom-left). Our technique (top-right) estimates
physically-based lens parameters that enable lens-aware insertion (bottom-right), where objects appear more realistic.

(fig. 1). It is of paramount importance that the inserted objects be rendered by a virtual camera and lens sharing the
same properties as the real ones (fig. 1, bottom-right), as not
doing so results in an improbable result (fig. 1, bottom-left).
Blur estimation is a longstanding problem in computer
vision, and many techniques estimating defocus blur specifically [43, 30, 23, 52, 28] have been proposed in the literature. However, these non-parametric approaches produce
per-pixel estimates, which do not allow advanced image
editing tasks such as 3D virtual object insertion as in fig. 1.
In this paper, we propose to go beyond per-pixel defocus
blur and argue that reasoning about the camera lens parameters is a more principled approach to understanding the
DoF effect in images. We propose what is, to the best of
our knowledge, the first method for estimating the camera
lens parameters that control the depth of field from a single
image. Specifically, we estimate two key lens parameters:
the focus disparity and the blur factor (scaled aperture). Our
approach first relies on pixel-wise depth and disparity es-

499

