This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Global Features are All You Need for Image Retrieval and Reranking
Shihao Shao1 ∗†

Kaifeng Chen2

Arjun Karpur2

Qinghua Cui1

André Araujo2

Bingyi Cao2 ∗†
1
2
Peking University
Google Research

1. Introduction
Image retrieval systems are tasked with searching large
databases for visual contents similar to a query image. Generally, the search process consists of two stages. First, an
efficient method sorts database images according to estimated high-level similarity to the query. Then, in the reranking stage, the most relevant database images found in the
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this paper.
† Co-corresponding authors. Emails:

shaoshihao@pku.edu.cn, bingyi@google.com

SuperGlobal Reranking

SuperGlobal
Pooling

1: Update global descriptors

2nd

…

1st

Mth

query

…
4th

SuperGlobal
Descriptor

2nd

3rd

…

Mth

1st

K nearest neighbor
aggregation

Scale-GeM

query

Large-Scale
Index

Top M results

…
New descriptors

Multi-scale
descriptors

GeM+ pooling
2: Rerank via new descriptor

Regional-GeM

query

Image retrieval systems conventionally use a two-stage
paradigm, leveraging global features for initial retrieval
and local features for reranking. However, the scalability
of this method is often limited due to the significant storage
and computation cost incurred by local feature matching in
the reranking stage. In this paper, we present SuperGlobal,
a novel approach that exclusively employs global features
for both stages, improving efficiency without sacrificing accuracy. SuperGlobal introduces key enhancements to the
retrieval system, specifically focusing on the global feature
extraction and reranking processes. For extraction, we identify sub-optimal performance when the widely-used ArcFace
loss and Generalized Mean (GeM) pooling methods are combined and propose several new modules to improve GeM
pooling. In the reranking stage, we introduce a novel method
to update the global features of the query and top-ranked
images by only considering feature refinement with a small
set of images, thus being very compute and memory efficient.
Our experiments demonstrate substantial improvements compared to the state of the art in standard benchmarks. Notably,
on the Revisited Oxford+1M Hard dataset, our single-stage
results improve by 7.1%, while our two-stage gain reaches
3.7% with a strong 64, 865× speedup. Our two-stage system
surpasses the current single-stage state-of-the-art by 16.3%,
offering a scalable, accurate alternative for high-performing
image retrieval systems with minimal time overhead.
Code: https:// github.com/ ShihaoShao-GH/ SuperGlobal.

Global Feature Retrieval

query

Abstract

CNN

…
Retrieval and Reranking Output

Figure 1: We introduce SuperGlobal, a novel method for image retrieval
and reranking which relies solely on global image features. SuperGlobal
leverages several improvements to the Generalized Mean (GeM) pooling
function, across regions and scales, as indicated in the purple box on the
left. Our reranking process, illustrated on the right green box, refines the
global feature representation based on the query and top retrieved images
to produce a more relevant set of results.

first stage undergo a more comprehensive matching process
against the query, to return an improved ranked list of results.
In modern implementations, the first stage is instantiated
with deep learning-based global features, which has received
substantial attention in the past few years [35, 37, 26, 48].
The reranking stage is commonly executed via geometric
matching of local image features [30, 32, 4, 8], which provides information on the spatial consistency between the
query and a given database image.
A recent trend in this area is on leveraging sophisticated
matching processes at the reranking stage, e.g. transformers
[40] or 4D correlation networks [23], which have led to remarkable improvements in the quality of retrieved results.
However, this has come at a significant cost, where reranking
latency takes several seconds per query and requires more
11036

