This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COPILOT: Human-Environment Collision Prediction
and Localization from Egocentric Videos
*

*

Boxiao Pan1
Bokui Shen1
Davis Rempe1,2
1,2
Kaichun Mo
Yanchao Yang1,3
1

Stanford University

2

NVIDIA Research

3

Despoina Paschalidou1
Leonidas J. Guibas1

The University of Hong Kong

Figure 1: Problem formulation. (Left) Egocentric videos from cameras mounted on the body are used to perform three
tasks: binary collision prediction, classifying the colliding joints, and localizing collision regions in the environment. In this
example, our model predicts and localizes a collision between the left knee and the chair. (Right) Our model is trained on a
newly proposed large-scale synthetic dataset and generalizes to diverse synthetic and real-world environments.

Abstract
The ability to forecast human-environment collisions
from egocentric observations is vital to enable collision
avoidance in applications such as VR, AR, and wearable
assistive robotics. In this work, we introduce the challenging problem of predicting collisions in diverse environments from multi-view egocentric videos captured from
body-mounted cameras. Solving this problem requires a
generalizable perception system that can classify which human body joints will collide and estimate a collision region heatmap to localize collisions in the environment. To
achieve this, we propose a transformer-based model called
COPILOT to perform collision prediction and localization simultaneously, which accumulates information across
multi-view inputs through a novel 4D space-time-viewpoint
attention mechanism. To train our model and enable future
research on this task, we develop a synthetic data generation framework that produces egocentric videos of virtual
humans moving and colliding within diverse 3D environments. This framework is then used to establish a largescale dataset consisting of 8.6M egocentric RGBD frames.
Extensive experiments show that COPILOT generalizes to
unseen synthetic as well as real-world scenes. We further
* Equal contribution

demonstrate COPILOT outputs are useful for downstream
collision avoidance through simple closed-loop control.
Please visit our project webpage at https://sites.
google.com/stanford.edu/copilot.

1. Introduction
Forecasting potential collisions between a human and
their environment from egocentric observations is crucial
to applications such as virtual reality (VR), augmented reality (AR), and wearable assistive robotics. As users are immersed in VR / AR, the effective and non-intrusive prevention of collisions with real-world surroundings is critical.
On the other hand, wearable exoskeletons [52, 10] provide
physical assistance to users with mobility impairments and
therefore must control user movements to avoid dangerous
falls by estimating when and where a collision may occur.
To this end, a multitude of works have explored ways
to predict and localize future collisions. For example, existing approaches for VR leverage redirected walking techniques [42] to guide users in the virtual world such that they
avoid collisions with real-world objects [23, 22, 48, 15, 57].
However, these approaches rely on pre-scanned scenes and
external tracking systems [23, 48, 15, 57] or resort to online SLAM [22, 12], making them cumbersome and tedious
to use. For assistive exoskeletons, several methods have

5262

