This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Novel-view Synthesis and Pose Estimation for Hand-Object Interaction
from Sparse Views
Wentian Qu1,2

Zhaopeng Cui3
Yinda Zhang4
Chenyu Meng1,2
Cuixia Ma1,2
1,2 *
1,2∗
Xiaoming Deng
Hongan Wang
1
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 4 Google

Abstract
Hand-object interaction understanding and the barely
addressed novel view synthesis are highly desired in the immersive communication, whereas it is challenging due to
the high deformation of hand and heavy occlusions between
hand and object. In this paper, we propose a neural rendering and pose estimation system for hand-object interaction
from sparse views, which can also enable 3D hand-object
interaction editing. We share the inspiration from recent
scene understanding work that shows a scene specific model
built beforehand can significantly improve and unblock vision tasks especially when inputs are sparse, and extend it
to the dynamic hand-object interaction scenario and propose to solve the problem in two stages. We first learn
the shape and appearance prior knowledge of hands and
objects separately with the neural representation at the offline stage. During the online stage, we design a renderingbased joint model fitting framework to understand the dynamic hand-object interaction with the pre-built hand and
object models as well as interaction priors, which thereby
overcomes penetration and separation issues between hand
and object and also enables novel view synthesis. In order to get stable contact during the hand-object interaction
process in a sequence, we propose a stable contact loss
to make the contact region to be consistent. Experiments
demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-theart methods. Code and dataset are available in project webpage https://iscas3dv.github.io/HO-NeRF.

1. Introduction
Hand-object interaction understanding plays an important role in immersive contextual teaching applications such
as surgical operation and training in the use of machinery. Previous works mostly focus on the hand-object interaction detection [10], reasoning [26] or pose estima* indicates corresponding author.

tion [17, 16]. However, the barely addressed novel view
synthesis of hand-object interaction is also highly desired.
Recently, neural rendering is emerging to facilitate the
novel view synthesis simply by learning from a collection
of images and produces promising high-quality images. Although existing neural rendering approaches perform well
on static scenes [31, 2], rigid objects [54, 12] and human
models [39, 38, 45], they barely considered scene context in interaction (such as contact [63] and model penetration [4, 24]). In the realm of hand, LISA [8] is the
only hand neural rendering model, and achieves promising rendering results of bare hands. However, LISA cannot
work well for hand-object interaction due to heavy interocclusions and it requires dense (about 20) camera views
that may refrain it from wide applications. It is even more
challenging to use sparse-view images to synthesize novel
views [49, 25] and estimate accurate pose for hand-object
interaction, which plays a key role in many applications
such as Holoportation [36] and manipulation skill learning
from human demonstration [42, 1].
In this work, we propose a novel-view synthesis and pose
estimation system for hand-object interaction scenes with
sparse camera views (Fig. 1). Recent scene understanding
work [53] shows a scene specific model built beforehand
can significantly improve and unblock vision tasks especially when inputs are sparse, and we extend it from static
objects to dynamic hand-object interaction scenes and solve
the problem in two stages. We first use sparse-view images
as input to train the pose-driven neural rendering models of
hand and object during the offline stage. Benefiting from
the progress of hand pose tracking [15, 19, 28] and object
pose estimation [27], we only need very low cost to build
hand model and object model. Then at the online stage,
we estimate both hand and object poses using a novel differentiable rendering-based model fitting under geometric
constraints. In this way, we can understand hand-object interaction accurately and render novel views effectively.
However, it is non-trivial to fulfill this goal. Firstly, it is
difficult to build neural rendering systems from sparse cam-

15100

