This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shift from Texture-bias to Shape-bias: Edge Deformation-based Augmentation
for Robust Object Recognition
*

Xilin He1,2,3 , Qinliang Lin1,2,3 , Cheng Luo1,2,3 Weicheng Xie1,2,3, , Siyang Song4 , Feng Liu1,2,3 , Linlin Shen1,2,3
1
Computer Vision Institute, School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Shenzhen Institue of Artificial Intelligence & Robotics for Society
3
Guangdong Key Laboratory of intelligent Information Processing
4
University of Leicester
{2020152115, linqinliang2021, luocheng2020}@email.szu.edu.cn
{wcxie,feng.liu,llshen}@szu.edu.cn, ss1535@leicester.ac.uk

Abstract

澤澢澬
澜濕澝

* Corresponding author

濄濦濣濖濕濖濝濠濝濨濭

Recent studies have shown the vulnerability of CNNs under perturbation noises, which is partially caused by the
reason that the well-trained CNNs are too biased toward
the object texture, i.e., they make predictions mainly based
on texture cues. To reduce this texture-bias, current studies resort to learning augmented samples with heavily perturbed texture to make networks be more biased toward relatively stable shape cues. However, such methods usually
fail to achieve real shape-biased networks due to the insufficient diversity of the shape cues. In this paper, we propose
to augment the training dataset by generating semantically
meaningful shapes and samples, via a shape deformationbased online augmentation, namely as SDbOA. The samples generated by our SDbOA have two main merits. First,
the augmented samples with more diverse shape variations
enable networks to learn the shape cues more elaborately,
which encourages the network to be shape-biased. Second,
semantic-meaningful shape-augmentation samples could be
produced by jointly regularizing the generator with object texture and edge-guidance soft constraint, where the
edges are represented more robustly with a self information
guided map to better against the noises on them. Extensive
experiments under various perturbation noises demonstrate
the obvious superiority of our shape-bias-motivated model
over the state of the arts in terms of robustness performance.
Code is available at https://github.com/C0notSilly/-ICCV23-Edge-Deformation-based-Online-Augmentation.

澽濢濘濝濕濢澔澹濠濙濤濜濕濢濨
濈濕濖濖濭澔澷濕濨
濃濨濜濙濦濧

澤澢澪
澤澢澨
澤澢澦

濈濙濬濨濩濦濙澮澔澽濢濘濝濕濢澔澹濠濙濤濜濕濢濨
濇濜濕濤濙澮澔濈濕濖濖濭澔澷濕濨

澤

濇濨濕濢濘濕濦濘澔濆濙濧濂濙濨澡澩澤
澜濈濙濬濨濩濦濙澡濖濝濕濧濙濘澝
澜濖澝

濇濨濭濠濙澔
澵濩濛濡濙濢濨濕濨濝濣濢

澸濙濚濣濦濡濕濨濝濣濢
澵濩濛濡濙濢濨濕濨濝濣濢

澜濗澝

澜濘澝

濃濩濦濧
澜濇濜濕濤濙澡濖濝濕濧濙濘澝
澜濙澝

濃濦濝濛濝濢濕濠澔澣澔澵濩濛濡濙濢濨濙濘澔
濝濡濕濛濙濧澔濚濣濦澔濨濦濕濝濢濝濢濛

Figure 1. Comparison of different models’ predictions on textureshape cue conflict samples [11] between Style Augmentation [21]
(CVPRW’19), deformation augmentation in [43] and ours. Specific to the testing image (a), the bottom row shows the original
(b) and augmented (c)-(e) images for training.

1. Introduction
Previous studies [13, 15, 38] have shown that convolution neural networks (CNNs) are vulnerable to perturbation
noises, e.g., adversarial noises. Such perturbation noises
imposed on the benign image can easily falsify model’s prediction [28]. To improve the network robustness against
these noises, algorithms of texture augmentation have been
long studied to enable network to learn robust and discriminative object texture features of different categories [11,24].
However, recent studies revealed that the vulnerability
of CNNs maybe caused by their ‘texture-bias’, i.e., the features learned for object recognition bias towards objects’
textures instead of their shapes [2, 11]. As illustrated in
Fig. 1, when the input image (a) contains a cat that is
filled with an elephant’s texture, standard CNN networks
are more likely to predict it as an elephant despite the obvious shape difference between cats and elephants.
Consequently, some studies devote to reducing such

1526

