This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Multi-Layered 3D Garments Animation
Yidi Shao1 Chen Change Loy1 Bo Dai2
1
S-Lab for Advanced Intelligence, Nanyang Technological University
yidi001@e.ntu.edu.sg, ccloy@ntu.edu.sg
2

Shanghai AI Laboratory
daibo@pjlab.org.cn

Figure 1: We present LayersNet, featuring a novel Rotation Equivariant Transformation, devised to simulate garment animation with increased realism. Our LayersNet is able to animate multi-layered garments, responding to various external forces,
such as human bodies and wind as shown in (a). LayersNet is powered by our proposed D-LAYERS, a novel large-scale 3D
garment animation dataset involving realistic and challenging scenarios, as shown in (b)-(d).

Abstract
Mimicking realistic dynamics in 3D garment animations is a challenging task due to the complex nature
of multi-layered garments and the variety of outer forces
involved. Existing approaches mostly focus on singlelayered garments driven by only human bodies and struggle to handle general scenarios. In this paper, we propose a novel data-driven method, called LayersNet, to
model garment-level animations as particle-wise interactions in a micro physics system. We improve simulation
efficiency by representing garments as patch-level particles in a two-level structural hierarchy. Moreover, we introduce a novel Rotation Equivalent Transformation with
Rotation Invariant Attention that leverage the rotation invariance and additivity of physics systems to better model
outer forces. To verify the effectiveness of our approach
and bridge the gap between experimental environments
and real-world scenarios, we introduce a new challenging
dataset, D-LAYERS, containing 700K frames of dynamics of 4,900 combinations of multi-layered garments driven
by human bodies and randomly sampled wind. Our LayersNet achieves superior performance both quantitatively
and qualitatively. Project page: www.mmlab-ntu.com/
project/layersnet/index.html .

1. Introduction
3D garment animation has been an active and important
topic in computer graphics and machine learning, due to
its great potential in various downstream tasks including
virtual reality, virtual try-on, gaming and film production.
However, realistic 3D garment animation remains an open
research problem due to the intrinsic challenge of modeling
garments dynamics.
Specifically, the dynamics of garments are jointly affected by both internal and external driving factors. For
internal factors, while garments vary in topologies and materials, different topologies and materials result in drastically different dynamics. Moreover, in practice, humans
usually wear multiple garments in a layered manner, and
such multi-layered garments further complicate the problem. For example, the rigid outer layer of a jacket can press
against a softer inner dress, while the inner layer of a rigid tshirt tries to maintain its shape against outer softer clothing.
As for external factors, in addition to the movement of human body, gravity, wind and friction also significantly influence the dynamics of garments in different ways. Given the
complexity of 3D garment animation, previous approaches
[40, 38, 20, 24] tend to simplify the problem, considering
only single-layered garments with the movement of human
body being the only external driving factor. Though being

14361

