This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MixSynthFormer: A Transformer Encoder-like Structure with Mixed Synthetic
Self-attention for Efficient Human Pose Estimation
Yuran Sun, Alan William Dougherty, Zhuoying Zhang, Yi King Choi, Chuan Wu
The University of Hong Kong
yuransun@connect.hku.hk,{alanwd,tinawork}@hku.hk,{ykchoi,cwu}@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Feature-based
Keyframe Selector

Input

Human pose estimation in videos has wide-ranging
practical applications across various fields, many of which
require fast inference on resource-scarce devices, necessitating the development of efficient and accurate algorithms. Previous works have demonstrated the feasibility of exploiting motion continuity to conduct pose estimation using sparsely sampled frames with transformerbased models. However, these methods only consider the
temporal relation while neglecting spatial attention, and
the complexity of dot product self-attention calculations
in transformers are quadratically proportional to the embedding size. To address these limitations, we propose
MixSynthFormer, a transformer encoder-like model with
MLP-based mixed synthetic attention. By mixing synthesized spatial and temporal attentions, our model incorporates inter-joint and inter-frame importance and can accurately estimate human poses in an entire video sequence
from sparsely sampled frames. Additionally, the flexible design of our model makes it versatile for other motion synthesis tasks. Our extensive experiments on 2D/3D
pose estimation, body mesh recovery, and motion prediction validate the effectiveness and efficiency of MixSynthFormer. The code is available at https://github.
com/ireneesun/MixSynthFormer.git

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation is a crucial task in computer vision which aims to estimate the keypoint locations of a human body from visual inputs. It has a wide range of applications in virtual/augmented reality, healthcare, and security surveillance [23, 5]. In recent years, there has been a
growing demand for real-time pose estimation in many of
these applications. However, the computational burden of
deep learning models makes their real-time estimation on
resource-constrained devices (e.g., CPU, mobile devices)
challenging. How to estimate human poses in videos ef-

E

Rkf

Poses

E

Pose Estimator

Rkf

Recovery
Module

R

Refinement
Module

(a) Feature-based Keyframe Selector

Input

Sampler

E

Rkf

R

R

Poses

(b) Sampling-based Keyframe Selector
Input

Sampler

E

Rkf

R

Poses

(c) Ours

Figure 1: Pipelines of keyframe-based pose estimation frameworks. The recover process is similar to interpolation. (a) is the
feature-based pipeline [40, 7], which selects 30% to 40% of frames
based on input features and recovers the whole sequence. (b) is
the existing sampling-based pipeline [38], which uses a sampler to
select frames and conducts keyframe refinement, whole sequence
recovery and whole sequence refinement. (c) is our proposed simplified sampling-based pipeline excluding keyframe refinement.

ficiently remains an open research problem.
Conventional pose estimators [3, 22, 41, 29, 4, 37, 27] estimate poses frame-by-frame, and the efficiency depends on
the model design. Recent methods [40, 7, 38] have proven
the viability of estimating poses in sequences based solely
on keyframes. By leveraging the temporal redundancy in
videos, poses in the remaining frames can be reconstructed
from keyframe poses, similar to motion completion, which
can significantly reduce the cost of resource-intensive pose
estimators.
In current keyframe-based pose estimation frameworks,
keyframes are selected using a feature-based selector or a
sampler, as illustrated in Figures 1a and 1b. Feature-based
keyframe selectors [40, 7] select “good” frames based on
features extracted from inputs. The final poses in the whole
sequence are recovered from the estimated poses in those
frames without further refinements. A more effective approach is to sample a portion of frames directly from inputs

14884

