This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-aware Adaptive Learning for Cross-domain Few-shot Learning
Yurong Guo1 , Ruoyi Du1 , Yuan Dong1 , Timothy Hospedales2 , Yi-Zhe Song3 , Zhanyu Ma1 *
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
3
University of Edinburgh, UK
University of Surrey, UK
{guoyurong, duruoyi, yuandong, mazhanyu}@bupt.edu.cn,
t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk, y.song@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract

* Corresponding Author

Module-1

Module-2

𝟏×𝟏

Traditional deep learning models [42, 36, 12, 17] show
excellent generalization performance when training on a
large number of labeled samples. However, both abundant
samples and reliable annotations are not always available in
realistic applications, e.g., rare disease diagnosis, and finegrained recognition. Few-shot learning [32, 33, 23, 4, 10],
inspired by the fact that humans can quickly learn new

Backbone

𝟏×𝟏

1. Introduction

ResNet-18

𝟏×𝟏

Although existing few-shot learning works yield promising results for in-domain queries, they still suffer from weak
cross-domain generalization. Limited support data requires
effective knowledge transfer, but domain-shift makes this
harder. Towards this emerging challenge, researchers improved adaptation by introducing task-specific parameters,
which are directly optimized and estimated for each task.
However, adding a fixed number of additional parameters
fails to consider the diverse domain shifts between target
tasks and the source domain, limiting efficacy. In this paper,
we first observe the dependence of task-specific parameter
configuration on the target task. Abundant task-specific parameters may over-fit, and insufficient task-specific parameters may result in under-adaptation – but the optimal taskspecific configuration varies for different test tasks. Based
on these findings, we propose the Task-aware Adaptive Network (TA2 -Net), which is trained by reinforcement learning
to adaptively estimate the optimal task-specific parameter
configuration for each test task. It learns, for example, that
tasks with significant domain-shift usually have a larger
need for task-specific parameters for adaptation. We evaluate our model on Meta-dataset. Empirical results show
that our model outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods. Our code is available at https://github.com/
PRIS-CV/TA2-Net.

Module-3
1

Figure 1. (a) and (b) reveal the accuracy of varying test tasks
when inference was performed in different models, in which TAModules are attached to each layer in the backbone network. (c)
and (d) show the accuracy when TA-Modules are attached to different layers in the backbone network. Four dashed boxes show
the backbone and several TA-Modules.

knowledge, aims to adapt the model to new classes by only
a few labeled samples for each one.
Recently, meta-learning-based few-shot learning methods have made great strides in the setting where the train
and test tasks are sampled from the same domain [49, 22].
However, more and more studies have demonstrated that
these existing works fail to generalize well to novel classes
that are heterogeneous with the source domain [45, 9, 14].
This limitation is attributable to the fact that most previous
few-shot learning models focus solely on how to quickly
adapt to a set of novel classes with only a few labeled samples per class but less effort has been made to understand
and address the domain shift problem between the target
(test) task and training domain. Recently, to address this
problem, a series of research referred to as cross-domain
few-shot learning are proposed [45, 14, 35, 3, 7, 20, 26, 6].
Generally, these existing methods address the domain

1590

