This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Point-SLAM: Dense Neural Point Cloud-based SLAM
Erik Sandström1 *
1
ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Luc Van Gool1,2
Martin R. Oswald1,3
Yue Li1 *
2
3
KU Leuven, Belgium
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
NICE-SLAM [79]

1. Introduction
Dense visual simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) is a long-standing problem in computer vision
where dense maps have widespread applications in augmented and virtual reality (AR, VR), robot navigation and
planning tasks [17], collision detection [7], detailed occlusion reasoning [46], and interpretation [72] of scene content
which is vital for scene understanding and perception.
To estimate a dense map via SLAM, tracking and mapping steps have traditionally been employed with different
scene representations which creates undesirable data redundancy and independence since the tracking is then often performed independently of the estimated dense map. Camera tracking is frequently done with sparse point clouds
or depth maps, e.g. via frame-to-model tracking [36, 66,
6, 38, 21] and with incorporated loop closures [15, 77, 5].
For dense mapping the most common scene representations
* Equal contribution.

Ground Truth

Rendering

We propose a dense neural simultaneous localization
and mapping (SLAM) approach for monocular RGBD input which anchors the features of a neural scene representation in a point cloud that is iteratively generated in
an input-dependent data-driven manner. We demonstrate
that both tracking and mapping can be performed with the
same point-based neural scene representation by minimizing an RGBD-based re-rendering loss. In contrast to recent
dense neural SLAM methods which anchor the scene features in a sparse grid, our point-based approach allows dynamically adapting the anchor point density to the information density of the input. This strategy reduces runtime and
memory usage in regions with fewer details and dedicates
higher point density to resolve fine details. Our approach
performs either better or competitive to existing dense neural RGBD SLAM methods in tracking, mapping and rendering accuracy on the Replica, TUM-RGBD and ScanNet datasets. The source code is available at https://
github.com/eriksandstroem/Point-SLAM .

Point-SLAM (ours)

Anchor Points

Abstract

Figure 1: Point-SLAM Benefits. Due to the spatially adaptive anchoring of neural features, Point-SLAM can encode
high-frequency details more effectively than NICE-SLAM
which leads to superior performance in rendering, reconstruction and tracking accuracy while attaining competitive
runtime and memory usage. The first row shows the feature anchor points. For NICE-SLAM we show the centers
of non-empty voxels located on a regular grid, while the
density of anchor points for Point-SLAM depends on depth
and image gradients. The row below depicts resulting renderings showing substantial differences on areas with highfrequency textures like the vase, blinds, floor or blanket.
are voxel grids [36, 37], voxel hashing [38, 15, 21, 20], octrees [16, 49, 29], or point/surfel clouds [77, 5, 48]. The
introduction of learned scene representations [42, 30, 8, 32]
has led to rapid progress for learning-based online mapping methods [63, 64, 31, 18, 24, 41] and offline methods [43, 1, 57, 73]. However, most of these methods require ground truth depth or 3D for model training and may
not generalize to unseen real-world scenarios at test time.
To eliminate the potential domain gap between train and
test time, recent SLAM methods rely on test time optimization via volume rendering [53, 69, 79]. Compared to tradi-

18433

