This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Object-Centric Multiple Object Tracking
Zixu Zhao1 Jiaze Wang2 * Max Horn1 Yizhuo Ding3∗ Tong He1 Zechen Bai1
Dominik Zietlow1 Carl-Johann Simon-Gabriel1 Bing Shuai1 Zhuowen Tu1 Thomas Brox1
Bernt Schiele1 Yanwei Fu3 Francesco Locatello1 Zheng Zhang1† Tianjun Xiao1
1
Amazon Web Services 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 Fudan University
{zhaozixu, jiazew, yizhuodi, htong, baizeche, bshuai, ztu, zhaz, tianjux}@amazon.com
{hornmax, zietld, cjsg, brox, bschiel, locatelf}@amazon.de, yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised object-centric learning methods allow the
partitioning of scenes into entities without additional localization information and are excellent candidates for reducing the annotation burden of multiple-object tracking
(MOT) pipelines. Unfortunately, they lack two key properties: objects are often split into parts and are not consistently tracked over time. In fact, state-of-the-art models
achieve pixel-level accuracy and temporal consistency by
relying on supervised object detection with additional ID
labels for the association through time. This paper proposes a video object-centric model for MOT. It consists
of an index-merge module that adapts the object-centric
slots into detection outputs and an object memory module that builds complete object prototypes to handle occlusions. Benefited from object-centric learning, we only require sparse detection labels (0%-6.25%) for object localization and feature binding. Relying on our self-supervised
Expectation-Maximization-inspired loss for object association, our approach requires no ID labels. Our experiments significantly narrow the gap between the existing
object-centric model and the fully supervised state-of-theart and outperform several unsupervised trackers. Code
is available at https://github.com/amazon-science/objectcentric-multiple-object-tracking.

1. Introduction
Visual indexing theory [45] proposes a psychological
mechanism that includes a set of indexes that can be associated with an object in the environment. Each index retains its association with an object, even when that object
moves, interacts with other objects, or becomes partially
occluded. This theory was originally developed in the cog* Work completed during internship at AWS Shanghai AI Lab.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Temporal inconsistency and part-whole split of
object-centric representations. We visualize a video objectcentric model SAVi [32] that groups objects into a set of slots without labels. Common issues include that there exist many duplicate
slots that capture the same object or its parts (dashed arrows), and
the slots fail to track objects consistently over time (red boxes).

nitive sciences, however, a very similar principle lies at the
heart of object-centric representation learning. By learning object-level representations, we can develop models inferring object relations [39, 60, 62] and even their causal
structure [36, 40]. Additionally, object-centric representations have shown to be more robust [13], allow for combinatorial generalization [36], and are beneficial for various
downstream applications [60]. Since causal relations often
unfold in time, it is only logical to combine object-centric
learning (OCL) with temporal dynamics modeling, where
consistent object representations are necessary.
Multiple object tracking (MOT) is a computer-vision
problem that resembles visual indexing theory. MOT aims
at localizing a set of objects while following their trajectories over time so that the same object keeps the same
identity in the entire video stream. The dominant MOT
methods follow the detect-to-track paradigm: First, employ
an object detector to localize objects in each frame, then
perform association on detected objects between adjacent
frames to get tracklets. The development of state-of-the-art

16601

