This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffRate : Differentiable Compression Rate for Efﬁcient Vision Transformers
Mengzhao Chen1,2†‡ , Wenqi Shao2‡ , Peng Xu2,3 , Mingbao Lin4 , Kaipeng Zhang2 , Fei Chao1 ,
Rongrong Ji1∗ , Yu Qiao2 , Ping Luo2,3
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efﬁcient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 The University of Hong Kong 4 Tencent Holdings Ltd
Abstract
Token compression aims to speed up large-scale vision
transformers (e.g. ViTs) by pruning (dropping) or merging tokens. It is an important but challenging task. Although recent advanced approaches achieved great success, they need to carefully handcraft a compression rate
(i.e. number of tokens to remove), which is tedious and
leads to sub-optimal performance. To tackle this problem,
we propose Differentiable Compression Rate (DiffRate), a
novel token compression method that has several appealing properties prior arts do not have. First, DiffRate enables propagating the loss function’s gradient onto the compression ratio, which is considered as a non-differentiable
hyperparameter in previous work. In this case, different
layers can automatically learn different compression rates
layer-wisely without extra overhead. Second, token pruning
and merging can be naturally performed simultaneously in
DiffRate, while they were isolated in previous works. Third,
extensive experiments demonstrate that DiffRate achieves
state-of-the-art performance. For example, by applying
the learned layer-wise compression rates to an off-the-shelf
ViT-H (MAE) model, we achieve a 40% FLOPs reduction
and a 1.5× throughput improvement, with a minor accuracy drop of 0.16% on ImageNet without ﬁne-tuning, even
outperforming previous methods with ﬁne-tuning. Codes
and models are available at https://github.com/
OpenGVLab/DiffRate.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformer (ViT) [7] has rapidly developed
and achieved state-of-the-art performance in various vision
tasks such as image classiﬁcation[26], object detection [45],
and semantic segmentation [36, 12, 15, 16]. Due to the
ﬂexibility in handling various input formats, ViT has also
∗ Corresponding authors: Rongrong Ji (rrji@xmu.edu.cn)

† This work was done during his internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
‡ Equal Contribution

Figure 1: Comparison of different token compression
methods including token pruning EViT [23], token merging
ToMe [1] and our method. Pruned tokens are represented
by black and non-border, while merged tokens are represented by patches with the same inner and border color.
(a) shows that our method achieves better top-1 accuracy
on ImageNet with FLOPs of 2.3G when compressing pretrained Deit-S [32] without ﬁne-tuning. (b) and (c) show
that previous methods typically focus on either pruning or
merging tokens using hand-picked compression rate with
the guidance of performance. But our method leverages
both approaches simultaneously to achieve more effective
compression using the differentiable compression rate with
gradient optimization.
been widely applied to self-supervised learning [13] and
other modalities [9, 37]. Despite the remarkable success,
ViTs suffer from the intensive computational complexity
that increases quadratically with the token length in the selfattention layer, presenting a challenge for practical applications. Therefore, it is crucial to improve the efﬁciency of
ViTs in order to make them more widespread.
In pursuit of efﬁcient ViTs, various network compression techniques such as weight pruning [39, 34], quantization [27, 42], distillation [17, 35] and so on have been
investigated. Among them, token compression[29, 1, 23]

17164

