This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Your Diffusion Model is Secretly a Zero-Shot Classifier
Alexander C. Li

Mihir Prabhudesai

Shivam Duggal

Ellis Brown

Deepak Pathak

Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
The recent wave of large-scale text-to-image diffusion
models has dramatically increased our text-based image
generation abilities. These models can generate realistic
images for a staggering variety of prompts and exhibit impressive compositional generalization abilities. Almost all
use cases thus far have solely focused on sampling; however, diffusion models can also provide conditional density
estimates, which are useful for tasks beyond image generation. In this paper, we show that the density estimates
from large-scale text-to-image diffusion models like Stable
Diffusion can be leveraged to perform zero-shot classification without any additional training. Our generative
approach to classification, which we call Diffusion Classifier, attains strong results on a variety of benchmarks
and outperforms alternative methods of extracting knowledge from diffusion models. Although a gap remains between generative and discriminative approaches on zeroshot recognition tasks, our diffusion-based approach has
stronger multimodal compositional reasoning abilities than
competing discriminative approaches. Finally, we use Diffusion Classifier to extract standard classifiers from classconditional diffusion models trained on ImageNet. These
models approach the performance of SOTA discriminative classifiers and exhibit strong “effective robustness”
to distribution shift. Overall, our results are a step toward using generative over discriminative models for downstream tasks. Results and visualizations on our website:
diffusion-classifier.github.io/

1. Introduction
To Recognize Shapes, First Learn to Generate Images [31]—in this seminal paper, Geoffrey Hinton emphasizes generative modeling as a crucial strategy for training
artificial neural networks for discriminative tasks like image
recognition. Although generative models tackle the more
challenging task of accurately modeling the underlying data
distribution, they can create a more complete representation
of the world that can be utilized for various downstream
Correspondence to: Alexander Li <alexanderli@cmu.edu>

tasks. As a result, a plethora of implicit and explicit generative modeling approaches [26, 42, 45, 21, 76, 69, 78]
have been proposed over the last decade. However, the
primary focus of these works has been content creation
[18, 8, 39, 40, 75, 34] rather than their ability to perform discriminative tasks. In this paper, we revisit this classic generative vs. discriminative debate in the context of diffusion
models, the current state-of-the-art generative model family. In particular, we examine how diffusion models compare against the state-of-the-art discriminative models on
the task of image classification.
Diffusion models are a recent class of likelihood-based
generative models that model the data distribution via an
iterative noising and denoising procedure [69, 35]. They
have recently achieved state-of-the-art performance [20]
on several text-based content creation and editing tasks
[24, 66, 34, 65, 58]. Diffusion models operate by performing two iterative processes—the fixed forward process,
which destroys structure in the data by iteratively adding
noise, and the learned backward process, which attempts to
recover the structure in the noised data. These models are
trained via a variational objective, which maximizes an evidence lower bound (ELBO) [5] of the log-likelihood. For
most diffusion models, computing the ELBO consists of
adding noise ✏ to a sample, using the neural network to predict the added noise, and measuring the prediction error.
Conditional generative models like diffusion models can
be easily converted into classifiers [53]. Given an input x
and a finite set of classes c that we want to choose from,
we can use the model to compute class-conditional likelihoods p✓ (x | c). Then, by selecting an appropriate prior
distribution p(c) and applying Bayes’ theorem, we can get
predicted class probabilities p(c | x). For conditional diffusion models that use an auxiliary input, like a class index for
class-conditioned models or prompt for text-to-image models, we can do this by leveraging the ELBO as an approximate class-conditional log-likelihood log p(x | c). In practice, obtaining a diffusion model classifier through Bayes’
theorem consists of repeatedly adding noise and computing
a Monte Carlo estimate of the expected noise reconstruction
losses (also called ✏-prediction loss) for every class. We call
this approach Diffusion Classifier. Diffusion Classifier can

2206

