This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Make-An-Animation:
Large-Scale Text-conditional 3D Human Motion Generation
Samaneh Azadi

Akbar Shah

Thomas Hayes
Meta AI

Devi Parikh

Sonal Gupta

Abstract
Text-guided human motion generation has drawn significant interest because of its impactful applications spanning
animation and robotics. Recently, application of diffusion
models for motion generation has enabled improvements
in the quality of generated motions. However, existing approaches are limited by their reliance on relatively smallscale motion capture data, leading to poor performance
on more diverse, in-the-wild prompts. In this paper, we
introduce Make-An-Animation, a text-conditioned human
motion generation model which learns more diverse poses
and prompts from large-scale image-text datasets, enabling
significant improvement in performance over prior works.
Make-An-Animation is trained in two stages. First, we train
on a curated large-scale dataset of (text, static pseudo-pose)
pairs extracted from image-text datasets. Second, we finetune on motion capture data, adding additional layers to
model the temporal dimension. Unlike prior diffusion models for motion generation, Make-An-Animation uses a UNet architecture similar to recent text-to-video generation
models. Human evaluation of motion realism and alignment
with input text shows that our model reaches state-of-theart performance on text-to-motion generation. Generated
samples can be viewed at https://azadis.github.io/make-ananimation.

1. Introduction
As the world shifts towards virtual spaces, and as embodied agents become more capable, it will be increasingly
important to be able to generate plausible human motion.
Speech or text are perhaps the most natural ways to prompt
generative models, which is one reason behind the explosion in text-to-x generation research. Human motion generation from text has diverse applications both in virtual and
real worlds. For instance, it enables control of robots with
speech, faster video game development, creation of special
effects featuring humans, as well as novel metaverse userinteraction modes whereby users can control the actions of
their or others’ avatars via voice or text.

A person is chopping down a tree with an axe.

A person is ice skating.

Figure 1. Samples generated by Make-An-Animation for text conditional motion generation. The lighting of the body models represents progress across time. Darker color indicates later frames in
the sequence. In the top image, for a better visualization, frames
are distributed horizontally.

Text-conditioned human motion generation is challenging for a number of reasons. Firstly, there exists a huge
diversity of human motions and text descriptions which describe those motions (i.e., the task is many-to-many distribution matching). Secondly, because motion capture data is
expensive to acquire, human motion datasets are limited in
scale and diversity.
Recently, text-to-motion generation has seen rapid improvements in the quality and diversity of poses generated.
In particular, diffusion models, which have yielded impressive results in text-conditioned image and video genera-

15039

