This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Read-only Prompt Optimization for Vision-Language Few-shot Learning
Dongjun Lee∗ Seokwon Song∗ Jihee Suh
Joonmyeong Choi Sanghyeok Lee Hyunwoo J. Kim†
Korea University
{mando03, tjrdnjs99, adelsuh, pizard99, cat0626, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
In recent years, prompt tuning has proven effective
in adapting pre-trained vision-language models to downstream tasks. These methods aim to adapt the pre-trained
models by introducing learnable prompts while keeping pretrained weights frozen. However, learnable prompts can
affect the internal representation within the self-attention
module, which may negatively impact performance variance and generalization, especially in data-deficient settings. To address these issues, we propose a novel approach, Read-only Prompt Optimization (RPO). RPO leverages masked attention to prevent the internal representation shift in the pre-trained model. Further, to facilitate
the optimization of RPO, the read-only prompts are initialized based on special tokens of the pre-trained model.
Our extensive experiments demonstrate that RPO outperforms CLIP and CoCoOp in base-to-new generalization
and domain generalization while displaying better robustness. Also, the proposed method achieves better generalization on extremely data-deficient settings, while improving
parameter efficiency and computational overhead. Code is
available at https://github.com/mlvlab/RPO.

1. Introduction
Vision-language models like CLIP [6], ALIGN [24], and
FILIP [50] have achieved excellent performance in various vision-language tasks. Since vision-language models
are supervised by natural language based on the contrastive
learning objective, by placing the class name in a textual
template (e.g.,“A photo of a [CLASS]”), vision-language
models can effectively classify images in open-vocabulary
settings [6].
Recent works have explored the adaptation of these
vision-language models on downstream tasks [19]. How* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Variance of CoCoOp, CoOp, and linear probing. Linear probing, which does not shift the pre-trained
representation, shows lower variance in performance compared with prompt learning methods such as CoOp and CoCoOp.

ever, unlike small pre-trained models, large-scale architectures (e.g., CLIP) are difficult to fine-tune, since it is
inefficient, resource-intensive, and possibly damaging to
the good representations learned during pre-training. In
CLIP, prompt engineering is conducted to provide domainspecific context to downstream tasks (e.g., “A photo of a
[CLASS], a type of car”) [6]. However, this means that the
prompt has to be chosen manually, based on trial and error.
To mitigate this issue, Context Optimization (CoOp) [33]
suggests automating prompt engineering on CLIP, replacing the context words in natural language-based prompts
with learnable vectors. Conditional Context Optimization
(CoCoOp) [31] extended CoOp with an image-conditional
prompt, generated by an additional neural network, to improve generalization.
Although these existing methods are proposed to avoid
adversely affecting the learned parameters of the pre-trained
model during prompt learning, they still affect the model’s
hidden representation through the attention mechanism,
which we call the internal representation shift. We visualize this process of representation shift in Figure 2a. As

1401

