This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion in Style
Martin Nicolas Everaert1 Marco Bocchio2 Sami Arpa2 Sabine Süsstrunk1 Radhakrishna Achanta1
1

School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Switzerland 2 Largo.ai, Lausanne, Switzerland
Project page: https://ivrl.github.io/diffusion-in-style/

Style 1:
Anime sketch
[43]

Style 2:
Few-shot Pokemon
[16, 35, 37]

Style 3:
48 Famous
Americans comics
[19, 44]
A side view of an
owl sitting in a
field.

A panda making
latte art.

Rainbow
coloured
penguin.

A cross-section
view of a brain.

A mouse using a
mushroom as an
umbrella.

A confused
grizzly bear in
calculus class.

Figure 1. Examples of style adaptations induced by Diffusion in Style. A small number of target style images are used to efficiently
adapt Stable Diffusion to a desired style: anime sketch (first row, [43]), few-shot Pokemon (middle row, [16, 35, 37]), and the 48 Famous
Americans comics (bottom row, [19, 44]). The adapted model can generate images in the desired style with any textual prompt, without
conditioning on a target style image at inference time. Each column is generated from only the textual prompt indicated at the bottom.

Abstract
We present Diffusion in Style, a simple method to adapt
Stable Diffusion to any desired style, using only a small set
of target images. It is based on the key observation that
the style of the images generated by Stable Diffusion is tied
to the initial latent tensor. Not adapting this initial latent
tensor to the style makes fine-tuning slow, expensive, and
impractical, especially when only a few target style images
are available. In contrast, fine-tuning is much easier if this
initial latent tensor is also adapted. Our Diffusion in Style is
orders of magnitude more sample-efficient and faster. It also
generates more pleasing images than existing approaches,
as shown qualitatively and with quantitative comparisons.

1. Introduction
Generating images of a specific style using large-scale
text-to-image models, such as Stable Diffusion [24], is an
attractive idea, owing to the high quality of the output images. However, enforcing a coherent style on the generated
images is not straightforward. Describing the style in the
input textual prompt is often insufficient to obtain images
in the desired style. As a consequence, the model needs to
be fine-tuned. Yet, current approaches for fine-tuning Stable
Diffusion to a particular style suffer from one or more of the
following limitations: results can be far from aesthetically
pleasing [40], results may not match the desired style precisely [38, 39], the method may require impractical amounts
of data and computational resources [46, 47], or fine-tuned

2251

