This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What Can Simple Arithmetic Operations Do for Temporal Modeling?
Wenhao Wu1,2 Yuxin Song2 Zhun Sun2 Jingdong Wang2 Chang Xu1 Wanli Ouyang3,1
1
2
3
The University of Sydney
Baidu Inc.
Shanghai AI Laboratory
wenhao.wu@sydney.edu.au

https://github.com/whwu95/ATM

Video frames

Abstract
Temporal modeling plays a crucial role in understanding video content. To tackle this problem, previous studies
built complicated temporal relations through time sequence
thanks to the development of computationally powerful devices. In this work, we explore the potential of four simple arithmetic operations for temporal modeling. Specifically, we first capture auxiliary temporal cues by computing addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division between pairs of extracted frame features. Then, we extract
corresponding features from these cues to benefit the original temporal-irrespective domain. We term such a simple
pipeline as an Arithmetic Temporal Module (ATM), which
operates on the stem of a visual backbone with a plug-andplay style. We conduct comprehensive ablation studies on
the instantiation of ATMs and demonstrate that this module provides powerful temporal modeling capability at a
low computational cost. Moreover, the ATM is compatible
with both CNNs- and ViTs-based architectures. Our results
show that ATM achieves superior performance over several popular video benchmarks. Specifically, on SomethingSomething V1, V2 and Kinetics-400, we reach top-1 accuracy of 65.6%, 74.6%, and 89.4% respectively. The code is
available at https://github.com/whwu95/ATM .

1. Introduction
Owing to the rapid development of the Internet and
mobile devices, researchers can now work with massive
amounts of video data. The time-sequenced data provides
substantial information in understanding visual tasks such
as human activity recognition. While significant progress
has been made in extracting the semantics from a single
image, how to model the temporal information effectively
becomes an essential problem for video recognition.
Historically, temporal information has been constructed
either by utilizing low-level streams (e.g. optical flow, motion vector) [14, 46, 58, 78], or by building segregated
time sequence with recurrent networks using features extracted from an image backbone [8, 25, 76]. After that,

Arithmetic Operations on frames

(a) t-th frame

(c) Addition

(d) Subtraction

(b) (t+1)-th frame

(e) Multiplication

(f) Division

Figure 1. (a),(b): A pair of consecutive video frames where a cyan
rectangle highlights the area around a moving hand. (c)-(f): Visualization of arithmetic operations (+, −, p, ÷) on consecutive
frames. Zoom in for the best view.

more works present 3D CNNs [5, 51] and factorized 2D+1D
CNNs [40, 53, 72] as the natural evolution from their 2D
counterparts for dealing with 3D volumetric video data
directly, thanks to the rapid improvement of computational capacity. Along this research line, many recent
pieces of research follow the “2D backbone + temporal
interaction” paradigm to develop efficient temporal modules [17, 23, 24, 27, 28, 29, 32, 34, 50, 57, 61, 68, 83]. The
strong point of this approach is that, the pre-trained image
backbone can serve as a reasonable initialization, reducing training time and enabling the optimization of the entire video architecture in an end-to-end manner. Under this
paradigm, the ways of temporal modeling can be roughly
divided into two categories based on the type of interaction
between frames: i) sequence-wise modeling (e.g., temporal
convolution [13, 29, 60, 61], dynamic convolution [34, 68],
and temporal transformer [1, 2, 33]); ii) pair-wise modeling
(e.g., pseudo optical flow estimation [50], similarity estimation [23, 24, 56], etc.).
We bring the latter into focus. Precisely, pair-wise modeling employs the relationship between an anchor frame and
the others. Such relationships are considered to contain expert knowledge. For instance, a few previous works [23, 24,
56] have used correlation operations to estimate the similar-

13712

