This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DenseShift : Towards Accurate and Efficient
Low-Bit Power-of-Two Quantization
Xinlin Li1 , Bang Liu2 , Rui Heng Yang1 , Vanessa Courville1 , Chao Xing1 , and Vahid Partovi Nia1
1

Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies.
University of Montreal & Mila - Quebec AI Institute
1
{ xinlin.li1, rui.heng.yang1, vanessa.courville, xingchao.ml, vahid.partovinia }@huawei.com
2
bang.liu@umontreal.ca
2

Abstract
70

Top 1 Accuracy

Efficiently deploying deep neural networks on lowresource edge devices is challenging due to their everincreasing resource requirements. To address this issue,
researchers have proposed multiplication-free neural networks, such as Power-of-Two quantization, or also known
as Shift networks, which aim to reduce memory usage and
simplify computation. However, existing low-bit Shift networks are not as accurate as their full-precision counterparts, typically suffering from limited weight range encoding schemes and quantization loss. In this paper, we propose the DenseShift network, which significantly improves
the accuracy of Shift networks, achieving competitive performance to full-precision networks for vision and speech
applications. In addition, we introduce a method to deploy an efficient DenseShift network using non-quantized
floating-point activations, while obtaining 1.6× speed-up
over existing methods. To achieve this, we demonstrate that
zero-weight values in low-bit Shift networks do not contribute to model capacity and negatively impact inference
computation. To address this issue, we propose a zerofree shifting mechanism that simplifies inference and increases model capacity. We further propose a sign-scale
decomposition design to enhance training efficiency and
a low-variance random initialization strategy to improve
the model’s transfer learning performance. Our extensive
experiments on various computer vision and speech tasks
demonstrate that DenseShift outperforms existing low-bit
multiplication-free networks and achieves competitive performance compared to full-precision networks. Furthermore, our proposed approach exhibits strong transfer learning performance without a drop in accuracy. Our code was
released on GitHub.

68

Ours (Random)
S3-Shift (Random)
DeepShift (Pre-trained)
INQ (Pre-trained)
DeepShift (Random)
TWN (Random)

66
64
62
2

3

4

Weight Bit-width

5

Figure 1: Benchmark low-bit DenseShift networks over
SOTA low-bit Shift networks on ImageNet using the
ResNet-18 model architecture.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated superior performance in diverse applications such as image classification, object detection, and image segmentation [17, 27, 6],
and speech [29]. However, despite the high accuracy of
multiplication-based deep neural networks, their computing resource requirement makes their deployment challenging, especially on low-resource devices. Recent research
has explored multiplication-free neural networks that reduce memory footprint and overall energy consumption to
address this issue.
Existing works on multiplication-free neural networks
include binary [8], and ternary quantization [21]. They respectively constrain their weights in the range of {±1} and
{0}∪{±1}, in order to replace multiplication computations
with less expensive operations such as a sign flip operator.

17010

