This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open Set Video HOI detection from Action-centric Chain-of-Look Prompting
Nan Xi1

Jingjing Meng2

Junsong Yuan1

1

State University of New York at Buffalo 2 Amazon
{nanxi, jsyuan@buffalo.edu}, jingjing.meng1@gmail.com

Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection is essential
for understanding and modeling real-world events. Existing works on HOI detection mainly focus on static images and a closed setting, where all HOI classes are provided in the training set. In comparison, detecting HOIs
in videos in open set scenarios is more challenging. First,
under open set circumstances, HOI detectors are expected
to hold strong generalizability to recognize unseen HOIs
not included in the training data. Second, accurately capturing temporal contextual information from videos is difficult, but it is crucial for detecting temporal-related actions
such as open, close, pull, push. To this end, we
propose ACoLP, a model of Action-centric Chain-of-Look
Prompting for open set video HOI detection. ACoLP regards actions as the carrier of semantics in videos, which
captures the essential semantic information across frames.
To make the model generalizable on unseen classes, inspired by the chain-of-thought prompting in natural language processing, we introduce the chain-of-look prompting scheme that decomposes prompt generation from largescale vision-language model into a series of intermediate
visual reasoning steps. Consequently, our model captures
complex visual reasoning processes underlying the HOI
events in videos, providing essential guidance for detecting
unseen classes. Extensive experiments on two video HOI
datasets, VidHOI and CAD120, demonstrate that ACoLP
achieves competitive performance compared with the stateof-the-art methods in the conventional closed setting, and
outperforms existing methods by a large margin in the open
set setting. Our code is avaliable at https://github.
com/southnx/ACoLP.

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection generates a
set of meaningful <person, interaction, object> triplets
for a given scene. It has attracted much attention in re-

Figure 1. Illustration on chain-of-thought prompting and
chain-of-look prompting. (a) Chain-of-thought prompting divides a problem into a series of intermediate reasoning steps, enabling large language models on symbolic reasoning tasks. (b) We
propose chain-of-look prompting scheme to captures complex visual reasoning processes with two reasoning networks from largescale vision-language models. Each reasoning network consists
of two visual reasoning chains. The learned visual reasoning processes can be expanded to unseen classes with strong generalization ability.

cent years, due to its importance for scene understanding, and applications in healthcare, autonomous driving,
etc. [47, 42, 15, 6, 12, 16, 24]. Most current works
investigate HOI detection in static images in a closed
setting[45, 15, 6, 29, 32], where all HOI classes are predefined with examples provided in the training set. However, real-world scenarios are often open-set, where HOIs
with novel actions are not present in the training set. Detecting open set HOIs in videos is challenging due to the
following reasons. First, static images barely contain temporal information of human and objects, thus directly transferring HOI detection methods for static images to videos
fails to model the temporal dynamics. Second, the possi-

3079

