This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Empowering Low-Light Image Enhancer through Customized Learnable Priors
Naishan Zheng 1 ,* Man Zhou 1 ,* Yanmeng Dong, Xiangyu Rui 2 , Jie Huang 1 , Chongyi Li 3 , Feng Zhao 1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University, 3 Nankai University
{nszheng,manman,hj0117}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{dongym.aca,xyrui.aca,lichongyi25}@gmail.com, fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Low-light conditions often result in images with limited visibility and noise, which can negatively affect downstream computer vision tasks. To recover details buried in
low-light images and remove noise effects, the field of low* Both authors contributed equally to this research.
† Corresponding author.

Adjustment

𝐿𝐾

Enh
𝑅𝐾

Restoration

…

𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐿K, 𝑅𝐾

𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐿2, 𝑅2

𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐿1, 𝑅1

Low

(a) Previous Deep Unfolding Methods

Noise

Low

Structure Flow

…

(b) Ours

𝐿𝐾

Adjustment

N

Customized
Learned Priors

Enh

𝑁𝐾
𝑅𝐾

Restoration

Reflectance

𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐿K, 𝑅𝐾, 𝑁𝐾

Illumination

R

𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐿2, 𝑅2, 𝑁2

L

𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐿1, 𝑅1, 𝑁1

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable
progress in enhancing low-light images by improving their
brightness and eliminating noise. However, most existing
methods construct end-to-end mapping networks heuristically, neglecting the intrinsic prior of image enhancement
task and lacking transparency and interpretability. Although some unfolding solutions have been proposed to relieve these issues, they rely on proximal operator networks
that deliver ambiguous and implicit priors. In this work,
we propose a paradigm for low-light image enhancement
that explores the potential of customized learnable priors to
improve the transparency of the deep unfolding paradigm.
Motivated by the powerful feature representation capability
of Masked Autoencoder (MAE), we customize MAE-based
illumination and noise priors and redevelop them from two
perspectives: 1) structure flow: we train the MAE from a
normal-light image to its illumination properties and then
embed it into the proximal operator design of the unfolding architecture; and 2) optimization flow: we train MAE
from a normal-light image to its gradient representation
and then employ it as a regularization term to constrain
noise in the model output. These designs improve the interpretability and representation capability of the model. Extensive experiments on multiple low-light image enhancement datasets demonstrate the superiority of our proposed
paradigm over state-of-the-art methods. Code is available
at https://github.com/zheng980629/CUE.

𝑈𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒 "Black
Box" 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟𝑠

Figure 1. Comparison between previous deep unfolding low-light
enhancement methods and our proposed paradigm. (a) Previous
works deliver the ambiguous and implicit priors by the heuristically proximal networks in a “black box” manner; and (b) our
CUE explores the potential of customized learnable priors on lowlight image enhancement to improve the transparency of the deep
unfolding paradigm.

light image enhancement has received significant attention.
Existing approaches can be classified into two categories:
traditional methods and deep learning-based methods.
Traditional methods for low-light image enhancement
involve formulating the problem as an optimization task and
using image priors as regularization terms to constrain the
solution space. One such representative method is based on
the Retinex theory[23], which assumes that an image can
be decomposed into reflectance and illumination components where the former keeps consistency under any lighting conditions and the latter reflects variations in bright-

12559

