This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Co-Evolution of Pose and Mesh for 3D Human Body Estimation from Video
Yingxuan You1 Hong Liu1 B
Ti Wang1 Wenhao Li1 Runwei Ding1 Xia Li2
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich

Despite significant progress in single image-based 3D
human mesh recovery, accurately and smoothly recovering
3D human motion from a video remains challenging. Existing video-based methods generally recover human mesh
by estimating the complex pose and shape parameters from
coupled image features, whose high complexity and low representation ability often result in inconsistent pose motion
and limited shape patterns. To alleviate this issue, we introduce 3D pose as the intermediary and propose a Pose
and Mesh Co-Evolution network (PMCE) that decouples
this task into two parts: 1) video-based 3D human pose estimation and 2) mesh vertices regression from the estimated
3D pose and temporal image feature. Specifically, we propose a two-stream encoder that estimates mid-frame 3D pose
and extracts a temporal image feature from the input image
sequence. In addition, we design a co-evolution decoder
that performs pose and mesh interactions with the imageguided Adaptive Layer Normalization (AdaLN) to make pose
and mesh fit the human body shape. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed PMCE outperforms previous
state-of-the-art methods in terms of both per-frame accuracy and temporal consistency on three benchmark datasets:
3DPW, Human3.6M, and MPI-INF-3DHP. Our code is available at https://github.com/kasvii/PMCE.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D human mesh from an image or a video
is an essential yet challenging task for many applications,
such as human-robot interaction, virtual reality, and motion
analysis. The challenges of this task arise from the 2D-to-3D
ambiguity, cluttered background, and occlusions. Recently,
many studies [8, 13, 16, 19, 22, 33] have been proposed to
recover the 3D human mesh from a single image, which can
generally be categorized into RGB-based methods and posebased methods. RGB-based methods predict human mesh
B Corresponding author.

30
25
20

VIBE
MEVA
TCMR
MPS-Net
MAED
PMCE (Ours)

15
10
5
60

70

80

MPJPE (mm)

90

acceleration error (mm/s2)

Abstract

acceleration error (mm/s2)

{youyx,tiwang}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {hongliu,wenhaoli,dingrunwei}@pku.edu.cn, xia.li@inf.ethz.ch

100

30
25
20
15

VIBE
MEVA
TCMR
MPS-Net
PMCE (Ours)

10
5
0
50

55

60

65

70

MPJPE (mm)

75

80

Figure 1: Comparison with video-based 3D human mesh
recovery methods upon accuracy (MPJPE ↓) and temporal
consistency (acceleration error ↓) on 3DPW [40] (left) and
Human3.6M [12] (right) datasets.

end-to-end from image pixels, typically predicting the pose
and shape parameters of the parametric human model (e.g.,
SMPL [27]) to generate the 3D human mesh. However,
the representation ability of the parametric model is constrained by the limited pose and shape space [18, 19]. To
overcome this limitation, non-parametric approaches have
been proposed to predict the 3D coordinates of mesh vertices directly, which generally use Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [8, 42] or Transformers [5, 24, 51] to capture
the relations among vertices. In contrast, pose-based methods leverage 2D pose detectors [4, 36] as the front-end to
recover human mesh from the detected 2D poses. With the
significant advancements in 2D pose detection, pose-based
methods have become increasingly robust and lightweight,
making them popular for real-world applications [51].
Despite the significant progress in single-image 3D human mesh recovery, these methods still struggle to capture
temporally consistent human motion from videos. To solve
this problem, several works [7, 15, 28, 43] extend single
image-based methods to video cases. They use a pre-trained
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [17] to extract static
features for each frame, then train a temporal network to predict SMPL parameters. Although these video-based methods
significantly improve the temporal consistency of 3D human
motion, there exists a trade-off between per-frame accuracy

14963

