This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Adversarial Robustness of Masked Autoencoders via
Test-time Frequency-domain Prompting
Qidong Huang1

Xiaoyi Dong2 Dongdong Chen3 Yinpeng Chen3 Lu Yuan3
Gang Hua4 Weiming Zhang1, * Nenghai Yu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Shanghai AI Lab
3
Microsoft Reaserch 4 Wormpex AI Research

{hqd0037@mail., zhangwm@, ynh@}ustc.edu.cn
{cddlyf@, ganghua@}gmail.com

1. Introduction
BERT pretraining for vision transformers [3, 25, 16, 60,
20] ignites rising interests recently and shows great po* Corresponding author.

Robust Accuracy (%)

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the adversarial robustness of
vision transformers that are equipped with BERT pretraining (e.g., BEiT, MAE). A surprising observation is that MAE
has significantly worse adversarial robustness than other
BERT pretraining methods. This observation drives us to
rethink the basic differences between these BERT pretraining methods and how these differences affect the robustness
against adversarial perturbations. Our empirical analysis
reveals that the adversarial robustness of BERT pretraining
is highly related to the reconstruction target, i.e., predicting
the raw pixels of masked image patches will degrade more
adversarial robustness of the model than predicting the semantic context, since it guides the model to concentrate
more on medium-/high-frequency components of images.
Based on our analysis, we provide a simple yet effective way
to boost the adversarial robustness of MAE. The basic idea
is using the dataset-extracted domain knowledge to occupy
the medium-/high-frequency of images, thus narrowing the
optimization space of adversarial perturbations. Specifically, we group the distribution of pretraining data and optimize a set of cluster-specific visual prompts on frequency
domain. These prompts are incorporated with input images
through prototype-based prompt selection during test period. Extensive evaluation shows that our method clearly
boost MAE’s adversarial robustness while maintaining its
clean performance on ImageNet-1k classification. Our code
is available at: https://github.com/shikiw/RobustMAE.

dongxiaoyi@pjlab.org.cn

{yiche@, luyuan@}microsoft.com

54
52
50
48
46
44
42
40
38

MoCo
PeCo

BEiT
DeiT

11.5% Drop!

supervised
self-supervised
82.0

82.5

MAE
83.0

83.5

Clean Accuracy (%)

84.0

84.5

85.0

Figure 1. MAE has much worse adversarial robustness than
other pretraining counterparts. We use ViT-Base as the backbone and evaluate on ImageNet-1k. The robust accuracy is tested
under standard l∞ -norm PGD attack.

tentials in improving downstream performance. Existing
methods share the similar pretraining principle, i.e., randomly masking some patches on the input images and asking the transformer to reconstruct them based on unmasked
patches, which encourages the transformer model to comprehend the semantic relationship among different patches
for better reconstruction. Thus their main differences lie in
the reconstruction targets.
Specifically, following the practices in natural language
processing [14], BEiT [3] and PeCo [16] convert the image
patches into discrete tokens with pretrained VQVAE [50]
and regard such discrete tokens as the prediction targets.
iBOT [60] integrates contrastive learning and uses online
learned feature as prediction target. MAE [25] takes a step
forward to directly use the raw pixel values as the target,
achieving surprisingly good results. It can be regarded as
a special form of denoising autoencoding, which provides
a possibility to revitalize this classical direction. Although
these methods have different reconstruction targets, they all
achieve substantial improvement over multiple vision tasks.
However, we observe a surprising discrepancy between
MAE and other pretraining counterparts (e.g., BEiT, PeCo)

1600

