This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CIRI: Curricular Inactivation for Residue-aware One-shot Video Inpainting
1

Weiying Zheng 1 * Cheng Xu 1∗ Xuemiao Xu1,2,3,4† Wenxi Liu 5 Shengfeng He 6†
South China University of Technology 2 State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Building Science
3
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Computational Intelligence and Cyberspace Information
5
Fuzhou University 6 Singapore Management University

First Frame X1 & Mask M1

Target
Prediction

Before Inactivation

Frame X65
13

Current Frames X2 , … , XT
...

O

…

Frame X70
Error-tolerant
Target Inactivation

Initial
Result

Online
Residue Removal

Figure 1: We resolve a challenging
problem of video inpainting with the one-and-only target annotation in the first frame. Our
Aa 13 14
method is completely plug-and-play that allows converting existing inpainting models to the one-shot setting with significant
performance improvements.

Abstract

line residue removal method in an iterative detect-andrefine manner. Extensive experiments on several real-world
datasets demonstrate the quantitative and qualitative superiorities of our proposed method in one-shot video inpainting. More importantly, our method is extremely flexible
that
can be integrated with arbitrary traditional inpaintT30
ing models, activating them to perform the reliable oneshot video inpainting task. Video demonstrations can be
found in our supplement, and our code can be found at
https://github.com/Arise-zwy/CIRI.

Target
Inactivation

Video inpainting aims at filling in missing regions of a
video. However, when dealing with dynamic scenes with
camera or object movements, annotating the inpainting
target becomes laborious and impractical. In this paper,
we resolve the one-shot video inpainting problem in which
only one annotated first frame is provided. A naive solution is to propagate the initial target to the other frames
with techniques like object tracking. In this context, the
main obstacles are the unreliable propagation and the partially inpainted artifacts due to the inaccurate mask. For
the former problem, we propose curricular inactivation to
replace the hard masking mechanism for indicating the inpainting target, which is robust to erroneous predictions
in long-term video inpainting. For the latter, we explore
the properties of inpainting residue and present an on* Both authors contributed equally to this research.
† Corresponding authors: Xuemiao Xu (xuemx@scut.edu.cn)

Shengfeng He (shengfenghe@smu.edu.sg).

and

1. Introduction
Video inpainting aims at filling holes with plausible content that is spatially and temporally consistent with the original video. It serves as an essential and fundamental function in numerous video editing applications, such as scratch
restoration [14, 36], video retargeting [1, 20], and object
removal [18].
Existing methods have a strong assumption that the in-

13012

17

