This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReGen: A good Generative zero-shot video classifier should be Rewarded
Adrian Bulat1,2 , Enrique Sanchez1 , Brais Martinez1 , Georgios Tzimiropoulos1,3
1
Samsung AI Cambridge 2 Technical University of Iasi 3 Queen Mary University of London

Abstract
This paper sets out to solve the following problem: How
can we turn a generative video captioning model into an
open-world video/action classification model? Video captioning models can naturally produce open-ended free-form
descriptions of a given video which, however, might not be
discriminative enough for video/action recognition. Unfortunately, when fine-tuned to auto-regress the class names
directly, video captioning models overfit the base classes
losing their open-world zero-shot capabilities. To alleviate
base class overfitting, in this work, we propose to use reinforcement learning to enforce the output of the video captioning model to be more class-level discriminative. Specifically, we propose ReGen, a novel reinforcement learning
based framework with a three-fold objective and reward
functions: (1) a class-level discrimination reward that enforces the generated caption to be correctly classified into
the corresponding action class, (2) a CLIP reward that encourages the generated caption to continue to be descriptive
of the input video (i.e. video-specific), and (3) a grammar
reward that preserves the grammatical correctness of the
caption. We show that ReGen can train a model to produce
captions that are: discriminative, video-specific and grammatically correct. Importantly, when evaluated on standard
benchmarks for zero- and few-shot action classification, ReGen significantly outperforms the previous state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Open-world or zero-shot video recognition is concerned
with the problem of recognizing at test time, unseen during training, video/action classes. For example, during
training, an open-world video recognition model might be
trained to classify dancing blues or dancing latin
but, during test time, it might be required to perform classification over new categories, not seen during training, like
dancing tango. Another application of open worldrecognition is when a model is trained on dataset A with
class taxonomy CA and then it is applied directly (i.e. without re-training) on a different dataset B with a different (i.e.
non- or partially-overlapping) class taxonomy CB .

A video captioning model uses (by construction) a generative language model, conditioned on features produced by
a video backbone, to generate a human-interpretable freeform textual description of the video which, in principle,
can be associated to any video/action class. Hence, a captioning model can be potentially used for open-world recognition. However, in practice, the generated captions are not
discriminative enough for video/action recognition. In this
paper, our goal is to turn a generative captioning model
into a highly-accurate open-world video/action classification model which, at the same time, maintains its ability to
generate video-specific grammatically correct captions.
To our knowledge, the only method that trains a generative captioning model for open-world video/action recognition is the recently proposed REST [8]. Therein, the
authors first showed that directly fine-tuning a captioning
model to auto-regress the action class names results in base
class overfitting and severely hurts zero-shot generalizability. While REST addresses, to some extent, this problem
by utilizing an unsupervised adaptation framework, it completely discards class information during training. As a result, the trained model might still not be very discriminative
for open-world video classification.
Our main goal in this work is to address this important
limitation of [8] by enabling the integration of class information into the training of a generative video captioning
model. To this end, we propose ReGen, a newly introduced
training framework based on Reinforcement Learning (RL)
and 3 appropriate rewards to train a Generative model so
that its output caption satisfies 3 key requirements: (1) be
class discriminative avoiding base overfitting, (2) maintain
the video-specific granularity of the generated text, and (3)
maintain the grammatical correctness of the generated text.
Different to video captioning, ReGen does not use captions
to train the model, only class label information. To this end,
in this paper, we make the following contributions:
• To avoid base class overfitting, we avoid training with
a standard language modelling loss and, instead, introduce RL and CLS-R, a class discrimination reward
computed from class names only, that enforces the generated caption for a given video to be correctly classified into the corresponding ground truth class.
• As the optimization of CLS-R alone results in a model

13523

