This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AccFlow: Backward Accumulation for Long-Range Optical Flow
Guangyang Wu1,2∗ Xiaohong Liu1† Kunming Luo5‡ Xi Liu2‡ Qingqing Zheng3
Shuaicheng Liu2 Xinyang Jiang4 Guangtao Zhai1 Wenyi Wang2†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology 4 Microsoft Research Asia
5
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Recent deep learning-based optical flow estimators have
exhibited impressive performance in generating local flows
between consecutive frames. However, the estimation of
long-range flows between distant frames, particularly under complex object deformation and large motion occlusion, remains a challenging task. One promising solution
is to accumulate local flows explicitly or implicitly to obtain the desired long-range flow. Nevertheless, the accumulation errors and flow misalignment can hinder the effectiveness of this approach. This paper proposes a novel recurrent framework called AccFlow, which recursively backward accumulates local flows using a deformable module
called as AccPlus. In addition, an adaptive blending module is designed along with AccPlus to alleviate the occlusion
effect by backward accumulation and rectify the accumulation error. Notably, we demonstrate the superiority of backward accumulation over conventional forward accumulation, which to the best of our knowledge has not been explicitly established before. To train and evaluate the proposed
AccFlow, we have constructed a large-scale high-quality
dataset named CVO, which provides ground-truth optical
flow labels between adjacent and distant frames. Extensive
experiments validate the effectiveness of AccFlow in handling long-range optical flow estimation. Codes are available at https://github.com/mulns/AccFlow.

1. Introduction
Optical flow is ideally a dense field of motion vectors
that depicts the pixel-wise correspondence of two video
frames. Since a variety of downstream applications (e.g.,
video editing [3, 14, 54], action recognition [42], and
object tracking [1]) significantly benefit from the accuracy of flow estimation, optical flow estimation turns out
† Corresponding authors. ‡ Equal contribution. ∗ Work was partially
finished at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China.

Reference Frame

Ground Truth

Target Frame

RAFT

Ground Truth

GMA

Ours

Figure 1: Comparisons of our method with RAFT [48]
and GMA [19] on HS-Sintel dataset [18]. Zoom-in regions
are annotated in red boxes. Our method outperforms other
methods especially for occluded area.
to be a long-standing fundamental task in computer vision [41, 39, 40, 27, 26, 55, 25, 13].
Recent advances [6, 47, 48] resort to deep learning to
estimate optical flow and achieve promising accuracy. Although remarkable performance has been achieved in the local flow estimation between two adjacent frames, it is nontrivial to estimate the long-range flow that records the pixel
correspondence between two distant frames.
The long-range optical flow is a grounded research topic
that has plenty of practical applications. For instance, in
video completion [8], long-range optical flow is beneficial to the detail compensation between distant frames; in
video key-point propagation [11], since the long-range optical flow performs holistic pixel-tracking in nature, it frees
the quantity limitation of tracked pixels; in video superresolution [31], it enables better inter-frame alignment in
one sliding window; and in segmentation mask propagation [51], it provides an explicit approach to propagate
masks to distant frames, improving the interpretability compared to the implicit matching. The above examples take a
glance at the wide applications of long-range optical flow.
More significantly, the success of this task has the potential to break through the performance bottleneck of relevant
tasks.

12119

