This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EGC: Image Generation and Classification via a Diffusion Energy-Based Model
Qiushan Guo1 , Chuofan Ma1 , Yi Jiang2 , Zehuan Yuan2 , Yizhou Yu1 , Ping Luo1,3
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 ByteDance Inc. 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory

Figure 1: Generated samples from our EGC models on CelebA-HQ 1024×1024, LSUN Church 256×256, CelebA-HQ
256×256 and ImageNet 256×256 datasets, shown from left to right.

Abstract
0
LDM-VQ8
10
20
30
40
50
N/A

VIM

FID

Learning image classification and image generation
using the same set of network parameters presents a
formidable challenge. Recent advanced approaches perform well in one task often exhibit poor performance in
the other. This work introduces an energy-based classifier and generator, namely EGC, which can achieve superior performance in both tasks using a single neural network. Unlike conventional classifiers that produce a label
given an image (i.e., a conditional distribution p(y|x)), the
forward pass in EGC is a classification model that yields
a joint distribution p(x, y), enabling a diffusion model in
its backward pass by marginalizing out the label y to estimate the score function. Furthermore, EGC can be adapted
for unsupervised learning by considering the label as latent variables. EGC achieves competitive generation results
compared with state-of-the-art approaches on ImageNet-1k,
CelebA-HQ and LSUN Church, while achieving superior
classification accuracy and robustness against adversarial
attacks on CIFAR-10. This work marks the inaugural success in mastering both domains using a unified network parameter set. We believe that EGC bridges the gap between
discriminative and generative learning. Code will be released at https://github.com/GuoQiushan/EGC.

EGC
IGEBM
HATEBM
ADM
IDDPM
N/A 20

VQGAN
BigBiGAN
ADM-C
LDM-VQ8
VIM-VQGAN
30

40
50
60
Top-1 Accuracy(%)

70

80

Figure 2: FID and classification accuracy on ImageNet
256×256 dataset. The scatters plots on the vertical N/A
line represent the image generation models, which are not
available for classification. The scatter plot on the horizontal N/A line represents the classification model, which is not
available for image generation. Remarkably, EGC achieves
superior performance in both tasks with a single neural network, demonstrating its effectiveness in bridging the gap
between discriminative and generative learning.

22952

