This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Action Sensitivity Learning for Temporal Action Localization
Jiayi Shao1, ,* Xiaohan Wang1 , Ruijie Quan1 , Junjun Zheng2 , Jiang Yang2 , Yi Yang1,†
1
ReLER Lab, CCAI, Zhejiang University, 2 Alibaba Group
shaojiayi1@zju.edu.cn, wxh1996111@gmail.com, quanruij@hotmail.com,
{fangcheng.zjj,yangjiang.yj}@alibaba-inc.com, yangyics@zju.edu.cn

Action Instance: clothes drying

Abstract
Temporal action localization (TAL), which involves recognizing and locating action instances, is a challenging
task in video understanding. Most existing approaches directly predict action classes and regress offsets to boundaries, while overlooking the discrepant importance of each
frame. In this paper, we propose an Action Sensitivity
Learning framework (ASL) to tackle this task, which aims
to assess the value of each frame and then leverage the
generated action sensitivity to recalibrate the training procedure. We first introduce a lightweight Action Sensitivity
Evaluator to learn the action sensitivity at the class level
and instance level, respectively. The outputs of the two
branches are combined to reweight the gradient of the two
sub-tasks. Moreover, based on the action sensitivity of each
frame, we design an Action Sensitive Contrastive Loss to
enhance features, where the action-aware frames are sampled as positive pairs to push away the action-irrelevant
frames. The extensive studies on various action localization
benchmarks (i.e., MultiThumos, Charades, Ego4D-Moment
Queries v1.0, Epic-Kitchens 100, Thumos14 and ActivityNet1.3) show that ASL surpasses the state-of-the-art in
terms of average-mAP under multiple types of scenarios,
e.g., single-labeled, densely-labeled and egocentric.

1. Introduction
With an increasing number of videos appearing online,
video understanding has become a prominent research topic
in computer vision. Temporal action localization (TAL),
which aims to temporally locate and recognize human actions with a set of categories in a video clip, is a challenging
yet fundamental task in this area, owing to its various applications such as sports highlighting, human action analysis
and security monitoring [25, 63, 46, 17, 14].
We have recently witnessed significant progress in TAL,
* This work was done during the first author’s internship in Alibaba.
† Corresponding Author.

take out clothes from laundry basket

hang clothes on the hanger

take out laundry basket

What helps to recognize this action?

What helps to find the boundary?

Figure 1. The motivation of our method. We show the action instance of clothes drying and depict the possible importance of
each frame to recognizing the action category and locating action
boundaries. Each frame’s importance is different.

where most methods can be mainly divided into two parts:
1) Two-stage approaches [75, 85] tackle this task accompanied by the generation of class-agnostic action proposals
and then perform classification and proposal boundaries refinement in proposal-level; 2) One-stage approaches [79,
72, 32] simultaneously recognize and localize action instances in a single-shot manner. Typical methods [76, 29] of
this type predict categories as well as locate corresponding
temporal boundaries in frame-level, achieving stronger TAL
results currently. In training, they classify every frame as
one action category or background and regress the boundaries of frames inside ground-truth action segments. However, these works treat each frame within action segments
equally in training, leading to sub-optimal performance.
When humans intend to locate action instances, the discrepant information of each frame is referred to. For the
instance of action: clothes drying, as depicted in Fig 1,
frames in the purple box promote recognizing clothes drying most as they describe the intrinsic sub-action: hang
clothes on the hanger. Analogously, frames in red and gray
boxes depict take out clothes from laundry basket and lift
laundry basket, which are more informative to locate precise start and end time respectively. In a word, each frame’s
contribution is quite different, due to intrinsic patterns of
actions, as well as existing transitional or blurred frames.
Can we discover informative frames for classifying and

13457

