This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DReg-NeRF: Deep Registration for Neural Radiance Fields
Yu Chen
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
chenyu@comp.nus.edu.sg

gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg

(b)

(a)

(c)

Figure 1: Our method registers multiple NeRF blocks. (a) One of the collected objects from the Objaverse [10] dataset. We
render the images from a predefined camera trajectory to construct our training data. (b) NeRF models are trained in different
coordinate frames. (c) Our method aligns NeRF blocks into the same coordinate frame without accessing raw image data.

Abstract
Although Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) is popular in
the computer vision community recently, registering multiple NeRFs has yet to gain much attention. Unlike the
existing work, NeRF2NeRF [14], which is based on traditional optimization methods and needs human annotated
keypoints, we propose DReg-NeRF to solve the NeRF registration problem on object-centric scenes without human
intervention. After training NeRF models, our DReg-NeRF
first extracts features from the occupancy grid in NeRF. Subsequently, our DReg-NeRF utilizes a transformer architecture with self-attention and cross-attention layers to learn
the relations between pairwise NeRF blocks. In contrast
to state-of-the-art (SOTA) point cloud registration methods,
the decoupled correspondences are supervised by surface
fields without any ground truth overlapping labels. We construct a novel view synthesis dataset with 1,700+ 3D objects
obtained from Objaverse to train our network. When evaluated on the test set, our proposed method beats the SOTA
point cloud registration methods by a large margin with a
mean RPE = 9.67◦ and a mean RTE = 0.038. Our code is
available at https://github.com/AIBluefisher/DReg-NeRF.

1. Introduction
Scene reconstruction has many applications in the real
world, for example, in augmented reality, ancient culture
preservation, 3D content generation, etc. Recently, rapid
progress has been made in increasing the reconstruction
quality using neural radiance fields (NeRF) [26]. While
previous works mostly focused on synthesizing images at
the object level or unbounded scenes within a small area,
Block-NeRF [34] extends NeRF to city-scale scenes by
splitting data into multiple intersected blocks. Specifically,
Block-NeRF trains multiple NeRF models in the same coordinate frame with the ground-truth camera poses provided
by fusing multiple high-precision sensors. However, images
can be collected without absolute pose information in some
cases, e.g., when images are captured with digital cameras
or in GPS-denied areas. In such cases, Block-NeRF cannot
work since NeRF models are trained on different coordinate frames. Consequently, NeRF registration [14] is necessary for synthesizing consistent novel views from multiple
NeRFs trained in different coordinate frames.
Point cloud registration is a classic problem in 3D computer vision, which aims at computing the relative transformation from the source point cloud to the target point cloud.

22703

