This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GPFL: Simultaneously Learning Global and Personalized Feature Information for
Personalized Federated Learning
Jianqing Zhang1 , Yang Hua2 , Hao Wang3 , Tao Song1
Zhengui Xue1 , Ruhui Ma1 ,* Jian Cao1 , Haibing Guan1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2

Queen’s University Belfast

3

Louisiana State University

{tsingz, songt333, zhenguixue, ruhuima, cao-jian, hbguan}@sjtu.edu.cn
Y.Hua@qub.ac.uk, haowang@lsu.edu

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is popular for its privacypreserving and collaborative learning capabilities. Recently,
personalized FL (pFL) has received attention for its ability to
address statistical heterogeneity and achieve personalization
in FL. However, from the perspective of feature extraction,
most existing pFL methods only focus on extracting global
or personalized feature information during local training,
which fails to meet the collaborative learning and personalization goals of pFL. To address this, we propose a new pFL
method, named GPFL, to simultaneously learn global and
personalized feature information on each client. We conduct
extensive experiments on six datasets in three statistically
heterogeneous settings and show the superiority of GPFL
over ten state-of-the-art methods regarding effectiveness,
scalability, fairness, stability, and privacy. Besides, GPFL
mitigates overfitting and outperforms the baselines by up to
8.99% in accuracy.

1. Introduction
To maximize the value of data generated on massive
clients while protecting privacy, Federated Learning (FL), an
iterative machine learning scheme, comes along with various
applications [25, 21, 38, 35, 34]. Traditional FL methods
focus on collaborative learning and obtaining a reasonable
global model. However, in practice, one single global model
cannot meet the requirements of every client and performs
poorly due to statistical heterogeneity [24, 1, 50].
Recently, personalized FL (pFL) has attracted increasing
attention in addressing statistical heterogeneity and achieving personalization in FL [50, 49, 63, 62]. From the view
of each client, it joins FL for additional server information
(e.g., global model parameters) to enhance its model and
* Corresponding author.

address the data shortage problem. To obtain high-quality
server information, each client also has to provide locally
learned information for server aggregation. Thus, an ideal
pFL is one kind of FL with two goals: (1) aggregating information for collaborative learning and (2) training reasonable
personalized models. On the other hand, since every client
is connected to the external environment and shares certain
common information, the data present on each client comprises both global and personalized feature information.
However, from a feature extraction perspective, existing pFL methods only focus on one of these two goals on
clients. For collaborative learning, FedRoD [8] trains the
feature extractor to extract global feature information for
its global objective, but it does not extract personalized feature information for personalized tasks. For personalization,
FedPer [3] and FedRep [12] only use local data to train the
model for the personalized objective, losing some global
information during local training [10], which is not beneficial for collaborative learning. Although FedPHP [32]/
FedProto [51] utilizes global features/prototypes to guide
personalized feature extraction, the quality of global features/prototypes depends on the quality of feature extractors,
which is paradoxical. Poor global features/prototypes mislead feature extraction in turn.
To simultaneously learn global and personalized feature information on each client, we propose a novel pFL
framework, named GPFL. Inspired by the category anchors
that introduce extra common information in domain adaptation [65], we learn the global feature information with the
guidance of global category embeddings using the Global
Category Embedding layer (GCE). Besides, we learn personalized feature information through personalized tasks.
However, learning two contrary (global vs. personalized)
objectives is confusing, so we devise and insert the Conditional Valve (CoV) after the feature extractor to create a
global guidance route and a personalized task route in the
client model. With CoV, we learn global and personalized
15041

