This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MB-TaylorFormer: Multi-branch Efﬁcient Transformer Expanded by Taylor
Formula for Image Dehazing
Yuwei Qiu1 Kaihao Zhang2 Chenxi Wang1 Wenhan Luo1 Hongdong Li2 Zhi Jin1,3 *
1

3

2
Sun Yat-sen University
Australian National University
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Robotics and Digital Intelligent Manufacturing Technology

Abstract
In recent years, Transformer networks are beginning to
replace pure convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in the
ﬁeld of computer vision due to their global receptive ﬁeld
and adaptability to input. However, the quadratic computational complexity of softmax-attention limits the wide
application in image dehazing task, especially for highresolution images. To address this issue, we propose a new
Transformer variant, which applies the Taylor expansion
to approximate the softmax-attention and achieves linear
computational complexity. A multi-scale attention reﬁnement module is proposed as a complement to correct the
error of the Taylor expansion. Furthermore, we introduce
a multi-branch architecture with multi-scale patch embedding to the proposed Transformer, which embeds features
by overlapping deformable convolution of different scales.
The design of multi-scale patch embedding is based on three
key ideas: 1) various sizes of the receptive ﬁeld; 2) multilevel semantic information; 3) ﬂexible shapes of the receptive ﬁeld. Our model, named Multi-branch Transformer
expanded by Taylor formula (MB-TaylorFormer), can embed coarse to ﬁne features more ﬂexibly at the patch embedding stage and capture long-distance pixel interactions
with limited computational cost. Experimental results on
several dehazing benchmarks show that MB-TaylorFormer
achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance with a light
computational burden. The source code and pre-trained
models are available at https://github.com/FVL2020/ICCV2023-MB-TaylorFormer.

1. Introduction
Single image dehazing is an image restoration task
which aims to estimate latent haze-free images from hazy
images. Starting with early CNN-based approaches [49, 5]
* Corresponding author: jinzh26@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

12802

Figure 1: Improvement of MB-TaylorFormer over the
SOTA approaches. The circle size is proportional to the
number of model parameters. All models are trained on
SOTS-Indoor [32].
and their revolutionary performance in dehazing, haze removal gradually shifts from prior based strategies [89, 20]
to deep learning-based methods. In the past decade, deep
dehazing networks achieve signiﬁcant performance improvement due to advanced architectures like multi-scale information fusion [49, 47, 37], sophisticated variants of convolution [74, 36], and attention mechanisms [45, 86, 21].
Recently, Transformer has been popularly employed in
various computer vision tasks and subsequently contributes
greatly to the progress of high-level vision tasks [39, 71,
61, 6]. In the ﬁeld of image dehazing, there are several
challenges with the direct application of Transformer: 1)
the computational complexity of Transformer is quadratic
with the resolution of feature map, which makes it poorly
suited to the pixel-to-pixel task of dehazing. Although some
works apply self-attention in small spatial windows [35, 73]
to relieve this problem, the receptive ﬁeld of Transformer
is restricted; 2) the basic elements of visual Transformer
usually have more ﬂexible scales [39]. However, existing

