This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-shot recognition of any material anywhere using contrastive learning with
physics-based rendering
Manuel S. Drehwald3,*,# , Sagi Eppel 1,2,4,*,# , Jolina Li 2,4 , Han Hao2 , Alan Aspuru-Guzik1,2,#

Abstract
Visual recognition of materials and their states is essential for understanding the world, from determining whether
food is cooked, metal is rusted, or a chemical reaction has
occurred. However, current image recognition methods are
limited to specific classes and properties and can’t handle
the vast number of material states in the world. To address this, we present MatSim: the first dataset and benchmark for computer vision-based recognition of similarities
and transitions between materials and textures, focusing on
identifying any material under any conditions using one or
a few examples. The dataset contains synthetic and natural images. Synthetic images were rendered using giant
collections of textures, objects, and environments generated by computer graphics artists. We use mixtures and
gradual transitions between materials to allow the system
to learn cases with smooth transitions between states (like
gradually cooked food). We also render images with materials inside transparent containers to support beverage
and chemistry lab use cases. We use this dataset to train
a Siamese net that identifies the same material in different
objects, mixtures, and environments. The descriptor generated by this net can be used to identify the states of materials
and their subclasses using a single image. We also present
the first few-shot material recognition benchmark with natural images from a wide range of fields, including the state
of foods and beverages, types of grounds, and many other
use cases. We show that a net trained on the MatSim synthetic dataset outperforms state-of-the-art models like Clip
on the benchmark and also achieves good results on other
unsupervised material classification tasks. Dataset, generation code and trained models have been made available
at: https://github.com/ZuseZ4/MatSim-Dataset-GeneratorScripts-And-Neural-net

Figure 1. The MatSim benchmark for identifying materials from
every aspect of the world using one or a few natural images (fewshot learning). Top-1 results of ConvNeXt trained on the MatSim
dataset and pretrained Clip H14, on materials classes unseen during training. Only selected samples are shown.

1 Vector institute, 2 University of Toronto,
3 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 4 Innoviz

* Equal Contributions, # Corresponding authors
alan@aspuru.com, manuel@drehwald.info, sagieppel@gmail.com

1. Introduction
The ability to visually identify materials is critical for
a wide range of applications, from material science and

23524

