This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniSeg: A Unified Multi-Modal LiDAR Segmentation Network
and the OpenPCSeg Codebase
Youquan Liu1,2, * Runnan Chen1,3, Xin Li1,4 Lingdong Kong1,5 Yuchen Yang1,6
Zhaoyang Xia1,6 Yeqi Bai1,† Xinge Zhu7 Yuexin Ma8 Yikang Li1,† Yu Qiao1 Yuenan Hou1,†
1
5

Shanghai AI Laboratory

2

3

Hochschule Bremerhaven

National University of Singapore

6

Fudan University

7

Abstract
Point-, voxel-, and range-views are three representative
forms of point clouds. All of them have accurate 3D measurements but lack color and texture information. RGB images
are a natural complement to these point cloud views and
fully utilizing the comprehensive information of them benefits more robust perceptions. In this paper, we present a
unified multi-modal LiDAR segmentation network, termed
UniSeg, which leverages the information of RGB images
and three views of the point cloud, and accomplishes semantic segmentation and panoptic segmentation simultaneously.
Specifically, we first design the Learnable cross-Modal
Association (LMA) module to automatically fuse voxel-view
and range-view features with image features, which fully
utilize the rich semantic information of images and are robust to calibration errors. Then, the enhanced voxel-view
and range-view features are transformed to the point space,
where three views of point cloud features are further fused
adaptively by the Learnable cross-View Association module (LVA). Notably, UniSeg achieves promising results in
three public benchmarks, i.e., SemanticKITTI, nuScenes,
and Waymo Open Dataset (WOD); it ranks 1st on two challenges of two benchmarks, including the LiDAR semantic
segmentation challenge of nuScenes and panoptic segmentation challenges of SemanticKITTI. Besides, we construct
the OpenPCSeg codebase, which is the largest and most
comprehensive outdoor LiDAR segmentation codebase. It
contains most of the popular outdoor LiDAR segmentation
algorithms and provides reproducible implementations. The
OpenPCSeg codebase will be made publicly available at
https://github.com/PJLab-ADG/PCSeg.

1. Introduction
LiDAR-based semantic segmentation, whose objective
is to assign a semantic label to each input point, acts as an
* Work performed during an internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
† Corresponding authors.

The University of Hong Kong

4

East China Normal University

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

8

Shanghai Tech University

essential component in autonomous driving, digital cities,
and service robots [16, 18, 21, 37]. With the advent of deep
learning, an enormous amount of methods [38, 62, 32, 31,
20, 48, 9, 52, 6, 5, 23, 22] have been proposed and quickly
dominate various benchmarks, such as SemanticKITTI [1]
and nuScenes [3, 15].
Point cloud and RGB images are two frequently used
modalities. As depicted in Fig. 1 (a), different modalities
have their own merits and drawbacks. Point cloud provides
reliable and accurate depth information, and can be processed in different views, e.g., point-view, voxel-view, and
range-view. Specifically, point-view representation maintains the complete point information but is inefficient in
capturing the neighboring point features due to the unstructured point locations. Voxel-view methods rasterize the point
cloud into voxel cells that retain regular structure but suffer
from severe voxelization loss especially when the voxel size
is large. Range-view representations are dense and compact,
which can be efficiently processed by highly optimized 2D
convolution. However, the spherical projection inevitably
destroys the original 3D geometric information. As for the
RGB image, it embraces rich color and texture information,
but can not provide precise spatial information.
Apparently, the input data from multi-modality and multiple views of the point cloud are supplementary to each
other. Therefore, fully utilizing the comprehensive information benefits a more robust perception. However, such
a cross-modal and cross-view fusion paradigm is not fully
explored in LiDAR segmentation [14, 28, 48, 52]. Current
multi-modal fusion methods are concentrated on the fusion
of RGB and range images [14, 28, 24]. Other representations such as voxel- and point-views of the LiDAR point
cloud, which maintain original data structure and provide
fine-grained spatial information, are ignored in prior methods. Besides, they typically fuse the image and point cloud
in a hard association manner through calibration matrices,
thus being vulnerable to calibration errors [25].
In this paper, to address the aforementioned problems,
we make the first attempt to dynamically fuse four differ-

21662

