This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic PlenOctree for Adaptive Sampling Refinement in Explicit NeRF
Haotian Bai1
1

Yiqi Lin1

Yize Chen1,2∗

VLIS LAB, AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ)

2

Lin Wang1,2 *

Dept. of CSE, HKUST

haotianwhite@outlook.com, linyq29@gmail.com, yizechen@ust.hk, linwang@ust.hk
Project homepage: https://vlislab22.github.io/DOT/

Abstract

nerf

sampling

d
xe
fi

octrees

drop

𝒓<𝛿

na
dy
ic
m

The explicit neural radiance field (NeRF) has gained
considerable interest for its efficient training and fast inference capabilities, making it a promising direction such
as virtual reality and gaming. In particular, PlenOctree
(POT) [43], an explicit hierarchical multi-scale octree representation, has emerged as a structural and influential
framework. However, POT’s fixed structure for direct optimization is sub-optimal as the scene complexity evolves
continuously with updates to cached color and density, necessitating refining the sampling distribution to capture signal complexity accordingly. To address this issue, we propose the dynamic PlenOctree (DOT), which adaptively refines the sample distribution to adjust to changing scene
complexity. Specifically, DOT proposes a concise yet novel
hierarchical feature fusion strategy during the iterative rendering process. Firstly, it identifies the regions of interest through training signals to ensure adaptive and efficient refinement. Next, rather than directly filtering out
valueless nodes, DOT introduces the sampling and pruning operations for octrees to aggregate features, enabling
rapid parameter learning. Compared with POT, our DOT
outperforms it by enhancing visual quality, reducing over
55.15/68.84% parameters, and providing 1.7/1.9 times FPS
for NeRF-synthetic and Tanks & Temples, respectively.

operations

Prune

Figure 1: While the POT framework is effective, its fixed
octree structure can limit its adaptability to varying scene
complexities. We introduce hierarchical feature fusion with
sampling/pruning to overcome this limitation, as illustrated
by the dashed box below. Varying colors on the grid represent the training signals. Internal nodes are denoted in
orange, while leaf nodes in green. Pruning occurs in regions of weak signal, where cached properties in leaf nodes
are aggregated, and the averaged value is propagated to internal nodes, which become the new leaves. Complementary sampling takes place in the red regions. The resulting
sampling distribution exhibits significant improvement, as
highlighted by the red boxes in our final octree results.

1. Introduction
Rendering photo-realistic scenes and objects is crucial
for providing users with an immersive and interactive experience in virtual reality [11, 45] and metaverse [19, 29, 50].
Neural radiance field (NeRF) [26] has emerged as a promising solution for modeling 3D scenes and objects with
only calibrated multi-view images. Many subsequent approaches [2, 20, 27, 36, 46] have been proposed to further
enhance NeRF’s rendering power in terms of the training
time, inference speed, and quality. PlenOctree (POT) [43]

stands out among these approaches. It employs an explicit
octree structure with spherical basis functions to accelerate
and enhance the rendering quality. Such method achieves
high-quality rendering at over 150 FPS on an NVIDIA
V100 GPU, opening up new possibilities for real-time and
high-quality rendering, utilizing explicit octrees. Moreover,
POT bridges the implicit and explicit NeRFs. Specifically,
it demonstrates that POT can transform the implicit NeRFs
into the octree representation, further boosting the NeRF
training by five orders of magnitudes with the early stop.
Technically, POT’s main contributions can be classified

* L. Wang and Y. Chen are the corresponding authors.

8785

