This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling Data Generation in Vision-and-Language Navigation
Zun Wang˚♠1,2 Jialu Li˚3 Yicong Hong˚:1
Yi Wang2 Qi Wu4 Mohit Bansal3 Stephen Gould1 Hao Tan5 Yu Qiao2
1
The Australian National University 2 OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
UNC, Chapel Hill 4 University of Adelaide 5 Adobe Research
wangzun@pjlab.org.cn, jialuli@cs.unc.edu, mr.yiconghong@gmail.com
Project URL: https://github.com/wz0919/ScaleVLN

Abstract

1. Introduction
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) [10] is a challenging task that requires an agent to navigate in photorealistic environments, following human natural language
instructions such as “Walk downstairs, move towards the
dining table, turn left to the kitchen, and stop in front
˚ Equal contribution. : Project lead.
♠ Research done during internship at Shanghai AI Lab.

ScaleVLN (Ours)

70
Success Rate (SR)

Recent research in language-guided visual navigation
has demonstrated a significant demand for the diversity
of traversable environments and the quantity of supervision for training generalizable agents. To tackle the common data scarcity issue in existing vision-and-language
navigation datasets, we propose an effective paradigm
for generating large-scale data for learning, which applies 1200+ photo-realistic environments from HM3D and
Gibson datasets and synthesizes 4.9 million instructiontrajectory pairs using fully-accessible resources on the web.
Importantly, we investigate the influence of each component
in this paradigm on the agent’s performance and study how
to adequately apply the augmented data to pre-train and
fine-tune an agent. Thanks to our large-scale dataset, the
performance of an existing agent can be pushed up (+11%
absolute with regard to previous SoTA) to a significantly
new best of 80% single-run success rate on the R2R test
split by simple imitation learning. The long-lasting generalization gap between navigating in seen and unseen environments is also reduced to less than 1% (versus 8% in the
previous best method). Moreover, our paradigm also facilitates different models to achieve new state-of-the-art navigation results on CVDN, REVERIE, and R2R in continuous
environments.

Human

80
DUET
HAMT
RecBERT

60

AirBERT

50

EnvDrop
Progress-Monitor

40

RCM

30

Speaker-Follower

20

MARVAL

PREVALENT

14K (R2R)
178K (Speaker-Follower)
228K (AirBERT)
1.0M (PREVALENT)
4.2M (MARVAL)
4.9M (Ours)
Human

R2R

2018

2019

2020

2021
Year

2022

2023

Future

Figure 1: Agent success rate with increasing data size
on addressing the R2R navigation task. Our proposed
method creates 4.9M instruction-trajectories pairs for learning, which greatly boosts the agent’s performance, and for
the first time approaching human results.
of the fridge.” Addressing VLN relies heavily on correctly interpreting the instructions, perceiving the environments, and learning from interaction, which demands
a large amount of diverse visual-language data for learning. Recent research shows that scaling up the diversity of environments and the quantity of demonstration for
training VLN agents are promising in improving generalization to unseen scenes [17, 37]. Compared to previous approaches of addressing data scarcity by augmenting
agent’s observations [47, 72] or employing large visionlinguistic models pre-trained with image-text data from the
web [27, 31, 53, 70, 71], utilizing additional traversable
environments allows the agents to learn from in-domain
visual-language data and physical interaction in the space.
In light of this, recent large datasets which contain hundreds of interactive scenes have been created [20, 65, 81], as
well as a vast amount of human demonstrations have been

12009

