This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SlaBins: Fisheye Depth Estimation using Slanted Bins on Road Environments
Jongsung Lee1 , Gyeongsu Cho1 ,* Jeongin Park1 ,* Kyongjun Kim1 *, Seongoh Lee1 ,*
Jung-Hee Kim2 , Seong-Gyun Jeong2 , Kyungdon Joo1†
1
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST, 2 42dot Inc.
{syniez, threedv, jeonginpark, kimkj38, solee, kyungdon}@unist.ac.kr
{junghee.kim, seonggyun.jeong}@42dot.ai



Abstract

 
      

Although 3D perception for autonomous vehicles has focused on frontal-view information, more than half of fatal
accidents occur due to side impacts in practice (e.g., T-bone
crash). Motivated by this fact, we investigate the problem of side-view depth estimation, especially for monocular ﬁsheye cameras, which provide wide FoV information.
However, since ﬁsheye cameras head road areas, it observes road areas mostly and results in severe distortion
on object areas, such as vehicles or pedestrians. To alleviate these issues, we propose a new ﬁsheye depth estimation network, SlaBins, that infers an accurate and
dense depth map based on a geometric property of road environments; most objects are standing (i.e., orthogonal) on
the road environments. Concretely, we introduce a slanted
multi-cylindrical image (MCI) representation, which allows us to describe a distance as a radius to a cylindrical layer orthogonal to the ground regardless of the camera viewing direction. Based on the slanted MCI, we estimate a set of adaptive bins and a per-pixel probability
map for depth estimation. Then by combining it with the
estimated slanted angle of viewing direction, we directly infer a dense and accurate depth map for ﬁsheye cameras.
Experiments demonstrate that SlaBins outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods in both qualitative and quantitative evaluation on the SynWoodScape and KITTI-360 depth
datasets. For more information, you can visit our project
page https://syniez.github.io/SlaBins/.







Figure 1: SlaBins on the SynWoodScape dataset [34].
SlaBins predicts dense and accurate depth maps regardless of
the viewing directions using the slanted MCI representation.

avoidance assist, depend on various sensor modalities to observe 3D information [43, 5]. Here, one interesting point is
that various sensor modalities for 3D perception, including
many datasets related to autonomous driving, are focusing
on the frontal view predominantly [43, 38, 2, 6]. We can
easily deduce the reason by our common sense that it is important to keep an eye on the front while driving. However,
according to the National Transportation Highway Safety
Administration [1], 51% of fatal car accidents correspond
to T-bone crashes in which one car hits the side of another,
which is the second highest type of accident. This statistic
supports that side-view 3D perception is important to assist
drivers because they are hard to pay attention to the side
view due to the physical characteristics of the people looking ahead and their position characteristics.
Motivated by this fact, 3D perception for side-view, especially ﬁsheye-based depth estimation, has started to gain
the spotlight [31, 16, 41]. Fisheye cameras have several
advantages for 3D perception in road scenes. Speciﬁcally,
ﬁsheye cameras provide broader FoV information (typically
greater than 180◦ ) in a single image, which allows us to observe road information (e.g., road, vehicles, and pedestrians) at a low cost. In addition, we can directly utilize perspective camera 3D perception approaches because mathematical mutual conversion between two camera models is
possible. Thus, if we can obtain side-view depth informa-

1. Introduction
With the advent of autonomous driving, the importance
of 3D perception keeps growing for safety [20, 25, 44].
For example, ADAS systems pervading our daily driving
already, such as lane-keeping aid and forward collision* Equal contribution (alphabet order).
† Corresponding author.

8765

