This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PPR: Physically Plausible Reconstruction from Monocular Videos
Gengshan Yang Shuo Yang John Z. Zhang Zachary Manchester Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University
Reference view
Controller

Differentiable
Rendering

Joint torques

Ground
Reaction
Force

Center of Mass
Gravity

Differentiable
Physics Simulation

Gradient

Gradient
Novel view

Monocular Videos

Target trajectory

Kinematic Reconstruction

Physical Reconstruction

Figure 1: Given casually-captured monocular videos (left), PPR builds 3D models of articulated objects and the surrounding environment.

Naive kinematic reconstruction (middle) generates a family of solutions, some containing inconsistent physical support and contact dynamics (blue and green color), such as floating or walking with sliding feet. We show that differentiable physics simulation acts as an
effective regularizer for improving the physical plausibility of visual reconstruction algorithms. As PPR reconstructs the dynamics scene,
it also drives a ragdoll in a physics simulator to track the kinematic reconstruction. This ensures the reconstructions are statically stable
with ground contact (right), and the center of mass is projected within the support polygon (marked with red). PPR also reports physics
estimations, such as ground reaction forces (red arrows) and center of mass (green arrow).

Abstract
Given monocular videos, we build 3D models of articulated objects and environments whose 3D configurations
satisfy dynamics and contact constraints. At its core, our
method leverages differentiable physics simulation to aid
visual reconstructions. We couple differentiable physics
simulation with differentiable rendering via coordinate descent, which enables end-to-end optimization of, not only
3D reconstructions, but also physical system parameters
from videos. We demonstrate the effectiveness of physicsinformed reconstruction on monocular videos of quadruped
animals and humans. It reduces reconstruction artifacts
(e.g., scale ambiguity, unbalanced poses, and foot swapping) that are challenging to address by visual cues alone,
and produces better foot contact estimation.

1. Introduction
Given casually-captured monocular RGB videos, we aim
to build 3D models of articulated objects and the environment, whose configurations (geometry, motion trajectory,
force, and mass distribution) satisfy physics constraints, and
can be replayed in a physics simulator.

Reconstructing dynamic 3D structures from monocular videos is challenging due to the under-constrained nature of the problem. Prior works often leverage first order
constraints. For instance, Nonrigid-SfM explores temporal
smoothness and low-rank priors [4] to constrain the problem. Recent works on differentiable rendering and dynamic
NeRF utilize divergence-free motion fields [42] or as-rigidas-possible priors [20]. Although those methods are able
to obtain visually appealing reconstruction results from the
reference viewpoint, physically-implausible configurations,
such as foot sliding, statically-unstable poses, etc., are often
observed from a novel viewpoint. An illustrative example
is shown in Fig. 2.
Physics as a prior. We seek a more principled way to model
the time-varying behavior of an object and its interaction
with the environment using physics constraints. Physical
priors tend to be relatively unexplored as a tool for aiding
reconstruction, though important exceptions exist in the domain of monocular human motion capture [8, 50, 53]. One
reason that such methods are not more widespread is that
they often make strong assumptions about the target and
the scene, for instance, accurate 2D/3D keypoint tracking,
known ground plane, and contact state annotations. Moreover, operationalizing such constraints requires the use of

3914

