This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SG-Former: Self-guided Transformer with Evolving Token Reallocation
Sucheng Ren, Xingyi Yang, Songhua Liu, Xinchao Wang*
National University of Singapore
Top-1 Accuracy on ImageNet

Abstract

1. Introduction
Transformers [49], originated from natural language processing (NLP), have recently demonstrated state-of-the-art
performance in visual learning. The pioneering work of
Vision Transformer (ViT) [10] introduces the self-attention
module and explicitly models the long-range dependency
between image patches, which overcomes the inherent limitation of the local receptive field in convolution, thereby
enhancing the performances of various tasks [9, 27, 56, 70,
74, 1].
Despite tremendous successes, the computation cost of
self-attention grows quadratically with respect to the se* Corresponding Author: xinchao@nus.edu.sg

85

Ours
CSWin

Top-1 Accuracy

Vision Transformer has demonstrated impressive success
across various vision tasks. However, its heavy computation cost, which grows quadratically with respect to the token sequence length, largely limits its power in handling
large feature maps. To alleviate the computation cost, previous works rely on either fine-grained self-attentions restricted to local small regions, or global self-attentions but
to shorten the sequence length resulting in coarse granularity. In this paper, we propose a novel model, termed
as Self-guided Transformer (SG-Former), towards effective global self-attention with adaptive fine granularity. At
the heart of our approach is to utilize a significance map,
which is estimated through hybrid-scale self-attention and
evolves itself during training, to reallocate tokens based
on the significance of each region. Intuitively, we assign
more tokens to the salient regions for achieving fine-grained
attention, while allocating fewer tokens to the minor regions in exchange for efficiency and global receptive fields.
The proposed SG-Former achieves performance superior
to state of the art: our base size model achieves 84.7%
Top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K, 51.2mAP bbAP on CoCo,
52.7mIoU on ADE20K surpassing the Swin Transformer
by +1.3% / +2.7 mAP/ +3 mIoU, with lower computation costs and fewer parameters. The code is available at
https://github.com/OliverRensu/SG-Former

Focal

Swin

83

TNT

T2T
PVT
DeiT

81

79

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Model Size (M)
Figure 1. Top-1 accuracy on ImageNet of recent Transformer models. Our proposed SG-Former yields significant improvements
over all the baselines, including Swin Transformer and the stateof-the-art CSWin Transformer.

quence length, which, in turn, greatly limits its applicability to large-scale inputs. To reduce the computation cost,
ViT takes a large stride patch embedding to reduce the sequence lengths. However, such operations inevitably result
in self-attention applicable only to small-size feature maps
with coarse granularity. To compute self-attention at highresolution features, some approaches of [27, 9, 48] are proposed to restrict the self-attention region into a local window instead of the whole feature map (i.e., fine-grained
local self-attention). For example, Swin Transformer designs window attention, and CSWin designs cross-shape attention. As such, these methods [27, 9, 48] sacrifice the
power of modeling global information in each self-attention
layer. Another stream of methods [53, 59, 52] aims to
aggregate tokens across the whole key-value feature maps
to reduce the global sequence length (i.e., coarse-grained
global attention). For instance, Pyramid vision Transfomer
(PVT) [53] uniformly aggregates tokens across the whole
feature map with a large kernel of the large stride, which results in uniform coarse information over the whole feature
map.
In this paper, we introduce a novel Transformer model,

6003

