This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AutoDiffusion: Training-Free Optimization of Time Steps and Architectures for
Automated Diffusion Model Acceleration
Lijiang Li1 , Huixia Li2 , Xiawu Zheng1,3,4,5 , Jie Wu2 , Xuefeng Xiao2 ,
Rui Wang2 , Min Zheng2 , Xin Pan2 , Fei Chao1 ,* Rongrong Ji1,3,4,5 ,
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics,
Xiamen University. 2 ByteDance Inc. 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory.
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University. 5 Fujian Engineering
Research Center of Trusted Artificial Intelligence Analysis and Application, Xiamen University.
lilijiang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, zhengxw01@pcl.ac.cn, wujie10558@gmail.com, {feichao, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn
{lihuixia, xiaoxuefeng.ailab, ruiwang.rw, zhengmin.666, panxin.321}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Diffusion models are emerging expressive generative
models, in which a large number of time steps (inference
steps) are required for a single image generation. To accelerate such tedious process, reducing steps uniformly is considered as an undisputed principle of diffusion models. We
consider that such a uniform assumption is not the optimal
solution in practice; i.e., we can find different optimal time
steps for different models. Therefore, we propose to search
the optimal time steps sequence and compressed model architecture in a unified framework to achieve effective image
generation for diffusion models without any further training. Specifically, we first design a unified search space that
consists of all possible time steps and various architectures.
Then, a two stage evolutionary algorithm is introduced to
find the optimal solution in the designed search space. To
further accelerate the search process, we employ FID score
between generated and real samples to estimate the performance of the sampled examples. As a result, the proposed
method is (i).training-free, obtaining the optimal time steps
and model architecture without any training process; (ii).
orthogonal to most advanced diffusion samplers and can
be integrated to gain better sample quality. (iii). generalized, where the searched time steps and architectures can
be directly applied on different diffusion models with the
same guidance scale. Experimental results show that our
method achieves excellent performance by using only a few
time steps, e.g. 17.86 FID score on ImageNet 64 × 64 with
only four steps, compared to 138.66 with DDIM.

* Corresponding author: fchao@xmu.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Diffusion models are a class of generative models that
exhibit remarkable performance across a broad range of
tasks, including but not limited to image generation [14, 24,
8, 2, 29, 4, 15, 38], super-resolution [33, 39, 6], inpainting [22, 31], and text-to-image generation [25, 32, 27, 10].
These models utilize the diffusion process to gradually introduce noise into the input data until it conforms to a Gaussian distribution. They then learn the reversal of this process
to restore the data from sampled noise. Consequently, they
achieve exact likelihood computation and excellent sample
quality. However, one major drawback of diffusion models
is their slow generation process. For instance, on a V100
GPU, generating a 256 × 256 image with StyleGAN [16]
only takes 0.015s, whereas the ADM model requires multiple time steps for denoising during generation, leading to a
significantly longer generation time of 14.75s.
Extensive studies have focused on reducing the number
of time steps to improve the generation process of diffusion models. Some of these studies represent the generation
process as either stochastic differential equations (SDEs) or
ordinary differential equations (ODEs), and then utilize numerical methods to solve these equations [36, 20, 6, 21].
The samplers obtained by these numerical methods can typically be applied to pre-trained diffusion models in a plugand-play manner without re-training. The other studies proposed to utilize knowledge distillation to reduce the number of time steps [34, 23]. These methods decrease the time
steps required for the generation process and then allow the
noise prediction network to learn from the network of the
original generation process. Although these methods are
effective in improving the sampling speed of diffusion mod-

7105

