This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RED-PSM: Regularization by Denoising of Partially Separable Models
for Dynamic Imaging

1

Berk Iskender1

Marc L. Klasky2

Yoram Bresler1

berki2@illinois.edu

mklasky@lanl.gov

ybresler@illinois.edu

2

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA

Abstract
Dynamic imaging involves the recovery of a time-varying
2D or 3D object at each time instant using its undersampled
measurements. In particular, in dynamic tomography, only
a single projection at a single view angle may be available
at a time, making the problem severely ill-posed. In this
work, we propose an approach, RED-PSM, which combines
for the first time two powerful techniques to address this
challenging imaging problem. The first, are partially separable models, which have been used to introduce a lowrank prior for the spatio-temporal object. The second is
the recent Regularization by Denoising (RED), which provides a flexible framework to exploit the impressive performance of state-of-the-art image denoising algorithms, for
various inverse problems. We propose a partially separable objective with RED and an optimization scheme with
variable splitting and ADMM. Our objective is proved to
converge to a value corresponding to a stationary point satisfying the first-order optimality conditions. Convergence
is accelerated by a particular projection-domain-based initialization. We demonstrate the performance and computational improvements of our proposed RED-PSM with a
learned image denoiser by comparing it to a recent deepprior-based method TD-DIP. Although the emphasis is on
dynamic tomography, we also demonstrate the performance
advantages of RED-PSM in a dynamic cardiac MRI setting.

1. Introduction
Time-varying tomography is a challenging ill-posed inverse problem that involves reconstructing a dynamic object
using its sequential projections at each time instant. Since
the measurements are inconsistent due to the evolving object, traditional reconstruction algorithms lead to significant
artifacts.
The problem arises in micro-CT [1], myocardial perfusion imaging [2], thoracic CT [3], imaging of fluid flow
processes [4, 5] and dynamic imaging of material samples
undergoing compression [6, 7]. Also, it is closely related to
the dynamic MRI (dMRI) problem, which typically arises

Los Alamos National Laboratory, USA

in cardiac imaging [8].
Previous work [9, 10] treated the problem as timesequential sampling of bandlimited signals and provided an
optimal view angle sampling order and theoretical guarantees for unique and stable reconstruction. However, the approach is limited by its bandlimitedness assumptions.
Several methods [11, 12] recover the underlying motion
field from projections using the Radon transform properties. However, these methods require the object information
a priori. Other algorithms [13, 14] alternate between estimating the motion field and the time-varying object. These
methods assume the total density to be preserved for a given
object at different times which may be a limiting assumption. For instance, imaging a fixed slice of a time-varying
object under compression may violate this assumption due
to perpendicularly evolving parts.
In dynamic tomography and MRI, partially-separable
models (PSM) have been used to represent the underlying object [15] and the time-sequential projections [16, 17].
The projection-domain PSM in [16, 17] carries the PSM to
the projection domain using the harmonic representation of
projections, and provides uniqueness and stability analysis
for the problem. In spite of this advantage of the projection
domain PSM over its object-domain counterparts, the performance of this approach is limited by the null space of the
measurement operator.
A different PSM-based method for dMRI [18] imposes
the low-rank structure as a soft constraint. It uses a hybrid
objective with the PSM model used in the data fidelity term
and the object in a simple l1 -norm penalty, with an additional penalty term to penalize the mismatch between the
PSM and the object. The method does not use a guided initial guess for the object or for the PSM basis functions. A
fast alternative low-rank (or PSM)-based method for dMRI
[19] decomposes the object representation into three components: the mean signal, a low-rank PSM, and the residual,
which is assumed to be sparse in the Fourier domain. Then,
each component is estimated in order. Although on some
of the data sets used for the comparison in [19] competing
methods are either faster or more accurate, the method provides better results when averaged over all data sets.
10595

