This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FRAug: Tackling Federated Learning with Non-IID Features via Representation
Augmentation
Haokun Chen 1,2 Ahmed Frikha 1,2,3 Denis Krompass 2 Jindong Gu 4 * Volker Tresp 1,3
1
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich 2 Siemens Technology
3
Munich Center for Machine Learning 4 University of Oxford
{haokun.chen, ahmed.frikha, denis.krompass}@siemens.com,
jindong.gu@outlook.com, volker.tresp@lmu.de

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a decentralized machine
learning paradigm, in which multiple clients collaboratively train neural networks without centralizing their local data, and hence preserve data privacy. However, realworld FL applications usually encounter challenges arising from distribution shifts across the local datasets of individual clients. These shifts may drift the global model
aggregation or result in convergence to deflected local optimum. While existing efforts have addressed distribution
shifts in the label space, an equally important challenge remains relatively unexplored. This challenge involves situations where the local data of different clients indicate identical label distributions but exhibit divergent feature distributions. This issue can significantly impact the global
model performance in the FL framework. In this work, we
propose Federated Representation Augmentation (FRAug)
to resolve this practical and challenging problem. FRAug
optimizes a shared embedding generator to capture client
consensus. Its output synthetic embeddings are transformed
into client-specific by a locally optimized RTNet to augment
the training space of each client. Our empirical evaluation on three public benchmarks and a real-world medical dataset demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed
method, which substantially outperforms the current stateof-the-art FL methods for feature distribution shifts, including PartialFed and FedBN.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a machine learning paradigm
in which a shared model is collaboratively trained using decentralized data sources. In the classical FL approach, e.g.,
FedAvg [49], the central server obtains the model by iteratively averaging the optimized model weights uploaded
* Corresponding author

from the active clients. FL has the benefit that it does not
require direct access to the client local datasets, resulting
in improved client-server communication efficiency and enhanced data confidentiality.
Despite these promising prospects, real-world FL applications encounter practical challenges arising from data heterogeneity, in which the client local datasets are not independent and identically distributed (non-IID). Non-IID data
from different clients may cause local model drifts during
the client update and overfitting to its local objective, making it challenging to obtain a stable and optimal convergence of the aggregated server model [41, 50].
As discussed in [28], data heterogeneity in FL can be categorized into label space heterogeneity and feature space
heterogeneity. A variety of methods were developed to
tackle problem settings where the client datasets are nonIID in the label space [75, 66]. However, the under-explored
problem of feature distribution shift is also prevalent in realworld applications, e.g., in the data collected from different scanners in clinical centers [10], as well as gathered by
different machines in industrial manufacturing plants [39].
Most importantly, although these entities may diagnose the
same types of cancers or detect the same types of anomalies,
i.e., having the same label distribution, they are not willing to share their original data to prevent competitive disadvantage or reverse engineering. Therefore, we propose an
effective and privacy-preserving FL algorithm, i.e., Federated Representation Augmentation (FRAug), to address this
practical problem of feature space heterogeneity.
Unlike previous works that generate synthetic samples in
the input space [69, 68] or acquire additional public datasets
[44, 17], FRAug applies data augmentation in the lowdimensional feature embedding space, which is more efficient and confronts fewer confidentiality threats. Moreover,
the proposed augmentation algorithm is especially suitable
for FL applications, where collaborative training is often
conducted by multiple edge devices (clients) with limited

4849

