This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unify, Align and Reﬁne:
Multi-Level Semantic Alignment for Radiology Report Generation
Yaowei Li1,2 , Bang Yang1,2 , Xuxin Cheng1 , Zhihong Zhu1 , Hongxiang Li1 , Yuexian Zou1†
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{ywl, chengxx, zhihongzhu, lihongxiang}@stu.pku.edu.cn; {yangbang, zouyx}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract



     

    
Visual
Encoder

Automatic radiology report generation has attracted enormous research interest due to its practical value in reducing
the workload of radiologists. However, simultaneously establishing global correspondences between the image (e.g.,
Chest X-ray) and its related report and local alignments
between image patches and keywords remains challenging.
To this end, we propose an Unify, Align and then Reﬁne
(UAR) approach to learn multi-level cross-modal alignments
and introduce three novel modules: Latent Space Uniﬁer
(LSU), Cross-modal Representation Aligner (CRA) and Textto-Image Reﬁner (TIR). Speciﬁcally, LSU uniﬁes multimodal
data into discrete tokens, making it ﬂexible to learn common
knowledge among modalities with a shared network. The
modality-agnostic CRA learns discriminative features via a
set of orthonormal basis and a dual-gate mechanism ﬁrst and
then globally aligns visual and textual representations under
a triplet contrastive loss. TIR boosts token-level local alignment via calibrating text-to-image attention with a learnable
mask. Additionally, we design a two-stage training procedure to make UAR gradually grasp cross-modal alignments
at different levels, which imitates radiologists’ workﬂow:
writing sentence by sentence ﬁrst and then checking word
by word. Extensive experiments and analyses on IU-Xray
and MIMIC-CXR benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our UAR against varied state-of-the-art methods.

Continuous Visual Signal

Discrete Textual Data

Gap

Textual
Encoder

   
Diffuse bilateral coarse interstitial markings
are unchanged. No focal consolidation,
pleural effusion, pneumothoraces.
Cardiomediastinal silhouette is within
normal limits. Degenerative changes of the
shoulder. Soft tissues are unremarkable.

Figure 1. Challenges of modeling cross-modal alignments in radiology report generation. At the encoding stage, it is intractable to
globally align visual and textual semantics due to (a) their different
characteristics (i.e., continuous signals vs. discrete data) and (b) the
lack of cross-modal interactions. (c) During decoding, capturing
the ﬁne-grained alignment between keywords and image patches is
difﬁcult because of the data deviation problem.

(CNNs) [50, 15], and then further decoded into a radiology
report comprised of natural language sentences by recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) [16, 10] or fully-attentive networks
like Transformer [55]. The key problems in this task are
twofold: 1) how to obtain comprehensive information associated with the input medical image and 2) how to accurately
establish cross-modal alignments (CMA), e.g., matching
generated words with their corresponding image regions.
This paper targets at improving CMA in automatic radiology report generation, which however, is hindered by
three factors shown in Figure 1. First of all, continuous
visual signals and discrete text data have the very different characteristics, resulting in semantic inconsistency and
modality-independent encoding pipelines in common practices. Secondly, as illustrated in Figure 1 (b), the vision and
text modalities are usually encoded via different backbones
without cross-modal interactions [7, 67, 43], leading to disparities in the representation space. Thirdly, as shown in Figure 1 (c), there exists the so-called “data deviation” problem,

1. Introduction
Automatic radiology report generation, as a potential
intelligent assistant to relieve radiologists from the heavy
workload, has attracted a surge of research interests in recent years [19, 30, 18, 24, 7, 35, 61, 67]. Mainstream
methods adopt the de facto encoder-decoder framework,
where a medical image (e.g., chest X-ray) is ﬁrst encoded
as latent representations via convolutional neural networks
2863

