This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structural Alignment for Network Pruning through Partial Regularization
Shangqian Gao1 , Zeyu Zhang2 , Yanfu Zhang1 , Feihu Huang1 , and Heng Huang* 3
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh
2
School of Information, University of Arizona
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland at College Park

{shg84, yaz91}@pitt.edu, zeyuzhang@email.arizona.edu, huangfeihu2018@gmail.com,
heng@umd.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel channel pruning
method to reduce the computational and storage costs of
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). Many existing
one-shot pruning methods directly remove redundant structures, which brings a huge gap between the model before
and after network pruning. This gap will no doubt result
in performance loss for network pruning. To mitigate this
gap, we first learn a target sub-network during the model
training process, and then we use this sub-network to guide
the learning of model weights through partial regularization. The target sub-network is learned and produced by
using an architecture generator, and it can be optimized efficiently. In addition, we also derive the proximal gradient for our proposed partial regularization to facilitate the
structural alignment process. With these designs, the gap
between the pruned model and the sub-network is reduced,
thus improving the pruning performance. Empirical results also suggest that the sub-network found by our method
has a much higher performance than the one-shot pruning
setting. Extensive experiments show that our method can
achieve state-of-the-art performances on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet with ResNets and MobileNet-V2.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved
many successes in different computer vision tasks [27, 46,
47, 50, 2, 6, 11]. To tackle real-world challenges, recent CNNs [27, 51, 14] become larger and larger regarding width, depth, etc. With such capacities, CNNs can obtain better performance on different benchmarks at the cost
* Corresponding author. This work was partially supported by NSF
IIS 1838627, 1837956, 1956002, 2211492, CNS 2213701, CCF 2217003,
DBI 2225775.

of computational and storage burdens. At the same time,
with the recent developments of mobile and embedded devices, the demand for deploying CNNs on these devices has
increased dramatically. However, there is a natural conflict between the size of CNNs and the hardware capability of these devices. To overcome these challenges, many
works [13, 12] try to reduce the size of CNNs, and make
them possible to be deployed on edge devices.
There are many directions to reduce the size of CNNs.
Among them, weight pruning and structural pruning are
two popular topics. Structural pruning, especially channel
pruning, is more friendly to hardware than weight pruning
since no post-processing steps are required to acquire savings in computational and storage costs. Thus, our paper
focuses on channel pruning for CNNs. Many existing oneshot pruning works [44, 56, 9, 42, 17, 8] prune trained models directly. No matter what method is used, there will be
a significant gap between the selected sub-network and the
pruned model. Such a gap creates difficulties in regaining
performance during the fine-tuning process. On the other
hand, soft pruning methods [16, 23] softly remove structures during the training process, which can produce good
results with a shorter fine-tuning process. However, soft
pruning methods generally perform worse than typical oneshot pruning methods, probably because the weight space is
restricted during the training process because of soft pruning.
To tackle the above problems, we introduce a novel partial regularization technique to align model weights and the
discovered sub-network during the training process, which
can produce a high performance sub-network and reduce
the gap between the sub-network and the original model.
In addition, unlike soft-pruning methods, all model structures are used for training. The partial regularization term
contains a partial group lasso regularization on selected
weights, and other weights remain intact without modifica-

17402

