This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Space Engage: Collaborative Space Supervision for Contrastive-based
Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Changqi Wang1 *, Haoyu Xie1∗ , Yuhui Yuan2 , Chong Fu1,4†, Xiangyu Yue3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing in Medical Image, Ministry of Education, NEU, China
2101668@stu.neu.edu.cn, xiehaoyu@stumail.neu.edu.cn, yuyua@microsoft.com
fuchong@mail.neu.edu.cn, xyyue@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation (S4) aims to
train a segmentation model with limited labeled images and
a substantial volume of unlabeled images. To improve the
robustness of representations, powerful methods introduce
a pixel-wise contrastive learning approach in latent space
(i.e., representation space) that aggregates the representations to their prototypes in a fully supervised manner. However, previous contrastive-based S4 methods merely rely on
the supervision from the model’s output (logits) in logit
space during unlabeled training. In contrast, we utilize the
outputs in both logit space and representation space to obtain supervision in a collaborative way. The supervision
from two spaces plays two roles: 1) reduces the risk of
over-fitting to incorrect semantic information in logits with
the help of representations; 2) enhances the knowledge exchange between the two spaces. Furthermore, unlike previous approaches, we use the similarity between representations and prototypes as a new indicator to tilt training
those under-performing representations and achieve a more
efficient contrastive learning process. Results on two public benchmarks demonstrate the competitive performance of
our method compared with state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer vision, aiming to classify each pixel in an image. Significant progress [22, 4] has been made in training on highquality labeled images using segmentation models composed of an encoder and a segmentation head. However,
annotating images is expensive and time-consuming. Semi* equal contribution
† corresponding author

Previous methods
logits in logit space
representation space
pseudo-labels

pull

pull
push

produce
supervision

confidence

Ours
logits in logit space

representation space
pseudo-labels

pull

pull
push

provide

confidence

similarity in representation space

produce
supervision
similarity
prototype

representation

produce
supervision
single/dual space supervision

Figure 1. We enhance the knowledge exchange between the logit
and representation spaces. Orange and blue represent different
classes. Top: Existing contrastive-based S4 methods overlook
the semantic information in representation space. Bottom: Our
method uses dual-space collaborative supervision.

supervised Semantic Segmentation (S4) alleviates the thirst
for annotation by leveraging unlabeled images to train segmentation models.
Most existing works learn from unlabeled images via
self-training [44, 37, 15] or consistency regularization [40,
38, 13] strategies, both of which retrain the model with
its predictions on unlabeled images. Recently, great success has been achieved by introducing pixel-wise contrastive learning to semantic segmentation, which endows
the model with a stronger features-extracting ability by accessing a more discriminative representation space. Specially, these methods [45, 23] project each pixel to repre-

931

