This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ref-NeuS: Ambiguity-Reduced Neural Implicit Surface Learning for Multi-View
Reconstruction with Reflection
Wenhang Ge1,2
1

HKUST(GZ)

2

Tao Hu4

Haoyu Zhao1

HKUST(GZ)-SmartMore Joint Lab

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction is a crucial task in computer vision
that serves as the foundation for multiple fields such as
computer-aided design [20, 8], computer animation [32,
22], and virtual reality [39]. Among various 3D reconstruction techniques, image-based 3D reconstruction is particularly challenging, which aims to recover 3D structures from
posed 2D images. Traditional multi-view stereo (MVS) approaches [11, 38, 50] generally require a multi-step pipeline
with supervision, which can be cumbersome. Recently,
neural implicit surface learning [44, 51, 30] has gained increasing attention due to its ability to achieve remarkable
reconstruction quality with a neat formulation that supports
end-to-end and unsupervised training. However, as illus* Corresponding author.

4

HKUST

5

CUHK

SmartMore

Ground Truth

Ref-NeuS

NeuS

Ref-NeRF

Accuracy↓:

0.29mm

1.33mm

-

MAE↓:

0.38°

1.12°

29.48°

PSNR↑:

32.85dB

27.78dB

29.68dB

Normals
Rendering

Neural implicit surface learning has shown significant
progress in multi-view 3D reconstruction, where an object
is represented by multilayer perceptrons that provide continuous implicit surface representation and view-dependent
radiance. However, current methods often fail to accurately
reconstruct reflective surfaces, leading to severe ambiguity.
To overcome this issue, we propose Ref-NeuS, which aims to
reduce ambiguity by attenuating the effect of reflective surfaces. Specifically, we utilize an anomaly detector to estimate an explicit reflection score with the guidance of multiview context to localize reflective surfaces. Afterward, we
design a reflection-aware photometric loss that adaptively
reduces ambiguity by modeling rendered color as a Gaussian distribution, with the reflection score representing the
variance. We show that together with a reflection directiondependent radiance, our model achieves high-quality surface reconstruction on reflective surfaces and outperforms
the state-of-the-arts by a large margin. Besides, our model
is also comparable on general surfaces.

3

Ying-Cong Chen1,2,3, *

Surfaces

Abstract

Shu Liu5

Figure 1. Our ambiguity-reduced framework significantly improves explicit surfaces geometry, surface normals and rendering
realism for modeling reflective surfaces compared to NeuS and
Ref-NeRF. Reconstruction accuracy (lower is better), surface normal mean angular error, i.e., MAE (lower is better) and PSNR
(higher is better) are compared.

trated in Fig. 1, existing methods tend to produce erroneous
results in reflective surfaces. Since these approaches infer
geometry information with multi-view consistency, which
is compromised due to the ambiguous surface prediction on
reflective surfaces. As a result, their practicality becomes
limited in scenarios where reflection is unavoidable.
Several recent works [3, 41, 54, 55, 42] have investigated
reflection modeling in neural radiance fields. These methods typically decompose the appearance of an object into
several physical components, allowing reflection to be explicitly represented. This can lead to a better estimation of
the 3D geometry by eliminating the influence of the reflection component. Nevertheless, physical decomposition can
be highly ill-posed [14], and inaccurate decomposition can
significantly constrain performance. For example, as shown
in Fig. 1, the predicted normals in Ref-NeRF [42] are not
accurate enough, which leads to suboptimal performance.

4251

