This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Holistic Label Correction for Noisy Multi-Label Classification
Xiaobo Xia1 , Jiankang Deng2 , Wei Bao1 ,
Yuxuan Du3 , Bo Han4 , Shiguang Shan5,6 , Tongliang Liu1 *
1
The University of Sydney 2 Imperial College London
3
JD Explore Academy 4 Hong Kong Baptist University
5
Chinese Academy of Sciences 6 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Multi-label classification aims to learn classification
models from instances associated with multiple labels. It
is pivotal to learn and utilize the label dependence among
multiple labels in multi-label classification. As a result of
today’s big and complex data, noisy labels are inevitable,
making it looming to target multi-label classification with
noisy labels. Although the importance of label dependence
has been shown in multi-label classification with clean labels, it is challenging and hard to bring label dependence
to the problem of multi-label classification with noisy labels. The issues are, that we do not understand why label dependence is helpful in the problem, and how to learn
and utilize label dependence only using training data with
noisy multiple labels. In this paper, we bring label dependence to tackle the problem of multi-label classification with
noisy labels. Specifically, we first provide a high-level understanding of why label dependence helps distinguish the
examples with clean/noisy multiple labels. Benefiting from
the memorization effect in handling noisy labels, a novel algorithm is then proposed to learn the label dependence by
only employing training data with noisy multiple labels, and
utilize the learned dependence to help correct noisy multiple labels to clean ones. We prove that the use of label dependence could bring a higher success rate for recovering
correct multiple labels. Empirical evaluations justify our
claims and demonstrate the superiority of our algorithm.

1. Introduction
Multi-label classification assigns a set of multiple labels
for each instance [71]. As a practical learning paradigm,
multi-label classification has been widely applied in various domains, ranging from computer vision [7] and natural language processing [41], to recommendation systems [69] and bioinformatics [8]. Consensually, compared
* Corresponding author (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au).

with multi-class classification [20, 23, 24], where each instance is assigned with a single label, multi-label classification is more challenging [35]. Plenty of advanced methods are proposed in recent years for multi-label classification [77, 45, 14, 74, 37, 9, 19, 64].
The great majority of the methods assume that training
data are annotated precisely. However, noisy labels are
inevitable in multi-label classification [36], especially for
classification with big and complex data. They may be resulted by unintentional mistakes of manual and automatic
annotators [51, 75, 13], or intentional corruptions on clean
labels [50, 44]. Noisy labels severely impair the generalization of learned models, over-parameterized deep models in
particular [26, 61, 58, 59, 55, 56]. A straightforward way
to address the problem of multi-label classification with
noisy labels is to treat each label in isolation and convert
the multi-label problem into a number of binary classification problems. Afterward, the methods in multi-class classification with noisy labels [16, 47] are applied to train independent binary classifiers, which capture instance-label
dependence robustly to strengthen classification. This way
is a remedy to handle noisy labels, but ignores the label
dependence among multiple labels. It is essential to learn
and utilize the label dependence in multi-label classification [70, 18, 11, 31].
Prior works [65, 6, 52] illustrate the successes of considering the label dependence among multiple labels in multilabel classification with clean labels. In different ways, e.g.,
helping learn inter-dependent classifiers [7], the label dependence can be used to boost the learning of the instancelabel dependence, which improves final classification. Inspired by the successes, it is concerned that label dependence could be exploited to handle the problem of multilabel classification with noisy labels. However, there are
few attempts before for this important problem. At least
three questions make the solution remain mysterious. First,
in intuition, we need to understand why label dependence is
helpful for the problem. Second, in technique, we need to
know how to learn and utilize the label dependence in the

1483

