This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mitigating and Evaluating Static Bias of Action Representations in the
Background and the Foreground

1

Haoxin Li1 , Yuan Liu2 , Hanwang Zhang1 , Boyang Li1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Guangzhou University

{haoxin003, hanwangzhang, boyang.li}@ntu.edu.sg, yuanliu@gzhu.edu.cn

Evaluation data

Abstract

IID test video

In video action recognition, shortcut static features can
interfere with the learning of motion features, resulting in
poor out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization. The video
background is clearly a source of static bias, but the video
foreground, such as the clothing of the actor, can also provide static bias. In this paper, we empirically verify the existence of foreground static bias by creating test videos with
conflicting signals from the static and moving portions of
the video. To tackle this issue, we propose a simple yet effective technique, StillMix, to learn robust action representations. Specifically, StillMix identifies bias-inducing video
frames using a 2D reference network and mixes them with
videos for training, serving as effective bias suppression
even when we cannot explicitly extract the source of bias
within each video frame or enumerate types of bias. Finally, to precisely evaluate static bias, we synthesize two
new benchmarks, SCUBA for static cues in the background,
and SCUFO for static cues in the foreground. With extensive experiments, we demonstrate that StillMix mitigates
both types of static bias and improves video representations for downstream applications. Code is available at
https://github.com/lihaoxin05/StillMix.

1. Introduction
Traditional computer vision techniques perform well on
independent and identically distributed (IID) test data, but
often lack out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization [9, 32,
12]. This is intimately tied to the learning of shortcut features [27, 16, 17], which are easy to learn and correlate
strongly with IID labels but cause poor OOD generalization
[53, 62, 49, 22]. In video action recognition, shortcut features often manifest as static cues. For example, a network
may classify a video as golf swinging based on its background, a golf course, even if the motion patterns indicate
another action such as walking. While static cues can provide valuable information [74, 11, 77], they often outcom-

(a)

Accuracy of action recognition
Swin-T

0.7392

Swin-T + FAME

0.7379

Swin-T + StillMix

0.7482

Replace background

(b)

SCUBA Video: test bias toward
static cue in the background

0.4141

Swin-T

Swin-T + FAME

0.4580
0.4973

Swin-T + StillMix

Insert static foreground
(humans in action)

(c)

Video with conflicting
foreground cues

Swin-T

0.3658

Swin-T + FAME 0.3961
Swin-T + StillMix

0.4738

Figure 1: Evaluation of background and foreground static
bias. (a) Testing on IID HMDB51 [36] test videos. (b) Testing on SCUBA videos, constructed by replacing the video
background with a synthetic sinusoidal stripe image. (c)
Testing on videos with conflicting foreground cues, constructed by inserting a random static foreground into the
SCUBA video.

pete motion features [23, 40, 41, 52, 69] and result in low
OOD performance [41, 63, 26]. In contrast to the rich literature on mitigating background static bias (e.g., golf courses
for golf swinging) [5, 63, 73, 10, 6], foreground static bias
has been underexplored. Examples of foreground bias include swimsuits for swimming and guitars for guitar playing — people can swim without swimsuits or show guitars
in the video without playing them.
The first question we ask is if foreground static bias
exists and if it is captured by the representations learned
by neural networks. Our investigation technique is to create test videos with conflicting action cues from the moving part and the static part of the video. In the first
step, shown in Figure 1(b), we replace the backgrounds
of IID HMDB51 [36] test videos by sinusoidal stripe images. These videos have no meaningful backgrounds, so
the action information must come from the foreground.
Therefore, models overly reliant on background static cues

19911

