This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SparseNeRF: Distilling Depth Ranking for Few-shot Novel View Synthesis
Guangcong Wang

Zhaoxi Chen
Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

Ziwei LiuB

{guangcong.wang,zhaoxi00,ccloy,ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg

Novel view (GT)

RegNeRF

MonoSDF*

DSNeRF

SparseNeRF (ours)

Figure 1: Comparing the state-of-the-arts RegNeRF [37], MonoSDF* [65], DSNeRF [17], and our SparseNeRF with three
views for training (* denotes a re-implementation for our task). RegNeRF regularizes geometry with sparsity and continuity
constraints. MonoSDF, and DSNeRF use scale-invariant depth constraints supervised by coarse depth maps. Our SparseNeRF
uses robust depth ranking of coarse depth maps. SparseNeRF can synthesize realistic novel views and coherent geometric
depth (Please refer to the supplementary material for rendered videos).

Abstract
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) significantly degrades
when only a limited number of views are available. To
complement the lack of 3D information, depth-based models, such as DSNeRF and MonoSDF, explicitly assume the
availability of accurate depth maps of multiple views. They
linearly scale the accurate depth maps as supervision to
guide the predicted depth of few-shot NeRFs. However, accurate depth maps are difficult and expensive to capture
due to wide-range depth distances in the wild. This work
presents a new Sparse-view NeRF (SparseNeRF) framework that exploits depth priors from real-world inaccurate
observations. The inaccurate depth observations are either from pre-trained depth models or coarse depth maps of
consumer-level depth sensors. Since coarse depth maps are
not strictly scaled to the ground-truth depth maps, we propose a simple yet effective constraint, a local depth ranking
method, on NeRFs such that the expected depth ranking of
the NeRF is consistent with that of the coarse depth maps in
local patches. To preserve the spatial continuity of the esti-

mated depth of NeRF, we further propose a spatial continuity constraint to encourage the consistency of the expected
depth continuity of NeRF with coarse depth maps. Surprisingly, with simple depth ranking constraints, SparseNeRF
outperforms all state-of-the-art few-shot NeRF methods (including depth-based models) on standard LLFF and DTU
datasets. Moreover, we collect a new dataset NVS-RGBD
that contains real-world depth maps from Azure Kinect,
ZED 2, and iPhone 13 Pro. Extensive experiments on NVSRGBD dataset also validate the superiority and generalizability of SparseNeRF. Code and dataset are available at
https://sparsenerf.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [36, 32, 1, 2, 44] have
made tremendous progress in generating photo-realistic
novel views of scenes by optimizing implicit function representations given a set of 2D input views. However, in a wide
range of real-world scenarios, collecting dense views of a
19065

