This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Contrastive Learning for Pattern-Generalizable Image
Corruption Detection
Xin Feng*
Yifeng Xu*
Guangming Lu†
Wenjie Pei†
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen

Input

VCNet

Input

Ours

VCNet

Ours

Figure 1: Visual comparison between our method and VCNet [42] (the state-of-the-art method for blind image inpainting)
on four tasks: blind image inpainting (graffiti corruption) (up left), blind image inpainting (real-image-patch corruption)
(up right), watermark removal (bottom left) and shadow removal (bottom right). The groundtruth mask and the predicted
masks by different methods are presented.

Abstract
Effective image restoration with large-size corruptions,
such as blind image inpainting, entails precise detection of
corruption region masks which remains extremely challenging due to diverse shapes and patterns of corruptions. In
this work, we present a novel method for automatic corruption detection, which allows for blind corruption restoration
without known corruption masks. Specifically, we develop a
hierarchical contrastive learning framework to detect corrupted regions by capturing the intrinsic semantic distinctions between corrupted and uncorrupted regions. In particular, our model detects the corrupted mask in a coarseto-fine manner by first predicting a coarse mask by contrastive learning in low-resolution feature space and then
refines the uncertain area of the mask by high-resolution
contrastive learning. A specialized hierarchical interaction
mechanism is designed to facilitate the knowledge propagation of contrastive learning in different scales, boosting the modeling performance substantially. The detected
multi-scale corruption masks are then leveraged to guide
the corruption restoration. Detecting corrupted regions
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

by learning the contrastive distinctions rather than the semantic patterns of corruptions, our model has well generalization ability across different corruption patterns. Extensive experiments demonstrate following merits of our
model: 1) the superior performance over other methods
on both corruption detection and various image restoration tasks including blind inpainting and watermark removal, and 2) strong generalization across different corruption patterns such as graffiti, random noise or other image content. Codes and trained weights are available at
https://github.com/xyfJASON/HCL.

1. Introduction
An essential yet challenging step for image restoration
with large-size corruptions, such as blind image inpainting, watermark removal or shadow removal, is to detect
the corruption region masks in pixel level precisely. The
difficulties lie in the diverse shapes and appearance of corruptions, which can be hardly modeled in a uniform pattern. As a result, blind image inpainting remains a challenging task although image inpainting with known corruption
masks [27, 11, 13, 32] has achieved remarkable progress.
A straightforward way for corruption detection is to for-

12076

