This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Simulating Fluids in Real-World Still Images
Siming Fan1 ,* Jingtan Piao1,3 ,* Chen Qian1 , Hongsheng Li2, 3,4 , Kwan-Yee Lin2,3
1
SenseTime Research, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 4 CPII
{fansiming,qianchen}@sensetime.com, 1155116308@link.cuhk.edu.hk,

Ours

hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, junyilin@cuhk.edu.hk

Ours

Ours

Ours

gt

gt

gt

Holynski

Input:Image

10th

Input: Mask and Arrows

Holynski

Zoom In

20th

Holynski

Zoom In

30th

Holynski

Zoom In

Output: Animated Video

Figure 1. Given a still image and a coarse hint (mask and arrows) of motion as input (left), our model estimates fluid motion to generate an
animating video (right). Holynski [11] is a state-of-the-art method. Please refer to the supplemental materials for video playing.

Abstract
In this work, we tackle the problem of real-world fluid
animation from a still image. The key of our system is
a surface-based layered representation, where the scene
is decoupled into a surface fluid layer and an impervious background layer with corresponding transparencies to
characterize the composition of the two layers. The animated video can be produced by warping only the surface
fluid layer according to the estimation of fluid motions and
recombining it with the background. In addition, we introduce surface-only fluid simulation, a 2.5D fluid calculation, as a replacement for motion estimation. Specifically,
we leverage triangular mesh based on a monocular depth
estimator to represent fluid surface layer and simulate the
motion with the inspiration of classic physics theory of hybrid Lagrangian-Eulerian method, along with a learnable
network so as to adapt to complex real-world image textures. Extensive experiments indicate our method’s competitive performance for common fluid scenes and better robustness and reasonability under complex transparent fluid
scenarios. Moreover, as proposed surface-based layer representation and surface-only fluid simulation naturally disentangle the scene, interactive editing such as adding objects and texture replacing could be easily achieved with

realistic results. Code, and dataset are publicly available.

1. Introduction
Given an image of a scene containing liquid such as
streams and waterfalls, humans can imagine how the liquid in the still image would move. The problem of animating fluid from a single image has become a blooming
topic recently studied by a series of work [6, 11, 27, 9, 21].
Their general pipeline can be summarized as: (1) estimating optical flow that indicates the movement of liquid and
(2) synthesizing future frame image based on the motion
estimation. Although these methods achieve impressive visual effects on simple fluid regions, how to handle complex contents with challenging transparency, collisions, and
thin structures in real-world scenes is still a challenging and
open problem.
The key to the limitation of previous work is that the
generation process of videos is modeled in a global manner. Specifically, the subsequent frames are generated based
on warping existing textures on input images [3] or neural
features [6]. Such operations regard the scene as a whole
and warp all the contents in the scene together. For some
complex transparent fluid cases, as shown in Figure 2(b),
we can see through the water to observe the background
rocks beneath the liquid. Textures on those static objects

* Equal contribution and joint first authorship.

Corresponding authors.

Project page: https://slr-sfs.github.io/

15922

