This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rapid Network Adaptation:
Learning to Adapt Neural Networks Using Test-Time Feedback
Teresa Yeo
Oğuzhan Fatih Kar
Zahra Sodagar
Amir Zamir
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL)
https://rapid-network-adaptation.epfl.ch/

Abstract
We propose a method for adapting neural networks to
distribution shifts at test-time. In contrast to trainingtime robustness mechanisms that attempt to anticipate and
counter the shift, we create a closed-loop system and make
use of test-time feedback signal to adapt a network on the
fly. We show that this loop can be effectively implemented
using a learning-based function, which realizes an amortized optimizer for the network. This leads to an adaptation method, named Rapid Network Adaptation (RNA), that
is notably more flexible and orders of magnitude faster
than the baselines. Through a broad set of experiments using various adaptation signals and target tasks, we study
the generality, efficiency, and flexibility of this method. We
perform the evaluations using various datasets (Taskonomy, Replica, ScanNet, Hypersim, COCO, ImageNet), tasks
(depth, optical flow, semantic segmentation, classification),
and distribution shifts (Cross-datasets, 2D and 3D Common
Corruptions) with promising results.

1. Introduction
Neural networks are found to be unreliable against distribution shifts [23, 35, 43, 42, 29]. Examples of such shifts include blur due to camera motion, object occlusions, changes
in weather conditions and lighting, etc. The training-time
strategies to deal with this issue attempt to anticipate the
shifts that may occur and counter them at the training stage
– for instance, by augmenting the training data or updating
the architecture with corresponding robustness inductive biases. As the possible shifts are numerous and unpredictable,
this approach has inherent limitations. This is the main motivation behind test-time adaptation methods, which instead
aim to adapt to such shifts as they occur and recover from
failure. In other words, these methods choose adaptation
over anticipation (see Fig. 1). In this work, we propose a
test-time adaptation framework that aims to perform an ef-

Distorted Input

Distorted Input

Non-adaptive

Adaptive

Predictions

Predictions

Error Feedback
Adaptation signal

Figure 1: Adaptive vs non-adaptive neural network pipelines. Top:
In order to be robust, non-adaptive methods include training-time interventions that anticipate and counter the distribution shifts that will occur
at test-time (e.g., via data augmentation). The learned model, fθ , is frozen
at test-time, thus upon encountering an out-of-distribution input, its predictions may collapse. Bottom: Adaptive methods create a closed-loop
and use an adaptation signal at test-time. The adaptation signal is a quantity that can be computed at test-time from the environment. hϕ acts as a
“controller” by taking in an error feedback, computed from the adaptation
signal and model predictions, to adapt fθ accordingly. It can be implemented as a (i) standard optimizer (e.g., using SGD) or (ii) neural network.
The former is equivalent to test-time optimization (TTO), while the latter
aims to amortize the optimization process, by training a controller network
to adapt fθ – thus, it can be more efficient and flexible. In this work, we
study the latter approach and show its efficiency and flexibility.

ficient adaptation of a given main network using a feedback
signal.
One can consider performing “test-time optimization” (TTO) for this purpose, similar to previous works [91,
108, 27] e.g. simply using SGD to finetune the network
to reduce a proxy loss [91]. While this can successfully
adapt a network, it is unnecessarily inefficient as it does not
make use of the learnable regularities in the adaptation pro-

4674

