This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Context-Aware Planning and Environment-Aware Memory
for Instruction Following Embodied Agents
Jonghyun Choi†
Byeonghwi Kim
Jinyeon Kim
Yuyeong Kim1, * Cheolhong Min
Yonsei University 1 Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology
{byeonghwikim,jinyeonkim,cheolhong.min,jc}@yonsei.ac.kr

uyeongkim@gm.gist.ac.kr

Instruction: Place an apple with a plate in a cabinet.

Abstract

Context-Aware Planning

1. Introduction
For decades, the research community has been pursuing
the goal of building a robotic assistant that can perform everyday tasks through language directives. Recent advancements in computer vision, natural language processing, and
embodied AI have led to the development of several benchmarks aimed at encouraging research on various components of such robotic agents. These benchmarks include
navigation [2, 7, 8, 24], object interaction [28, 42], and interactive reasoning [11, 16] in visually rich 3D environments
[6,23,40]. However, for realistic assistants to be built, active
research in interactive instruction following [16, 28, 36, 42]
has been in progress. This requires agents to navigate, in* Work done while YK was an intern at Yonsei University. †: Corresponding author.

Instruction
Sub-goal Planner
1

(Pickup,

4

,

-

Semantic
Spatial Map

Retrospective Object
Recognition

Context: Apple Plate Cabinet
Sub-goal
frames

Environment-Aware Memory
Object Relocation
Tracking

)

...

Accomplishing household tasks requires to plan
step-by-step actions considering the consequences of
previous actions.
However, the state-of-the-art embodied agents often make mistakes in navigating the
environment and interacting with proper objects due to
imperfect learning by imitating experts or algorithmic
planners without such knowledge. To improve both visual navigation and object interaction, we propose to
consider the consequence of taken actions by CAPEAM
(Context-Aware Planning and Environment-Aware Memory)
that incorporates semantic context (e.g., appropriate objects to interact with) in a sequence of actions, and the
changed spatial arrangement and states of interacted
objects (e.g., location that the object has been moved
to) in inferring the subsequent actions. We empirically
show that the agent with the proposed CAPEAM achieves
state-of-the-art performance in various metrics using a
challenging interactive instruction following benchmark in
both seen and unseen environments by large margins (up to
+10.70% in unseen env.).

(Put,

,

)

Object Location
Caching

Sub-goals
1 (Pickup, Apple , -

)

2 (Put, Apple , Plate )
3 (Pickup, Plate , -

Environment

)

4 (Put, Plate , Cabinet )

Interaction
Detailed Planners
w/o context

w/ context

(Pickup, Plate )

(Pickup, Pan) (Pickup, Plate )

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed ‘Context-Aware Planning
(CAP)’ and ‘Environment-Aware Memory (EAM)’. The CAP
incorporates ‘context’ (i.e., task-relevant objects) of the task (denoted by ✓ in generating a sequence of sub-goals, compared with
the output without the CAP, denoted by ✗). The detailed planners
then predict a sequence of agent-executable actions for each respective sub-goal. The agent keeps the state changes of objects
and their masks in the EAM and utilizes them when necessary.
Even when the agent may not predict the mask of the plate due
to occlusion, it can still interact with the plate thanks to the mask
remembered in EAM, leading to successful task completion.

teract with objects, and complete long-horizon tasks by following natural language instructions with egocentric vision.
To accomplish a given task, the agent needs to plan a sequence of actions to interact with specific task-relevant objects. However, the agent often plans to interact with irrelevant objects to the task. For instance, for the task “put an apple slice on the table”, after slicing an apple, the agent might
plan to pick up a bread slice, which can lead to the failure of
the entire task, mainly due to a lack of contextual memory.
To address this issue, we first propose a novel approach that

10936

