This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parameterized Cost Volume for Stereo Matching
Jiaxi Zeng1†, Chengtang Yao1,3†, Lidong Yu3 , Yuwei Wu1 ,* Yunde Jia2 ,
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing,
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, China
3
Autonomous Driving Algorithm, Deeproute
{jiaxi,yao.c.t,wuyuwei,jiayunde}@bit.edu.cn
yvlidong@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Stereo matching aims to find the pixel-wise correspondence between paired images within a predefined disparity range. The pixel-wise matching is efficiently real† These authors contributed equally to this work.
* Corresponding author.

1.75
1.50

Runtime(s)

1.25

CFNet
ACVNet
deeppruner-fast
CREStereo
RAFT-Stereo
PCVNet(ours)

1.00

EPE(px)

Stereo matching becomes computationally challenging
when dealing with a large disparity range. Prior methods
mainly alleviate the computation through dynamic cost volume by focusing on a local disparity space, but it requires
many iterations to get close to the ground truth due to the
lack of a global view. We find that the dynamic cost volume
approximately encodes the disparity space as a single
Gaussian distribution with a fixed and small variance at
each iteration, which results in an inadequate global view
over disparity space and a small update step at every
iteration. In this paper, we propose a parameterized cost
volume to encode the entire disparity space using multiGaussian distribution. The disparity distribution of each
pixel is parameterized by weights, means, and variances.
The means and variances are used to sample disparity
candidates for cost computation, while the weights and
means are used to calculate the disparity output. The above
parameters are computed through a JS-divergence-based
optimization, which is realized as a gradient descent update
in a feed-forward differential module. Experiments show
that our method speeds up the runtime of RAFT-Stereo
by 4 ∼ 15 times, achieving real-time performance and
comparable accuracy. The code is available at https:
//github.com/jiaxiZeng/ParameterizedCost-Volume-for-Stereo-Matching.

CREStereo
RAFT-Stereo
PCVNet(ours)

3

Abstract

1.00

0.75
0.50

0.75
0.60

0.25

1

3

5

7

9 11 13 15 17 19

Iterations

0.00

2000

4000

6000

8000

Width of the image(px)

10000

(a) The illustration of End-Point-Error (EPE) changing with the increase of iteration on the Sceneflow dataset (left) and the illustration of time cost changing with the increase in image width (right).

t=3 t=2

t=15
...

t=5
...

...

t=4 t=1

t= 20 t=10

Moving Step of Ours

Moving Step of RAFT-Stereo

(b) The visualization of the moving step at each iteration t.

Figure 1: (a) We analyze the EPE at different iterations
and time cost with the increase of image width. (b) The
moving steps are visualized on the right view image, starting from a disparity value of 0 towards the ground truth.
Compared to RAFT-Stereo [13] and CREStereo [11], our
method achieves a rapid decrease in EPE and a large moving step from the first iteration, greatly reducing the number
of iterations.
ized by existing methods within a small predefined range
[1, 26, 30, 6, 5, 20, 27]. However, the matching becomes
time- and memory-consuming for a large predefined range,
as computational cost increases rapidly with the growing
range. This challenge limits the application of stereo matching in the real world, e.g., in high-resolution images.
Prior methods relieve the challenge mainly relying on

18347

