This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Image Harmonization with Learnable Augmentation
Li Niu*, Junyan Cao, Wenyan Cong, Liqing Zhang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{ustcnewly,Joy C1}@sjtu.edu.cn, wycong@utexas.edu, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The goal of image harmonization is adjusting the foreground appearance in a composite image to make the
whole image harmonious. To construct paired training
images, existing datasets adopt different ways to adjust
the illumination statistics of foregrounds of real images
to produce synthetic composite images. However, different datasets have considerable domain gap and the performances on small-scale datasets are limited by insufficient training data. In this work, we explore learnable augmentation to enrich the illumination diversity of small-scale
datasets for better harmonization performance. In particular, our designed SYthetic COmposite Network (SycoNet)
takes in a real image with foreground mask and a random vector to learn suitable color transformation, which
is applied to the foreground of this real image to produce a synthetic composite image. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed learnable augmentation for image harmonization. The code
of SycoNet is released at https://github.com/bcmi/SycoNetAdaptive-Image-Harmonization.

1. Introduction
As a prevalent image editing operation, image composition [28] aims to cut the foreground from one image and
paste it on another background image, making a realisticlooking composite image. Image composition plays a critical role in artistic creation, augmented reality, automatic
advertising, and so on [37, 44]. However, the illumination statistics of foreground and background could be inconsistent due to distinct capture conditions or capture devices (e.g., season, weather, time of the day, camera setting),
which makes the resultant composite image unrealistic. To
address this issue, image harmonization [5] targets at adjusting the illumination statistics of foreground to make it
compatible with the background, leading to a harmonious
* Corresponding author.

composite image.
Training data-hungry deep learning models for image
harmonization relies on abundant pairs of composite images and harmonious images. Nevertheless, it is extremely
difficult and expensive to manually adjust the foreground
of composite image to produce harmonious image. Therefore, recent works turn to an inverse manner, that is, adjusting the foreground of real image to produce a synthetic
composite image, resulting in pairs of synthetic composite
images and ground-truth harmonious real images. In this
inverse manner, the work in [5] constructed four datasets
(HCOCO, HFlickr, HAdobe5k, and Hday2night), which are
collectively called iHarmony4. Despite similar construction pipeline, four datasets adopt different foreground adjustment approaches. In particular, HCOCO and HFlickr
adopt traditional color transfer methods [31, 38, 11, 30] to
adjust the foreground, while HAdobe5k (resp., Hday2night)
replaces the foreground with the counterpart retouched by
different experts (resp., captured at different times). Previous works usually train a deep image harmonization model
based on the union of training sets from four datasets. However, the data distributions of different datasets are considerably different, which is caused by many factors (e.g., image
source, capture device, scene type, foreground adjustment
approach). Following the terminology of domain adaptation [35, 29], we treat each dataset as one domain and
four datasets have large domain gap. We observe that
finetuning on different datasets can bring notable performance gain (see Section 4.2), but the performance is still
limited by insufficient training data on small-scale datasets
(e.g., HFlickr, Hday2night).
In this work, we attempt to augment small-scale datasets
with more synthetic composite images to enrich the illumination diversity, which may not be easily achieved by using the original foreground adjustment approach. Specifically, for HFlickr, we need to manually filter unqualified
synthetic composite images [5], otherwise the performance
would be significantly compromised (see Section 4.2). For
Hday2night, it is almost impossible to recapture the same
scene at different times. Therefore, we design an aug-

7482

