This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Guiding Local Feature Matching with Surface Curvature
Shuzhe Wang1 *
1

Juho kannala1

Aalto University

Marc Pollefeys2,3
2

ETH zurich

3

Daniel Barath2

Microsoft

Abstract
We propose a new method, called curvature similarity extractor (CSE), for improving local feature matching
across images. CSE calculates the curvature of the local 3D
surface patch for each detected feature point in a viewpointinvariant manner via fitting quadrics to predicted monocular depth maps. This curvature is then leveraged as an additional signal in feature matching with off-the-shelf matchers
like SuperGlue and LoFTR. Additionally, CSE enables endto-end joint training by connecting the matcher and depth
predictor networks. Our experiments demonstrate on largescale real-world datasets that CSE consistently improves
the accuracy of state-of-the-art methods. Fine-tuning the
depth prediction network further enhances the accuracy.
The proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art results on
the ScanNet dataset, showcasing the effectiveness of incorporating 3D geometric information into feature matching.1

1. Introduction
Local feature matching is a crucial component for many
geometric computer vision tasks, including visual localization [50, 51, 52, 48, 14, 66], structure-from-motion
(SfM) [67, 53, 29], and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [38, 39, 10]. Given a pair of images observing a 3D scene, the task is to find reliable tentative
point-to-point correspondences in the two images. Forming such feature matches is often a challenging task as
the images may undergo large viewpoint and illumination
changes, have occlusions or repetitive patterns.
The standard pipeline for local feature matching typically involves two steps: (1) keypoint detection and description and (2) point-wise feature matching. Traditional
approaches mainly focus on improving the robustness of
* Part of the work was done during the author’s visit to ETH zurich.
1 Code and trained models are available at https://github.com/

AaltoVision/surface-curvature-estimator.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Curvature-guided match selection: (a) Correct
matches in two views must share the same underlying surface curvature, e.g., predicted from monocular depth. (b) Correspondences
from different surfaces are guaranteed to be incorrect.

keypoint detection and description through, for example,
extending the Harris [21] detector to handle affine transformations and multiple scales [35, 36] or using more discriminative or efficient descriptors [32, 7, 34, 1, 3]. However, despite their unbroken popularity, these algorithms often fail
to cope with the challenges that arise in real-world environments, leading to low accuracy.
Recent advances in deep learning-based feature matching have made significant progress in addressing the limitations of hand-crafted approaches, such as by jointly
training detectors and descriptors [69, 12, 15, 44, 63, 40]
with convolutional neural networks (CNNs), or combining hand-crafted and learning-based descriptors in a hybrid manner [41, 6]. SuperGlue [49] introduced the use
of transformer networks to learn the matching process and
formulate the problem as an optimal transport task [64].
LoFTR [55] and its recent variants [58, 8, 65] leverage both
the global and local context from raw images by jointly
learning the feature extraction and matching in a single network. While these approaches have led to state-of-the-art
performance on several benchmarks, they work entirely in
the 2D image domain and ignore the underlying 3D geometry of the scene. As feature matching is, essentially,
finding the corresponding projections of an actual 3D point,
this could be a critical limitation in real scenarios where the

17981

