This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Moment Detection in Long Tutorial Videos
Ioana Croitoru*
Simion-Vlad Bogolin3
Samuel Albanie2
Yang Liu4
Zhaowen Wang1
Seunghyun Yoon1
Franck Dernoncourt1
Hailin Jin1
Trung Bui1
1

Adobe Research
3

Filtir

4

2

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge

Wangxuan Inst. of Computer Technology, Peking University

Abstract
Tutorial videos play an increasingly important role in
professional development and self-directed education. For
users to realise the full benefits of this medium, tutorial
videos must be efficiently searchable. In this work, we focus on the task of moment detection, in which the goal is
to localise the temporal window where a given event occurs
within a given tutorial video. Prior work on moment detection has focused primarily on short videos (typically on
videos shorter than three minutes). However, many tutorial
videos are substantially longer (stretching to hours in duration), presenting significant challenges for existing moment
detection approaches.
To study this problem, we propose the first dataset
of untrimmed, long-form tutorial videos for the task of
Moment Detection called the Behance Moment Detection
(BMD) dataset. BMD videos have an average duration
of over one hour and are characterised by slowly evolving visual content and wide-ranging dialogue. To meet
the unique challenges of this dataset, we propose a new
framework, L ONG M OMENT-D ETR, and demonstrate that
it outperforms strong baselines. Additionally, we introduce
a variation of the dataset that contains YouTube Chapter
annotations and show that the features obtained by our
framework can be successfully used to boost the performance on the task of chapter detection. Code and data
can be found at https://github.com/ioanacroi/
longmoment-detr.

1. Introduction
Enabled by cheaper disk storage and networking technology, long-form videos of tutorial content are proliferating. As such, there is a pressing need to develop effective
tools for searching within videos. In this work, we consider
this problem through the lens of moment detection— given
a video and a natural language query, our task is to find the

Figure 1. L ONG M OMENT-D ETR. Our framework performs moment detection and unlike previous state of the art methods, it
works on long tutorial videos.

temporal span of the video that best matches the query (as
shown in Fig. 1). Beyond tutorial content, this task also has
applications in domains such as security and entertainment.
To study moment detection in the long-form setting, we
introduce, the first database of long tutorial videos with
manual annotations for validation and testing, called Behance Moment Detection (BMD). The videos, which are
collected from the Behance platform1 , consist of tutorial
videos that teach skills with various creative tools such as
drawing, movie editing, animation and photo editing.
Existing moment detection datasets predominantly feature short videos centered on human activities, such as
cooking or swimming. In contrast, our BMD dataset emphasizes long tutorial videos that explore the use of software tools for digital artistry. Typically, these tutorials involve screen-sharing sessions detailing creative processes,
often spanning several hours. Efficiently localizing specific
segments in such long videos can greatly enhance user nav-

* Work done during an internship at Adobe. Now at V7 Labs.

1 https://behance.net

2594

