This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Degradation-Resistant Unfolding Network for Heterogeneous Image Fusion
Chunming He1,3,† , Kai Li2 * , Guoxia Xu3,4,∗ , Yulun Zhang5 , Runze Hu6 , Zhenhua Guo7 , Xiu Li1,∗
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, 2 NEC Laboratories America,
3
Smart Vision, 4 Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
5
ETH Zürich, 6 Beijing Institute of Technology, 7 Tianyi Traffic Technology
{chunminghe19990224, li.gml.kai, gxxu.re, yulun100, hrzlpk2015, cszguo}@gmail.com
li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Heterogeneous image fusion (HIF) techniques aim to enhance image quality by merging complementary information from images captured by different sensors. Among
these algorithms, deep unfolding network (DUN)-based
methods achieve promising performance but still suffer from
two issues: they lack a degradation-resistant-oriented fusion model and struggle to adequately consider the structural properties of DUNs, making them vulnerable to degradation scenarios. In this paper, we propose a DegradationResistant Unfolding Network (DeRUN) for the HIF task to
generate high-quality fused images even in degradation scenarios. Specifically, we introduce a novel HIF model for
degradation resistance and derive its optimization procedures. Then, we incorporate the optimization unfolding
process into the proposed DeRUN for end-to-end training.
To ensure the robustness and efficiency of DeRUN, we employ a joint constraint strategy and a lightweight partial
weight sharing module. To train DeRUN, we further propose a gradient direction-based entropy loss with powerful texture representation capacity. Extensive experiments
show that DeRUN significantly outperforms existing methods on four HIF tasks, as well as downstream applications,
with cheaper computational and memory costs.

1. Introduction
Heterogeneous image fusion (HIF) aims to integrate images acquired by different imaging sensors to generate a
more robust and informative image. HIF has been investigated in various domains, such as infrared and visible image
fusion (IVF) [61], medical image fusion (MIF) [45], and
biological image fusion (BIF) [41], based on different sensors. By merging the complementary information from the
* Corresponding author, † Work done during the internship at Smart
Vision.

Infrared

Visible

IVF-Net [17]

DeRUN

Figure 1: IVF results under degradation scenarios, including low
light and heavy smoke. DeRUN generates more visual-appealing
results for its degradation resistance capacity.

heterogeneous images, the fused image is expected to have
better quality than individual ones and thus serves better
for decision-making or subsequent processing, especially
in degradation scenarios such as extreme weather in IVF,
magnetic turbulence in MIF, and phase noise in BIF.
Taking the IVF task as an example, visible images typically contain more details but are easily influenced by poor
illumination, fog, and other factors. In contrast, infrared images are resistant to lighting and weather disturbances but
usually have poor texture details. Hence, IVF aims to get
fused images that preserve texture details from visible images and the robust thermal radiation from infrared images
simultaneously. The fused images with enhanced quality
and informative components can better resist degradation
conditions and thus benefit high-level image analysis.
Existing HIF techniques can be classified into modelbased and learning-based methods. Model-based fusion
methods focus on iteratively solving the optimization-based
fusion framework with manually designed fusion rules [30,
34]. Although guaranteed with strong interpretability, such
methods are limited by hand-crafted feature extractors with
poor generalizability, thus failing to cope with degradation
conditions. Benefiting from the nonlinear capacity of convolutional neural network (CNN), learning-based fusion solutions have strong generalizability by learning an end-toend fusion mapping [60, 65, 64]. However, such learning-

12611

