This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EMR-MSF: Self-Supervised Recurrent Monocular Scene Flow
Exploiting Ego-Motion Rigidity
Zijie Jiang
Masatoshi Okutomi
Tokyo Institute of Technology
zjiang@ok.sc.e.titech.ac.jp, mxo@ctrl.titech.ac.jp

Abstract
Self-supervised monocular scene flow estimation, aiming
to understand both 3D structures and 3D motions from two
temporally consecutive monocular images, has received increasing attention for its simple and economical sensor
setup. However, the accuracy of current methods suffers
from the bottleneck of less-efficient network architecture
and lack of motion rigidity for regularization. In this paper, we propose a superior model named EMR-MSF by
borrowing the advantages of network architecture design
under the scope of supervised learning. We further impose explicit and robust geometric constraints with an elaborately constructed ego-motion aggregation module where
a rigidity soft mask is proposed to filter out dynamic regions for stable ego-motion estimation using static regions.
Moreover, we propose a motion consistency loss along with
a mask regularization loss to fully exploit static regions.
Several efficient training strategies are integrated including a gradient detachment technique and an enhanced view
synthesis process for better performance. Our proposed
method outperforms the previous self-supervised works by
a large margin and catches up to the performance of supervised methods. On the KITTI scene flow benchmark,
our approach improves the SF-all metric of the state-of-theart self-supervised monocular method by 44% and demonstrates superior performance across sub-tasks including
depth and visual odometry, amongst other self-supervised
single-task or multi-task methods.

1. Introduction
Scene flow estimation, which involves estimating both
3D structure and 3D motion of a dynamic scene from
its two consecutive observations, has been receiving increasing attention due to its significance in areas such as
robotics [10], augmented reality [22], and autonomous vehicles [35]. Recently, deep learning has demonstrated remarkable progress in the domain of scene flow estimation

( a)

( b)

( c)

( d)

( e)

( )f

Figure 1: Comparison between our method and [20]. (a)
input first frame, (b) input second frame, (c) depth of first
frame from [20], (d) synthesized optical flow from [20], (e)
depth of first frame from our method, (f) synthesized optical
flow from our method. Our method generates more regularized and detailed predictions as shown in red boxes.

based on various input modalities, including stereo images
[3, 24, 32, 41, 51, 40], RGB-D pairs [31, 39, 45, 33], or
Lidar points [28, 18, 54, 56, 38, 55, 12, 7, 11, 52]. These
methods, however, either require strict sensor calibrations
(e.g., stereo-based), or expensive devices (e.g., RGB-D or
Lidar-based) for achieving satisfactory performance, which
restricts their widespread applications.
On the other hand, monocular scene flow estimation
methods [5, 57, 58, 62, 30, 26, 20, 21, 2] which only require a monocular camera for obtaining both 3D structure
and 3D motion, have been presented as an economical yet
effective solution for dynamic 3D perception. The methods [5, 57] combined with supervised learning have yielded
promising results, yet the primary challenge facing them
has been the limited availability of ground-truth training
data. To address this limitation, several multi-task methods [58, 62, 30, 53, 26] have been proposed to jointly learn
the depth, 2D optical flow and camera ego-motion networks
from monocular sequences in a self-supervised manner, and
the scene flow can be calculated from the outputs. Recently,
[20, 21, 2] have shown it feasible to train a single network
to directly estimate both depth and 3D scene flow from two

69

