This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Achievement-based Training Progress Balancing for Multi-Task Learning
Hayoung Yun and Hanjoo Cho*
Samsung Research
{hayoung.yun, hanjoo.cho}@samsung.com

Abstract
Multi-task learning faces two challenging issues: (1) the
high cost of annotating labels for all tasks and (2) balancing the training progress of various tasks with different natures. To resolve the label annotation issue, we construct
a large-scale ”partially annotated” multi-task dataset by
combining task-specific datasets. However, the numbers
of annotations for individual tasks are imbalanced, which
may escalate an imbalance in training progress. To balance the training progress, we propose an achievementbased multi-task loss to modulate training speed based on
the ”achievement,” defined as the ratio of current accuracy to single-task accuracy. Then, we formulate the multitask loss as a weighted geometric mean of individual task
losses instead of a weighted sum to prevent any task from
dominating the loss. In experiments, we evaluated the accuracy and training speed of the proposed multi-task loss
on the large-scale multi-task dataset against recent multitask losses. The proposed loss achieved the best multi-task
accuracy without incurring training time overhead. Compared to single-task models, the proposed one achieved
1.28%, 1.65%, and 1.18% accuracy improvement in object detection, semantic segmentation, and depth estimation, respectively, while reducing computations to 33.73%.
Source code is available at https://github.com/
samsung/Achievement-based-MTL.

1. Introduction
Cooperation of various vision tasks is often required for
high-level vision applications for autonomous driving and
surveillance cameras [6, 16, 41, 8, 12, 38]. The vision
task models typically consist of two parts: a feature extractor and a prediction head, and most computations are
concentrated on the feature extractor. Hence, sharing the
feature extractor among different tasks, multi-task learning, can significantly expedite inference and enhance the
* Corresponding author

feature extractor to produce more general representations
[25, 18, 3, 12, 38]. However, multi-task learning faces two
major challenges: balancing the training progress of various tasks with different natures and the cost of annotating
the labels of all tasks for plenty of images.
There are two major approaches to balancing the training
progress: loss scale-based [25, 5, 20] and gradients-based
[4, 31, 40, 24]. Primitive multi-task losses [25, 5] address
the difference in loss scale among individual tasks due to
their distinct loss functions (e.g., cross entropy for classification and L1 loss for regression). However, simply matching the loss scales is insufficient to balance the gradients
because the derivatives of distinct functions can differ.
Recent multi-task losses have directly adjusted backpropagated gradients [4, 31, 40, 24, 23]. The gradient-based
methods seek to equalize the task gradients at the last shared
layer [4, 24]. However, achieving balance in task gradients
does not guarantee balance in the training progress because
the difficulty of tasks may differ. Easy tasks quickly converge, while difficult ones are trained slowly [13]. Hence, it
is insufficient to consider only gradients to balance the training progress, but task difficulty should also be regarded.
Annotating labels for all tasks on plenty of images is
expensive and time-consuming. Thus, multi-task datasets
[33, 7, 10] suffer from a lack of annotations, while taskspecific datasets have become larger and larger [29, 22, 32].
Some previous works [18, 38] construct a union dataset
composed of task-specific datasets to resolve this issue. Images of the union dataset are partially annotated. Because
task losses are only produced for existing labels, multi-task
models can be easily biased toward the dominant task if the
numbers of labels for individual tasks differ significantly.
Moreover, the gradient of each task is also heavily influenced by the number of task labels presented in a batch,
and thus gradient-based multi-task losses are significantly
disturbed on a partially annotated dataset.
In this paper, we propose a novel multi-task loss that can
balance the training progress of different tasks effectively,
without using task gradients. The proposed loss controls
the training progress based on accuracy achievement, defined as the ratio of current accuracy to single-task accuracy.

16935

