This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

View Consistent Purification for Accurate Cross-View Localization
Shan Wang1,2
1

Yanhao Zhang1

Akhil Perincherry3

Australian National University

2

Ankit Vora3

Data61, CSIRO

3

Hongdong Li1

Ford Motor Company

Abstract
This paper proposes a fine-grained self-localization
method for outdoor robotics that utilizes a flexible number of onboard cameras and readily accessible satellite images. The proposed method addresses limitations in existing cross-view localization methods that struggle to handle
noise sources such as moving objects and seasonal variations. It is the first sparse visual-only method that enhances perception in dynamic environments by detecting
view-consistent key points and their corresponding deep
features from ground and satellite views, while removing
off-the-ground objects and establishing homography transformation between the two views. Moreover, the proposed
method incorporates a spatial embedding approach that
leverages camera intrinsic and extrinsic information to reduce the ambiguity of purely visual matching, leading to
improved feature matching and overall pose estimation accuracy. The method exhibits strong generalization and is
robust to environmental changes, requiring only geo-poses
as ground truth. Extensive experiments on the KITTI and
Ford Multi-AV Seasonal datasets demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods, achieving median spatial accuracy errors below 0.5
meters along the lateral and longitudinal directions, and a
median orientation accuracy error below 2◦ 1 .

1. Introduction
Accurate self-localization is a fundamental problem in
mobile robotics, particularly in the context of autonomous
driving. While Global Positioning System (GPS) is a
widely adopted solution, its accuracy hardly meets the stringent requirements of autonomous driving [20]. Real-Time
Kinematic (RTK) positioning systems provide an alternative by correcting GPS errors, but their implementation is
hindered by the need for signal reference stations [13], rendering them an expensive solution. On the other hand,
odometry [18, 4, 37, 32] or simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM) [17, 11, 25, 32] methods can generate
1 Our project page is https://shanwang-shan.github.io/PureACLwebsite/

(a) Query

(b) Reference

Figure 1: (a) Query ground view (onboard camera) images
(front, rear, left, and right). (b) reference satellite image.
The initial and ground truth poses, and FoV of cameras are
shown in (red) and (green), respectively.
accurate short-term trajectories, however, they experience
drift accumulation over time that can only be alleviated
through loop closures if the agent’s trajectories overlap.
Lastly, other self-localization techniques [35, 15, 31, 21]
that rely on a pre-constructed 3D High Definition (HD)
maps face limitations in terms of the extensive time and resources required for map acquisition and maintenance.
Using off-the-shelf satellite images as ready-to-use maps
to achieve cross-view localization brings an alternative and
promising way for low-cost localization. However, due to
the significant disparity between overhead views captured
by satellites and views seen by robots, cross-view localization is more challenging than traditional methods. To address this, it is crucial to purify view-consistent features that
can support the localization process. Furthermore, satellite views can be captured at different times, leading to
variations in seasonal and temporal conditions. The crossview consistent purification can also minimize the impact
of moving and seasonal objects.
Most previous cross-view localization methods [24, 10,
14, 29, 23, 38] approach the task as an image retrieval problem, leading to coarse localization accuracy that is inferior
to commercial GPS which can achieve an error of up to 4.9
meters in open sky conditions [30]. In contrast, our method
utilizes a coarse pose that is easily obtainable from the Autonomous Vehicles system, to estimate the fine-grained 3DoF (lateral, longitudinal, yaw) pose of the robot. This
is accomplished through visual cross-view matching, utilizing ground-view images captured by onboard cameras and a

8197

