This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Test Time Adaptation for Blind Image Quality Assessment
Subhadeep Roy∗ Shankhanil Mitra∗ Soma Biswas Rajiv Soundararajan
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India
subhadeeproy2000@gmail.com, {shankhanilm, somabiswas, rajivs}@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
While the design of blind image quality assessment (IQA)
algorithms has improved significantly, the distribution shift
between the training and testing scenarios often leads to a
poor performance of these methods at inference time. This
motivates the study of test time adaptation (TTA) techniques
to improve their performance at inference time. Existing
auxiliary tasks and loss functions used for TTA may not
be relevant for quality-aware adaptation of the pre-trained
model. In this work, we introduce two novel quality-relevant
auxiliary tasks at the batch and sample levels to enable
TTA for blind IQA. In particular, we introduce a group contrastive loss at the batch level and a relative rank loss at
the sample level to make the model quality aware and adapt
to the target data. Our experiments reveal that even using a small batch of images from the test distribution helps
achieve significant improvement in performance by updating the batch normalization statistics of the source model.

1. Introduction
The problem of image quality assessment (IQA) is extremely important in diverse image capture, processing, and
sharing applications. However, a reference image is often
not available for quality assessment. No reference (NR) or
blind IQA primarily deals with the question of predicting
image quality without using a reference image. Such NR
IQA algorithms are often designed using machine learning approaches. More recently, deep learning based approaches have been extremely successful in achieving impressive performance. However, IQA applications are quite
diverse and deal with several different distortions and distributional shifts. IQA models often have poor generalization
ability and find it difficult to perform well under such shifts.
Test time adaptation (TTA) has emerged as an important
approach to address distributional shifts at test time [8]. It
has been shown that by modifying a few global parameters
of the model using a suitable loss that does not require the
∗ Authors contributed equally to this work
§ https://github.com/subhadeeproy2000/TTA-IQA

ground truth, one can significantly improve the performance
of the model on the test data. Further, source-free adaptation, where the source data on which the original model
was trained is not available while updating the model, is a
realistic setting. While such approaches have been studied
extensively in image classification literature [31, 33], there
is hardly any literature on TTA for IQA.
There are multiple challenges in designing TTA for IQA.
Typical losses used for TTA, such as entropy minimization [33], are not applicable for IQA. For example, IQA
is often studied in the regression context. This makes it
difficult to extend models based on class confidences [24]
or class prototypes [10] for classification to IQA. Also, the
relevance of other self-supervised tasks such as rotation prediction [14], context prediction [5], colorization [15], noise
prediction [1], feature clustering [3] for adapting IQA models is not clear. While contrastive learning has also been
employed for TTA [20], such a framework is not explicitly
based on contrasting image quality, and its relevance is also
not clear.
Our main contribution is in the design of auxiliary tasks
to enable TTA for IQA. We start with a source model trained
on a large IQA dataset and fine-tune the model on individual batches of test samples. The first task we introduce
for adaptation is based on contrasting groups of low and
high quality images in a batch. Thus, we exploit the initial
knowledge of the source model and try to adapt it by enforcing quality relationships among the batch of samples. Such
a group contrastive (GC) learning approach fits naturally to
our setting to account for any errors on individual samples
that the source model may be prone to.
In contrast to the GC learning that depends on the batch,
our second auxiliary task is an image specific task based on
distorted augmentations of different types. Here, our goal is
to enable the model to rank the image quality of further distorted versions of each test sample. We explore the role of
different distortion types to leverage the maximum benefit
of this task. While GC learning is more effective when samples in a batch are diverse in quality, the rank order based
learning is more effective when the quality of the images
is not extremely poor. Thus, a combination of the tasks

16742

