This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Fine-Grained Features for Pixel-wise Video Correspondences
Rui Li
Shenglong Zhou
Dong Liu
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
{liruid,slzhou96}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn
https://github.com/qianduoduolr/FGVC

Coarse

Abstract

Fine

Video analysis tasks rely heavily on identifying the pixels from different frames that correspond to the same visual
target. To tackle this problem, recent studies have advocated feature learning methods that aim to learn distinctive representations to match the pixels, especially in a selfsupervised fashion. Unfortunately, these methods have difﬁculties for tiny or even single-pixel visual targets. Pixelwise video correspondences were traditionally related to
optical ﬂows, which however lead to deterministic correspondences and lack robustness on real-world videos. We
address the problem of learning features for establishing
pixel-wise correspondences. Motivated by optical ﬂows as
well as the self-supervised feature learning, we propose to
use not only labeled synthetic videos but also unlabeled
real-world videos for learning ﬁne-grained representations
in a holistic framework. We adopt an adversarial learning
scheme to enhance the generalization ability of the learned
features. Moreover, we design a coarse-to-ﬁne framework
to pursue high computational efﬁciency. Our experimental
results on a series of correspondence-based tasks demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms state-of-theart rivals in both accuracy and efﬁciency.

Figure 1: We illustrate video correspondences with different
granularities, including object-wise, group-wise, and pixel-wise.
In this paper, we concentrate on learning ﬁne-grained features to
address the pixel-wise video correspondences.
ing to the granularity: the ﬁrst one is object-wise correspondences that exist between coarsely localized bounding
boxes [36, 39] along the video; the second one is groupwise correspondences, indicating the mapping at grouplevel, and usually applied to downstream tasks like video
object segmentation [5, 25]; the third one is pixel-wise correspondences, which describe the pixel-level relation between video frames with the ﬁnest granularity.
Learning dense representations from videos is one approach to ﬁnding the correspondences. Researchers have
been exploring different self-supervised methods for learning generalizable representations using unlabeled videos
collected in the real world [16, 20, 23, 24, 41, 45]. For example, Wang et al. [41] propose using an object-level cycleconsistency across time (i.e., forward-backward tracking)
as a supervision signal. Jabri et al. [16] further enhance it
by combining cycles of time with the similarities between
path-level representations. Inspired by contrastive learning,
Xu et al. [45] try to learn spatial and temporal representation through a frame-wise contrastive loss, while Li et
al. [23] propose a spatial-then-temporal pretext task to learn
better spatiotemporal features. Despite obtaining promising
outcomes, current research has predominantly emphasized
performing object-level or patch-level similarity learning,
making it difﬁcult to accurately recognize pixel-wise differences with the learned features. As a result, there is an in-

1. Introduction
One of the most fundamental problems in computer vision is learning visual correspondences across space and
time, which has many applications such as 3D reconstruction, physical understanding, and dynamic object modeling. Due to the factors such as viewpoint change, distractors, and deformations, this task is extremely challenging
and can be roughly divided into three categories accordThis work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grants 62022075 and 62036005, and by the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities under Grant WK3490000006. This
work was also supported by the advanced computing resources provided
by the Supercomputing Center of USTC. (Corresponding author: Dong
Liu.)

9632

