This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DDS2M: Self-Supervised Denoising Diffusion Spatio-Spectral Model for
Hyperspectral Image Restoration
Yuchun Miao1
1

Lefei Zhang1,3 *

Liangpei Zhang2

Dacheng Tao4

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
State Key Lab. of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing, Wuhan University
3
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, 4 Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney
{miaoyuchun, zhanglefei, zlp62}@whu.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

(a) Denoising Diffusion Restoration Model (DDRM)

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently received a surge of interest due to their impressive performance for image restoration, especially in terms of noise robustness. However, existing diffusion-based methods are trained on a large amount
of training data and perform very well in-distribution, but
can be quite susceptible to distribution shift. This is especially inappropriate for data-starved hyperspectral image (HSI) restoration. To tackle this problem, this work
puts forth a self-supervised diffusion model for HSI restoration, namely Denoising Diffusion Spatio-Spectral Model
(DDS2M), which works by inferring the parameters of the
proposed Variational Spatio-Spectral Module (VS2M) during the reverse diffusion process, solely using the degraded
HSI without any extra training data. In VS2M, a variational inference-based loss function is customized to enable the untrained spatial and spectral networks to learn
the posterior distribution, which serves as the transitions
of the sampling chain to help reverse the diffusion process.
Benefiting from its self-supervised nature and the diffusion
process, DDS2M enjoys stronger generalization ability to
various HSIs compared to existing diffusion-based methods
and superior robustness to noise compared to existing HSI
restoration methods. Extensive experiments on HSI denoising, noisy HSI completion and super-resolution on a variety of HSIs demonstrate DDS2M’s superiority over the existing task-specific state-of-the-arts. Code is available at:
https://github.com/miaoyuchun/DDS2M .

1. Introduction
As a new trendy generative model, diffusion models [37,
13, 28, 38] have attracted significant attention in the community owing to their state-of-the-art performance in image synthesis [7]. In essence, diffusion model is a parameterized sampling chain trained using a variational bound
* Corresponding Author

xt 1

xt

p (x t | x t 1 , y)
(fixed)
A Large Number of Extra Training Data

Using untrained neural networks

(b) Denoising Diffusion Spatio-Spectral Model (DDS2M)

xt 1

xt

p t , t (x t | x t 1 , y)
t , t (learnable)

Variational Inference-based
Loss Function

t 1

, t 1 Untrained Neural
Nertworks

Figure 1. Comparison between DDRM and our self-supervised
DDS2M. (a) DDRM utilizes a denoising network pre-trained on a
large number of extra training data to reverse the diffusion process.
(b) Our DDS2M works by inferring the untrained neural networks’
parameters {θ, ζ} during the reverse diffusion process, only using the degraded HSI y without any extra training data. The untrained neural networks and the variational inference-based loss
function constitute the proposed Variational Spatio-Spectral Module (VS2M).

objective, which is equivalent to that of score-based models [39, 40, 41]. After training, samples are generated by
the sampling chain, starting from white noise and gradually
denoising to a clean image.
Remarkably, diffusion models can go beyond image synthesis [11, 32, 20], and have been widely utilized in image
restoration tasks, such as super-resolution [16, 46, 34, 6], inpainting [16, 46, 33, 21, 39, 41], denoising [16], and so on.
Among these methods, DDRM [16], a diffusion-based image restoration framework, has achieved powerful robustness to noise, which is also noteworthy for hyperspectral
images (HSIs). HSIs often suffer from noise corruption due

12086

