This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViLTA: Enhancing Vision-Language Pre-training through Textual Augmentation
Weihan Wang∗

Zhen Yang*

Bin Xu†

Juanzi Li

Yankui Sun

Tsinghua University
{wangwh21, yangz21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision-language pre-training (VLP) methods are blossoming recently, and its crucial goal is to jointly learn visual and textual features via a transformer-based architecture, demonstrating promising improvements on a variety
of vision-language tasks. Prior arts usually focus on how to
align visual and textual features, but strategies for improving the robustness of model and speeding up model convergence are left insufficiently explored.
In this paper, we propose a novel method ViLTA, comprising of two components to further facilitate the model to
learn fine-grained representations among image-text pairs.
For Masked Language Modeling (MLM), we propose a
cross-distillation method to generate soft labels to enhance
the robustness of model, which alleviates the problem of
treating synonyms of masked words as negative samples in
one-hot labels. For Image-Text Matching (ITM), we leverage the current language encoder to synthesize hard negatives based on the context of language input, encouraging
the model to learn high-quality representations by increasing the difficulty of the ITM task. By leveraging the above
techniques, our ViLTA can achieve better performance on
various vision-language tasks. Extensive experiments on
benchmark datasets demonstrate that the effectiveness of
ViLTA and its promising potential for vision-language pretraining.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Vision-Language Pre-training
(VLP) have achieved significant improvements in a wide
range of multimodal tasks, such as visual question answering (VQA) [4], image captioning [3], and image-text retrieval [34, 43]. The target of VLP generally starts with
training a model on massive image-text pairs in a selfsupervised way, which empowers a new paradigm for finetuning various downstream tasks. Most recent VLP mod* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

{xubin, lijuanzi, syk}@tsinghua.edu.cn

els [42, 30, 6, 62, 5] usually utilize a transformer-based
architecture [52] with some specific training techniques
(e.g. image-text contrastive learning (ITC), masked language modeling (MLM), and image-text matching (ITM))
to align visual and textual information. These models have
achieved outstanding performance on a variety of multimodal benchmarks, which further advances the field of multimodal representation learning. However, the above VLP
models also suffer from two vital limitations: (1) one-hot
labels in MLM hinder the robustness of the model; (2) negative samples selection in ITM affects the model convergency and downstream performance.
In specific, the MLM task is designed to predict masked
tokens in a given language input by utilizing both visual and
textual features. However, compared to traditional MLM
approaches in NLP [13], the MLM task in vision-language
pre-training presents a unique limitation. VLP models use
a pre-trained language model for secondary pre-training
on image-text pairs, which may result in a loss of knowledge initially acquired from NLP datasets. Empirical results from previous studies [16] indicate that pre-training on
multimodal datasets may lead to degraded performance on
unimodal language tasks. Moreover, the presence of multiple candidate words to fill a masked position in an imagetext pair can hinder the training of MLM. For instance, in
the sentence ”Two giraffes pace around their habitat”, substituting ”pace” with ”walk” does not alter the sentence’s
meaning. Consequently, treating these words as negative
samples in one-hot labels can impede MLM training.
As a popular pre-training task in VLP, the goal of ITM
task is to distinguish positive and negative image-text pairs
based on the learned representations. The common and
straightforward way for negative selection is to randomly
sample negatives for any given image-text pair. However,
such a simple method can not provide more contributions
for model convergence and result in sub-optimal performance. As a result, the model can easily achieve high accuracy in the first training epoch, usually above 99%. To further improve the model’s ability to learn fine-grained representations, an effective method is to offer hard negative
samples to make the pre-training task more challenging.

3158

