This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Image Denoising in Real-World Scenarios via Self-Collaboration
Parallel Generative Adversarial Branches
Xin Lin
Sichuan University

Chao Ren*
Sichuan University

Xiao Liu
Sichuan University

linxin@stu.scu.edu.cn

chaoren@scu.edu.cn

liux@stu.scu.edu.cn

Jie Huang
Sichuan University

Yinjie Lei
Sichuan University

huangjiechn@stu.scu.edu.cn

yinjie@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning methods have shown remarkable performance in image denoising, particularly when trained
on large-scale paired datasets. However, acquiring such
paired datasets for real-world scenarios poses a significant
challenge. Although unsupervised approaches based on
generative adversarial networks (GANs) offer a promising
solution for denoising without paired datasets, they are difficult in surpassing the performance limitations of conventional GAN-based unsupervised frameworks without significantly modifying existing structures or increasing the computational complexity of denoisers. To address this problem, we propose a self-collaboration (SC) strategy for multiple denoisers. This strategy can achieve significant performance improvement without increasing the inference complexity of the GAN-based denoising framework. Its basic
idea is to iteratively replace the previous less powerful denoiser in the filter-guided noise extraction module with the
current powerful denoiser. This process generates better
synthetic clean-noisy image pairs, leading to a more powerful denoiser for the next iteration. In addition, we propose a baseline method that includes parallel generative
adversarial branches with complementary “self-synthesis”
and “unpaired-synthesis” constraints. This baseline ensures the stability and effectiveness of the training network. The experimental results demonstrate the superiority
of our method over state-of-the-art unsupervised methods.
https://github.com/linxin0/SCPGabNet

1. Introduction
Image denoising aims to recover noise-free images from
noisy observations by reducing the potential noise. Al* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. A real noisy image from the SSID Validation dataset.
Our SCPGabNet achieves better results compared to other denoising methods.

though it is one of the oldest and most classical tasks in
low-level computer vision, its fundamental nature continues
drawing much interest. In general, existing image denoising
algorithms can be divided into three groups: filtering-based
[11, 9, 5, 14, 35], model-based methods [16, 31, 7, 19, 48,
41] and learning-based [46, 28, 36, 30, 42, 44, 29, 8, 2, 20]
methods.
The additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) assumption
is widely used in image denoising. However, it is complex and challenging to adaptively achieve denoising based
on filtering-based or model-based methods for high performance. In contrast, learning-based methods have demonstrated their superiority in image denoising. However, these
methods [47, 36, 20, 39, 37, 45] are data-driven and typically require pairs of clean-noisy datasets to train their models. These noise samples are usually obtained through a
predefined AWGN formulation that assumes the noise is

12642

