This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MixCycle: Mixup Assisted Semi-Supervised 3D Single Object Tracking with
Cycle Consistency
Qiao Wu1 Jiaqi Yang1 * Kun Sun2 Chu’ai Zhang1 Yanning Zhang1 Mathieu Salzmann3
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 China University of Geosciences, Wuhan
3
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
qiaowu@mail.nwpu.edu.cn; jqyang@nwpu.edu.cn; sunkun@cug.edu.cn;
cazhang@mail.nwpu.edu.cn; ynzhang@nwpu.edu.cn; mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

55

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D single object tracking (SOT) plays a critical role in
the field of autonomous driving. For example, given object
detection [15, 33] results as input, it can output the necessary information for trajectory prediction [8]. The goal of
SOT is to regress the center position and 3D bounding-box
(BBox) of an object of interest in a search area, given the
point cloud (PC) patch and BBox of the object template.
* Corresponding author

45
40
36.3

Succ./Prec.

3D single object tracking (SOT) is an indispensable part
of automated driving. Existing approaches rely heavily on
large, densely labeled datasets. However, annotating point
clouds is both costly and time-consuming. Inspired by the
great success of cycle tracking in unsupervised 2D SOT,
we introduce the first semi-supervised approach to 3D SOT.
Specifically, we introduce two cycle-consistency strategies
for supervision: 1) Self tracking cycles, which leverage labels to help the model converge better in the early stages
of training; 2) forward-backward cycles, which strengthen
the tracker’s robustness to motion variations and the template noise caused by the template update strategy. Furthermore, we propose a data augmentation strategy named SOTMixup to improve the tracker’s robustness to point cloud
diversity. SOTMixup generates training samples by sampling points in two point clouds with a mixing rate and assigns a reasonable loss weight for training according to
the mixing rate. The resulting MixCycle approach generalizes to appearance matching-based trackers. On the
KITTI benchmark, based on the P2B tracker [16], MixCycle trained with 10% labels outperforms P2B trained
with 100% labels, and achieves a 28.4% precision improvement when using 1% labels. Our code will be released at
https://github.com/Mumuqiao/MixCycle.

Succ.
Ours Succ.
Prec.
Ours Prec.

49.2

50

35

33.4

32.4

30
27
25

25
20.3

20

19.7

15

12.3
10.1

10
6.1
5

5

0
P2B

MLVSNet

BAT

Network Backbone

Figure 1. Comparison of MixCycle and fully-supervised methods [16, 25, 34], all trained with 1% labels on KITTI [5]. ‘Succ.’
and ‘Prec.’ represent Success and Precision, respectively.

This is a very challenging task because (i) point clouds obtained with, e.g., LiDAR sensors, suffer from occlusions
and point sparsity, complicating the tracker’s task of finding
the object of interest; (ii) the point distribution for an object
may vary significantly, making it difficult for the model to
learn discriminative object features.
To tackle the above challenges, existing 3D SOT models [6, 16, 4, 9, 10, 25, 34, 18, 35] rely on large scale annotated point cloud datasets for training. Unfortunately,
obtaining annotations for this task, as for many 3D tasks,
is extremely time-consuming. Furthermore, as shown in
Fig. 1, the performance of these methods degrades dramatically as the number of labeled samples decreases. Nevertheless, no semi-supervised or unsupervised methods have
been explored so far in 3D SOT.
As shown in Fig. 2, the matching-based tracker of [34]
can still track the target at the very beginning of a sequence
by predicting a motion offset relative to the reference coordinate, even though there are no points in the template for
appearance matching. This indicates that the appearance

13956

