This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MemorySeg: Online LiDAR Semantic Segmentation with a Latent Memory
Enxu Li Sergio Casas Raquel Urtasun
Waabi University of Toronto
{tli, sergio, urtasun}@waabi.ai

Abstract
Semantic segmentation of LiDAR point clouds has been
widely studied in recent years, with most existing methods
focusing on tackling this task using a single scan of the environment. However, leveraging the temporal stream of observations can provide very rich contextual information on
regions of the scene with poor visibility (e.g., occlusions)
or sparse observations (e.g., at long range), and can help
reduce redundant computation frame after frame. In this
paper, we tackle the challenge of exploiting the information from the past frames to improve the predictions of the
current frame in an online fashion. To address this challenge, we propose a novel framework for semantic segmentation of a temporal sequence of LiDAR point clouds that
utilizes a memory network to store, update and retrieve past
information. Our framework also includes a novel regularizer that penalizes prediction variations in the neighborhood of the point cloud. Prior works have attempted
to incorporate memory in range view representations for
semantic segmentation, but these methods fail to handle
occlusions and the range view representation of the scene
changes drastically as agents nearby move. Our proposed
framework overcomes these limitations by building a sparse
3D latent representation of the surroundings. We evaluate our method on SemanticKITTI, nuScenes, and PandaSet. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed framework compared to the state-of-the-art.
For more information, visit the project website: https:
//waabi.ai/research/memoryseg.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation of LiDAR point clouds is a key
component for the safe deployment of self-driving vehicles (SDV). It enables SDVs to enhance their understanding of the surrounding environment by categorizing every
3D point into specific classes of interest, such as vehicles,
pedestrians, traffic signs, buildings, roadways, etc. This rich
and precise 3D representation of the environment can then
be used for various applications such as generating online or

Single Frame LiDAR Point Cloud

Learned 3D Sparse Latent Memory

Figure 1. Objects could be partially occluded in single frame
LiDAR point cloud. Our approach learns a 3D latent memory representation for better contextualizing the online observations. We
apply PCA [14] to reduce the latent dimension to 3 and plot as
RGB. (Best viewed in color and zoomed-in.)

offline semantic maps, building localization priors, or making the shapes of an object tracker more precise.
LiDAR data is typically captured as a continuous stream
of data, where every fraction of a second (typically 100ms)
a new point cloud is available. Despite this fact, most LiDAR segmentation approaches process each frame independently [15, 32, 28, 22, 34, 5, 29] due to the computational
and memory complexity associated with processing large
amounts of 3D point cloud data. However, reasoning about
a single frame suffers from the sparsity of the observations,
particularly at range, and has difficulty handling occluded
objects. Furthermore, the absence of motion information
can make categorizing certain objects difficult.
Several approaches [20, 19] utilize a sliding window approach, where a small set of past frames is processed independently at every time step. The main shortcoming of this
approach is its limited temporal context (typically under 1
second) due to resource constraints, as processing multiple
LiDAR scans at once is expensive. TemporalLidarSeg [8]
proposed to utilize a latent spatial memory to retain information about the past while avoiding redundant computation every time a new scan is available, in a range view (RV)
representation. However, the RV of the scene changes drastically as the SDV or the other actors move due to changes
in perspective. As a result, the memory can be dominated
by nearby objects, which appear larger in the RV represen-

745

