This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instance and Category Supervision are Alternate Learners for Continual
Learning
Xudong Tian1,2,3 , Zhizhong Zhang1,3(B) , Xin Tan1,2,3 , Jun Liu4 , Chengjie Wang4 , Yanyun Qu5 ,
Guannan Jiang6 , Yuan Xie1,3(B)
1
East China Normal University, 2 Shanghai Key Laboratory of Computer Software Testing &
Evaluating, 3 Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University, 4 Tencent YouTu Lab, 5 Xiamen
University, 6 Contemporary Amperex Technology Co., Limited
txd51194501066@gmail, {zzzhang,xtan}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, junsenselee@gmail.com
jasoncjwang@tencent.com, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn, jianggn@catl.com, xieyuan8589@foxmail.com

Abstract
max 𝛽𝐼(X , Z " )

Continual Learning (CL) is the constant development of
complex behaviors by building upon previously acquired
skills. Yet, current CL algorithms tend to incur class-level
forgetting as the label information is often quickly overwritten by new knowledge. This motivates attempts to mine
instance-level discrimination by resorting to recent selfsupervised learning (SSL) techniques. However, previous
works have pointed out that the self-supervised learning objective is essentially a trade-off between invariance to distortion and preserving sample information, which seriously
hinders the unleashing of instance-level discrimination.
In this work, we reformulate SSL from the informationtheoretic perspective by disentangling the goal of instancelevel discrimination, and tackle the trade-off to promote
compact representations with maximally preserved invariance to distortion. On this basis, we develop a novel alternate learning paradigm to enjoy the complementary merits of instance-level and category-level supervision, which
yields improved robustness against forgetting and better
adaptation to each task. To verify the proposed method, we
conduct extensive experiments on four different benchmarks
using both class-incremental and task-incremental settings,
where the leap in performance and thorough ablation studies demonstrate the efficacy and efficiency of our modeling
strategy.

1. Introduction
Humans learn from visual inputs with everchanging scenarios, both rapidly and flexibly absorbing new knowledge
with constantly emerging concepts, and robustly accumulat-

!

X

𝑇 ! ~𝒯
augmentation

min 𝐼(V " , Z " )

V!

!

𝑓"

Z!

Figure 1: Illustration of the trade-off that is widely embodied in recent self-supervised learning techniques. X denotes
the given sample, V A and Z A stand for the augmented view
and the corresponding embedding obtained from distortion
T A ∼ T and network fψ , respectively.
ing previously acquired experiences. Modeling such powerful capability is the central target of continual learning
(CL), and would be of substantial utility in real-world computer vision settings [44].
To this end, a variety of CL algorithms [7, 8, 19, 28, 40]
have been developed to get rid of the requirement of i.i.d
samples, and attempt to alleviate catastrophic forgetting
[23] when learning a continuum of training data. Broadly
speaking, studies on this topic can be categorized into three
schools: (i) rehearsal-based methods [4, 14, 33], which
store samples in raw or generative format, and replay them
to alleviate forgetting; (ii) regularization-based methods
[32, 36] that impose extra constraints to prediction, gradient, etc. to consolidate previously learned contents; (iii)
parameter isolation strategies [13, 22] that dedicate or mask
a part of the model parameters for the training of each task.
Albeit the differences, the typical solution is to utilize the
label, i.e., category-level supervision to acquire new knowledge while accumulating previously learned contents. Although this usually leads to fast adaptation, such strategy,
i.e., supervised learning (SL), is prone to incur class-level

5596

