This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Pixel-based MIM by Reducing Wasted Modeling Capability
Yuan Liu1 , Songyang Zhang1,‡ , Jiacheng Chen2 , Zhaohui Yu3 , Kai Chen1,‡
Dahua Lin1,3
1
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Simon Fraser University 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
‡

Corresponding author

Abstract

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has made remarkable
progress in language and computer vision. Masked Image
Modeling (MIM) is an effective framework in image SSL,
which boasts a simple training pipeline, a few handcrafted
data augmentations, and high performance across downstream tasks. In the pioneering work of BEiT [1], 40% of
the input image is masked, and the model is trained to capture the semantics of the masked patches by reconstructing
the DALL-E [37] output features. To simplify pre-training
and reduce computational overhead, MAE [14] only feeds
the visible tokens into the encoder and encourages the decoder to reconstruct the raw pixels of masked patches. More
1 https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmpretrain

Layer3
Layer4
Layer5

Layer6
Layer7
Layer8

Layer9
Layer10
Layer11

0.40

Normalized Weight Per Layer

There has been significant progress in Masked Image
Modeling (MIM). Existing MIM methods can be broadly
categorized into two groups based on the reconstruction
target: pixel-based and tokenizer-based approaches. The
former offers a simpler pipeline and lower computational
cost, but it is known to be biased toward high-frequency details. In this paper, we provide a set of empirical studies
to confirm this limitation of pixel-based MIM and propose
a new method that explicitly utilizes low-level features from
shallow layers to aid pixel reconstruction. By incorporating this design into our base method, MAE, we reduce the
wasted modeling capability of pixel-based MIM, improving its convergence and achieving non-trivial improvements
across various downstream tasks. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to systematically investigate multilevel feature fusion for isotropic architectures like the standard Vision Transformer (ViT). Notably, when applied to a
smaller model (e.g., ViT-S), our method yields significant
performance gains, such as 1.2% on fine-tuning, 2.8% on
linear probing, and 2.6% on semantic segmentation. Code
and models are available in MMPretrain1 .

Layer0
Layer1
Layer2

Output layer

0.35
0.30
0.25

Shallow layer

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Iteration (K)

Figure 1: Fusing shallow encoder layers for MAE. During
the training process, MAE increasingly relies on shallow
layers for the pixel reconstruction task, demonstrating a bias
toward low-level features.

recently, follow-up works have focused on adding auxiliary
tasks or using large-scale pre-trained models to produce reconstruction targets. For instance, CMAE [23] explicitly
adds a contrastive task and optimizes it in conjunction with
the MIM task, while MILAN [20] and BEiT-v2 [34] employ multimodal pre-trained models such as CLIP [36] to
generate the reconstruction features. Among the various
MIM methods available, pixel-based approaches such as
MAE [14] are particularly interesting because of their simple pre-training pipeline and minimal computational overhead. However, these methods are typically biased towards
capturing high-frequency details due to their emphasis on
reconstructing raw pixels [1, 30]. As a result, they waste
a significant amount of modeling capability that could be
better utilized to capture low-frequency semantics. Our objective is to reduce this waste of modeling capacity, aiming
for an improved quality of learned representation for downstream visual tasks. Toward this goal, we design two pilot

5361

