This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SC3K: Self-supervised and Coherent 3D Keypoints Estimation
from Rotated, Noisy, and Decimated Point Cloud Data
Mohammad Zohaib, Alessio Del Bue
Pattern Analysis & Computer Vision (PAVIS)
Italian Institute of Technology (IIT), Genoa, Italy
{mohammad.zohaib, alessio.delbue}@iit.it

Abstract
This paper proposes a new method to infer keypoints
from arbitrary object categories in practical scenarios
where point cloud data (PCD) are noisy, down-sampled
and arbitrarily rotated. Our proposed model adheres
to the following principles: i) keypoints inference is
fully unsupervised (no annotation given), ii) keypoints
position error should be low and resilient to PCD perturbations (robustness), iii) keypoints should not change
their indexes for the intra-class objects (semantic coherence), iv) keypoints should be close to or proximal to
PCD surface (compactness). We achieve these desiderata by proposing a new self-supervised training strategy
for keypoints estimation that does not assume any a
priori knowledge of the object class, and a model architecture with coupled auxiliary losses that promotes
the desired keypoints properties. We compare the keypoints estimated by the proposed approach with those
of the state-of-the-art unsupervised approaches. The
experiments show that our approach outperforms by estimating keypoints with improved coverage (+9.41%)
while being semantically consistent (+4.66%) that best
characterize the object’s 3D shape for downstream tasks.
Code and data are available at: https://github.com/IITPAVIS/SC3K

1. Introduction
Representing 3D objects using a set of keypoints [2,
10, 28] is a common and fundamental step for several
geometrical reasoning tasks, including pose estimation,
action recognition, object tracking, shape registration,
deformation, retrieval and reconstruction [23, 35, 30,
42, 9]. As being a first processing step, it is crucial that
the keypoints (see Fig. 1) are extracted reliably from
point cloud data (PCD) of object shapes, as any error
may negatively impact further higher-level tasks.

Figure 1: Self/un-supervised keypoints estimation from
PCD has to be robust to perturbations such as rotations,
intra-class shape variations, noisy data and an arbitrary
number of input 3D points. The keypoint localization
needs to be not only accurate and pertain to the object
surface, but also preserve semantic coherence, as the
green keypoint is always associated with a specific object
region despite arbitrary variations in the PCD.

The solution to this problem was initially cast as
a supervised learning task: given a dataset of manually annotated PCDs with keypoints, a computational
model infers the keypoints position given a PCD as input [32, 45, 44, 13, 8, 36]. While these methods provided
impressive results on the dataset they were trained on,
they also highlighted the limitations of supervised approaches. The basic issue is the requirement of having
large enough datasets containing well-defined ground
truth annotations for every object. Annotating such
datasets is difficult as finding 3D keypoints manually
is a hard and time consuming activity. Similarly, noise
or missing data on the PCD can compromise quality,
and highly symmetric/smooth objects might confuse
the annotator in finding the correct keypoints.
Considering such limitations, recent methods have focused on not-supervised approaches to bypass the need

22509

