This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Visual Primitive Experts for Compositional Zero-Shot Learning
Hanjae Kim1
1

Yonsei University

Jiyoung Lee2
2

Seongheon Park1

NAVER AI Lab

3

Kwanghoon Sohn1,3, *

Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)

{incohjk,sam121796,khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr

lee.j@navercorp.com

Jacket

Water

Jeans

Sky

Shirt

Blank

Concrete

Brick

Tiled

Stone

1. Introduction
Humans perceive entities as hierarchies of parts; for example, we recognize ‘Cute Cat’ by composing the meaning
of ‘Cute’ and ‘Cat’. People can even perceive new concepts by composing the primitive meanings they already
* Corresponding author

This work was supported by the Institute of Information Communications Technology Planning Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korean
government (MSIT) (No. 2021-0-02068, Artiﬁcial Intelligence Innovation
Hub)

( _ , Wall )

Compositional zero-shot learning (CZSL) aims to recognize unseen compositions with prior knowledge of known
primitives (attribute and object). Previous works for CZSL
often suffer from grasping the contextuality between attribute and object, as well as the discriminability of visual features, and the long-tailed distribution of real-world
compositional data. We propose a simple and scalable
framework called Composition Transformer (CoT) to address these issues. CoT employs object and attribute experts
in distinctive manners to generate representative embeddings, using the visual network hierarchically. The object
expert extracts representative object embeddings from the
ﬁnal layer in a bottom-up manner, while the attribute expert
makes attribute embeddings in a top-down manner with a
proposed object-guided attention module that models contextuality explicitly. To remedy biased prediction caused by
imbalanced data distribution, we develop a simple minority attribute augmentation (MAA) that synthesizes virtual
samples by mixing two images and oversampling minority
attribute classes. Our method achieves SoTA performance
on several benchmarks, including MIT-States, C-GQA, and
VAW-CZSL. We also demonstrate the effectiveness of CoT in
improving visual discrimination and addressing the model
bias from the imbalanced data distribution. The code is
available at https://github.com/HanjaeKim98/
CoT.

( Blue , _ )

Abstract

(a) OADis

(b) CoT (Ours)

Figure 1: Visual feature distribution of previous state-of-the-art
approach (OADis) [53] and CoT (Ours). The features are gathered with respect to attribute ‘Blue -’ (Top) and object ‘- Wall’
(Bottom). Notably, the previous method suffers from degraded visual discrimination such as (‘Blue, Jeans’ vs. ‘Blue, Shirt’), or all
attributes composed into object ‘Wall’.

knew. Such compositionality is a fundamental ability of humans for all cognition. For this reason, compositional zeroshot learning (CZSL), recognizing a novel composition of
known components (i.e., object and attribute), has been regarded as a crucial problem in the research community.
A naive approach for CZSL is to combine attribute and
object scores estimated from individually trained classiﬁers [39, 21]. However, it is hard for these independent predictions to consider the interactions that result from a combination of different primitives, which is contextuality (e.g.
different meaning of ‘Old’ in ‘Old Car’ and ‘Old Cat’) in the
composition [39]. Previous approaches [42, 76, 36, 41, 53,
80] have solved the problem by modeling the compositional
label (text) embedding for each class. They leverage external knowledge bases like Glove [37, 47] to extract attribute
and object semantic vectors, and concatenate them with a
few layers into the composition label embedding. The embeddings are then aligned with visual features in the shared
embedding space, where the recognition of unseen image

5675

