This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniverSeg: Universal Medical Image Segmentation
Victor Ion Butoi*
MIT CSAIL

Jose Javier Gonzalez Ortiz*
MIT CSAIL

Tianyu Ma
Cornell University

Mert R. Sabuncu
Cornell University

vbutoi@mit.edu

josejg@mit.edu

tm478@cornell.edu

msabuncu@cornell.edu

John Guttag
MIT CSAIL

Adrian V. Dalca
MIT CSAIL & MGH, HMS

guttag@mit.edu

adalca@mit.edu

Abstract
While deep learning models have become the predominant method for medical image segmentation, they are typically not capable of generalizing to unseen segmentation
tasks involving new anatomies, image modalities, or labels.
Given a new segmentation task, researchers generally have
to train or fine-tune models. This is time-consuming and
poses a substantial barrier for clinical researchers, who often lack the resources and expertise to train neural networks.
We present UniverSeg, a method for solving unseen medical segmentation tasks without additional training. Given
a query image and an example set of image-label pairs that
define a new segmentation task, UniverSeg employs a new
CrossBlock mechanism to produce accurate segmentation
maps without additional training. To achieve generalization
to new tasks, we have gathered and standardized a collection of 53 open-access medical segmentation datasets with
over 22,000 scans, which we refer to as MegaMedical. We
used this collection to train UniverSeg on a diverse set of
anatomies and imaging modalities. We demonstrate that Uni* Denotes equal contribution

verSeg substantially outperforms several related methods
on unseen tasks, and thoroughly analyze and draw insights
about important aspects of the proposed system. The UniverSeg source code and model weights are freely available
at https://universeg.csail.mit.edu

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is a widely studied problem in computer vision and a central challenge in medical image analysis. Medical segmentation tasks can involve diverse imaging
modalities, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), Xray, computerized tomography (CT), and microscopy; different biomedical domains, such as the abdomen, chest, brain,
retina, or individual cells; and different labels within a region, such as heart valves or chambers (Figure 1). This diversity has inspired a wide array of segmentation tools, each
usually tackling one task or a small set of closely related
tasks [17, 23, 41, 42, 87, 94]. In recent years, deep-learning
models have become the predominant strategy for medical
image segmentation [45, 74, 87].
A key problem in image segmentation is domain shift,

Train Segmentation Tasks

Test Segmentation Tasks

Figure 1: Medical segmentation involves many imaging types, biomedical domains, and target labels. We employ a large
diverse set of training tasks (blue) to build a model that can segment unseen tasks (orange) without additional training.

21438

