This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViM: Vision Middleware for Unified Downstream Transferring
Yutong Feng1 , Biao Gong1 , Jianwen Jiang1 , Yiliang Lv1 , Yujun Shen2 , Deli Zhao1 , Jingren Zhou1
1
Alibaba Group 2 Ant Group
{fengyutong.fyt, a.biao.gong, jianwen.alan, shenyujun0302, zhaodeli}@gmail.com
{yiliang.lyl, jingren.zhou}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

Task Preference

1. Introduction
The pretrain-finetune paradigm has served as a general framework across various vision tasks, where models
are pre-trained on large-scale datasets and fine-tuned on
downstream tasks [64]. Recent efforts have been attracted
to build up a foundation model [54, 73, 80] with large
architecture and massive pre-trained data (e.g., in the scale
of billions). Considering the trend of scaling up foundation
models, it is costly to fine-tune model for different tasks
separately, and worthy of solving tasks with single model.
When directly transferred to downstream tasks, foundation
models still suffer from the task-gap problem. Downstream
tasks may require different targets with the upstream, thus
could not fully leverage the pre-learned knowledge. As
shown in Figure 1, models are observed with preference

classification

performance

Foundation models are pre-trained on massive data
and transferred to downstream tasks via fine-tuning. This
work presents Vision Middleware (ViM), a new learning
paradigm that targets unified transferring from a single
foundation model to a variety of downstream tasks. ViM
consists of a zoo of lightweight plug-in modules, each of
which is independently learned on a midstream dataset
with a shared frozen backbone. Downstream tasks can
then benefit from an adequate aggregation of the module
zoo thanks to the rich knowledge inherited from midstream
tasks. There are three major advantages of such a design.
From the efficiency aspect, the upstream backbone can be
trained only once and reused for all downstream tasks
without tuning. From the scalability aspect, we can easily
append additional modules to ViM with no influence on
existing modules. From the performance aspect, ViM can
include as many midstream tasks as possible, narrowing the
task gap between upstream and downstream. Considering
these benefits, we believe that ViM, which the community
could maintain and develop together, would serve as a
powerful tool to assist foundation models.

detection

segmentation

task

(a)
models

transfer
Classification
Pre-trained
(ImageNet)

Detection
Pre-trained
(Objects365)

Segmentation
Pre-trained
(COCO-Stuff)

[CLS] VTAB-1K
76.0

[SEG]
LoveDA

[CLS]
FGVC

72.8
93.0

56.0

Backbone: CLIP-B/16

90.4
48.8

the pre-trained model

(b)

[CLS] ImageNet ft.
[DET] Objects365 ft.
86.0

[SEG]
PASCAL

[SEG] COCO-Sutff ft.

85.6

76.8

87.0

55.4

[DET]
PASCAL

57.0

[DET] Cityscapes

Figure 1. Task preference problem: (a) Single-task pre-trained
models tend to perform better on tasks similar to their upstream.
(b) Intermediate task fine-tuning further tunes the pre-trained
model on specific task, showing similar imbalanced performance.

to those tasks similar to their encountered ones. Task
preference restricts unified transferring of single foundation
model to multiple tasks with varying targets.
To bridge the task-gap, existing works address the
problem on either upstream or downstream. Upstream
works propose multi-task pre-training to simultaneously
learn various types of tasks [18, 23, 28, 49, 72]. However,
when extending to a new pre-training task, these works
require to re-formulate the task I/O and re-train the model
together with existing tasks, which is complicated and timeconsuming. Downstream works introduce prompt [34, 46,

11696

