This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Parse-Then-Place Approach for Generating Graphic Layouts
from Textual Descriptions
Jiawei Lin1 *, Jiaqi Guo2 , Shizhao Sun2 , Weijiang Xu2 , Ting Liu1 ,
Jian-Guang Lou2 , Dongmei Zhang2
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, 2 Microsoft Research Asia
kylelin@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, tingliu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,
{jiaqiguo, shizsu, weijiangxu, jlou, dongmeiz}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Creating layouts is a fundamental step in graphic design. In this work, we propose to use text as the guidance
to create graphic layouts, i.e., Text-to-Layout, aiming to
lower the design barriers. Text-to-Layout is a challenging task, because it needs to consider the implicit, combined, and incomplete layout constraints from text, each of
which has not been studied in previous work. To address
this, we present a two-stage approach, named parse-thenplace. The approach introduces an intermediate representation (IR) between text and layout to represent diverse layout
constraints. With IR, Text-to-Layout is decomposed into a
parse stage and a place stage. The parse stage takes a textual description as input and generates an IR, in which the
implicit constraints from the text are transformed into explicit ones. The place stage generates layouts based on the
IR. To model combined and incomplete constraints, we use
a Transformer-based layout generation model and carefully
design a way to represent constraints and layouts as sequences. Besides, we adopt the pretrain-then-finetune strategy to boost the performance of the layout generation model
with large-scale unlabeled layouts. To evaluate our approach, we construct two Text-to-Layout datasets and conduct experiments on them. Quantitative results, qualitative
analysis, and user studies demonstrate our approach’s effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Graphic design is ubiquitous in our daily life. Layout,
the sizes and positions of design elements, is fundamental
to a graphic design. However, creating layouts is a complex task that requires design expertise and consumes much
time. While we may not have design knowledge and be
unfamiliar with design tools, we have a strong linguistic
* Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

I want to show several pieces
of news, each of which has a
title and a brief summary. It
would be better to display a
heading at the top.

Title
Image

Image

Image

Title

Title

Title

Description

Description

Description

(b)

(a)

(c)

Figure 1. An example of Text-to-Layout. (a) A user describes the
desired layout in natural language. (b) A visually appealing layout
is automatically generated. (c) The layout is a fundamental ingredient of the final graphic design.

ability to express our requirements. That is also what we
are doing in the communication with designers. Thus, we
propose to use text as the guidance to create graphic layouts, i.e., Text-to-Layout (see Figure 1). This enables people
without expertise to participate in the design. Moreover, it
helps professional designers create drafts more efficiently,
thereby reducing their workloads. Besides, it also makes
the discussion between users and designers much smoother.
While automatic layout generation has been intensively
studied [23, 1, 9, 20], Text-to-Layout is rarely investigated
and remains a challenging task due to its unique way to
specify layout constraints. (i) Implicit Constraint. Textual
description tends to be abstract and vague, and thus layout
constraints from the text are often specified in an implicit
and vague way. Consider the description in Figure 1. It
describes the elements in a layout by their functional roles
(e.g., news title and summary) rather than their primitive element types (e.g., text box). It also states a vague, subjective
position constraint (e.g., heading at the top) and implicitly
poses a hierarchy constraint (e.g., news should be organized
in a list). This characteristic makes Text-to-Layout drastically different from other conditional layout generation

23622

