This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FastRecon: Few-shot Industrial Anomaly Detection via Fast
Feature Reconstruction
Zheng Fang1,2†

Xiaoyang Wang1,2†
Haocheng Li3 Jiejie Liu1,3 Qiugui Hu3
1
2
XJTLU
Metavisioncn 3 Dinnar Automation Technology

Jimin Xiao1∗

{fz.jun26th, haocheng.li789}@gmail.com,
{xiaoyang.wang20, jiejie.liu22}@student.xjtlu.edu.cn, jimin.xiao@xjtlu.edu.cn

Abstract
In industrial anomaly detection, data efficiency and the
ability for fast migration across products become the main
concerns when developing detection algorithms. Existing
methods tend to be data-hungry and work in the one-modelone-category way, which hinders their effectiveness in realworld industrial scenarios. In this paper, we propose a fewshot anomaly detection strategy that works in a low-data
regime and can generalize across products at no cost. Given
a defective query sample, we propose to utilize a few normal samples as a reference to reconstruct its normal version, where the final anomaly detection can be achieved by
sample alignment. Specifically, we introduce a novel regression with distribution regularization to obtain the optimal transformation from support to query features, which
guarantees the reconstruction result shares visual similarity
with the query sample and meanwhile maintains the property of normal samples. Experimental results show that our
method significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art
at both image and pixel-level AUROC performances from
2 to 8-shot scenarios. Besides, with only a limited number of training samples (less than 8 samples), our method
reaches competitive performance with vanilla AD methods
which are trained with extensive normal samples. The code
is available at https://github.com/FzJun26th/
FastRecon.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) in computer vision aims to
identify rare observations that deviate significantly from the
majority of the data and do not conform to a well-defined
notion of normal behavior [4]. In industrial settings, AD
is widely used to detect the anomalies on the surface of
the product, which has been attracting a lot of attention re† Equal contribution.
* Corresponding author.

(a) Vanilla Reconstruction-based AD

..

Anomaly Detection

Generative
Model

Reconstruction
Error
Or
Discriminator
Decision

Massive Normal Samples for Training

(b) Vanilla Feature-matching-based AD

..

Anomaly Detection

Pretrained
Encoder

Feature
Memory

Feature
Matching

Massive Normal Samples for Training

Test Sample

(c) Fast Feature Reconstruction based AD (Ours)
Test Sample

Pretrained
Encoder

A Few Normal Samples

Test Sample

Alignment

Anomaly Detection

FastRecon

Feature
Reconstruction

Test Sample

Figure 1: Comparison of our FastRecon with (a) Vanilla
Reconstruction-based method and (b) Vanilla FeatureMatching-based method. Compared with (a), our method
needs no training session and requires less normal samples for feature reconstruction. Compared with (b), our
method applies direct pixel-to-pixel alignment between the
test sample and reconstruction result for anomaly detection
without an exhaustive feature searching process, thus being
more efficient in inference.

cently [31, 16, 9]. The difficulty of industrial AD lies in
the diversity of the defects, which can take different forms,
from subtle flaws like slight bruises, to obvious ones such
as missing components [3]. This makes it difficult to detect
and classify anomalies. Primal researches focus on utilizing
supervised learning to tackle industrial AD [5, 17]. However, such a learning paradigm often requires an exhaustive
set of anomalous samples for each category, which can be

17481

