This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dense 2D-3D Indoor Prediction with Sound via Aligned Cross-Modal Distillation
Heeseung Yun,* Joonil Na,∗ Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University
{heeseung.yun, joonil}@vision.snu.ac.kr, gunhee@snu.ac.kr
https://github.com/hs-yn/DAPS

Abstract
Sound can convey significant information for spatial reasoning in our daily lives. To endow deep networks with such
ability, we address the challenge of dense indoor prediction
with sound in both 2D and 3D via cross-modal knowledge
distillation. In this work, we propose a Spatial Alignment
via Matching (SAM) distillation framework that elicits local correspondence between the two modalities in visionto-audio knowledge transfer. SAM integrates audio features with visually coherent learnable spatial embeddings
to resolve inconsistencies in multiple layers of a student
model. Our approach does not rely on a specific input
representation, allowing for flexibility in the input shapes
or dimensions without performance degradation. With a
newly curated benchmark named Dense Auditory Prediction of Surroundings (DAPS), we are the first to tackle
dense indoor prediction of omnidirectional surroundings in
both 2D and 3D with audio observations. Specifically, for
audio-based depth estimation, semantic segmentation, and
challenging 3D scene reconstruction, the proposed distillation framework consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance across various metrics and backbone architectures.

1. Introduction
Humans can get a good grasp of various information
about surroundings with hearing without seeing, like the
size of a room or the location of an active alarm. A long line
of research has analyzed such intriguing abilities of humans
based on interaural differences [1, 2] or brain activation with
respect to spatially aligned audio-visual inputs [3, 4], to list
a few. Accordingly, there is an emerging interest in teaching
neural network models for spatial reasoning without seeing.
Such models that spatially perceive the surroundings from
sound can be utilized in various environments that are critical for privacy preservation or visually ill-posed (e.g., low
illumination or occlusion) [5, 6, 7, 8].
* Equal Contribution

❄ Training-only

Align

(a) Mitigating inconsistencies in Cross-Modal Distillation

(b) Dense Auditory Prediction of Surroundings

Figure 1: key idea of our approach. (a) For vision-toaudio cross-modal distillation, instead of direct distillation
between geometrically inconsistent modalities, we spatially
align the latent feature maps of students with those of teachers. (b) Using auditory input only, we perform three dense
predictions of surroundings: depth estimation, semantic
segmentation, and 3D scene reconstruction.
Since predicting visual properties directly from audio is
challenging, cross-modal knowledge distillation [9] is often utilized, i.e., teaching audio models with the guidance
of visual models. Visual models can make precise predictions about the image of the surroundings, like the location
of objects or the depth of a scene. Thus, using visual models as the teacher, audio models can learn how to predict
visual properties in a scene from sound inputs. This crossmodal knowledge distillation has been successfully applied

7863

