This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RawHDR: High Dynamic Range Image Reconstruction from
a Single Raw Image

1

Yunhao Zou1
Chenggang Yan2
Ying Fu1 *
2
Beijing Institute of Technology
Hangzhou Dianzi University

Abstract
High dynamic range (HDR) images capture much more
intensity levels than standard ones. Current methods predominantly generate HDR images from 8-bit low dynamic
range (LDR) sRGB images that have been degraded by
the camera processing pipeline. However, it becomes a
formidable task to retrieve extremely high dynamic range
scenes from such limited bit-depth data. Unlike existing
methods, the core idea of this work is to incorporate more
informative Raw sensor data to generate HDR images, aiming to recover scene information in hard regions (the darkest and brightest areas of an HDR scene). To this end, we
propose a model tailor-made for Raw images, harnessing
the unique features of Raw data to facilitate the Raw-toHDR mapping. Specifically, we learn exposure masks to
separate the hard and easy regions of a high dynamic scene.
Then, we introduce two important guidances, dual intensity guidance, which guides less informative channels with
more informative ones, and global spatial guidance, which
extrapolates scene specifics over an extended spatial domain. To verify our Raw-to-HDR approach, we collect a
large Raw/HDR paired dataset for both training and testing. Our empirical evaluations validate the superiority of
the proposed Raw-to-HDR reconstruction model, as well as
our newly captured dataset in the experiments.

1. Introduction
The dynamic range of real-world scenes often surpasses
the recording capability of standard consumer camera sensors, leading images to lose details in both over- and underexposed regions [6]. To endow today’s digital photos with
the capacity to contain more scene information, the technique called high dynamic range (HDR) that records data
with a wide range of intensity levels has been extensively
explored in the computational imaging community [45].
Compared with conventional low dynamic range (LDR) images, HDR retains more details in over- and under-exposure
* Corresponding Author: fuying@bit.edu.cn

Dark (RGB)

Dark (Raw)

Dark (HDR)

Bright (RGB)

Bright (Raw)

Bright (HDR)

Figure 1: The RGB/Raw/HDR images of the darkest (first
row) and brightest (second row) regions in a high dynamic
scene. This paper is motivated by two observations: (1)
HDR scenes contain both extremely dark and bright regions, which are very challenging to reconstruct from a single image; (2) Raw images contain much more information
in these hard regions, compared to low-bit RGB images.
regions. Thus, HDR benefits downstream vision tasks
including segmentation [33], object detection [36], and
also provide more aesthetically appealing pictures [19, 25],
which computer vision researchers have longly pursued.
Methods to obtain HDR data broadly fall into three categories, i.e., reconstruction from multi-exposure, singleexposure images, and novel camera sensors. Among new
sensors, some noteworthy examples include HDR cameras [34, 41], event cameras [18, 40, 44, 58], and infrared
sensors [29]. Since these sensors are all specialized devices, more works focus on the reconstruction from multi/single-exposures captured by commercial cameras, which
are more practical and commercially friendly.
Historically, considering that single exposure cannot
record the intensity information of a scene that covers a
large dynamic range, researchers often combined multiexposure images to generate HDR content [10,14,19,23,52,
53]. The quality of these images greatly depend on align-

12334

