This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Representation Uncertainty in Self-Supervised Learning as Variational Inference
Hiroki Nakamura*
Panasonic Holdings Corp.

Masashi Okada*
Panasonic Holdings Corp.

nakamura.hiroki003@jp.panasonic.com

okada.masashi001@jp.panasonic.com

Tadahiro Taniguchi
Ritsumeikan University
taniguchi@em.ci.ritsumei.ac.jp

Abstract

Low uncertainty images
ߢ ൌ ͳͷ͵ͻ

In this study, a novel self-supervised learning (SSL)
method is proposed, which considers SSL in terms of variational inference to learn not only representation but also
representation uncertainties. SSL is a method of learning
representations without labels by maximizing the similarity between image representations of different augmented
views of an image. Meanwhile, variational autoencoder
(VAE) is an unsupervised representation learning method
that trains a probabilistic generative model with variational
inference. Both VAE and SSL can learn representations without labels, but their relationship has not been investigated
in the past. Herein, the theoretical relationship between
SSL and variational inference has been clariﬁed. Furthermore, a novel method, namely variational inference SimSiam
(VI-SimSiam), has been proposed. VI-SimSiam can predict
the representation uncertainty by interpreting SimSiam with
variational inference and deﬁning the latent space distribution. The present experiments qualitatively show that VISimSiam could learn uncertainty by comparing input images
and predicted uncertainties. Additionally, we described a relationship between estimated uncertainty and classiﬁcation
accuracy.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a framework for learning representations of data [6, 14, 20, 7, 5, 61, 50, 37, 28, 39].
This method enables training of high-performance models
in downstream tasks (e.g., image classiﬁcation and object
detection) without substantial manually labeled data through
pre-training the network to generate features. It can mitigate
the annotation bottleneck, one of the crucial barriers to the
practical application of deep learning. Some state-of-the* Equal contribution

ߢ ൌ ͳͶʹͻ

ߢ ൌ ͳͶ͵͸

High uncertainty images
ߢ ൌ ͶͶʹ

ߢ ൌ ͷʹͺ

ߢ ൌ Ͷ͹ͷ

Figure 1: Input images and the predicted uncertainty parameter κ. Our method learns not only representations of images but
also uncertainties in them without supervision. The lower the κ,
the higher the uncertainty. The images with a low κ appear to have
less salient features than those with a high κ.

art SSL methods, such as SimSiam [6], SimCLR [5], and
DINO [4], train image encoders by maximizing the similarity between representations of different augmented views of
an image.
The probabilistic generative models with variational inference provide another approach for representation learning [27]. This approach learns latent representations in an
unsupervised fashion by training inference and generative
models (i.e., autoencoders) together. It can naturally incorporate representation uncertainty by formulating them as
probabilistic distribution models (e.g., Gaussian). However,
the pixel-wise objective for reconstruction is sensitive to
rare samples [32] in such methods. Furthermore, this representation learning is recently found to be less competitive
than the SSL methods on the benchmarking classiﬁcation
tasks [32, 37]. Although SSL and variational inference seem

16484

