This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Audio-Visual Glance Network for Efficient Video Recognition
Muhammad Adi Nugroho
Sangmin Woo
Sumin Lee
Changick Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{madin, smwoo95, suminlee94, changick}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep learning has made significant strides in video understanding tasks, but the computation required to classify
lengthy and massive videos using clip-level video classifiers
remains impractical and prohibitively expensive. To address
this issue, we propose Audio-Visual Glance Network (AVGN),
which leverages the commonly available audio and visual
modalities to efficiently process the spatio-temporally important parts of a video. AVGN firstly divides the video into
snippets of image-audio clip pair and employs lightweight
unimodal encoders to extract global visual features and audio features. To identify the important temporal segments,
we use an Audio-Visual Temporal Saliency Transformer (AVTeST) that estimates the saliency scores of each frame. To
further increase efficiency in the spatial dimension, AVGN
processes only the important patches instead of the whole
images. We use an Audio-Enhanced Spatial Patch Attention
(AESPA) module to produce a set of enhanced coarse visual
features, which are fed to a policy network that produces the
coordinates of the important patches. This approach enables
us to focus only on the most important spatio-temporally
parts of the video, leading to more efficient video recognition.
Moreover, we incorporate various training techniques and
multi-modal feature fusion to enhance the robustness and
effectiveness of our AVGN. By combining these strategies,
our AVGN sets new state-of-the-art performance in multiple video recognition benchmarks while achieving faster
processing speed.

1. Introduction
The exponential growth of diverse video contents, particularly those involving human-related actions, has prompted
the development of deep learning algorithms [2, 7, 32, 45]
that can effectively process and understand such data. Video
recognition can bring benefits to multiple fields, such as
sports for performance analysis [4], military for situational
awareness [9], transportation for traffic monitoring [1], security for threat detection [29] and surveillance for public
safety [5]. However, the current state-of-the-art methods of-

⋯

⋯

⋯

Temporal-Spatial Glance

Audio-Visual Glance Network
Temporal Efficiency

⋯

⋯

⋯

Spatial Efficiency

Video Recognition

“Skiing”

Figure 1. Audio-Visual Glance Network (AVGN) performs efficient video recognition by processing only a few highly salient
frames based on the audio and visual information. Then, it determines and extracts the important spatial area in those frames to
construct even more compact video representations.

ten require high computational costs, especially when dealing with lengthy and heavy videos, hindering their practical
application in real-world scenarios. This has led to an increasing demand for efficient video understanding methods [31].
To address this issue, various approaches have been proposed, such as developing efficient and lightweight architecture [17], or adaptively selecting only the most informative
subset of given videos [10, 43, 47], or training a policy network using policy gradient [24, 30]. On the other hand, some
approaches manipulate the spatial resolution of input video
frames to achieve efficiency, such as extracting only important spatial patches [36, 37] or adaptively changing the
resolution frames based on the importance [24].
From all those approaches, we found that for efficient
action recognition, we need to selectively locate and process
only the important temporal and spatial location of the video.
Intuitively, we need to know when and where to look at. For
example in Fig. 1, to determine the action class “skiing”,
we only need the frames that contain a person riding the ski,
not the frames that only show the snowfield or the person

10150

