This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Coarse-to-Fine Alignment for Video-Text Retrieval
Ziyang Wang, Yi-Lin Sung, Feng Cheng, Gedas Bertasius, Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill
{ziyangw, ylsung, fengchan, gedas, mbansal}.cs.unc.edu

Abstract
The canonical approach to video-text retrieval leverages a coarse-grained or fine-grained alignment between
visual and textual information. However, retrieving the correct video according to the text query is often challenging
as it requires the ability to reason about both high-level
(scene) and low-level (object) visual clues and how they relate to the text query. To this end, we propose a Unified
Coarse-to-fine Alignment model, dubbed UC O F I A. Specifically, our model captures the cross-modal similarity information at different granularity levels. To alleviate the effect of irrelevant visual clues, we also apply an Interactive Similarity Aggregation module (ISA) to consider the
importance of different visual features while aggregating
the cross-modal similarity to obtain a similarity score for
each granularity. Finally, we apply the Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithm to normalize the similarities of each level before
summing them, alleviating over- and under-representation
issues at different levels. By jointly considering the crossmodal similarity of different granularity, UC O F I A allows
the effective unification of multi-grained alignments. Empirically, UC O F I A outperforms previous state-of-the-art
CLIP-based methods on multiple video-text retrieval benchmarks, achieving 2.4%, 1.4% and 1.3% improvements in
text-to-video retrieval R@1 on MSR-VTT, Activity-Net, and
DiDeMo, respectively. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Ziyang412/UCoFiA.

1. Introduction
The fields of computer vision and natural language processing have both seen significant progress in recent years.
Thus, the cross-modal alignment [1, 64, 28, 44, 61, 56,
48, 47, 49], which involve developing techniques to connect these two domains, has seen considerable attention and
progress. As a direct application of cross-modal alignment,
the video-text retrieval task aligns video candidates with
text queries to identify the most relevant videos, and the
standard practice [50, 62, 63] is to align the video and text
features extracted by vision and language encoders. Re-

Query: a man is singing on stage to a huge audience he is holding a microphone.

Coarse-grained

Wrongly
retrieved
video

Fine-grained

Wrongly
retrieved
video

Coarse-grained
+ fine-grained
(ours)

Correct
video

Figure 1. Comparison of the retrieved video from different level
cross-modal alignments given a specific query. The coarse-grained
alignment (the first row) only observes the high-level scene information and overlooks the detailed information like “microphone”. The fine-grained alignment (the second row) does capture
the detailed information but ignores the high-level scene information like “stage with the huge audience”. To this end, our work
(the last row) combines the strengths of coarse-grained and finegrained alignments by a Unified Coarse-to-fine Alignment model
(UC O F I A).

cently, the emergence of large-scale image-text pretrained
models prompted several methods [39, 40, 35] to utilize
CLIP [45] image and text encoder to achieve strong performance on many video-text retrieval benchmarks. As a direct
extension of CLIP, Luo et al. [39] proposed temporal fusion
modules to aggregate the features of different video frames
and then perform the cross-modal alignment on video and
text features. Later, to capture more correspondences between video and text, several works [35, 20, 18, 11] propose
to conduct the alignment between frame and text features.
Ma et al. [40] take a step forward and leverage an alignment between frame and word features for more detailed
information.
Although the aforementioned methods have achieved
impressive results, they only rely on high-level visual information (frame and video) to perform the cross-modal

2816

