This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Black-box Unsupervised Domain Adaptation with Bi-directional
Atkinson-Shiffrin Memory
Jingyi Zhang Jiaxing Huang Xueying Jiang Shijian Lu*
S-lab, Nanyang Technological University
{Jingyi.Zhang, Jiaxing.Huang, Shijian.Lu}@ntu.edu.sg, xueying003@e.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Black-box unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
learns with source predictions of target data without accessing either source data or source models during training, and it has clear superiority in data privacy and flexibility in target network selection. However, the source predictions of target data are often noisy and training with them
is prone to learning collapses. We propose BiMem, a bidirectional memorization mechanism that learns to remember useful and representative information to correct noisy
pseudo labels on the fly, leading to robust black-box UDA
that can generalize across different visual recognition tasks.
BiMem constructs three types of memory, including sensory
memory, short-term memory, and long-term memory, which
interact in a bi-directional manner for comprehensive and
robust memorization of learnt features. It includes a forward memorization flow that identifies and stores useful features and a backward calibration flow that rectifies features’
pseudo labels progressively. Extensive experiments show
that BiMem achieves superior domain adaptation performance consistently across various visual recognition tasks
such as image classification, semantic segmentation and object detection.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has been studied extensively in recent years, aiming to alleviate data
collection and annotation constraint in deep network training [8, 67, 25, 57, 75, 88, 12, 58, 52, 56, 93]. However,
most existing UDA methods could impair data privacy and
confidentiality [43] as they require to access source data or
source-trained models during training. In addition, most existing UDA imposes the same network architecture (i.e.,
the source model architecture) in adaptation which limits the flexibility of selecting different target networks in
UDA [43]. Black-box UDA only requires the initial pre* Corresponding author

Figure 1: Self-training including Vanilla self-training [34],
and advanced CBST [92] and CRST [93] tends to ‘forget’ learnt useful features due to the accumulation of noisy
pseudo labels along the training process in black-box UDA
– it learns well at the early adaptation stage but collapses
with the adaptation moving on and the finally adapted models in [34, 92] cannot even compare with the Source only.
We introduce bi-directional memory to remember useful
and representative features learnt during adaptation, which
helps calibrate noisy pseudo labels on the fly and leads to
stabler black-box UDA without collapse. The experiments
were conducted over domain adaptive semantic segmentation task GTA5 → Cityscapes and the evaluations were performed over the Cityscapes validation data.

dictions of target data provided by black-box source models [43] (i.e., only the model predictions of target data are
available [43]) for domain adaptation, as shown in Table 1.
It has attracted increasing attention in recent years [43, 44]
due to its advantages in data privacy and flexibility of allowing different target networks regardless of the sourcetrained black-box models.
However, the black-box predictions of the target data are
prone to errors due to the cross-domain discrepancy, lead-

11771

