This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Partition Speeds Up Learning Implicit Neural Representations Based on
Exponential-Increase Hypothesis
Ke Liu1 , Feng Liu2 , Haishuai Wang1 *, Ning Ma1 , Jiajun Bu1 , Bo Han3
1

Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Service Robot,
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia
3
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China
{keliu99, haishuai.wang, ma ning, bjj}@zju.edu.cn,
fengliu.ml@gmail.com, bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Implicit neural representations (INRs) aim to learn a
continuous function (i.e., a neural network) to represent an
image, where the input and output of the function are pixel
coordinates and RGB/Gray values, respectively. However,
images tend to consist of many objects whose colors are not
perfectly consistent, resulting in the challenge that image
is actually a discontinuous piecewise function and cannot
be well estimated by a continuous function. In this paper,
we empirically investigate that if a neural network is enforced to fit a discontinuous piecewise function to reach a
fixed small error, the time costs will increase exponentially
with respect to the boundaries in the spatial domain of the
target signal. We name this phenomenon the exponentialincrease hypothesis. Under the exponential-increase hypothesis, learning INRs for images with many objects will
converge very slowly. To address this issue, we first prove
that partitioning a complex signal into several sub-regions
and utilizing piecewise INRs to fit that signal can significantly speed up the convergence. Based on this fact, we
introduce a simple partition mechanism to boost the performance of two INR methods for image reconstruction:
one for learning INRs, and the other for learning-to-learn
INRs. In both cases, we partition an image into different
sub-regions and dedicate smaller networks for each part.
In addition, we further propose two partition rules based
on regular grids and semantic segmentation maps, respectively. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of
the proposed partitioning methods in terms of learning INR
for a single image (ordinary learning framework) and the
learning-to-learn framework. Code is released here.
* Corresponding author: Haishuai Wang (haishuai.wang@zju.edu.cn)

1. Introduction
Recently, an innovative model for data/signal representation called implicit neural representations (INRs) has
aroused researchers’ great attention, due to their remarkable
visual performance in computer vision tasks, including image generation [29, 9, 31, 4] and novel views synthesis [12].
To fit such an implicit neural representation for a 2D image, we usually learn a continuous function formalized by
a neural network, which takes space coordinates x ∈ R2 as
input and outputs the color values at the queried coordinate
(y ∈ R3 if RGB and y ∈ R if gray).
However, in-the-wild images are actually discontinuous
piecewise functions. They consist of discrete objects with
not perfectly consistent colors (as shown in Figure 1(a)).
Large gradients exist on the boundaries between two discontinuous parts, preventing the neural network from converging to a small error when fitting images. To study the
above issue, related research called “spectral bias” [19, 34]
has proved that neural networks prioritize learning the lowfrequency components. Yet, they only describe this phenomenon from the view of the implicit frequency domain
and do not propose a quantitative relation between the convergence rate and the attribute of the target signal.
In this paper, we first re-examine the above phenomenon
from the explicit spatial domain and empirically investigate
a quantitative relation: the time complexity of fitting a discontinuous piecewise function with a neural network would
increase exponentially with respect to the number of boundaries. For example, in Figure 1(b) and 1(c), we use SIREN
MLPs [29] to fit 1D synthetic signals and 2D synthetic signals where N boundaries exist in their spatial domain. We
then explore the relation between the required convergence
step n and the number of boundaries N , and find that the
relation curves align with the exponential function. We

5474

