This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sound Source Localization is All about Cross-Modal Alignment
Arda Senocak1∗

Hyeonggon Ryu1∗ Junsik Kim2∗ Tae-Hyun Oh3,4
Hanspeter Pfister2 Joon Son Chung1

1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 2 Harvard University
3
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Grad. School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH
4
Institute for Convergence Research and Education in Advanced Technology, Yonsei University

Abstract
Humans can easily perceive the direction of sound
sources in a visual scene, termed sound source localization.
Recent studies on learning-based sound source localization
have mainly explored the problem from a localization perspective. However, prior arts and existing benchmarks do
not account for a more important aspect of the problem,
cross-modal semantic understanding, which is essential for
genuine sound source localization. Cross-modal semantic
understanding is important in understanding semantically
mismatched audio-visual events, e.g., silent objects, or offscreen sounds. To account for this, we propose a crossmodal alignment task as a joint task with sound source
localization to better learn the interaction between audio
and visual modalities. Thereby, we achieve high localization performance with strong cross-modal semantic understanding. Our method outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches in both sound source localization and cross-modal
retrieval. Our work suggests that jointly tackling both tasks
is necessary to conquer genuine sound source localization.

1. Introduction
Humans can easily perceive where the sound comes from
in a scene. We naturally attend to the sounding direction
and associate incoming audio-visual signals to understand
the event. To achieve human-level audio-visual perception,
sound source localization in visual scenes has been extensively studied [50, 51, 4, 47, 8, 35, 31, 33, 53, 54, 52, 36,
39, 38, 20]. Motivated by that humans learn from natural
audio-visual correspondences without explicit supervision,
most of the studies have been developed on a fundamental
assumption that audio and visual signals are temporally correlated. With the assumption, losses of the sound source localization task are modeled by audio-visual correspondence
as a self-supervision signal and are implemented by con∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. A conceptual difference between prior approaches
and our alignment-based sound source localization.

trasting audio-visual pairs, i.e., contrastive learning.
While these approaches appear to be unsupervised methods, they strongly rely on partial supervision information;
e.g., using supervisedly pretrained vision networks [50, 51,
47, 53, 54, 20] and visual objectness estimators for postprocessing [39, 38]. Without leveraging such strong initial
representations, the performance is degraded. Thus, the previous methods are not purely self-supervised approaches.
Even further, there are recent studies [45, 39, 38] that point
out visual objectness bias in existing sound source localization benchmarks and exploit the objectness prior to improve
the localization accuracy. They show that, even without interaction between visual and audio signals, a model may
achieve strong accuracy in localization by only referring
visual signals alone, which is not the true intention of the
sound source localization task. In short, the current evaluation and setting of the sound source localization do not
capture the true sound source localization performance.
In this work, we first sort out evaluating sound source
localization methods by introducing a cross-modal retrieval
task as an auxiliary evaluation task. By this task, we can
measure whether the learned representation have the capability to accurately interact between audio and visual
modalities; i.e., more fine-grained audio-visual correspondence which is essential for genuine sound source localization. This aspect has been missed in existing sound source
localization benchmarks. Indeed, our experiments show
that higher sound localization performance does not guarantee higher cross-modal retrieval performance.

7777

