This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interactive Class-Agnostic Object Counting
Yifeng Huang1 , Viresh Ranjan2 ,* Minh Hoai1,3
1
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA
2
Amazon, USA 3 VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam
Abstract
We propose a novel framework for interactive classagnostic object counting, where a human user can interactively provide feedback to improve the accuracy of
a counter. Our framework consists of two main components: a user-friendly visualizer to gather feedback and
an efﬁcient mechanism to incorporate it. In each iteration, we produce a density map to show the current prediction result, and we segment it into non-overlapping regions with an easily veriﬁable number of objects. The user
can provide feedback by selecting a region with obvious
counting errors and specifying the range for the estimated
number of objects within it. To improve the counting result, we develop a novel adaptation loss to force the visual counter to output the predicted count within the userspeciﬁed range. For effective and efﬁcient adaptation, we
propose a reﬁnement module that can be used with any
density-based visual counter, and only the parameters in
the reﬁnement module will be updated during adaptation.
Our experiments on two challenging class-agnostic object
counting benchmarks, FSCD-LVIS and FSC-147, show that
our method can reduce the mean absolute error of multiple state-of-the-art visual counters by roughly 30% to 40%
with minimal user input. Our project can be found at
https://yifehuang97.github.io/ICACountProjectPage/.

1. Introduction
The need for counting objects in images arises in many
applications, and signiﬁcant progress has been made for
both class-speciﬁc [17, 30, 13, 46, 47, 9, 3, 24, 44, 25, 19,
38, 23, 16, 34, 36, 1] and class-agnostic [49, 35, 33, 41,
51, 26, 31, 32] counting. However, unlike in many other
computer vision tasks where the predicted results can be
veriﬁed for reliability, visual counting results are difﬁcult to
validate, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Mistakes can be made, and
often there are no mechanisms to correct them. To enhance
the practicality of visual counting methods, the results need
* Work done at Stony Brook University, prior to joining Amazon



   

   

 

Figure 1. Given an input image and several exemplar objects, a
class-agnostic counter will output a density map and the total object count. It is often challenging to validate these outputs, making
it difﬁcult to adopt automatic visual counting in practice. To improve the practicality of a visual counter, we propose an interactive
framework that allows a human user to quickly detect mistakes and
improve performance based on the identiﬁed errors.

to be more intuitive and veriﬁable, and feedback mechanisms should be incorporated to allow errors to be corrected.
This necessitates a human-in-the-loop framework that can
interactively display the predicted results, collect user feedback, and adapt the visual counter to reduce counting errors.
It is, however, challenging to develop an interactive
framework for visual counting. The ﬁrst challenge is to
provide the user with an intuitive visualizer for the counting result. Current state-of-the-art visual counting methods typically generate a density map and then sum the density values to obtain the ﬁnal count. However, as shown
in Fig. 1, verifying the ﬁnal predicted count can be difﬁcult, as can verifying the intermediate density map, due to
the mismatch between the continuous nature of the density
map and the discrete nature of the objects in the image. The
second challenge is to design an appropriate user interaction method that requires minimal user effort while being
suited for providing feedback on object counting. The third
challenge is developing an effective adaptation scheme for
the selected interaction type that can incorporate user feedback and improve the performance of visual counters. In
this paper, we address all three aforementioned challenges
to develop an interactive framework for visual counting.
For the ﬁrst challenge, we propose a novel segmentation
method that segments a density map into non-overlapping
regions, where the sum of density values in each region is a
near-integer value that can be easily veriﬁed. This provides
the user with a more natural and understandable interpretation of the predicted density map. Notably, developing such

22312

