This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Perils of Learning From Unlabeled Data:
Backdoor Attacks on Semi-supervised Learning
Virat Shejwalkar
UMass Amherst

Lingjuan Lyu
Sony AI

Amir Houmansadr
UMass Amherst

vshejwalkar@cs.umass.edu

lingjuan.lv@sony.com

amir@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is gaining popularity as
it reduces cost of machine learning (ML) by training high
performance models using unlabeled data. In this paper, we
reveal that the key feature of SSL, i.e., learning from (noninspected) unlabeled data, exposes SSL to strong poisoning
attacks that can significantly damage its security. Poisoning
is a long-standing problem in conventional supervised ML,
but we argue that, as SSL relies on non-inspected unlabeled
data, poisoning poses a more significant threat to SSL.
We demonstrate this by designing a backdoor poisoning
attack on SSL that can be conducted by a weak adversary
with no knowledge of the target SSL pipeline. This is unlike prior poisoning attacks on supervised ML that assume
strong adversaries with impractical capabilities. We show
that by poisoning only 0.2% of the unlabeled training data,
our (weak) adversary can successfully cause misclassification on more than 80% of test inputs (when they contain
the backdoor trigger). Our attack remains effective across
different benchmark datasets and SSL algorithms, and even
circumvents state-of-the-art defenses against backdoor attacks. Our work raises significant concerns about the security of SSL in real-world security critical applications.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) models perform better with increased amounts of training data [13, 12]. However, conventional supervised ML requires labeling large amounts of
training data, an expensive [11] and error prone [31, 26]
process that makes it prohibitively expensive, especially
with today’s exploding training data sizes.
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) addresses this major
challenge by significantly reducing the need for labeled
training data: SSL uses a combination of a small, highquality labeled data (expensive data) with a large, lowquality unlabeled data (cheap data) to train models. For
instance, the FixMatch [40] SSL algorithm combines only

40 labeled with 50k unlabeled data to achieve a 90% accuracy on CIFAR10. Training SSL involves two loss functions: a supervised loss (e.g., cross-entropy [30] over true
labels) on labeled training data and an unsupervised loss
(e.g., cross-entropy over pseudo-labels [22]) on unlabeled
training data. Different SSL algorithms primarily differ in
terms of how they compute their unsupervised losses.
SSL has gained popularity in both academia [52, 46, 47]
and industry [40, 41, 3, 2], as recent SSL algorithms offer
state-of-the-art performances comparable or even superior
to supervised techniques—but with no need of large wellinspected labeled data. For instance, due to their effective
use of unlabeled data, with less than 10% of training data
labeled, FixMatch [40] outperforms supervised ML.
Unlabeled data enables poisoning by weak adversaries:
Multiple researches have demonstrated the data poisoning
threat to supervised ML [18, 28, 34, 36, 50, 44, 38]. However, as the training data in supervised ML undergo an extensive and careful inspection, these attacks assume strong
adversaries with the knowledge of model parameters [28],
training data [44, 4, 29], its distribution [50], or the ML algorithm. Such strong adversaries are important to evaluate
worse-case security of a system, but are irrelevant in practice [38]. On the other hand, the key feature of SSL that
makes it attractive to real-world applications is its ability to
leverage large amounts of—raw, non-inspected—unlabeled
data, e.g., the data scraped off the Internet. We argue that
the use of non-inspected data by SSL presents a unique
threat to its security, as it allows even the most naive
adversaries (with no knowledge of training algorithm,
data, etc.) to poison SSL models by simply fabricating
malicious unlabeled data. Unfortunately, this ostensible
threat is largely unexplored in the SSL literature.
To address this gap, in this paper, we take the first step
towards understanding this threat by studying the possibility of backdoor attacks against SSL in real-world settings.
Backdoor attacks aim to install a backdoor function in the
target model, such that the backdoored target model will
misclassify any test input to the adversary chosen target
class when patched with a specific backdoor trigger, but

4730

