This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AIDE: A Vision-Driven Multi-View, Multi-Modal, Multi-Tasking Dataset
for Assistive Driving Perception
Shuai Huang1† Zhi Xu1† Zhenpeng Li1† Shunli Wang1†
Dingkang Yang1,2
Mingcheng Li1† Yuzheng Wang1† Yang Liu1† Kun Yang1† Zhaoyu Chen1† Yan Wang1†
Jing Liu1† Peixuan Zhang5† Peng Zhai1† Lihua Zhang1,2,3,4§
1
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University 2 Institute of Meta-Medical
3
Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China
4
AI and Unmanned Systems Engineering Research Center of Jilin Province, Changchun, China
5
Boli Technology Co., Ltd., Changchun, China
{dkyang20,lihuazhang}@fudan.edu.cn
(a)

Multi-View

(b)

Front View

Inside View

Left View

(c)

Driver
Emotion
Categories

Multi-Task

Driver
Behavior
Categories

Smoking

Traffic Jam

Waiting

Making Phone

Smooth Traffic

Traffic Context Categories

Multi-Modal
Posture

Face

Body

Right View

Multimodal Annotations

Gesture

Anxiety

Peace

Weariness

Happiness

Anger

Looking Around

Dozing Off

Normal Driving

Talking

Body Movement

Turning

Backward Moving

Changing Lane

Forward Moving

Parking

Vehicle Condition Categories

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed AIDE dataset for assistive driving perception. (a) illustrates four distinct perception views inside and
outside the vehicle. (b) illustrates multi-modal data annotations, including the driver’s face, body, posture, and gesture. (c) illustrates four
pragmatic driving recognition tasks concerning driver emotion, driver behavior, traffic context, and vehicle condition.

Abstract
Driver distraction has become a significant cause of severe traffic accidents over the past decade. Despite the
growing development of vision-driven driver monitoring
systems, the lack of comprehensive perception datasets restricts road safety and traffic security. In this paper, we
† These authors are second contributions.

Project lead.

present an AssIstive Driving pErception dataset (AIDE) that
considers context information both inside and outside the
vehicle in naturalistic scenarios. AIDE facilitates holistic driver monitoring through three distinctive characteristics, including multi-view settings of driver and scene,
multi-modal annotations of face, body, posture, and gesture, and four pragmatic task designs for driving understanding. To thoroughly explore AIDE, we provide experimental benchmarks on three kinds of baseline frameworks

§ Corresponding author.

20459

