This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scene as Occupancy
Wenwen Tong1,2∗ , Chonghao Sima1,3∗† , Tai Wang1,4 , Li Chen1,3 , Silei Wu2 ,
Hanming Deng2 , Yi Gu1 , Lewei Lu2 , Ping Luo3 , Dahua Lin1,4 , Hongyang Li1†
1

3

Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 SenseTime Research
The University of Hong Kong 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
∗

Equal contribution † Project lead
https://github.com/OpenDriveLab/OccNet
https://github.com/OpenDriveLab/OpenScene

Abstract
Human driver can easily describe the complex traffic
scene by visual system. Such an ability of precise perception is essential for driver’s planning. To achieve this, a
geometry-aware representation that quantizes the physical
3D scene into structured grid map with semantic labels per
cell, termed as 3D Occupancy, would be desirable. Compared to the form of bounding box, a key insight behind occupancy is that it could capture the fine-grained details of
critical obstacles in the scene, and thereby facilitate subsequent tasks. Prior or concurrent literature mainly concentrate on a single scene completion task, where we might
argue that the potential of this occupancy representation
might obsess broader impact. In this paper, we propose OccNet, a multi-view vision-centric pipeline with a cascade
and temporal voxel decoder to reconstruct 3D occupancy.
At the core of OccNet is a general occupancy embedding
to represent 3D physical world. Such a descriptor could
be applied towards a wide span of driving tasks, including
detection, segmentation and planning. To validate the effectiveness of this new representation and our proposed algorithm, we propose OpenOcc, the first dense high-quality 3D
occupancy benchmark built on top of nuScenes. Empirical
experiments show that there are evident performance gain
across multiple tasks, e.g., motion planning could witness
a collision rate reduction by 15%-58%, demonstrating the
superiority of our method.

1. Introduction
When you are driving on the road, how would you describe the scene in 3D space through your eyes? Human
driver can easily describe the environment by “There is a
Benz on the left side of my car in around 5 inches”, “There
is a truck carrying huge protruding gas pipe on the rear,

(b)

(a)

Mobileye

Tesla

(c)

(d)

3D Box

Occupancy

(e) Scene as Occupancy
Scene
Completion
BEV
Encoder

3D Object
Detection

Cascade
Voxel Decoder
Occupancy
Descriptor

Motion
Planning

Figure 1. Scene as Occupancy. Representing objects as ViDAR
(a) or 3D occupancy (b) has been endorsed by industry [1, 2].
due to the fact that conventional 3D bounding box cannot describe
in detail irregular vehicles in daily driving scenes, e.g., protruding
tail in (a) or (c). Defining the 3D world as Occupancy in (d) serves
better to represent obstacles and avoid collision. In this paper, we
envision Occupancy as a general Scene Descriptor as in (e) for a
wide span of driving tasks beyond detection, such as planning, and
witness performance gain compared to previous alternatives.

in around 50 meters ahead” and so on. Having the ability
to describe the real world in a “There is” form is essential
for making safe autonomous driving (AD) a reality. This is
non-trivial for vision-centric AD systems due to the diverse
range of entities present in the Scene, including vehicles
such as cars, SUVs, and construction trucks, as well as static
barriers, pedestrians, background buildings and vegetation.

8406

