This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GraphEcho: Graph-Driven Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for
Echocardiogram Video Segmentation
Jiewen Yang1 Xinpeng Ding1 Ziyang Zheng1† Xiaowei Xu2∗ Xiaomeng Li1∗
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology1
Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital, Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, GuangZhou, China2
{jyangcu, xdingaf}@connect.ust.hk, xiao.Wei.xu@foxmail.com, eexmli@ust.hk

Abstract
Echocardiogram video segmentation plays an important
role in cardiac disease diagnosis. This paper studies the
unsupervised domain adaption (UDA) for echocardiogram
video segmentation, where the goal is to generalize the
model trained on the source domain to other unlabelled
target domains. Existing UDA segmentation methods are
not suitable for this task because they do not model local information and the cyclical consistency of heartbeat.
In this paper, we introduce a newly collected CardiacUDA
dataset and a novel GraphEcho method for cardiac structure segmentation. Our GraphEcho comprises two innovative modules, the Spatial-wise Cross-domain Graph Matching (SCGM) and the Temporal Cycle Consistency (TCC)
module, which utilize prior knowledge of echocardiogram
videos, i.e., consistent cardiac structure across patients
and centers and the heartbeat cyclical consistency, respectively. These two modules can better align global and local features from source and target domains, leading to
improved UDA segmentation results. Experimental results
showed that our GraphEcho outperforms existing state-ofthe-art UDA segmentation methods. Our collected dataset
and code will be publicly released upon acceptance. This
work will lay a new and solid cornerstone for cardiac
structure segmentation from echocardiogram videos. Code
and dataset are available at : https://github.com/xmedlab/GraphEcho

1. Introduction
Echocardiography is a non-invasive diagnostic tool that
enables the observation of all the structures of the heart.
It can capture dynamic information on cardiac motion and
function [33, 11, 20], making it a safe and cost-effective
option for cardiac morphological and functional analysis.
Accurate segmentation of cardiac structure, such as Left
* Corresponding author
† Interning at The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Figure 1. Examples of nine frames from our newly collected
CardiacUDA dataset, which serves as a new domain adaptation
benchmark for cardiac structure segmentation from echocardiogram videos.

Ventricle (LV), Right Ventricle (RV), Left Atrium (LA), and
Right Atrium (RA), is crucial for determining essential cardiac functional parameters, such as ejection fraction and
myocardial strain. These parameters can assist physicians
in identifying heart diseases, planning treatments, and monitoring progress [12, 32]. Therefore, the development of an
automated structure segmentation method for echocardiogram videos is of great significance. Nonetheless, a model
trained using data obtained from a specific medical institution may not perform as effectively on data collected from
other institutions. For example, when a model trained on
site G is directly tested on site R, its performance can significantly decrease to 48.5% Dice, which is significantly lower
than the performance of a model trained directly on site
R, which achieves 81.3% Dice; see results of Without DA
and Upper Bound in Table 2. The result indicates that there
are clear domain gaps between echocardiogram videos collected on different sites; see (c-d) in Figure 2. Therefore,
it is highly desirable to develop an unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) method for cardiac structure segmentation from echocardiogram videos.
To the best of our knowledge, the UDA segmentation
for echocardiogram videos has not been explored yet, and
the most intuitive way is to adapt existing UDA methods designed for natural image segmentation and medi-

11878

