This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Manipulate by Seeing: Creating Manipulation Controllers
from Pre-Trained Representations
Jianren Wang∗

Sudeep Dasari∗

Mohan Kumar Srirama

Shubham Tulsiani

Abhinav Gupta

Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
The field of visual representation learning has seen
explosive growth in the past years, but its benefits in
robotics have been surprisingly limited so far. Prior
work uses generic visual representations as a basis to
learn (task-specific) robot action policies (e.g., via behavior cloning). While the visual representations do
accelerate learning, they are primarily used to encode
visual observations. Thus, action information has to
be derived purely from robot data, which is expensive to
collect! In this work, we present a scalable alternative
where the visual representations can help directly infer
robot actions. We observe that vision encoders express
relationships between image observations as distances
(e.g., via embedding dot product) that could be used to
efficiently plan robot behavior. We operationalize this
insight and develop a simple algorithm for acquiring
a distance function and dynamics predictor, by finetuning a pre-trained representation on human collected
video sequences. The final method is able to substantially outperform traditional robot learning baselines
(e.g., 70% success v.s. 50% for behavior cloning on
pick-place) on a suite of diverse real-world manipulation tasks. It can also generalize to novel objects, without using any robot demonstrations during train time.
For visualizations of the learned policies please check:
https://agi-labs.github.io/manipulate-by-seeing/.

1. Introduction
The lack of suitable, large-scale data-sets is a major
bottleneck in robot learning. Due to the physical nature of data collection, robotics data-sets are: (a) hard
to scale; (b) collected in sterile, non-realistic environments (e.g. robotics lab); (c) too homogeneous (e.g.
toy objects with fixed backgrounds/lighting). In contrast, vision data-sets contain diverse tasks, objects,
∗ Denotes equal contribution.

Choose Action
w/ Min Distance!

.4

.3

Goal Image

.5
Current State
Figure 1: This paper proposes to solve a range of manipulation tasks (e.g. pushing) by learning a functional
distance metric within the embedding space of a pretrained network. This distance function – in combination with a learned dynamics model – can be used to
greedily plan for robot actions that reach a goal state.
Our experiments reveal that the proposed method can
outperform SOTA robot learning methods across four
diverse manipulation tasks.

and settings (e.g. Ego4D [14]). Therefore, recent approaches have explored transferring priors from large
scale vision data-sets to robotics settings. What is the
right way to accomplish this?
Prior work uses vision data-sets to pre-train representations [31, 29, 32] that encode image observations
as state vectors (i.e. s = R(i)). This visual representation is then simply used as an input for a controller
learned from robot data – e.g. a policy π(a|s), trained
with expert data via Behavior Cloning [35], or a Value
function V (s), trained using exploratory roll-outs via
Reinforcement Learning [43]. Is this approach the most
efficient way to use pre-trained representations? We argue that pre-trained networks can do more than just
represent states, since their latent space already encodes semantic, task-level information – e.g. by plac13859

