This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vision Relation Transformer for Unbiased Scene Graph Generation
Gopika Sudhakaran1,3

Devendra Singh Dhami1,3

Kristian Kersting1,2,3

Stefan Roth1,2,3

1

2

Department of Computer Science, Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany
3
Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt
Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI)

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual scene understanding has made great strides in recent years, extending beyond standard object detection and
recognition tasks to tackle more complex problems such as
visual question answering [1] and image captioning [11].
One powerful tool for scene understanding is Scene Graph
Generation (SGG), which aims to identify the relationships
between entities in a scene [23]. However, despite recent
advancements, SGG models still have significant limitations when it comes to real-world applications.
Conventional SGG approaches, as shown in Fig. 1 (panel
3), generate global-level entity patches for relation encoding. Yet, during the relation encoding process, they lose
local-level entity information. As illustrated in Fig. 2a,
we humans have a tendency to focus on the critical locallevel information necessary to construct relations between
1 Code is available at https://github.com/visinf/veto

Frequency distribution of predicates

Recent years have seen a growing interest in Scene
Graph Generation (SGG), a comprehensive visual scene
understanding task that aims to predict entity relationships
using a relation encoder-decoder pipeline stacked on top of
an object encoder-decoder backbone. Unfortunately, current SGG methods suffer from an information loss regarding
the entities’ local-level cues during the relation encoding
process. To mitigate this, we introduce the Vision rElation
TransfOrmer (VETO), consisting of a novel local-level entity relation encoder. We further observe that many existing
SGG methods claim to be unbiased, but are still biased towards either head or tail classes. To overcome this bias, we
introduce a Mutually Exclusive ExperT (MEET) learning
strategy that captures important relation features without
bias towards head or tail classes. Experimental results on
the VG and GQA datasets demonstrate that VETO + MEET
boosts the predictive performance by up to 47% over the
state of the art while being ∼ 10× smaller.1

VETO
VETO

Geometric cues
Relation Fusion
Visual cues

Local-level entity
projection

Relation Fusion

Local patches

Semantic cues
women helmet
horse
Conventional SGG

10
Modality Fusion

….
….

SGG
woman
wearing
riding
hat
horse
A

A
B

B
B

A

A B

E1

E2

E3

Location cues

Relation Encoder

MEET

Visual cues

Global-level entity
projection

SGG

Semantic cues
women helmet
horse
Location cues

Global patches

Relation
Decoder

Relation Encoder

A
B

2

3

Globallevel entity
projection
Visual cues

Predicate classes of Visual Genome (VG) dataset

Figure 1. VETO-MEET vs. Conventional SGG. (1) VETO: Enhancing the information flow from entity features to relationship
prediction by using a local-level entity relation encoder that conducts relation and modality fusion of local-level entity patches.
The local-level components (green ticks) keep the model lightweight while reducing information loss. A (blue) and B (green)
denote example relation classes taken from the corresponding colored region in the predicate frequency histogram of the VG dataset
[17]. (2) MEET: Debiased relation decoder that employs out-ofdistribution aware mutually exclusive experts (E1–E3). Grey A
and B denote an out-of-distribution prediction discarded by the
model. (3) Conventional SGG: The projection components (red
crosses) yield a computationally expensive model and the globallevel entity patches result in a local-level information loss.

things in a scene, which is overlooked by current SGG approaches. Moreover, the major parameter count of current
SGG models stems from projections (red-crossed components in Fig. 1) involved in global-level entity patch generation. Another challenge with existing SGG approaches, despite efforts to enhance scene graphs using additional cues
like depth maps and knowledge graphs [27, 48], is that they
are either resource intensive or limited in exploiting crossmodal information.
Finally but crucially, SGG training setups are challenged
by the strong bias of the visual world around us towards a
few frequently occurring relationships, leaving a long tail
of under-represented relations. This is also the case with

21882

