This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly-Supervised Action Localization by Hierarchically-structured Latent
Attention Modeling
Guiqin Wang1† Peng Zhao1

Cong Zhao3,4 Shusen Yang3,4 Jie Cheng2 Luziwei Leng2
Jianxing Liao2 Qinghai Guo2 *
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiao Tong University
2
ACS Lab, Huawei Technologies
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiao Tong University
4
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Analytics, Xi’an Jiao tong University

Abstract
Weakly-supervised action localization aims to recognize
and localize action instancese in untrimmed videos with
only video-level labels. Most existing models rely on multiple instance learning(MIL), where the predictions of unlabeled instances are supervised by classifying labeled bags.
The MIL-based methods are relatively well studied with cogent performance achieved on classification but not on localization. Generally, they locate temporal regions by the
video-level classification but overlook the temporal variations of feature semantics. To address this problem, we propose a novel attention-based hierarchically-structured latent model to learn the temporal variations of feature semantics. Specifically, our model entails two components,
the first is an unsupervised change-points detection module that detects change-points by learning the latent representations of video features in a temporal hierarchy based
on their rates of change, and the second is an attentionbased classification model that selects the change-points of
the foreground as the boundaries. To evaluate the effectiveness of our model, we conduct extensive experiments
on two benchmark datasets, THUMOS-14 and ActivityNetv1.3. The experiments show that our method outperforms
current state-of-the-art methods, and even achieves comparable performance with fully-supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Action localization is one of the most challenging tasks
in video analytics and understanding [16, 43, 50, 17]. The
goal is to predict the accurate start and end time stamps
of different human actions. Owing to its wide application
(e.g., surveillance [40, 42], video summarization [27], high† Work is done during the internship at ACS Lab, Huawei Technologies.
* Corresponding author (guoqinghai@huawei.com).

light detection [13]), action localization has drawn lots of
attention in the community. To tackle this problem, many
methods try to solve it in a fully-supervised manner [5,
48, 49], but they rely on massive time-consuming annotations. To alleviate this issue, researchers pay more attention to weakly-supervised action localization (WSAL) [47,
16, 17, 43, 50, 22, 44, 11, 23], which explores a more efficient learning strategy with only video-level categorical labels. Nevertheless, recent works [22, 11, 50, 23] mostly rely
on the multiple instance learning (MIL) framework [56]:
obtaining a video-level prediction via aggregation and optimization under the video-level supervision. While sig-

Figure 1. Visualization of the change-point detection component
and the co-occurrence component(attention-based classification
module) decoupled by our method from a snippet representation.
The change-point component helps to detect change-points of temporal variations, which include the change-points of foreground in
a video(i.e. the highlighted frames in the left part). Collaborating
with the attention module, the points of the foreground are chosen as boundaries of action(i.e. the highlighted frames in the right
part).

10203

