This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Texture Learning Domain Randomization for Domain Generalized Segmentation
Sunghwan Kim
Dae-hwan Kim
Hoseong Kim*
Agency for Defense Development (ADD)
{ssshwan, dhkim7, hoseongkim}@add.re.kr

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)-based semantic segmentation models trained on a source domain often struggle
to generalize to unseen target domains, i.e., a domain gap
problem. Texture often contributes to the domain gap, making DNNs vulnerable to domain shift because they are prone
to be texture-biased. Existing Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation (DGSS) methods have alleviated the domain gap problem by guiding models to prioritize shape
over texture. On the other hand, shape and texture are two
prominent and complementary cues in semantic segmentation. This paper argues that leveraging texture is crucial
for improving performance in DGSS. Speciﬁcally, we propose a novel framework, coined Texture Learning Domain
Randomization (TLDR). TLDR includes two novel losses to
effectively enhance texture learning in DGSS: (1) a texture
regularization loss to prevent overﬁtting to source domain
textures by using texture features from an ImageNet pretrained model and (2) a texture generalization loss that utilizes random style images to learn diverse texture representations in a self-supervised manner. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed TLDR;
e.g., TLDR achieves 46.5 mIoU on GTA→Cityscapes using ResNet-50, which improves the prior state-of-the-art
method by 1.9 mIoU. The source code is available at
https://github.com/ssssshwan/TLDR.

Unseen Target Image

(a) Normalization & Whitening

(b) Domain Randomization

(c) TLDR (ours)

Figure 1. Segmentation results for an image from an unseen domain (i.e., Cityscapes [12]), using models trained on GTA [47]
with DGSS methods. (a-b) Existing methods [10, 59] have difﬁculty in distinguishing between road, sidewalk, and terrain which
have similar shapes and contexts, as the texture is not sufﬁciently
considered during the training process. (c) Our Texture Learning
Domain Randomization (TLDR) can distinguish the classes effectively as we utilize the texture as prediction cues.

volve unseen out-of-distribution scenarios, also known as a
domain gap problem. Many domain adaptation and generalization methods have been proposed to solve the domain
gap problem [10, 24, 28, 42–44, 54, 59, 60]. Domain adaptation assumes accessibility of target domain images, differing from domain generalization. This paper addresses Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation (DGSS), which
aims to train models that can generalize to diverse unseen
domains by training on a single source domain.
Existing DGSS methods have attempted to address
the domain gap problem by guiding models to focus
on shape rather than texture. Given that texture often
varies across different domains (e.g., synthetic/real and
sunny/rainy/foggy), DNNs are susceptible to domain shift
because they tend to be texture-biased [19, 39]. Accordingly, there are two main approaches for the DGSS methods. The ﬁrst approach is Normalization and Whitening

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is an essential task in computer vision with many real-world applications, such as autonomous vehicles, augmented reality, and medical imaging. Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)-based semantic segmentation models work well when the data distributions
are consistent between a source domain and target domains
[1,5–7,22,34,55]. However, the performance of the models
tends to degrade signiﬁcantly in practical settings that in* Corresponding author.

677

