This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

End-to-End Diffusion Latent Optimization Improves Classifier Guidance
Bram Wallace
Salesforce AI

Akash Gokul
Salesforce AI

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University

Nikhil Naik
Salesforce AI

b.wallace@salesforce.com

agokul@salesforce.com

ermon@cs.stanford.edu

nnaik@salesforce.com

“Darth Vader
playing with a
raccoon on Mars
during sunset”

“A dog swimming”

CLIP
Text
Encoder

CLIP
Visual
Encoder

“A Blue-Winged
Warbler”

Aesthetic
Scoring
Model

Supervised
CUB-200
Classifier

Figure 1: We propose DOODL - a process that directly optimizes diffusion latents w.r.t. a model-based loss on the final
generation. Our method improves on vanilla classifier guidance in all tested settings and we demonstrate capabilities novel
to this class of methods such as vocabulary expansion, entity personalization, and perceived aesthetic value improvement.

Abstract
Classifier guidance—using the gradients of an image
classifier to steer the generations of a diffusion model—
has the potential to dramatically expand the creative control over image generation and editing. However, currently
classifier guidance requires either training new noiseaware models to obtain accurate gradients or using a onestep denoising approximation of the final generation, which
leads to misaligned gradients and sub-optimal control.We
highlight this approximation’s shortcomings and propose
a novel guidance method: Direct Optimization of Diffusion Latents (DOODL), which enables plug-and-play guidance by optimizing diffusion latents w.r.t. the gradients of
a pre-trained classifier on the true generated pixels, using
an invertible diffusion process to achieve memory-efficient

backpropagation. Showcasing the potential of more precise guidance, DOODL outperforms one-step classifier
guidance on computational and human evaluation metrics
across different forms of guidance: using CLIP guidance to
improve generations of complex prompts from DrawBench,
using fine-grained visual classifiers to expand the vocabulary of Stable Diffusion, enabling image-conditioned generation with a CLIP visual encoder, and improving image
aesthetics using an aesthetic scoring network.

1. Introduction
Text-conditioned denoising diffusion models (DDMs),
such as Latent/Stable Diffusion, Imagen and numerous others, have been widely adopted for synthesizing realistic im-

7280

