This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient 3D Semantic Segmentation with Superpoint Transformer
Damien Robert1, 2

Hugo Raguet3

Loic Landrieu2,4

damien.robert@ign.fr

hugo.raguet@insa-cvl.fr

loic.landrieu@enpc.fr

1

CSAI, ENGIE Lab CRIGEN, France
LASTIG, IGN, ENSG, Univ Gustave Eiffel, France
3
INSA Centre Val-de-Loire Univ de Tours, LIFAT, France
4
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
2

Abstract

1. Introduction
As the expressivity of deep learning models increases
rapidly, so do their complexity and resource requirements
[13]. In particular, vision transformers have demonstrated
remarkable results for 3D point cloud semantic segmentation
[56, 37, 16, 23, 32], but their high computational requirements make them challenging to train effectively. Additionally, these models rely on regular grids or point samplings,
which do not adapt to the varying complexity of 3D data: the
same computational effort is allocated everywhere, regardless of the local geometry or radiometry of the point cloud.
This issue leads to needlessly high memory consumption,
limits the number of points that can be processed simultaneously, and hinders the modeling of long-range interactions.
Superpoint-based methods [26, 24, 21, 40] address the

75

XL

Stratified Trans.

L

Point Trans.

70

SPT-nano
RandLaNet

Deep
View
Agg

B

KPConv
S

mIoU 6-Fold

We introduce a novel superpoint-based transformer architecture for efficient semantic segmentation of large-scale
3D scenes. Our method incorporates a fast algorithm to partition point clouds into a hierarchical superpoint structure,
which makes our preprocessing 7 times faster than existing
superpoint-based approaches. Additionally, we leverage a
self-attention mechanism to capture the relationships between superpoints at multiple scales, leading to state-of-theart performance on three challenging benchmark datasets:
S3DIS (76.0% mIoU 6-fold validation), KITTI-360 (63.5%
on Val), and DALES (79.6%). With only 212k parameters,
our approach is up to 200 times more compact than other
state-of-the-art models while maintaining similar performance. Furthermore, our model can be trained on a single
GPU in 3 hours for a fold of the S3DIS dataset, which is
7× to 70× fewer GPU-hours than the best-performing methods. Our code and models are accessible at github.com/
drprojects/superpoint_transformer.

SPT

60 4
10

100h

PointNeXt
MinkowskiNet

25h
5h
Training time
(GPU-h)

105

SPG

Model Size

107

Figure 1: Model Size vs. Performance. We visualize the
performance of different methods on the S3DIS dataset (6fold validation) in relation to their model size in log-scale.
The area of the markers indicates the GPU-time to train on a
single fold. Our proposed method Superpoint Transformer
(SPT) achieves state-of-the-art with a reduction of up to 200fold in model size and 70-fold in training time (in GPU-h)
compared to recent methods. The even smaller SPT-nano
model achieves a fair performance with 26k parameters only.

limitation of regular grids by partitioning large point clouds
into sets of points— superpoints—which adapt to the local
complexity. By directly learning the interaction between superpoints instead of individual points, these methods enable
the analysis of large scenes with compact and parsimonious
models that can be trained faster than standard approaches.
However, superpoint-based methods often require a costly
preprocessing step, and their range and expressivity are lim-

17195

