This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EgoPCA: A New Framework for Egocentric Hand-Object Interaction
Understanding
Yue Xu1 , Yong-Lu Li1,2 *, Zhemin Huang1 , Michael Xu Liu3 , Cewu Lu1 ,
Yu-Wing Tai4 , Chi-Keung Tang2

Contrastive learning
Counterfactual learning
{silicxuyue, yonglu li, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn
Human intention
......
zhemin.huang@outlook.com, Michaelliu@newhope.cn, yuwing@gmail.com, cktang@cs.ust.hk
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2

HKUST

3

New Hope Investment Group

4

Dartmouth College

Balanced Videos
and Frames

Counterfactual Reasoning
Visual Scene Attention

Analysis
Sampling

Ego-HOI Datasets
(Unorganized)

Balanced
Test Set

New Dataset

New Baseline

New Benchmark

Figure 1: A new framework for Ego-HOI learning, consisting of a new benchmark, a new baseline model, and a learning mechanism.

Abstract
With the surge in attention to Egocentric Hand-Object
Interaction (Ego-HOI), large-scale datasets such as Ego4D
and EPIC-KITCHENS have been proposed. However, most
current research is built on resources derived from thirdperson video action recognition. This inherent domain gap
between first- and third-person action videos, which have
not been adequately addressed before, makes current EgoHOI suboptimal. This paper rethinks and proposes a new
framework as an infrastructure to advance Ego-HOI recognition by Probing, Curation and Adaption (EgoPCA). We
contribute comprehensive pre-train sets, balanced test sets
and a new baseline, which are complete with a trainingfinetuning strategy. With our new framework, we not only
achieve state-of-the-art performance on Ego-HOI benchmarks but also build several new and effective mechanisms
and settings to advance further research. We believe our
data and the findings will pave a new way for Ego-HOI
* Corresponding author.
† This research is supported in part by the Research Grant Council of

the Hong Kong SAR under grant no. 16201420.

understanding. Code and data are available at https:
//mvig-rhos.com/ego_pca.

1. Introduction
Understanding Egocentric Hand-Object Interaction
(Ego-HOI) is a fundamental task for computer vision and
embodied AI. To promote HOI learning, many egocentric
video datasets [17, 7, 24, 16, 44] have been released, which
contributed to recent advances in this direction. Recently,
deep learning based methods [50, 12, 4], especially Transformers and visual-language models [11, 1, 2, 51] have
achieved high performances on these benchmarks.
Though significant progress has been made, challenges
remain. With few better choices available, current studies
on Ego-HOI typically adopt existing tools and settings of
third-person action recognition, despite the significant domain gap between egocentric and exocentric action [44, 25].
Notably, third-person action depicts almost full human body
and associated poses, while first-person action typically
only engages hands; third-person videos are usually stable
or readily stabilized, while first-person videos can exhibit

5273

