This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SFHarmony: Source Free Domain Adaptation for Distributed Neuroimaging
Analysis
Nicola K Dinsdale1

Mark Jenkinson2,3,4

Ana IL Namburete1,2

1. Oxford Machine Learning in NeuroImaging (OMNI) Lab, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
2. Wellcome Centre for Integrative Neuroimaging, FMRIB, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
3. Australian Institute for Machine Learning (AIML), Department of Computer Science, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
4. South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute (SAHMRI), North Terrace, Adelaide, Australia
nicola.dinsdale@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
To represent the biological variability of clinical neuroimaging populations, it is vital to be able to combine data
across scanners and studies. However, different MRI scanners produce images with different characteristics, resulting
in a domain shift known as the ‘harmonisation problem’.
Additionally, neuroimaging data is inherently personal in
nature, leading to data privacy concerns when sharing the
data. To overcome these barriers, we propose an Unsupervised Source-Free Domain Adaptation (SFDA) method,
SFHarmony. Through modelling the imaging features as a
Gaussian Mixture Model and minimising an adapted Bhattacharyya distance between the source and target features,
we can create a model that performs well for the target
data whilst having a shared feature representation across
the data domains, without needing access to the source
data for adaptation or target labels. We demonstrate the
performance of our method on simulated and real domain
shifts, showing that the approach is applicable to classification, segmentation and regression tasks, requiring no
changes to the algorithm. Our method outperforms existing SFDA approaches across a range of realistic data
scenarios, demonstrating the potential utility of our approach for MRI harmonisation and general SFDA problems. Our code is available at https://github.com/
nkdinsdale/SFHarmony.

1. Introduction
Deep learning (DL) models have proved to be powerful tools for neuroimage analysis. However, the majority of neuroimaging datasets remain small, posing a challenge for the training of sophisticated architectures with

many parameters. Thus, it is common practice to combine data from multiple sites and MRI scanners, both to
increase the amount of data available for training, and to
represent the breadth of biological variability that can be
expected in diverse populations. However, the combination of data across MRI scanners with different acquisition protocols and hardware leads to an increase in nonbiological variance [25, 26, 50], which can be large enough
to mask the biological signals of interest [49], even after
careful pre-processing with state-of-the-art neuroimaging
pipelines [23]. The development of harmonisation methods is therefore vital to enable the joint unbiased analysis of
neuroimaging data from different scanners and studies.
The key goal for harmonisation methods is to be discriminative for the main task of interest whilst creating shared
feature representations of the data across acquisition scanners, clearly mirroring the goal of domain adaptation (DA)
[15]. The majority of deep learning based harmonisation
methods are based on DA methods, either using adversarial approaches to create shared feature embeddings [15,24],
or using generative approaches to create harmonised images [11, 63].
However, the vast majority of existing methods fail to
be applicable in many realistic data scenarios. For example, MR images are inherently personal information so their
sharing is protected by legislation, such as GDPR [9] and
HIPAA [39]. Thus, the assumption of centralised data stores
for model training is infeasible, particularly when working
with clinical imaging data, which will be essential in order to produce representative models [14, 52]. Distributed
learning offers a promising solution, but the few proposed
distributed harmonisation methods [8,16] assume the simultaneous presence of the source and target data. The source
data may not be available for the adaptation phase, for instance, due to confidentiality agreements, loss of the source

11494

