This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lossy and Lossless (L2 ) Post-training Model Size Compression
Yumeng Shi1,2

Shihao Bai2
Xiuying Wei1,2
Ruihao Gong1,2 *
1
Beihang University 2 SenseTime Research

Jianlei Yang1∗

{senbei,jianlei}@buaa.edu.cn {baishihao,gongruihao}@sensetime.com weixiuying966@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks have delivered remarkable performance and have been widely used in various visual tasks.
However, their huge sizes cause significant inconvenience
for transmission and storage. Many previous studies have
explored model size compression. However, these studies often approach various lossy and lossless compression
methods in isolation, leading to challenges in achieving
high compression ratios efficiently. This work proposes a
post-training model size compression method that combines
lossy and lossless compression in a unified way. We first
propose a unified parametric weight transformation, which
ensures different lossy compression methods can be performed jointly in a post-training manner. Then, a dedicated
differentiable counter is introduced to guide the optimization of lossy compression to arrive at a more suitable point
for later lossless compression. Additionally, our method
can easily control a desired global compression ratio and
allocate adaptive ratios for different layers. Finally, our
method can achieve a stable 10× compression ratio without sacrificing accuracy and a 20× compression ratio with
minor accuracy loss in a short time. Our code is available
at https://github.com/ModelTC/L2 Compression.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs), especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [1, 2, 3, 4],
have achieved attractive performance in various computer
vision tasks such as image classification, detection, and segmentation. However, as their performance improves, their
parameter counts also significantly increase, which is very
storage-consuming. Therefore, despite their excellent performance, it is difficult to deploy models with a large number of parameters, particularly on mobile or edge devices
with limited storage resources.
Model compression [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] is a common solution to reduce the model size, including lossless and lossy
* Corresponding Author

Previous Independent
Compression with Low CR

Quantization
1
-1

Pruning

…
-127

…

127

Utilize

Uncompressed Weights
Train
Our Unified
Compression with High CR Pruning + Quantization

Range Coding

Figure 1. Comparison between previous compression methods and
our unified post-training compression.

compression. Common lossless compression methods such
as Huffman coding and Range coding are both entropy coding methods. They can leverage redundant information in
data to achieve distortion-free compression. However, for
data with weak spatiotemporal coherence, high compression ratios are often difficult to achieve. Compared with
lossless methods, lossy methods such as pruning [11] and
quantization [12, 13] have attracted more attention recently.
Pruning reduces the model size by removing extraneous
weights, and quantization replaces weights in a low-bit format. Both pruning and quantization are trade-offs between
model distortion and compression ratio. Previous studies
have primarily focused on individual compression methods
or have merely combined different compression techniques
without considering the interaction between them, resulting
in multiple isolated trade-offs in successive stages. Hence,
they can hardly achieve a higher compression ratio with a
small amount of data and little training time.
To address this issue, as shown in Figure 1, this paper
proposes to mix different compression methods and optimize them under the recent popular post-training setting,
which slightly adjusts weights for better performance. We
build an optimization objective that introduces an entropy
regularization term, making the global compression ratio
controllable. Based on it, a unified parametric weight transformation is first designed to integrate different lossy com-

17546

