This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Doppelgangers: Learning to Disambiguate Images of Similar Structures
Ruojin Cai1 Joseph Tung1 Qianqian Wang1
Hadar Averbuch-Elor2 Bharath Hariharan1 Noah Snavely1
1
Cornell University 2 Tel Aviv University

Abstract
We consider the visual disambiguation task of determining whether a pair of visually similar images depict the same
or distinct 3D surfaces (e.g., the same or opposite sides of
a symmetric building). Illusory image matches, where two
images observe distinct but visually similar 3D surfaces, can
be challenging for humans to differentiate, and can also
lead 3D reconstruction algorithms to produce erroneous
results. We propose a learning-based approach to visual disambiguation, formulating it as a binary classification task
on image pairs. To that end, we introduce a new dataset for
this problem, Doppelgangers, which includes image pairs of
similar structures with ground truth labels. We also design
a network architecture that takes the spatial distribution of
local keypoints and matches as input, allowing for better
reasoning about both local and global cues. Our evaluation
shows that our method can distinguish illusory matches in
difficult cases, and can be integrated into SfM pipelines to
produce correct, disambiguated 3D reconstructions. See
our project page for our code, datasets, and more results:
doppelgangers-3d.github.io.

1. Introduction
From time to time we are faced with the task of distinguishing between two things that are nearly indistinguishable, but are not the same object. Examples of such lookalikes include identical twin siblings, two similar keys on
a keychain, and two cups on a table at a party—only one
of which is ours. While these objects might look identical,
there are often subtle cues we can use to tell them apart;
for instance, even “identical” twins are not truly visually
identical, but have perceptible differences.
Computer vision systems also face a version of this problem. In particular, our work considers geometric vision tasks
like 3D reconstruction, where methods often must determine
whether two images depict the exact same 3D surface in
the world, or two different 3D surfaces that happen to look
very similar—where wrong answers can lead to wrong 3D

(a) Arc de Triomphe

(b) Charlottenburg Palace

(c) Alexander Nevsky Cathedral

(d) Sleeping Beauty Castles

Figure 1. These image pairs observe distinct but visually similar
3D surfaces. Can you spot the differences and distinguish between
the two images in each pair? Hints in the footnote.1 Such illusory
image matches can fool humans, and also fool 3D reconstruction
algorithms into thinking they share 3D correspondence. We propose
a new method to disambiguate these kinds of false matches from
image pairs that truly observe the same structure.

models. We call this task visual disambiguation, but you
could also call it the Big Ben problem: London’s Big Ben
is a clock tower with four-way symmetry, where the four
sides of the tower look nearly the same. Local feature matching methods like SIFT easily confuse one side for another,
finding many matches between distinct 3D surfaces. These
spurious matches lead structure from motion methods to produce incorrect reconstructions where multiple sides collapse
together. Yet views of different sides of Big Ben are not
truly identical—the individual bricks are different, the backgrounds are different, etc. If matching methods knew what
to look for, they could perhaps tell the different sides apart.
Figure 1 shows other examples of this “spot the difference”
problem—see if you can tell these structures apart yourself.
We call illusory image matches like those in Fig. 1 doppelgangers, after the idea of two distinct people or objects that
look very similar. Prior methods for disambiguating doppelgangers in the context of 3D vision have devised heuristics
1 Attend to: (a) the sculptures on the bottom half of the monument, (b)
the shape of the facade’s roof (flat or triangular), (c) the location of the
smaller tower (left or right), and (d) the background (with or without a
mountain). Note that (a), (b), (c) show different faces of the same building,
while (d) shows replicas of the same castle in different Disney parks.

34

