This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Thinking Image Color Aesthetics Assessment: Models, Datasets and Benchmarks
Shuai He†

Anlong Ming†,∗ Yaqi Li Jinyuan Sun ShunTian Zheng
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

Huadong Ma

{hs19951021, mal, lyq645146943, jinyuan, zhengshuntian, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn
https://github.com/woshidandan/Image-Color-Aesthetics-Assessment

Abstract
We present a comprehensive study on a new task named
image color aesthetics assessment (ICAA), which aims to
assess color aesthetics based on human perception. ICAA
is important for various applications such as imaging measurement and image analysis. However, due to the highly
diverse aesthetic preferences and numerous color combinations, ICAA presents more challenges than conventional
image quality assessment tasks. To advance ICAA research,
1) we propose a baseline model called the Delegate Transformer, which not only deploys deformable transformers
to adaptively allocate interest points, but also learns human color space segmentation behavior by the dedicated
module. 2) We elaborately build a color-oriented dataset,
ICAA17K, containing 17K images, covering 30 popular
color combinations, 80 devices and 50 scenes, with each
image densely annotated by more than 1,500 people. Moreover, we develop a large-scale benchmark of 15 methods,
the most comprehensive one thus far based on two datasets,
SPAQ and ICAA17K. Our work, not only achieves state-ofthe-art performance, but more importantly offers the community a roadmap to explore solutions for ICAA. Code and
dataset are available in here.

1. Introduction
Color is known as having a higher degree of discriminability and correlation compared to other visual features
[1, 2, 3], because the human eye can directly perceive
light of different wavelengths and convert them into different color signals. As digital photography expands rapidly,
ICAA has become one of the most important criteria to automatically assess whether the image meets users’ aesthetic
preferences [4, 5, 6, 7]. It is also an essential step in imaging
measurements among manufacturers to evaluate the performance of smartphones and cameras [8, 9, 10].
† Equal Contribution; ∗ Contact Author.

2

1
8.3

7.1

3

8.0

8.0

Tiny adjustment

1

2
3

5.9
(a) Input

(b) Color Histogram

7.3
(c) MaxVit

8.0
(d) NIMA

6.1
(e) Ours

Figure 1. The results of different methods on two similar images with tiny color adjustment, ground-truth (red) and predicted
(black) scores are shown below. (a) Similar images. (b) Color histogram [16] is unable to differentiate and quantify the color aesthetics. The saliency maps of (c) MaxViT [17], (d) NIMA [18]
and (e) our method, whereas our method achieves a fine-grained
perception of color aesthetics.

Although ICAA is an important branch of IAA (image aesthetics assessment), they deal with different tasks.
IAA evaluates the holistic aesthetics of an image, which
implicitly depends on color and other attributes (brightness,sharpness, etc.) [11, 12, 8]. ICAA focuses more on
evaluating the impact of color harmony, color combinations
and other factors on color perception.
ICAA is confronted with two major challenges. First, the
types and combinations of colors are intrinsically complex,
thus the color aesthetics are determined by specific colors
and their relative positions in color spaces [13]. However,
biological studies show that humans can perceive only up
to 8 colors due to the human eye and perception limits [14].
Therefore, extracting dominant colors from an image is a
crucial process and important prior knowledge [6, 15]. Second, human color preferences are subjective and vary from
person to person based on factors such as age and culture
that may change over time.
Most traditional quantization methods for ICAA rely on
objective rules such as color histogram [16] or color wheel
[19] theories. However, the color information obtained
from pixel statistics is limited to capture the nuances of
color aesthetics (Fig. 1 (b)), mainly due to these methods
cannot perceive the spatial information of colors and the ef-

21838

