This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIPTrans: Transferring Visual Knowledge with Pre-trained Models for
Multimodal Machine Translation
Devaansh Gupta1,2, *

Siddhant Kharbanda3

Jiawei Zhou4

guptadm@bc.edu

skharbanda@microsoft.com

jzhou02@g.harvard.edu

Wanhua Li4

Hanspeter Pfister4

Donglai Wei1

wanhua@seas.harvard.edu

pfister@seas.harvard.edu

weidf@bc.edu

1

Boston College

2

BITS Pilani

3

Abstract
There has been a growing interest in developing multimodal machine translation (MMT) systems that enhance
neural machine translation (NMT) with visual knowledge.
This problem setup involves using images as auxiliary information during training, and more recently, eliminating their
use during inference. Towards this end, previous works
face a challenge in training powerful MMT models from
scratch due to the scarcity of annotated multilingual visionlanguage data, especially for low-resource languages. Simultaneously, there has been an influx of multilingual pretrained models for NMT and multimodal pre-trained models
for vision-language tasks, primarily in English, which have
shown exceptional generalisation ability. However, these
are not directly applicable to MMT since they do not provide
aligned multimodal multilingual features for generative
tasks. To alleviate this issue, instead of designing complex
modules for MMT, we propose CLIPTrans, which simply
adapts the independently pre-trained multimodal M-CLIP
and the multilingual mBART. In order to align their embedding spaces, mBART is conditioned on the M-CLIP features
by a prefix sequence generated through a lightweight mapping network. We train this in a two-stage pipeline which
warms up the model with image captioning before the actual translation task. Through experiments, we demonstrate
the merits of this framework and consequently push forward the state-of-the-art across standard benchmarks by
an average of +2.67 BLEU. The code can be found at
www.github.com/devaansh100/CLIPTrans.

1. Introduction
Over the decades, Machine Translation (MT) has
evolved from being rule-based [45], to more intricate prob* Work done as an intern at Boston College

4

Microsoft India

Harvard University

(training only)

Image
Encoder
Indoor shot of
intersection at night

Lang 1
Encoder

Multimodal
Encoder

Lang 2
Decoder

Innenaufnahme
einer Kreuzung
bei Nacht

(a) Multimodal machine translation pipeline (no image during inference)
Image

Lang 1

Lang 1

Lang 2

Multimodal
Multilingual

(b) Pre-trained Models

Figure 1: (a) Multimodal machine translation (MMT) models are hard to train due to the scarcity of triplet data, especially for low-resource languages. (b) Our work aims
to leverage existing non-triplet pre-trained models for the
MMT task (without image during inference setting).

abilistic models [42, 14, 38, 23] and recently to end-to-end
deep neural networks [1, 11, 62, 59] giving rise to the subdomain of Neural Machine Translation (NMT). Most recent
NMT models largely rely on paired textual data and typically make use of transformer-based encoder-decoder models [62, 28] to set impressive benchmarks [35, 49]. With
advancements in the transformer’s ability to encode both
images and texts in the same latent space [56, 26, 17, 39],
there has been a rise in works [33, 34, 66, 54] leveraging
images as auxiliary information to provide visual grounding to the translation task to enhance MT systems, a setting
known as Multimodal Machine Translation (MMT).
For incorporation of the visual input, previous works
have employed specifically engineered encoder-decoder architectures with multimodal attention modules [33, 34, 7,
71, 32, 75] that need to be learned from scratch. Consequently, they are forced to balance vision-language alignment with the translation task. Furthermore, to reduce the

2875

