This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ObjectFusion: Multi-modal 3D Object Detection with Object-Centric Fusion
Qi Cai, Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, Chong-Wah Ngo and Tao Mei
University of Science and Technology of China
HiDream.ai Inc
Singapore Management University
{cqcaiqi, panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, cwngo@smu.edu.sg, tmei@hidream.ai

Abstract
Recent progress on multi-modal 3D object detection has
featured BEV (Bird-Eye-View) based fusion, which effectively unifies both LiDAR point clouds and camera images
in a shared BEV space. Nevertheless, it is not trivial to
perform camera-to-BEV transformation due to the inherently ambiguous depth estimation of each pixel, resulting
in spatial misalignment between these two multi-modal features. Moreover, such transformation also inevitably leads
to projection distortion of camera image features in BEV
space. In this paper, we propose a novel Object-centric
Fusion (ObjectFusion) paradigm, which completely gets
rid of camera-to-BEV transformation during fusion to align
object-centric features across different modalities for 3D
object detection. ObjectFusion first learns three kinds of
modality-specific feature maps (i.e., voxel, BEV, and image
features) from LiDAR point clouds and its BEV projections,
camera images. Then a set of 3D object proposals are produced from the BEV features via a heatmap-based proposal
generator. Next, the 3D object proposals are reprojected
back to voxel, BEV, and image spaces. We leverage voxel
and RoI pooling to generate spatially aligned object-centric
features for each modality. All the object-centric features of
three modalities are further fused at object level, which is
finally fed into the detection heads. Extensive experiments
on nuScenes dataset demonstrate the superiority of our ObjectFusion, by achieving 69.8% mAP on nuScenes validation set and improving BEVFusion by 1.3%.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is one of the fundamental tasks in 3D
vision, which aims to localize the objects of interest in the
3D scene. This task plays a critical role in perceiving the
surrounding environment of autonomous driving. For robust and high-quality detection, the current practice mostly
follows multi-sensor fusion paradigm, which integrates the
data derived from different sensors (e.g., cameras and Li-

Images

Image
feature

(a)
Points

BEV
feature

Heads

BEV
feature

Heads

Voxel
feature

Images

Image
feature

(b)
Points

Images

Voxel
feature

Image
feature

Object feature
BEV feature

(c)

RoI Pool

3D Proposals

...
Points

Heads

Voxel
feature

Figure 1: Illustration of (a) point-based fusion [48], (b)
BEV-based fusion [34], and (c) our object-centric fusion.
DAR). On one hand, the RGB images convey rich texture
and semantics of objects captured from different angles of
cameras. LiDAR, on the other hand, observes the environment by emitting pulses of light, yielding point cloud data
that preserves accurate geometry information regardless of
lighting conditions. As RGB images are vulnerable to lighting conditions, LiDAR point clouds naturally complement
camera images and lead to the idea of blending these multisensor data for robust and accurate perception.
Considering that camera and LiDAR offer different perspectives (i.e., images versus point clouds) of 3D scenes, the
mainstream approaches unify them into a shared representation space. Cross-modal projection, such as by point-based
[48, 49] or BEV-based [30, 34] fusing has been proposed.
The point-based fusion strategy [48, 49] first builds the correspondence between 3D points and image pixels via calibration matrices. As shown in Figure 1(a), the images are
projected into the raw point space, augmenting points with
the corresponding image features or semantic scores. The
augmented points are further transformed into BEV features
for 3D detection. However, this point-based fusion only
associates points with a small portion of images, leaving
the rich semantic information of images under-exploited.
Instead, BEV-based fusion [30, 34] projects both the im-

18067

