This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Role-aware Interaction Generation from Textual Description
Mikihiro Tanaka1 , KentFujiwara2
LINE Corporation
1
mikihiro.tanaka@linecorp.com, 2 kent.fujiwara@linecorp.com

Abstract
This research tackles the problem of generating interaction between two human actors corresponding to textual description. We claim that certain interactions, which we call
asymmetric interactions, involve a relationship between an
actor and a receiver, whose motions significantly differ depending on the assigned role. However, existing studies of
interaction generation attempt to learn the correspondence
between a single label and the motions of both actors combined, overlooking differences in individual roles. We consider a novel problem of role-aware interaction generation,
where roles can be designated before generation. We translate the text of the asymmetric interactions into active and
passive voice to ensure the textual context is consistent with
each role. We propose a model that learns to generate motions of the designated role, which together form a mutually
consistent interaction. As the model treats individual motions separately, it can be pretrained to derive knowledge
from single-person motion data for more accurate interactions. Moreover, we introduce a method inspired by Permutation Invariant Training (PIT) that can automatically
learn which of the two actions corresponds to an actor or a
receiver without additional annotation. We further present
cases where existing evaluation metrics fail to accurately
assess the quality of generated interactions, and propose a
novel metric, Mutual Consistency, to address such shortcomings. Experimental results demonstrate the efficacy of
our method, as well as the necessity of the proposed metric. Our code is available at https://github.com/
line/Human-Interaction-Generation.

1. Introduction
Modeling human motion is becoming an important element for creating high-quality 3D animation, with the rising
demand in applications such as animating game characters
and 3D online avatars. As human motion is complex and
has a wide range of variations, animation of human characters has mostly been either hand-crafted or produced based
on human actors through means such as 3D motion capture

A is whispering
in B’s ear.

A and B are
shaking hands.

Figure 1. Examples of role-aware interactions generated by the
proposed method, with language as input and colored roles assigned to corresponding human actors. Top: Asymmetric interaction, in which there is a speaker and a listener. Bottom: Symmetric
interaction, in which both share the same action of shaking hands.

systems, both of which are generally very expensive.
In recent years, generating single human motion from
language has made significant progress [37, 9, 51, 59].
Especially with the recent development of diffusion models [16, 47, 20], it has become possible to generate more
faithful and diverse motions of a single character from language. When we consider multiple characters, more complex modeling is required compared to animating a single
character, as their relative positions and interactions need
to be taken into account, in addition to modeling individual
motions. Some attempts have been made to combine two
human motions and learn the correspondence between a single label and the pair of actions [29, 11]. However, viewing
from the perspective of each actor, this approach is particularly problematic in interactions where there is an initiator and a receiver of an action, as there is a contradiction
between the action label, which is generally in the active
voice, and the receiver’s motion, which should be passive.
In this paper, we propose a role-aware interaction generation model that can designate individual roles while
achieving consistency between two human motions by extending a single motion generation method based on the diffusion model [59]. We base our proposal on the insight that
among interactions between two humans, there are asymmetric interactions, in which there is an actor and a receiver,

15999

