This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Aggregating Feature Point Cloud for Depth Completion
Zhu Yu1 , Zehua Sheng1 , Zili Zhou1 , Lun Luo1 ,
Si-Yuan Cao2,1∗ Hong Gu4 , Huaqi Zhang4 , Hui-Liang Shen1,3 *
1
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
Ningbo Innovation Center, Zhejiang University
3
Key Laboratory of Collaborative Sensing and Autonomous Unmanned Systems of Zhejiang Province
4
vivo Mobile Communication Company Ltd.
{yu zhu, shengzehua, zhou zili, luolun, cao siyuan, shenhl}@zju.edu.cn
{guhong, zhanghuaqi}@vivo.com

Abstract

Feature Point Cloud Aggregation
Reshape

Guided depth completion aims to recover dense depth
maps by propagating depth information from the given pixels to the remaining ones under the guidance of RGB images. However, most of the existing methods achieve this
using a large number of iterative refinements or stacking
repetitive blocks. Due to the limited receptive field of conventional convolution, the generalizability with respect to
different sparsity levels of input depth maps is impeded.
To tackle these problems, we propose a feature point cloud
aggregation framework to directly propagate 3D depth information between the given points and the missing ones.
We extract 2D feature map from images and transform the
sparse depth map to point cloud to extract sparse 3D features. By regarding the extracted features as two sets of feature point clouds, the depth information for a target location
can be reconstructed by aggregating adjacent sparse 3D
features from the known points using cross attention. Based
on this, we design a neural network, called as PointDC, to
complete the entire depth information reconstruction process. Experimental results show that, our PointDC achieves
superior or competitive results on the KITTI benchmark and
NYUv2 dataset. In addition, the proposed PointDC demonstrates its higher generalizability to different sparsity levels
of the input depth maps and cross-dataset evaluation.

1. Introduction
In recent years, dense depth maps have shown great importance in various computer vision tasks, including autonomous driving [39, 7], 3D object detection [48, 47], augmented reality[22, 9, 55] and 3D reconstruction [11, 35].
* Corresponding author.

2D Feature Point Cloud
2D Feature Map
3D Information
Encoding

Cross
Attention
Dense 3D
Feature Point Cloud

Sparse 3D
Feature Point Cloud

(a) A diagram of our feature point cloud aggregation module.

RGB

RGB Patch

Ground Truth

NLSPN

PointDC (ours)

(b) An example scene for comparison.

Figure 1. The diagram of feature point cloud aggregation module
of our PointDC. It reconstructs 3D information for the 2D feature
map by aggregating from the 3D features, where the 2D and 3D
features are viewed as two sets of feature point clouds. Compared
with the state-of-the-art depth completion approach NLSPN [31],
our PointDC can still achieve better results although the details in
the RGB image are hard to discriminate by human eyes.

However, commercially available depth sensors, such as LiDARs or RGB-D cameras, typically produce highly sparse
depth maps that cannot accurately capture the full 3D information of the scene. To address this limitation, recent researches [20, 42, 10] have focused on directly reconstructing dense depth maps from sparse observations. Despite
significant progress, this approach remains challenging due
to the ill-posed nature of the problem, which often leads to
unsatisfactory accuracy. In comparison, a more promising
solution is to incorporate an additional RGB image captured

8732

