This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shape Analysis of Euclidean Curves under Frenet-Serret Framework
Perrine Chassat1
1
LaMME, University of Paris-Saclay

Juhyun Park1,2
2
ENSIIE, Evry

Nicolas Brunel1,2,3
3
Quantmetry, Paris

perrine.chassat@univ-evry.fr

juhyun.park@ensiie.fr

nicolas.brunel@ensiie.fr

Abstract
Geometric frameworks for analyzing curves are common in applications as they focus on invariant features and
provide visually satisfying solutions to standard problems
such as computing invariant distances, averaging curves,
or registering curves. We show that for any smooth curve
in Rd , d > 1, the generalized curvatures associated with
the Frenet-Serret equation can be used to define a Riemannian geometry that takes into account all the geometric features of the shape. This geometry is based on a Square Root
Curvature Transform that extends the square root-velocity
transform for Euclidean curves (in any dimensions) and
provides likely geodesics that avoid artefacts encountered
by representations using only first-order geometric information. Our analysis is supported by simulated data and is
especially relevant for analyzing human motions. We consider trajectories acquired from sign language, and show
the interest of considering curvature and also torsion in
their analysis, both being physically meaningful.

1. Introduction
Identifying and comparing different types of visual objects is a fundamental task in machine learning and computer vision problems [13, 5, 8]. The shape is one of the
essential features of objects that allow us to understand and
characterize them. Nowadays, it is much easier to obtain
data in the form of shapes, typically as dense point clouds
or landmarks. The main task in shape analysis is to define a
proper framework to compare and quantify the variation of
the shapes. However, the shape space is generally nonlinear,
and extracting meaningful information or features is complex. One of the successful approaches to shape analysis
utilizes a Riemannian framework of differential geometry,
where a metric can be defined between the shapes, which is
invariant with respect to shape-preserving transformations
such as translation and rotation. For instance, this gives rise
to geodesic distances that are naturally invariant to smooth
and optimal deformations through geodesic paths between
the shapes [11]. This approach is very versatile as it can

be adapted to various kinds of manifold-value data and can
be designed to emphasize important geometric information
to be preserved. As a consequence, several choices of metrics are possible, such as the class of invariant Sobolev metrics, often called elastic, for the analysis of curves [1]. In
this work, we are concerned with curves that often arise in
the application as trajectories (function of time) or motions
(animation, activity recognition) and with the definition of
a framework to compare their shapes. The differential geometry of Euclidean curves is among the simplest (with respect to higher dimensional manifolds), and relatively simple Riemannian metrics are available with different mathematical representations of curves [28]. Quite remarkably,
the introduction of the Square Root Velocity (SRV) transform [24] that consists of a particular representation of the
shape of a curve enables to define a so-called elastic Riemannian distance, which has proven to be useful for the statistical shape analysis of 2D and 3D curves in applications.
The SRV possesses interesting properties such as a principled theoretical framework, efficient computation, and generalization to higher dimensions [2]. Nevertheless, a limitation of the SRV transform and the corresponding elastic
distance is the restrictive use of the first-order derivative,
while the geometry of 3-D (or d-D) curves depends on the
derivatives until order d. Indeed, it is well-known that a 3D
curve is characterized by its curvature and its torsion: this
is particularly critical when we consider trajectories or human movements, where the curvature and torsion can have
a physical meaning.

2. Related works and contributions
As we will recall in section 3, the full geometry of a
curve can be given either by the Frenet curvatures (standard curvature and torsion in 3D) or by the path of Frenet
frames. There have been few attempts to directly deal with
the Frenet curvatures: most of the works have been produced in 2D curves as an alternative representation [23].
Nevertheless, the potential for applications has not been investigated. In [17], the elastic shape analysis framework has
been considered for 3D curves based on the Frenet frames,
but the link to the physical parameters has been overlooked.

4027

