This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust One-Shot Face Video Re-enactment using
Hybrid Latent Spaces of StyleGAN2
Trevine Oorloff
Yaser Yacoob
University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA
{trevine,yaser}@umd.edu

Figure 1: The proposed end-to-end framework facilitates robust one-shot face video re-enactment at 10242 , purely
based on StyleGAN2’s predefined latent spaces without explicit structural priors for guidance. We show on the Left,
2nd row: re-enactment examples successfully animating the source frame to mimic the motion of the driving sequence and
3rd row: re-enactments with latent-based attribute edits facilitated by our approach. Right: Ideally, re-enactments need to
be insensitive to the head pose and expressions of the source. The heatmap depicts the L1 loss (lower the better) averaged
across 5 one-shot same-identity re-enactments of the driving frame, each initiated from a single source frame with a different
head pose and expression. This proves the superior robustness of our approach in comparison to existing approaches (FOMM
[30], PIRenderer [26], FS-Vid2Vid [35], LIA [37], StyleHEAT [42]).

Abstract
Recent research on one-shot face re-enactment has progressively overcome the low-resolution constraint with the
help of StyleGAN’s high-fidelity portrait generation. However, such approaches rely on explicit 2D/3D structural priors for guidance and/or use flow-based warping which constrain their performance. Moreover, existing methods are
sensitive (not robust) to the source frame’s facial expressions and head pose, even though ideally only the identity of the source frame should have an effect. Addressing these limitations, we propose a novel framework exploiting the implicit 3D prior and inherent latent properties of StyleGAN2 to facilitate one-shot face re-enactment
at 10242 (1) with zero dependencies on explicit structural
priors, (2) accommodating attribute edits, and (3) robust
to diverse facial expressions and head poses of the source

frame. We train an encoder using a self-supervised approach to decompose the identity and facial deformation of
a portrait image within the pre-trained StyleGAN2’s predefined latent spaces itself (automatically facilitating (1)
and (2)). The decomposed identity latent of the source
and the facial deformation latents of the driving sequence
are used to generate re-enacted frames using the StyleGAN2 generator. Additionally, to improve the identity
reconstruction and to enable seamless transfer of driving motion, we propose a novel approach, Cyclic Manifold Adjustment. We perform extensive qualitative and
quantitative analyses which demonstrate the superiority of
the proposed approach against state-of-the-art methods.
Project page: https://trevineoorloff.github.io/
FaceVideoReenactment_HybridLatents.io/.

20947

