This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation from CLIP Vision Encoder
Distillation Only
Jun Chen1,2 *
Deyao Zhu1
Guocheng Qian1
Bernard Ghanem1
Zhicheng Yan2
†
†
Mohamed Elhoseiny1
Chenchen Zhu2
Fanyi Xiao2
Sean Chang Culatana2
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
2
Meta AI Research

Abstract
Semantic segmentation is a crucial task in computer
vision that involves segmenting images into semantically
meaningful regions at the pixel level. However, existing
approaches often rely on expensive human annotations as
supervision for model training, limiting their scalability to
large, unlabeled datasets. To address this challenge, we
present ZeroSeg, a novel method that leverages the existing pretrained vision-language (VL) model (e.g. CLIP vision encoder [39]) to train open-vocabulary zero-shot semantic segmentation models. Although acquired extensive knowledge of visual concepts, it is non-trivial to exploit knowledge from these VL models to the task of semantic segmentation, as they are usually trained at an image level. ZeroSeg overcomes this by distilling the visual
concepts learned by VL models into a set of segment tokens, each summarizing a localized region of the target image. We evaluate ZeroSeg on multiple popular segmentation benchmarks, including PASCAL VOC 2012, PASCAL
Context, and COCO, in a zero-shot manner Our approach
achieves state-of-the-art performance when compared to
other zero-shot segmentation methods under the same training data, while also performing competitively compared
to strongly supervised methods. Finally, we also demonstrated the effectiveness of ZeroSeg on open-vocabulary
segmentation, through both human studies and qualitative
visualizations. The code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/facebookresearch/ZeroSeg

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation involves dividing an image into
distinct regions and assigning each area a corresponding
* Work done during an internship at Meta AI
† Equal mentorships

Zero-shot
segmentation

ZeroSeg

Visual distillation

…

CLIP

❄

Divided into
multi-scaled views

CLIP

❄

…

CLIP

❄

…

Figure 1. ZeroSeg overview. ZeroSeg is a zero-shot openvocabulary method for semantic segmentation. The approach begins by dividing the input image into a set of multi-scale views.
Each view is then individually processed by a pretrained CLIP visual encoder model to extract visual concepts. These visual concepts are then distilled into our ZeroSeg model via the proposed
segment matching loss. After training, our ZeroSeg model can be
directly transferred to downstream semantic segmentation tasks in
a zero-shot manner (i.e., no training or adaption on target datasets).

label, and the open-vocabulary setting targets performing
segmentation with an unrestricted vocabulary. This process
typically necessitates human-generated annotations, such as
per-pixel label supervision [55, 19, 24, 40, 45, 53, 56, 11],
or image-level supervision, e.g. human natural language
[20, 16, 48]. However, it can be time-consuming and expensive to obtain these annotations, and thus the resulting
model can not be trained on large amounts of data. Recently, new developments in the field of vision and lan1699

