This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Preserving Tumor Volumes for Unsupervised Medical Image Registration
Qihua Dong1 , Hao Du1 , Ying Song2 , Yan Xu3 *, Jing Liao1 *
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College
3
School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beihang University
dongqh078@gmail.com, haodu8-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, jingliao@cityu.edu.hk;
songying1770@hotmail.com
xuyan04@gmail.com

Abstract
Medical image registration is a critical task that estimates the spatial correspondence between pairs of images. However, current traditional and deep-learningbased methods rely on similarity measures to generate a
deforming field, which often results in disproportionate volume changes in dissimilar regions, especially in tumor regions. These changes can significantly alter the tumor size
and underlying anatomy, which limits the practical use of
image registration in clinical diagnosis. To address this issue, we have formulated image registration with tumors as
a constraint problem that preserves tumor volumes while
maximizing image similarity in other normal regions. Our
proposed strategy involves a two-stage process. In the first
stage, we use similarity-based registration to identify potential tumor regions by their volume change, generating a
soft tumor mask accordingly. In the second stage, we propose a volume-preserving registration with a novel adaptive volume-preserving loss that penalizes the change in size
adaptively based on the masks calculated from the previous
stage. Our approach balances image similarity and volume
preservation in different regions, i.e., normal and tumor regions, by using soft tumor masks to adjust the imposition of
volume-preserving loss on each one. This ensures that the
tumor volume is preserved during the registration process.
We have evaluated our strategy on various datasets and network architectures, demonstrating that our method successfully preserves the tumor volume while achieving comparable registration results with state-of-the-art methods. Our
codes is available at: https://dddraxxx.github.
io/Volume-Preserving-Registration/.

* Corresponding authors

1. Introduction

Fixed Image

Similarity-Based Registration

Moving Image

Volume-Preserving Registration

Figure 1. Red boxes represent the location of tumors in the moving image before warped. In image registration with tumors,
similarity-based registration typically leads to significant alterations in tumor size while our volume-preserving registration is
capable of preserving tumor anatomy.

Deformable image registration is a fundamental task that
estimates non-linear spatial correspondences between two
images. It is useful for medical image studies that involve
3D images of organs or tissues, such as MR brain scans and
CT liver scans. Recently, a wide range of deep-learningbased methods are proposed in the field, with better performance and obvious speed-ups in inference time compared
to the traditional registration methods [5, 38, 32, 14, 15].
Currently, most of the learning-based methods [5, 38]
train a registration model to achieve high similarity in either

21208

