This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Complete Recipe for Diffusion Generative Models
Kushagra Pandey
Dept. of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine

Stephan Mandt
Dept. of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine

pandeyk1@uci.edu

mandt@uci.edu

Abstract
Score-based Generative Models (SGMs) have demonstrated exceptional synthesis outcomes across various tasks.
However, the current design landscape of the forward diffusion process remains largely untapped and often relies
on physical heuristics or simplifying assumptions. Utilizing
insights from the development of scalable Bayesian posterior samplers, we present a complete recipe for formulating
forward processes in SGMs, ensuring convergence to the
desired target distribution. Our approach reveals that several existing SGMs can be seen as specific manifestations
of our framework. Building upon this method, we introduce
Phase Space Langevin Diffusion (PSLD), which relies on
score-based modeling within an augmented space enriched
by auxiliary variables akin to physical phase space. Empirical results exhibit the superior sample quality and improved
speed-quality trade-off of PSLD compared to various competing approaches on established image synthesis benchmarks.
Remarkably, PSLD achieves sample quality akin to state-ofthe-art SGMs (FID: 2.10 for unconditional CIFAR-10 generation). Lastly, we demonstrate the applicability of PSLD in
conditional synthesis using pre-trained score networks, offering an appealing alternative as an SGM backbone for future
advancements. Code and model checkpoints can be accessed
at https://github.com/mandt-lab/PSLD.

1. Introduction
Score-based Generative Models [15, 50, 53, 56] are a
class of explicit-likelihood based generative models that
have recently demonstrated impressive performance on
various synthesis benchmarks, such as image generation
[7, 16, 39, 42, 43], video synthesis [17, 62] and 3D shape
generation [32, 68]. SGMs employ a forward stochastic
process to add noise to data incrementally, transforming the
data-generating distribution to a tractable prior distribution
that enables sampling. Subsequently, a learnable reverse
process transforms the prior distribution back to the data
distribution using a parametric estimator of the gradient field

Figure 1: Unconditional PSLD generated samples. AFHQv2
128 x 128 (Top), CelebA-64 (Bottom Left, FID=2.01) and
CIFAR-10 (Bottom Right, FID=2.10)

of the log probability density of the data (a.k.a score).
However, a principled framework for extending the current design space of diffusion processes is still missing. Although some studies have proposed augmenting the forward
diffusion process with auxiliary variables [9] to improve
sample quality, their design is primarily motivated by physical intuition and non-obvious how to generalize. Therefore,
a principled framework is required to explore the space of
possible diffusion processes better.
In this work, we propose a complete recipe for the design
of diffusion processes, motivated by the design of stochastic gradient MCMC samplers [5, 33, 61]. Our recipe leads
to a flexible parameterization of the forward diffusion process without requiring physical intuition. Moreover, under
the proposed parameterization, the forward process is guaranteed to converge to a prior distribution of interest. We
show that several existing SGMs can be cast under our diffusion process parameterization. Furthermore, using our
proposed recipe, we introduce PSLD, a novel SGM which
performs diffusion in the joint space of data and auxiliary
variables. We demonstrate that PSLD generalizes Critically
Damped Langevin Diffusion (CLD) [9] and outperforms
existing baselines on several empirical settings on standard
image synthesis benchmarks such as CIFAR-10 [25] and
CelebA-64 [30]. More specifically, we make the following

4261

