This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViLLA: Fine-Grained Vision-Language Representation Learning from
Real-World Data
Maya Varma

Jean-Benoit Delbrouck Sarah Hooper Akshay Chaudhari
Stanford University

Curtis Langlotz

{mvarma2, jbdel, smhooper, akshaysc, langlotz}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP and
ALIGN, are generally trained on datasets consisting of
image-caption pairs obtained from the web. However,
real-world multimodal datasets, such as healthcare data,
are significantly more complex: each image (e.g. X-ray)
is often paired with text (e.g. physician report) that describes many distinct attributes occurring in fine-grained
regions of the image. We refer to these samples as exhibiting high pairwise complexity, since each image-text
pair can be decomposed into a large number of regionattribute pairings. The extent to which VLMs can capture
fine-grained relationships between image regions and textual attributes when trained on such data has not been previously evaluated. The first key contribution of this work
is to demonstrate through systematic evaluations that as
the pairwise complexity of the training dataset increases,
standard VLMs struggle to learn region-attribute relationships, exhibiting performance degradations of up to 37%
on retrieval tasks. In order to address this issue, we introduce ViLLA as our second key contribution. ViLLA, which
is trained to capture fine-grained region-attribute relationships from complex datasets, involves two components: (a)
a lightweight, self-supervised mapping model to decompose
image-text samples into region-attribute pairs, and (b) a
contrastive VLM to learn representations from generated
region-attribute pairs. We demonstrate with experiments
across four domains (synthetic, product, medical, and natural images) that ViLLA outperforms comparable VLMs on
fine-grained reasoning tasks, such as zero-shot object detection (up to 3.6 AP50 points on COCO and 0.6 mAP points
on LVIS) and retrieval (up to 14.2 R-Precision points)1 .

1. Introduction
Vision-language models (VLMs), which jointly learn relationships between images and text, have been shown in
1 Code: https://github.com/StanfordMIMI/villa

recent years to be highly effective on a variety of classification, retrieval, and robustness tasks [28, 17, 27, 8, 42, 9].
VLMs are trained on large-scale datasets consisting of
image-text pairs, where the text takes the form of a concise
caption (e.g. alt-text) describing salient attributes in the image [28, 33, 34]. During training, VLMs generally model
the relationship between a paired image-text sample as a
one-to-one mapping: a single embedding of the entire image is contrastively aligned with a single embedding of the
entire caption [28, 42, 17].
However, real-world multimodal datasets, such as those
obtained from healthcare settings or product databases, consist of samples that are significantly more complex than
standard image-caption pairs [19, 3, 1, 25]. In particular,
real-world image-text samples include text that describes
many distinct attributes occurring in fine-grained regions of
the paired image. For example, medical images (e.g. Xrays) are accompanied by detailed text reports describing a
variety of attributes (e.g. characteristics of organs, signs of
disease) that map to specific regions of the image [19, 3, 4].
We refer to these samples as exhibiting high pairwise complexity, since each image-text pair can be decomposed into a
large number of fine-grained region-attribute pairings. Figure 1 provides a visual depiction of pairwise complexity.
Models with knowledge of region-attribute relationships
have been shown to exhibit numerous advantages, ranging from improved performance on fine-grained tasks (such
as object detection) to improved subgroup robustness [43,
32, 29]. However, the extent to which standard one-toone VLMs can learn these fine-grained relationships when
trained on complex, real-world datasets is not currently well
understood2 . Prior work [43] has observed that standard
one-to-one VLMs often struggle to learn region-attribute relationships3 , yet the specific effects of training dataset complexity on the ability of a VLM to capture these relationships have not been previously evaluated.
2 As a motivating example, a VLM trained on X-rays should learn to
link the region of the heart to the attribute “enlarged heart” in the report.
3 When CLIP is applied to a region-level object detection task, performance is 40% lower than simply applying CLIP at the image level [43].

22225

