This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NAPA-VQ: Neighborhood Aware Prototype Augmentation with Vector
Quantization for Continual Learning
Tamasha Malepathirana
Damith Senanayake
Saman Halgamuge
Dept. of Mechanical Engineering
The University of Melbourne
{tamasha.malepathirana, damith.senanayake, saman.halgamuge}@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Catastrophic forgetting; the loss of old knowledge upon
acquiring new knowledge, is a pitfall faced by deep neural networks in real-world applications. Many prevailing solutions to this problem rely on storing exemplars
(previously encountered data), which may not be feasible in applications with memory limitations or privacy
constraints. Therefore, the recent focus has been on
Non-Exemplar based Class Incremental Learning (NECIL)
where a model incrementally learns about new classes without using any past exemplars. However, due to the lack
of old data, NECIL methods struggle to discriminate between old and new classes causing their feature representations to overlap. We propose NAPA-VQ: Neighborhood
Aware Prototype Augmentation with Vector Quantization,
a framework that reduces this class overlap in NECIL. We
draw inspiration from Neural Gas to learn the topological
relationships in the feature space, identifying the neighboring classes that are most likely to get confused with each
other. This neighborhood information is utilized to enforce
strong separation between the neighboring classes as well
as to generate old class representative prototypes that can
better aid in obtaining a discriminative decision boundary
between old and new classes. Our comprehensive experiments on CIFAR-100, TinyImageNet, and ImageNet-Subset
demonstrate that NAPA-VQ outperforms the State-of-theart NECIL methods by an average improvement of 5%,
2%, and 4% in accuracy and 10%, 3%, and 9% in forgetting respectively. Our code can be found in https:
//github.com/TamashaM/NAPA-VQ.git.

1. Introduction
The achievements of deep neural networks over the years
have grown significantly, and their efficiency and applicability have been demonstrated by numerous state-of-the-art

works [29, 23, 35, 20]. However, a major requirement for
the optimal operation of gradient-based optimization – the
ubiquitous learning paradigm – is the data samples being independently and identically distributed (IID) [21]. This assumption may not hold in real data owing to various factors
such as the addition of new classes of data, the removal of
old data due to memory or availability constraints, and the
changes in the data-generating phenomena (concept drift).
As a result, neural networks may experience catastrophic
forgetting where the network forgets the previously learned
knowledge upon acquiring new knowledge [25].
“Continual Learning” is a field of research pursuing
mechanisms to mitigate this forgetting [13]. In this
manuscript, we focus on one paradigm of continual learning, named Class Incremental Learning (CIL) [38]. In CIL,
a neural network is trained over a series of tasks and at
each task, the network learns a new set of classes. At any
given time, the network should classify between all learned
classes thus far. Among the techniques proposed for CIL,
rehearsal-based methods have demonstrated promising results in mitigating forgetting by storing exemplars (old samples) and reusing them while learning new tasks [38, 5, 36].
However, such storage is not always possible due to memory limitations and privacy constraints [45]. Therefore, we
focus on Non-Exemplar based CIL (NECIL), a more pragmatic yet challenging scenario, which attempts to preserve
the old knowledge without storing any exemplars [57, 58].
NECIL methods often struggle with overlapping old and
new class representations due to the unavailability of exemplars, resulting in catastrophic forgetting. [57]. While
prototypes of old classes in the deep feature space are a viable alternative to reusing exemplars [57, 56], if not properly generated, the class boundaries refined using such prototypes tend to be muddled, causing confusion between the
old and new classes, and in turn, leading to catastrophic forgetting. To overcome this limitation, we propose NAPAVQ: Neighborhood-Aware Prototype Augmentation with

11674

