This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STEPs: Self-Supervised Key Step Extraction and Localization from Unlabeled
Procedural Videos
Anshul Shah1
1

Benjamin Lundell2
Johns Hopkins University

Harpreet Sawhney2
2

Rama Chellappa1

Microsoft Mixed Reality

{ashah95, rchella4}@jhu.edu {benjamin.lundell,harpreet.sawhney}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We address the problem of extracting key steps from unlabeled procedural videos, motivated by the potential of
Augmented Reality (AR) headsets to revolutionize job training and performance. We decompose the problem into two
steps: representation learning and key steps extraction. We
propose a training objective, Bootstrapped Multi-Cue Contrastive (BMC2) loss to learn discriminative representations for various steps without any labels. Different from
prior works, we develop techniques to train a light-weight
temporal module which uses off-the-shelf features for self
supervision. Our approach can seamlessly leverage information from multiple cues like optical flow, depth or gaze
to learn discriminative features for key-steps, making it
amenable for AR applications. We finally extract key steps
via a tunable algorithm that clusters the representations
and samples. We show significant improvements over prior
works for the task of key step localization and phase classification. Qualitative results demonstrate that the extracted
key steps are meaningful and succinctly represent various
steps of the procedural tasks. Our code can be found at
https://github.com/anshulbshah/STEPs.

1. Introduction
Rapid shifts in technology and business models have led
to a mismatch between the skills needed by employers and
the skills possessed by the labor force. It has been estimated
that this mismatch will reduce manufacturing output by $2.4
trillion over ten years in the US alone [31, 33]. Increased
attention has been placed on effective methods of “reskilling”
workers [2]. Unfortunately, reskilling will not be easy: human expertise in performing a complex task takes years of
training and mastery of domain-specific knowledge [10, 27].
Augmented Reality (AR) headsets can play an important
role in collective reskilling efforts. AR headsets are known to
improve the efficiency of front line workers during training

placing cartridge

opening cartridge lid

opening cartridge lid

placing cartridge

closing cartridge lid

taking cartridge

Figure 1. An illustrative example of automatically generated key
steps using our approach STEPs for the task of changing the cartridge in a printer. Data was captured using a Microsoft HoloLens
2 and extracted using a publicly available repository. Our approach
leads to plausible key steps for sub-tasks of ‘opening cartridge lid’,
‘taking cartridge’, ‘placing cartridge’ and ‘closing cartridge lid‘ and
‘end recording’. Note that the associated labels and arrows are for
visualization purposes only and were not used for training.

and on the job, across industries as diverse as food service,
manufacturing, medicine, and warehousing [1,14,74,76]. AR
plays a strikingly similar role across these diverse use cases:
to assist the user in completing a complex task, the headset
renders a sequence of visual cues on real-world objects.
Our approach focuses on extracting key-steps of a complex task which is the most crucial component needed for
automatic AR content creation. We employ a “learning-fromobservation”-style framework [60], where an instructor is
recorded while performing a complex task. The goal is to
automatically parse the recording into key steps (KSs) that
succinctly represent the complete task. This greatly streamlines the content creation process, as the trainer no longer
has to manually edit the recording to find the key steps.
Consider the task of changing the cartridge in a printer.
Using tools from the public repository [19], we captured
data on a Microsoft HoloLens 2 of an “expert” undertaking
this task. Using multiple cues – hand pose, head pose, eye
gaze and first person video – we automatically generate the
key-steps shown in Figure 1. Using multiple cues when observing experts perform procedural tasks is important when
generating training materials for novices [12, 28, 32].
The key step extraction problem for complex procedural

10375

