This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DOT: A Distillation-Oriented Trainer
Borui Zhao1
1

Quan Cui2

Renjie Song1

MEGVII Technology

2

Jiajun Liang1

Waseda University

zhaoborui.gm@gmail.com, cui-quan@toki.waseda.jp,
song.renjie@foxmail.com, liangjiajun@megvii.com

Abstract
Knowledge distillation transfers knowledge from a large
model to a small one via task and distillation losses. In this
paper, we observe a trade-off between task and distillation
losses, i.e., introducing distillation loss limits the convergence of task loss. We believe that the trade-off results from
the insufﬁcient optimization of distillation loss. The reason
is: The teacher has a lower task loss than the student, and a
lower distillation loss drives the student more similar to the
teacher, then a better-converged task loss could be obtained.
To break the trade-off, we propose the Distillation-Oriented
Trainer (DOT). DOT separately considers gradients of task
and distillation losses, then applies a larger momentum to
distillation loss to accelerate its optimization. We empirically prove that DOT breaks the trade-off, i.e., both losses
are sufﬁciently optimized. Extensive experiments validate
the superiority of DOT. Notably, DOT achieves a +2.59%
accuracy improvement on ImageNet-1k for the ResNet50MobileNetV1 pair. Conclusively, DOT greatly beneﬁts the
student’s optimization properties in terms of loss convergence and model generalization. https://github.com/megviiresearch/mdistiller.

1. Introduction
Knowledge distillation [17, 44, 12, 2, 21, 49, 24] has
been proved to be an effective manner to transfer knowledge from a heavy (teacher) model to a light (student) one
in a wide range of deep learning tasks [40, 14, 35, 7, 4].
Novel learning algorithms have been proposed to achieve
better distillation performance [36, 46, 15, 43]. The working mechanism of knowledge distillation also attracts research attention [33, 28, 20, 30, 42, 39, 41, 45]. Yet, the optimization property of knowledge distillation has not been
widely investigated, which is also an important perspective
to understand KD.
As shown in Figure 1 (left), the typical optimization objective of knowledge distillation is composed of two parts,

a task loss (e.g., the cross-entropy loss) and a distillation
loss (e.g., the KL-Divergence [17]). We mainly study how
the incremental distillation loss inﬂuences the optimization
of task loss. Concretely, for an image classiﬁcation task,
we visualize (1) the task loss landscapes and (2) task and
distillation loss dynamics during the optimization. As Figure 1 (middle) illustrates, we observe that the distillation
loss helps the student converge to ﬂat minima, where the
student tends to generalize better due to the robustness of
ﬂatter minima [25, 22, 8]. However, as illustrated in Figure 1 (right), introducing distillation loss brings about a
trade-off. The task loss is not converged as sufﬁciently as
the cross-entropy baseline, although the student’s logits become similar to the teacher’s.
We suppose that the trade-off is somehow counterintuitive. The reason is presented below: the teacher always
yields a lower task loss than the student due to the larger
model capacity. If the distillation loss is sufﬁciently optimized, the task loss would also be decreased since the student becomes more similar to the better-performing teacher.
We ask: why is there a trade-off and how to break it? We
attempt to answer this question from the following perspective. The task and distillation loss terms are combined with
a simple summation in practical implementations of popular
distillation methods [17, 36, 46, 43, 15]. It could make the
optimization manner degrade to multi-task learning, where
the network attempts to ﬁnd a balance between the two
tasks. As aforementioned, if the distillation loss is sufﬁciently optimized, both losses would be decreased. Thus,
we believe that sufﬁciently optimizing the distillation loss is
the key to breaking the trade-off.
To this end, we present the Distillation-Oriented
Trainer (DOT) which enables the distillation loss to dominate the optimization. It separately considers the gradients
provided by the task and the distillation losses, then adjusts
the optimization orientation by weighing different momentums. A larger momentum is applied to distillation loss,
while a smaller one is to task loss. It ensures the optimization is dominated by gradients of distillation loss since a
larger momentum accumulates larger and more consistent
16189

