This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distribution Shift Matters for Knowledge Distillation
with Webly Collected Images
Jialiang Tang1,2,3 , Shuo Chen4,∗ , Gang Niu4 , Masashi Sugiyama4,5 , Chen Gong1,2,3, *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems for
High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, China
3
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, China
4
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Japan
5
The Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Japan
Abstract
Knowledge distillation aims to learn a lightweight student network from a pre-trained teacher network. In practice, existing knowledge distillation methods are usually
infeasible when the original training data is unavailable
due to some privacy issues and data management considerations. Therefore, data-free knowledge distillation approaches proposed to collect training instances from the Internet. However, most of them have ignored the common
distribution shift between the instances from original training data and webly collected data, affecting the reliability
of the trained student network. To solve this problem, we
propose a novel method dubbed “Knowledge Distillation
between Different Distributions” (KD3 ), which consists of
three components. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst dynamically select
useful training instances from the webly collected data according to the combined predictions of teacher network and
student network. Subsequently, we align both the weighted
features and classiﬁer parameters of the two networks for
knowledge memorization. Meanwhile, we also build a new
contrastive learning block called MixDistribution to generate perturbed data with a new distribution for instance
alignment, so that the student network can further learn
a distribution-invariant representation. Intensive experiments on various benchmark datasets demonstrate that our
proposed KD3 can outperform the state-of-the-art data-free
knowledge distillation approaches.

1. Introduction
In recent years, advanced deep neural networks (DNNs)
have signiﬁcantly succeeded in many computer vision
* Corresponding authors: Chen Gong (chen.gong@njust.edu.cn), Shuo
Chen (shuo.chen.ya@riken.jp).

17470

ﬁelds [19, 21]. However, those excellent DNNs usually
have excess learning parameters, which may incur unaffordable computation and memory burdens for resourcelimited intelligent devices. To address this problem, model
compression algorithms have been developed to constrict
heavy DNNs into portable ones, mainly including the network pruning [28], network quantization [35], and knowledge distillation [23].
Most existing compression algorithms are data-driven
and rely on massive original training data that is usually
inaccessible in the real world. For example, the large-scale
ImageNet [12] requires 138GB of storage and is too heavy
to transfer among devices, yet the ResNet34 [22] trained on
ImageNet only needs 85MB memory and can be shared at
a relatively low cost. Besides, users may be more willing
to share pre-trained models than their personal data, such
as photos and travel records. As a result, existing datadriven algorithms for model compression frequently fail to
deal with large DNNs in practical applications.
To address this issue, data-free model compression methods have received wide attention in recent studies [6, 10,
13, 16]. Among these methods, data-free knowledge distillation has shown encouraging results, which only requires
a pre-trained large network (a.k.a. a teacher network) to
learn a compact network (a.k.a. a student network). Existing data-free knowledge distillation methods train student
network with the guidance of teacher network through the
generated pseudo data [7, 45, 50] or real-world data collected from the Internet [6]. Generally, the performance
of the student networks trained on synthetic data might be
suboptimal due to the ﬂawed or distorted synthetic images.
In comparison, the student networks using real-world data
from the Internet usually achieve better performance, especially on the tasks involving complicated natural images.
Current data-free knowledge distillation methods [6] that

