This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

µSplit: image decomposition for fluorescence microscopy
Ashesh1 , Alexander Krull2 , Moises Di Sante3 , Francesco Silvio Pasqualini3 , Florian Jug1, *
1

Human Technopole, Italy, 2 University of Birmingham, UK, 3 University of Pavia, Italy

Abstract
We present µSplit, a dedicated approach for trained
image decomposition in the context of fluorescence microscopy images. We find that best results using regular
deep architectures are achieved when large image patches
are used during training, making memory consumption the
limiting factor to further improving performance. We therefore introduce lateral contextualization (LC), a novel metaarchitecture that enables the memory efficient incorporation
of large image-context, which we observe is a key ingredient to solving the image decomposition task at hand. We
integrate LC with U-Nets, Hierarchical AEs, and Hierarchical VAEs, for which we formulate a modified ELBO loss.
Additionally, LC enables training deeper hierarchical models than otherwise possible and, interestingly, helps to reduce tiling artefacts that are inherently impossible to avoid
when using tiled VAE predictions. We apply µSplit to five
decomposition tasks, one on a synthetic dataset, four others derived from real microscopy data. Our method consistently achieves best results (average improvements to the
best baseline of 2.25 dB PSNR), while simultaneously requiring considerably less GPU memory. Our code and
datasets can be found at https://github.com/juglab/uSplit.

1. Introduction
Fluorescence microscopy [10] is routinely used to look at
living cells and biological tissues at cellular and sub-cellular
resolution [18]. Components of the imaged cells can be
highlighted using fluorescent labels, allowing biologists to
investigate individual structures of interest. Given the complexity of biological processes, it is typically necessary to
look at multiple structures simultaneously, typically via a
temporal multiplexing scheme [10] that separates them into
different image channels.
Imaging more than 3 or 4 structures in this way is difficult for technical reasons, limiting the rate of scientific
progress in the life sciences. One way to circumvent this
limitation would be to label two cellular components with
the same fluorophore, i.e. image them in the same image
* Corresponding Author, (florian.jug@fht.org).

Figure 1. Splitting of superimposed image channels. The input
image is the sum of two image channels, each channel containing
structures from one given object class. The task of µSplit is to
identify and split the structures superimposed in the given input
image (dashed rectangles).

channel. Hence, a computational method to split apart (decompose) superimposed biological structures acquired in a
single image channel, i.e. without temporal multiplexing,
would have tremendous impact (see Figure 1).
Historically, image decomposition has found applications on natural images [9, 8, 1, 3]. Our approach for image
decomposition, called µSplit, rests on the idea of learning
structural priors for the two unmixed target image channels,
and then using these to guide the decomposition of the superimposed (added) pixel intensities. Such content-aware
priors have previously been used for tasks such as image
restoration [29, 4, 28], denoising [14, 2, 15, 11, 20, 19], and
segmentation [5, 25, 30].
In many of these cases, the achievable performance
heavily depends on the portion of the image a network can
see before having to make a prediction. As we show in this
work, the need for large spatial context, i.e. receptive field
and patch size, is particularly pronounced for image decomposition. Biological structures in microscopy images can
easily extend over distances of several hundred pixels. Accordingly, we observe that results improve with larger training patch sizes and deeper architectures (see Figure 6(a)).
Naturally, this leads to models having a huge GPU memory footprint, which limits their applicability to selected
compute-savvy life-science labs.
The importance of context has previously been utilized
in the field of image segmentation [16, 13]. Leng et al. [16]
devised a method to efficiently use the available context of

21219

