This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Smoothness Similarity Regularization for Few-Shot GAN Adaptation
Vadim Sushko1,2
1
3

Ruyu Wang1

Juergen Gall2,3

2
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
University of Bonn
Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence

vad221@gmail.com

ruyu.wang@de.bosch.com

Few-shot Shells dataset

Abstract
The task of few-shot GAN adaptation aims to adapt a
pre-trained GAN model to a small dataset with very few
training images. While existing methods perform well when
the dataset for pre-training is structurally similar to the target dataset, the approaches suffer from training instabilities or memorization issues when the objects in the two domains have a very different structure. To mitigate this limitation, we propose a new smoothness similarity regularization that transfers the inherently learned smoothness of the
pre-trained GAN to the few-shot target domain even if the
two domains are very different. We evaluate our approach
by adapting an unconditional and a class-conditional GAN
to diverse few-shot target domains. Our proposed method
significantly outperforms prior few-shot GAN adaptation
methods in the challenging case of structurally dissimilar
source-target domains, while performing on par with the
state of the art for similar source-target domains.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have been
shown to be powerful at various image synthesis tasks
[4, 28, 3, 13, 27, 26]. The success of these models is in large
part enabled by the availability of large datasets for training, typically consisting of thousands of images. However,
there are many applications and computer vision tasks such
as one-shot or few-shot learning [1, 33], out-of-distribution
detection [24], or long-tailed recognition tasks [8] where the
number of available training images is very low.
Since training a GAN from scratch on very few samples
does not perform well as shown in Fig. 1, a common strategy is to fine-tune a pre-trained GAN model on the few-shot
dataset, typically employing additional regularization losses
to penalize the degradation of the diversity [23, 37]. This
approach, referred to as few-shot GAN adaptation, performs
well when the target domain is structurally very similar to
the dataset that has been used for pre-training, e.g., photographs vs. sketches of human faces. However, the performance drastically degrades in case of large dissimilarities
between the source and target domain as shown in Fig. 1.

gall@iai.uni-bonn.de

Few-shot GAN training (from scratch)

G
Few-shot GAN adaptation from LSUN-Churches

Gs

Gt
(CDC)

Gt
(ours)

Figure 1. Training a GAN model G on a few-shot dataset (row 1)
from scratch fails due to training instabilities (row 2). We thus aim
to adapt a GAN Gs that has been pre-trained on a large dataset like
LSUN-Church (row 3) to the target few-shot dataset (Gt ). While
fine-tuning [23] does not perform well either if source and target
are dissimilar (row 4), our approach generates diverse and realistic
images (row 5) by transferring the smoothness properties of Gs .

Such dissimilarities are a major bottleneck of using GANs
in other disciplines like medicine, production, or crop science, where there is a lack of large datasets due to privacy,
confidentiality, or simply lack of data. Motivated by this
fact, we extend the protocol for few-shot GAN adaptation
by investigating also pairs of datasets that are very different
like churches and shells as shown in Fig. 1.
To improve few-shot GAN adaptation in the case of
structurally dissimilar pairs, we propose a new GAN adaptation strategy. Firstly, we propose a new smoothness similarity regularization for the generator. Our key observation
is that pre-trained GAN generators, regardless of the exact
structure of objects in the pre-training dataset, learn wellstructured and smooth latent spaces. For example, prior
works demonstrated that various local shifts in the latent
space can lead to interpretable and smooth transitions of

7073

