This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CVRecon: Rethinking 3D Geometric Feature Learning For Neural
Reconstruction
Ziyue Feng1 , Liang Yang2 , Pengsheng Guo3 , and Bing Li1
1

Clemson University

2

City University of New York

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D reconstruction is a fundamental task in
computer vision with wide-ranging applications, including
augmented reality [31, 24], virtual reality, robotics [25, 7],
and autonomous driving[38, 10]. In recent years, learningbased methods [1, 21, 24, 29, 31] have shown promising
results for this task. These methods use a sequence of
posed images to predict a Truncated Signed Distance Field
(TSDF) volume as the 3D reconstruction. They can be
broadly categorized into two groups: volumetric-based and
depth-based.
Existing volumetric-based methods [1, 21, 29, 31] suf-

Carnegie Mellon University

Existing Back-Projected
2D Features

Abstract
Recent advances in neural reconstruction using posed
image sequences have made remarkable progress. However, due to the lack of depth information, existing
volumetric-based techniques simply duplicate 2D image
features of the object surface along the entire camera ray.
We contend this duplication introduces noise in empty and
occluded spaces, posing challenges for producing highquality 3D geometry. Drawing inspiration from traditional multi-view stereo methods, we propose an end-to-end
3D neural reconstruction framework CVRecon, designed
to exploit the rich geometric embedding in the cost volumes to facilitate 3D geometric feature learning. Furthermore, we present Ray-contextual Compensated Cost Volume (RCCV ), a novel 3D geometric feature representation
that encodes view-dependent information with improved integrity and robustness. Through comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate that our approach significantly improves the reconstruction quality in various metrics and recovers clear fine details of the 3D geometries. Our extensive ablation studies provide insights into the development
of effective 3D geometric feature learning schemes. Project
page: https://cvrecon.ziyue.cool

3

We Propose to Directly
Build 3D Features

empty
Obj

3D Feat Frustums
(RCCV)

Occlude
Grid-Sample

Figure 1. Novel 3D geometric feature learning paradigm. Existing volumetric-based neural reconstruction methods simply backproject and duplicate the 2D image features along the entire camera ray, including empty spaces in front of the object and occluded
areas behind the object, which will introduce noise and degrade
the performance. We propose Ray-contextual Compensated Cost
Volume (RCCV ) as a novel 3D geometric feature representation.
Geometries could be inferred from a fusion of the RCCV s.

fer from a critical limitation where the image feature is in
the 2D while the reconstruction target is in 3D. As shown
in Fig. 1, previous works simply duplicate the 2D features
along the entire camera ray to the 3D space. When 2D
image features representing object surfaces are placed in
empty or occluded spaces without differentiation, it can
complicate feature fusion and TSDF prediction in later
stages, introduce noise and limit the model’s ability to predict fine geometries. Therefore, it is more logical to directly
build 3D feature representations that encode the geometry
clue instead of simply filling it with 2D feature copies.
The cost volume, widely used in the depth prediction
task, is a great choice for 3D geometric feature representation. It is composed of multi-view feature matching confidences across a set of pre-defined depth planes. A higher
feature matching confidence at a given position indicates a
greater likelihood of that position being an object surface.
Compared to the simply duplicated 2D image features, cost
volume explicitly encodes the depth probability distribution
along the ray. However, existing depth-based reconstruction
methods [3, 16, 18, 24, 33, 40] predict 2D depth maps from
the 3D cost volume and then reconstruct the 3D structure

17750

