This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NaviNeRF: NeRF-based 3D Representation Disentanglement
by Latent Semantic Navigation
Baao Xie1,2,3 Bohan Li2,4 Zequn Zhang2,5 Junting Dong6 Xin Jin2,3,* Jingyu Yang1 Wenjun Zeng2,3
1
Tianjin University 2 Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo 3 Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 Northwest Normal University 6 Zhejiang University

Latent
Semantic
Navigation

- Smile +

NaviNeRF
3D
Reconstruction

- 3D Views +

...

Figure 1. Generated 3D objects by NaviNeRF – a model aims to achieve fine-grained 3D disentanglement by bridging 3D reconstruction and
latent semantic manipulation. The top row presents the results of shifting along the learned semantic direction that represents continuous
changes in a man’s mouth, visually looks like a “smile” expression. The bottom row showcases the results of multi-view generation, which
demonstrates that the attribute manipulation could still remain consistent across different views.

Abstract
3D representation disentanglement aims to identify, decompose, and manipulate the underlying explanatory factors of 3D data, which helps AI fundamentally understand
our 3D world. This task is currently under-explored and
poses great challenges: (i) the 3D representations are complex and in general contains much more information than
2D image; (ii) many 3D representations are not well suited
for gradient-based optimization, let alone disentanglement.
To address these challenges, we use NeRF as a differentiable 3D representation, and introduce a self-supervised
Navigation to identify interpretable semantic directions in
the latent space. To our best knowledge, this novel method,
dubbed NaviNeRF, is the first work to achieve fine-grained
3D disentanglement without any priors or supervisions.
Specifically, NaviNeRF is built upon the generative NeRF
pipeline, and equipped with an Outer Navigation Branch
and an Inner Refinement Branch. They are complementary —— the outer navigation is to identify global-view
semantic directions, and the inner refinement dedicates to
fine-grained attributes. A synergistic loss is further devised

to coordinate two branches. Extensive experiments demonstrate that NaviNeRF has a superior fine-grained 3D disentanglement ability than the previous 3D-aware models. Its
performance is also comparable to editing-oriented models
relying on semantic or geometry priors.*

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction aims to create a virtual representation of an object or scene based on point cloud, voxel, 3D
mesh, and etc. Despite significant progress of explicit reconstruction technologies such as Structure from Motion
(SfM) [1], Multi-View Stereo (MVS) [2] and Structured
Light (SL) [3], it remains a critical problem that the reconstructed scenes typically lack interpretability and controllability. Thus, it is important to study the 3D representation
disentanglement, in which we can identify, decompose, and
manipulate the underlying explanatory factors hidden in the
observed 3D data.
However, 3D representation disentanglement is currently
* Denotes the corresponding author. Code is available at this link.

17992

