This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SUMMIT: Source-Free Adaptation of Uni-Modal Models to Multi-Modal Targets
Cody Simons1 Dripta S. Raychaudhuri1,2,∗ Sk Miraj Ahmed1 Suya You3
Konstantinos Karydis1 Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1
1
University of California, Riverside 2 AWS AI Labs 3 DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory
{csimo005@,drayc001@,sahme047@,kkarydis@ece.,amitrc@ece.}ucr.edu

Abstract
Scene understanding using multi-modal data is necessary in many applications, e.g., autonomous navigation. To
achieve this in a variety of situations, existing models must be
able to adapt to shifting data distributions without arduous
data annotation. Current approaches assume that the source
data is available during adaptation and that the source consists of paired multi-modal data. Both these assumptions
may be problematic for many applications. Source data may
not be available due to privacy, security, or economic concerns. Assuming the existence of paired multi-modal data
for training also entails significant data collection costs and
fails to take advantage of widely available freely distributed
pre-trained uni-modal models. In this work, we relax both
of these assumptions by addressing the problem of adapting
a set of models trained independently on uni-modal data to
a target domain consisting of unlabeled multi-modal data,
without having access to the original source dataset. Our
proposed approach solves this problem through a switching
framework which automatically chooses between two complementary methods of cross-modal pseudo-label fusion –
agreement filtering and entropy weighting – based on the estimated domain gap. We demonstrate our work on the semantic segmentation problem. Experiments across seven challenging adaptation scenarios verify the efficacy of our approach, achieving results comparable to, and in some cases
outperforming, methods which assume access to source data.
Our method achieves an improvement in mIoU of up to 12%
over competing baselines. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/csimo005/SUMMIT.

1. Introduction
There has been a recent surge of interest in autonomous
vehicles which typically rely on a wide variety of sensors.
This has fueled the need for machine learning models ca* Currently at AWS AI Labs. Work done while the author was at UCR.

suya.you.civ@army.mil

pable of processing multiple sensing modalities, commonly
referred to as multi-modal models. One problem of particular interest is 3D semantic segmentation, which has received
a lot of interest [12, 24, 36] driven by the introduction of new
multi-modal datasets [5, 11, 4]. Many 3D semantic segmentation methods (e.g., [12, 24, 36]) fuse data across different
sensing modalities, e.g., RGB images and point clouds to obtain and employ colored pointclouds [31], to increase performance and robustness. As with most learning problems, the
performance of 3D semantic segmentation degrades as the
input data distribution diverges from the training set distribution [16], referred to as domain shift. This is particularly true
for autonomous navigation which can experience domain
shifts because of lighting and weather changes throughout
the day, as well as geographic changes when traveling over
large distances. Many works have sought to address this domain shift in the Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA)
setting [14, 21, 8]. Recently, the relationship between different modalities has been leveraged to aid in the adaptation
process via cross-modal UDA (xMUDA) [16].
While xMUDA [16] has made significant improvements
over uni-modal UDA methods, it assumes that the source
dataset used for training (i) consists of paired multi-modal
data, and (ii) is available during adaptation to the target
domain.1 However, these conditions may be hard to satisfy
in real-world scenarios:
• The first assumption is problematic because it requires
collection and annotation of large volumes of paired multimodal data for every sensor configuration (e.g., RGB and
depth, RGB and IR, etc), a very time-consuming operation.
Also, it fails to take advantage of the large volumes of unimodal data and pre-trained models that are easily accessible.
• The second assumption is problematic because sharing the
source data for adaptation may be impossible due to privacy,
security and commercial reasons. Additionally, as datasets
have grown, their transfer and storage have begun to present
non-trivial engineering challenges and financial costs.
1 In this work, modality refers to a specific type of input data, such as
RGB images or point clouds, while domain refers to the underlying data
distribution, such as cities in different continents.

1239

