This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ordered Atomic Activity for Fine-grained Interactive Traffic Scenario
Understanding

1

Nakul Agarwal1
Yi-Ting Chen2
2
Honda Research Institute USA
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
nakul agarwal@honda-ri.com

ychen@cs.nycu.edu.tw

Abstract
We introduce a novel representation called Ordered
Atomic Activity for interactive scenario understanding. The
representation decomposes each scenario into a set of ordered atomic activities, where each activity consists of an
action and the corresponding actors involved and the order
denotes the temporal development of the scenario. This design also helps in identifying important interactive relationships, such as yielding. The action is a high-level semantic motion pattern that is grounded in the surrounding road
topology, which we decompose into zones and corners with
unique IDs. For example, a group of pedestrians crossing
in front is denoted as C1 → C4: P+, as depicted in Figure 1. We collect a new large-scale dataset called OATS1
(Ordered Atomic Activities in interactive Traffic Scenarios),
comprising 1026 video clips (∼ 20s) captured at intersections in San Francisco Bay Area. Each clip is labeled with
the proposed language, resulting in 59 activity categories
and 6512 annotated activity instances. We propose three
fine-grained scenario understanding tasks, i.e., multilabel
atomic activity recognition, activity order prediction, and
interactive scenario retrieval. We also propose a Graph
Convolutional Network based framework that models both
appearance and motion of traffic participants to tackle the
above tasks, that performs favorably against state-of-theart methods. However, we find that the methods cannot
achieve satisfactory performance, indicating rising opportunities for the community to develop new algorithms for
these tasks towards better interactive scenario understanding.

1. Introduction
Intelligent transportation systems (ITS) have made significant progress in addressing traffic fatalities, with advancements in perception [20, 55, 70, 26, 19], prediction [90, 48, 16], hazard identification [54, 71, 39, 31], and
1 https://usa.honda-ri.com/oats

Ordered
Atomic
Activity
QUERY
ACTIVITY
MATCHING

DATABASE

TOP K
TOP K

Figure 1. Ordered Atomic Activity. Instead of using natural language to describe a scenario which is verbose and timeconsuming, Ordered Atomic Activity decomposes each interactive
scenario into a set of ordered atomic activities, where each activity consists of an action and the corresponding actors involved
and the order represents the temporal development of the scenario.
The activity of ”a group of pedestrians crossing in front” is represented as C1 → C4: P+, where C1 and C4 are the two corners, →
denotes the moving direction and the actors P+ (a group of pedestrians) perform the action. We denote the temporal development
in a scenario by tagging the order of activities based on their occurrence. Ordered Atomic Activity also enables efficient scenario
retrieval for applications such as scenario-based assessment.

planning [5, 1]. To deploy ITS at scale, extensive research
has been conducted on scenario-based simulation assessment [15, 5, 85, 1] to validate ITS in challenging scenarios
and identify the causes of failure. Effective scenario understanding and retrieval of real-world data, therefore, can enhance scenario-based assessment [65, 21] and help improve
ITS deployment.
In this work, we focus on intersection scenarios, which
involve the highest number of interactions among traffic participants and account for approximately 40% of all
crashes [53]. We specifically examine scenarios where traffic participants are crossing at the intersections, rather than

8624

