This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoMIM: Towards Better 3D Knowledge Transfer via Masked Image Modeling
for Multi-view 3D Understanding
Jihao Liu1,2

Tai Wang1,3

Boxiao Liu2 Qihang Zhang1 Yu Liu2
1
CUHK MMLab 2 SenseTime Research
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 CPII under InnoHK

Abstract
Multi-view camera-based 3D detection is a challenging
problem in computer vision. Recent works leverage a pretrained LiDAR detection model to transfer knowledge to a
camera-based student network. However, we argue that there
is a major domain gap between the LiDAR BEV features and
the camera-based BEV features, as they have different characteristics and are derived from different sources. In this
paper, we propose Geometry Enhanced Masked Image Modeling (GeoMIM) to transfer the knowledge of the LiDAR
model in a pretrain-finetune paradigm for improving the
multi-view camera-based 3D detection. GeoMIM is a multicamera vision transformer with Cross-View Attention (CVA)
blocks that uses LiDAR BEV features encoded by the pretrained BEV model as learning targets. During pretraining,
GeoMIM’s decoder has a semantic branch completing dense
perspective-view features and the other geometry branch reconstructing dense perspective-view depth maps. The depth
branch is designed to be camera-aware by inputting the
camera’s parameters for better transfer capability. Extensive results demonstrate that GeoMIM outperforms existing
methods on nuScenes benchmark, achieving state-of-the-art
performance for camera-based 3D object detection and 3D
segmentation.

1. Introduction
Multi-view camera-based 3D detection is an emerging
critical problem in computer vision [20, 46, 47, 19, 28, 29,
36, 26, 31, 32, 40, 41]. To improve the detection performance, recent works [9, 27, 21] often choose to use a pretrained LiDAR model as the teacher and transfer its knowledge to a camera-based student network. Various techniques,
such as LIGA-Stereo [13], CMKD [17], and BEVDistill [8],
have been proposed to leverage the rich geometry information of the LiDAR model’s BEV (bird’s eye view) features.
Utilizing a pretrained LiDAR model to provide auxiliary
supervision has become a widely adopted design that can
Corresponding author.

Hongsheng Li1,3,4

Pretrain

Supervision

Finetune

Finetune +
LiDAR BEV

SL [33]
SSL [30]
GeoMIM

Classes
RGB Pixels
BEV Feature

40.6
44.3
47.2

41.7
43.9
45.4

Table 1: The effects of LiDAR BEV feature distillation
on ImageNet-pretrained (SL), self-supervised (SSL), and
our GeoMIM pretraining-finetuning settings for BEVDet
in nuScenes 3D detection. Naively distilling LiDAR BEV
features in finetuning introduces domain gaps and harms the
performance when the pretrianed model is powerful enough.
enhance the performance of camera-based models. However, we contend that this design is not optimal due to a
significant domain gap between the BEV features of the
LiDAR model and those of the camera-based model. This
domain gap arises from the 3D and sparse characteristics
of LiDAR point clouds compared to the dense 2D images
captured by the camera. Additionally, the LiDAR model’s
BEV features are grounded in ground truth depth, while
those of the camera-based model are typically inferred from
2D images, a problem that is often ill-posed. We empirically
demonstrate their domain gap with a pilot study as shown
in Tab. 1. We find that utilizing a LiDAR teacher to provide auxiliary supervision can indeed improve an ImageNetpretrained [33] camera-based model, but is unable to improve a stronger camera-based model initialized by recent
powerful self-supervised pretraining. In other words, directly utilizing the pretrained LiDAR model to distill the
final camera-based model might not be an optimal design
and does not necessarily lead to performance gain.
To better take advantage of the LiDAR model, in this
paper, we propose Geometry Enhanced Masked Image Modeling (GeoMIM) to transfer the knowledge of the LiDAR
model in a pretrain-finetune paradigm for improving the
multi-view camera-based 3D detection. It is built upon
a multi-camera vision transformer with Cross-View Attention (CVA) blocks and enables perspective-view (PV) representation pretraining via BEV feature reconstruction from
masked images. Specifically, during pretraining, we parti-

17839

