This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AerialVLN
Shubo Liu1†

: Vision-and-Language Navigation for UAVs

Hongsheng Zhang1†

Yuankai Qi2
Peng Wang1 *
Qi Wu2∗
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
University of Adelaide

Yanning Zhang1

{shubo.liu, hongsheng.zhang}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, qykshr@gmail.com,
{peng.wang, ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Route Overview

Start Point

Landmark 1

Landmark 2

Landmark 3

Landmark 4

End Point

Instruction: Take off, ﬂy through the tower of cable bridge and down to the end of the road. Turn left, ﬂy over the
ﬁve-ﬂoor building with a yellow shop sign and down to the intersection on the left. Head to the park and turn right,
ﬂy along the edge of the park. March forward, at the intersection turn right, and ﬁnally land in front of the building
with a red billboard on its rooftop.
Figure 1: An intelligent agent should be able to follow given natural language instructions and navigate to the destination
in an unseen environment with visual perceptions along the way. The green line shows the agent’s ground truth trajectory,
and the chequered ﬂag represents the end of it.

Abstract
Recently emerged Vision-and-Language Navigation
(VLN) tasks have drawn signiﬁcant attention in both computer vision and natural language processing communities. Existing VLN tasks are built for agents that navigate
on the ground, either indoors or outdoors. However,
many tasks require intelligent agents to carry out in the
sky, such as UAV-based goods delivery, trafﬁc/security
† These authors contribute equally to this work

∗ Corresponding Author

15384

patrol, and scenery tour, to name a few. Navigating
in the sky is more complicated than on the ground because agents need to consider the ﬂying height and
more complex spatial relationship reasoning. To ﬁll
this gap and facilitate research in this ﬁeld, we propose a new task named AerialVLN, which is UAV-based
and towards outdoor environments. We develop a 3D
simulator rendered by near-realistic pictures of 25 citylevel scenarios. Our simulator supports continuous navigation, environment extension and conﬁguration. We
also proposed an extended baseline model based on
the widely-used cross-modal-alignment (CMA) naviga-

