This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BlendFace: Re-designing Identity Encoders for Face-Swapping
Kaede Shiohara1 * Xingchao Yang2 Takafumi Taketomi2
1
2
The University of Tokyo
CyberAgent AI Lab
shiohara@cvm.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

{you koutyo,taketomi takafumi}@cyberagent.co.jp

Abstract
The great advancements of generative adversarial networks and face recognition models in computer vision have
made it possible to swap identities on images from single sources. Although a lot of studies seems to have
proposed almost satisfactory solutions, we notice previous methods still suffer from an identity-attribute entanglement that causes undesired attributes swapping because
widely used identity encoders, e.g., ArcFace, have some
crucial attribute biases owing to their pretraining on face
recognition tasks. To address this issue, we design BlendFace, a novel identity encoder for face-swapping. The
key idea behind BlendFace is training face recognition
models on blended images whose attributes are replaced
with those of another mitigates inter-personal biases such
as hairsyles. BlendFace feeds disentangled identity features into generators and guides generators properly as an
identity loss function. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that BlendFace improves the identity-attribute disentanglement in face-swapping models, maintaining a comparable
quantitative performance to previous methods. The code
and models are available at https://github.com/
mapooon/BlendFace.

1. Introduction
Face-swapping aims to replace target identities with
source identities in images while preserving the target attributes, e.g., facial expression, hair, pose, and background.
This task is receiving considerable attention because of its
potential applications in various fields, such as films and
metaverses. Recent advances in generative adversarial networks (GANs) [7, 25, 34, 36, 51, 58, 89] have enabled the
photo-realistic image generation in various conditions, e.g.,
attribute [29], identity [9], and expression [83], as well as
unconditional image generation. Moreover, the advancement in face recognition models provides powerful identity encoders for face-swapping, which boosts the trans* Work done during an internship at CyberAgent AI Lab

Source

Target

ArcFace

BlendFace

Figure 1: Examples of attribute leakages. The direct
use of face recognition models, i.e., ArcFace [17] as an
identity guidance causes attribute leakages, especially on
head shapes and hairstyles due to attribute biases inherent
in the face recognition models whereas our identity encoder
BlendFace address these problems. Best viewed in zoom.
ferability of identities from source inputs to generated images and leads to successful one-shot face-swapping models [9, 14, 22, 45, 50, 72, 74–76, 90] with reasonable quality.
However, despite these impressive efforts, a critical issue still remains. Previous state-of-the-art methods suffer from identity-attribute entanglements because of biased
guidance from face recognition models used as identity encoders. Fig. 1 presents the failure cases of a traditional face
recognition model ArcFace [17]. As shown in the figure,
ArcFace-based face-swapping models tend to swap undesired attributes, e.g., hairstyles and head shapes. This is
because images of the same identity have strong correlations for some attributes; therefore, face recognition models
accidentally learn to recognize the attributes as identities,
which causes misguidances in training face-swapping models. Though certain studies in the field of face recognition
propose effective approaches to mitigate biases between
individuals, they cannot be solutions for biases in faceswapping models as they do not consider intra-personal biases.
In this paper, we propose BlendFace, a novel identity encoder that provides well-disentangled identity features for

7634

