This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GAIT: Generating Aesthetic Indoor Tours with Deep Reinforcement Learning
Desai Xie1
Ping Hu1
Xin Sun2
Sören Pirk2
Jianming Zhang2
Radomír Měch2
Arie E. Kaufman1
1
2
Stony Brook University
Adobe Research

Abstract
Placing and orienting a camera to compose aesthetically
meaningful shots of a scene is not only a key objective in
real-world photography and cinematography but also for
virtual content creation. The framing of a camera often significantly contributes to the story telling in movies, games,
and mixed reality applications. Generating single camera
poses or even contiguous trajectories either requires a significant amount of manual labor or requires solving highdimensional optimization problems, which can be computationally demanding and error-prone. In this paper, we introduce GAIT, a framework for training a Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) agent, that learns to automatically control
a camera to generate a sequence of aesthetically meaningful views for synthetic 3D indoor scenes. To generate sequences of frames with high aesthetic value, GAIT relies on
a neural aesthetics estimator, which is trained on a crowedsourced dataset. Additionally, we introduce regularization
techniques for diversity and smoothness to generate visually interesting trajectories for a 3D environment, and to
constrain agent acceleration in the reward function to generate a smooth sequence of camera frames. We validated
our method by comparing it to baseline algorithms, based
on a perceptual user study, and through ablation studies.
Code and visual results are available on the project website: https://desaixie.github.io/gait-rl

1. Introduction
Composing a shot by framing a scene with a camera
plays an integral part in photography and cinematography.
A carefully composed frame does not only provide the information of a scene, but also serves to define the visual
style, to instill a desired emotion in the viewer, and to carry
forward the story the artist wants to convey [39]. Photographers and movie directors commonly spend a significant
amount of time to perfect the camera framing, which – consequently – often leads to extensive cost footprints. While
framing scenes in virtual setups, such as games or mixed
reality applications, is arguably less involved, defining aes-

Figure 1: Our novel DRL agent, GAIT, automatically generates camera poses so as to obtain aesthetic views of 3D
indoor scenes. Left: Views of three camera poses from a
generated sequence. Right: the 3D indoor environment with
three highlighted camera poses. Red, yellow, orange corresponds to the three frames on the left respectively, where
the red dot is the initial pose. GAIT maintains high aesthetic
views throughout the sequence, while satisfying the initial
pose, diversity, smoothness, and boundary constraints.
thetically valuable camera poses and trajectories still requires a considerable amount of manual work. An artist has
to position key frames in space, define the orientation of the
camera, and specify the temporal profile for the interpolation between keyframes. While this provides a high degree
of control, for many applications, it would be desirable to
frame a scene automatically by computing camera poses.
Existing methods for automatically computing single
camera poses or camera trajectories either rely on handcrafted methods with heuristics, which commonly do not
generalize [40], are limited to specific applications, such as
a trip between two cities [19], or specifically focus on moving targets [36]. Recently, it has been recognized that neural
aesthetics estimators can serve as more generic solution for
generating camera poses for the purpose of obtaining aesthetically meaningful camera frames [32] – a 2D image is
mapped to a score that quantifies the aesthetics. An aesthetics estimator can be used to compare any two images with
different contents or styles, which makes them applicable
for finding views in lower dimensional spaces such as im-

7409

