This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scene Graph Contrastive Learning for Embodied Navigation
Kunal Pratap Singh

Jordi Salvador
Luca Weihs
Allen Institute for AI

Aniruddha Kembhavi

{kunals, jordis, lucaw, anik}@allenai.org
t=0

t=1

t=2

Sees
On
Contains

t=2

Ep1

Embedding
Space

Kitchen
Counter

g0

g0

Floor

Coffee Maker
Sink

b0

b0

Agent

t=1

t=0

t=2

Garbage Can

Soap Bottle

Ep2

Figure 1: Scene Graph Contrastive (SGC) Learning. We propose to use scene graphs as an auxiliary supervisory signal for
embodied agents. We iteratively build a scene graph based on the agent’s observations. The agent, the current room, and the
objects are represented as nodes in the graph, as shown in the magnified t = 2 window. Edges of the graph encode various
relationships like Sees, On and Contains. We optimize the agent belief to be closer to the graph representation at that time
step. Ep1 and Ep2 denote two different episode rollouts. g0 and b0 denote the belief and the graph representation at the t=0.

Abstract
Training effective embodied AI agents often involves expert imitation, specialized components such as maps, or
leveraging additional sensors for depth and localization.
Another approach is to use neural architectures alongside
self-supervised objectives which encourage better representation learning. However, in practice, there are few guarantees that these self-supervised objectives encode taskrelevant information. We propose the Scene Graph Contrastive (SGC) loss, which uses scene graphs as trainingonly supervisory signals. The SGC loss does away with
explicit graph decoding and instead uses contrastive learning to align an agent’s representation with a rich graphical encoding of its environment. The SGC loss is simple to
implement and encourages representations that encode objects’ semantics, relationships, and history. By using the
SGC loss, we attain gains on three embodied tasks: Object Navigation, Multi-Object Navigation, and Arm Point
Navigation. Finally, we present studies and analyses which
demonstrate the ability of our trained representation to encode semantic cues about the environment.

1. Introduction.
Researchers have pursued designing embodied agents
with general neural architectures and training them via endto-end reinforcement learning (RL) to flexibly complete

a range of complex tasks. In practice, however, training
agents to perform long horizon tasks using only terminal rewards has been ineffective and inefficient [37], particularly
in complex visual environments with high-dimensional sensor inputs and large action spaces. This has led to the use
of several common “tricks” to improve training, e.g. manually engineered shaped rewards, use of off-the-shelf vision
models to pre-process images, imitation learning with expert trajectories, and the use of special purpose mapping
architectures [9, 10, 69, 37, 22, 56, 40].
Looking to reduce the need for such “tricks”, one
promising line of work has looked into training agents
with RL and auxiliary losses to encourage the production of powerful and useful environment representations.
These include self-supervised losses like forward prediction [31], contrastive predictive coding [32], and inverse
dynamics [55], that are task and environment independent.
The cost of this generality is that there are no guarantees
that the resulting representations will encode task-relevant
features like the semantic grounding of objects, which is
often key to agent success. Moreover, in practice, these
losses tend to work well in video game and gridworld environments but are not effective in more complex visual
worlds. On the other hand, supervised auxiliary losses such
as disturbance avoidance [53], depth generation [52] are frequently designed to help with specific tasks but are not generally useful for new tasks.
10884

