This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdaMV-MoE: Adaptive Multi-Task Vision Mixture-of-Experts
Tianlong Chen1∗† , Xuxi Chen1∗ , Xianzhi Du2† , Abdullah Rashwan3 , Fan Yang3
Huizhong Chen3 , Zhangyang Wang1 , Yeqing Li3
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Apple, 3 Google
{tianlong.chen, xxchen, atlaswang}@utexas.edu, xianzhi@apple.com, {arashwan, fyangf, huizhongc, yeqing}@google.com

80

Sparsely activated Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) is becoming a promising paradigm for multi-task learning (MTL).
Instead of compressing multiple tasks’ knowledge into a single model, MoE separates the parameter space and only
utilizes the relevant model pieces given task type and its
input, which provides stabilized MTL training and ultraefficient inference. However, current MoE approaches
adopt a fixed network capacity (e.g., two experts in usual)
for all tasks. It potentially results in the over-fitting of
simple tasks or the under-fitting of challenging scenarios, especially when tasks are significantly distinctive in
their complexity. In this paper, we propose an adaptive
MoE framework for multi-task vision recognition, dubbed
AdaMV-MoE. Based on the training dynamics, it automatically determines the number of activated experts for
each task, avoiding the laborious manual tuning of optimal model size. To validate our proposal, we benchmark
it on ImageNet classification and COCO object detection
& instance segmentation which are notoriously difficult to
learn in concert, due to their discrepancy. Extensive experiments across a variety of vision transformers demonstrate a superior performance of AdaMV-MoE, compared
to MTL with a shared backbone and the recent state-of-theart (SoTA) MTL MoE approach. Codes are available online: https://github.com/google-research/
google-research/tree/master/moe_mtl.

1. Introduction
Multi-task vision recognition aims to simultaneously
solve multiple objectives, which is commonly required in
real-world applications. For instance, robotics [64] need to
learn how to pick, place, cover, rearrange, and align objects
simultaneously; autonomous vehicles [42] are expected to
concurrently perform drivable area estimation, lane detection, pedestrian detection, and more. Classic multi-task
learning (MTL) methods [52, 60, 28, 48, 67, 85, 51] learn a
shared representation among different tasks and attach task* Equal Contribution. † Work done while at Google.

Classification Accuracy (%)

Abstract

78
76

ViT-Small*
ViT-Small
ViT-Base
UViT-Base

74
72
70

(Liang et al. , NeurIPS 022)[46]

Ours
Baseline
TAPS

36 37 38 39 40 41 42
Avg. AP of Detection and Segmentation (%)
Figure 1. The multi-task vision recognition performance of various ViT architectures on ImageNet classification (y-axis), COCO
object detection and instance segmentation (x-axis) benchmarks.
Averaged results of detection’s AP (%) and segmentation APmask
(%) are reported. Markers ✫ and ❍ denote ours and baseline approaches, respectively. A larger marker indicates more floating
point operations (FLOPs) are used for inference. ViT-Small∗ is a
reduced backbone variant with half transformer layers.

specific heads. Following the generic trend in visual recognition, recent MTL works leveraged Vision Transformers
(ViTs) [25, 68, 49, 10] as the new unified backbone [7, 5].
However, such MTL models with a single backbone suffer from unstable training and inefficient inference. As
pointed out by [56, 81, 17], the shared parameters might
receive conflicted update directions from different objectives, and this negative competition usually leads to poor
training convergence, biased representations, and inferior
performance. Meantime, existing MTL regimes usually
activate the whole network backbone, regardless of what
tasks come. It causes a waste of computations in potential
since various real-world MTL systems [64] perform one or
a few tasks at each moment, which may only require the
relevant model pieces. The sparsely activated Mixture-ofExperts (SMoE) serves as an encouraging remedy for tackling these two MTL bottlenecks. Specifically, a pioneering
study [46] inserts SMoE layers into the MTL ViT by replacing its dense feedforward network with a series of sparsely

17346

