This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RCA-NOC: Relative Contrastive Alignment
for Novel Object Captioning
Jiashuo Fan 2 Yaoyuan Liang 2 Leyao Liu 2 Shaolun Huang 2 Lei Zhang1
1
International Digital Economy Academy 2 Tsinghua University

Abstract

NOC-REK: panda, animal, chunk, tree, branch.
VIVO: panda, bear, chunk, tree, branch, animal,
raccoon, hedge, food, raccoon.

In this paper, we introduce a novel approach to novel
object captioning which employs relative contrastive learning to learn visual and semantic alignment. Our approach
maximizes compatibility between regions and object tags in
a contrastive manner. To set up a proper contrastive learning objective, for each image, we augment tags by leveraging the relative nature of positive and negative pairs obtained from foundation models such as CLIP. We then use
the rank of each augmented tag in a list as a relative relevance label to contrast each top-ranked tag with a set of
lower-ranked tags. This learning objective encourages the
top-ranked tags to be more compatible with their image and
text context than lower-ranked tags, thus improving the discriminative ability of the learned multi-modality representation. We evaluate our approach on two datasets and show
that our proposed RCA-NOC approach outperforms stateof-the-art methods by a large margin, demonstrating its effectiveness in improving vision-language representation for
novel object captioning.

1. Introduction
Describing novel objects unseen in training data is a
highly desired capability for a real-world image captioning
model. Conventional image captioning models [4, 20, 28]
often fail to describe novel objects because they only cover
limited visual concepts and generalize poorly to images in
the wild [26]. To overcome this limitation, approaches that
rely on object detection as the external resource [7,8,13,18,
20, 25, 27, 33, 35] have been widely explored and demonstrated breakthroughs in vision-language (VL) understanding.
Although object detection models (e.g., Faster
RCNN [23]) have been improved to recognize a wide
range of objects including novel ones like zero-shot object
detection [14], using object detection in novel captioning
models brings a new challenge. VIVO [13] leverages extra
object tags to pre-train a visual vocabulary and help image
captioning generalize to new categories. NOC-REK [29]

Ours: panda, animal, tree, branch, chunk… / hedge,
raccoon, sky, advertisement, water…

(a) :Training
(Train)

NOC-REK: A raccoon sitting on top of a tree branch.
(panda, tree, branch)
VIVO: A raccoon sitting on a tree branch. (panda, tree,
branch)
Ours: A red panda sitting in a tree branch (panda, tree,
branch)

(b): Inference

Figure 1. An illustrative example of our method to leverage relative semantic relevance to achieve modality alignment.
Our method could give accurate captions "A cute red panda
sitting in a tree branch" conditioned on the objects "red
panda" while VINVL+VIVO generates a wrong caption "A cute
raccoon sitting in a tree branch". This inference result
shows that our method can differentiate some confusing objects
and generate accurate captions for novel objects when the object
detection is well aligned with other modalities.

tries to augment object tags in the training stage based on
the similarity between region and word. Such methods simply concatenate regions, object tags, and caption features as
input to a Transformer-based model and use masked token
reconstruction to implicitly learn an alignment between
vision and language. Although such an alignment can help
bring regions and words of the same concept closer, it lacks
an effective mechanism to push away irrelevant concepts.
As a result, it still makes mistakes on some confusing
concepts, as shown in Figure 1.
Different from previous methods, this study aims to
learn visual and semantic alignment in a contrastive manner. Gupta et al. [10] showed that modality alignment could
be achieved by maximizing the information lower bound
between an image and its object tags. That is, given pairs of
image and object tags, we can maximize the compatibility
between tags and their attention-weighted region representations, compared to regions and non-corresponding tags.
However, there are two critical problems that need to be
further addressed: 1) how to effectively generate contrastive
tags (augmented tags) that are closely relevant to an image,
and 2) how to design a proper contrastive learning objective
that allows the model to effectively leverage the contrastive

15510

