This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification
via Semantic Alignment and Affinity Inference
Xingye Fang1 , Yang Yang2 , Ying Fu1 *
1
Beijing Institute of Technology
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{fangxingye, fuying}@bit.edu.cn, yang.yang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Visible-infrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) focuses on matching the pedestrian images of the same identity captured by different modality cameras. The part-based
methods achieve great success by extracting fine-grained
features from feature maps. But most existing part-based
methods employ horizontal division to obtain part features
suffering from misalignment caused by irregular pedestrian
movements. Moreover, most current methods use Euclidean
or cosine distance of the output features to measure the
similarity without considering the pedestrian relationships.
Misaligned part features and naive inference methods both
limit the performance of existing works. We propose a Semantic Alignment and Affinity Inference framework (SAAI),
which aims to align latent semantic part features with the
learnable prototypes and improve inference with affinity information. Specifically, we first propose semantic-aligned
feature learning that employs the similarity between pixelwise features and learnable prototypes to aggregate the latent semantic part features. Then, we devise an affinity inference module to optimize the inference with pedestrian relationships. Comprehensive experimental results conducted
on the SYSU-MM01 and RegDB datasets demonstrate the
favorable performance of our SAAI framework. Our code
will be released at https://github.com/xiaoye-hhh/SAAI.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) is the task of retrieving
pedestrian images shot by different cameras. Most existing
person ReID methods [12, 16, 17, 40] focus on matching
the images shot by visible cameras, essentially addressing a
single-modality pedestrian matching assignment. However,
the generally visible surveillance cameras cannot capture
pedestrian information well under poor illumination con* Corresponding author

Feature Map Extractor

Feature Map Extractor

Horizontal Part Extractor

Latent Semantic Part Extractor

Naive Inference

Affinity Inference

Existing Methods

（a）

Our Method

q

（b）Part Extraction

𝒈𝟏 𝒈𝟐 𝒈𝟑 𝒈𝟒

q
𝒈𝟏 𝒈𝟐 𝒈𝟑 𝒈𝟒

（c）Inference Method

Figure 1. Framework Differences. (a) Most existing part-based
methods extract horizontal part features from feature maps and
employ naive inference (e.g., Euclidean and cosine distance) to
match images. Differently, our method extracts latent semantic
part features and utilizes affinity information. (b) The part features
extracted by our method have better semantic information. (c) Our
affinity inference utilizes pedestrian relationships to optimize the
distance calculation. Lines represent image relationships. Thicker
lines indicate higher affinity. The green and red circles denote
positive and negative gallery images, respectively.

ditions. In response to this challenge, modern surveillance
cameras can automatically switch to infrared mode for capturing images under low-light conditions. This technological advancement increases interest in researching visibleinfrared person re-identification (VI-ReID).
VI-ReID suffers from substantial modality discrepancy
and other factors (e.g., viewpoints, backgrounds, and movements). The factors leading to a sizeable intra-class discrepancy make matching difficult. Figure 1 (a) exhibits that
existing methods [13, 23, 24, 35] extract horizontal part features to alleviate this problem. Figure 1 (b) illustrates that
pedestrian parts (e.g., arms) are not located in a fixed position due to movements. Therefore, the simple horizontal
partition by fixed height can cause part features to become

11270

