This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Power of Sound (TPoS):
Audio Reactive Video Generation with Stable Diffusion
Yujin Jeong1 , Wonjeong Ryoo2 , Seunghyun Lee2 , Dabin Seo1 ,
Wonmin Byeon3 , Sangpil Kim,2,* and Jinkyu Kim1,*
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Korea
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Korea
3
NVIDIA Research, Santa Clara 95050, USA
Correspondences: S. Kim (spk7@korea.ac.kr) and J. Kim (jinkyukim@korea.ac.kr)

(Single Sound)

*

(Magnitude Change)

Increase in Magnitude
Prompt

“A photo of beautiful beach
with blue sky”

(Semantic Change)

Change in Semantics

Frame 1

Frame 2

Frame 3

Frame 4

Frame 5

Figure 1: The Power of Sound (TPoS) is a novel framework that generates audio-reactive video sequences. Built upon
the Stable Diffusion model, our model first generates an initial frame from a user-provided text prompt (e.g. “a photo of a
beautiful beach with a blue sky”), then reactively manipulates the style of generated images corresponding to the sound inputs
(e.g. an audio sequence of fireplace). Our model is indeed able to generate a frame conditioned on semantic information of
the sound (see 1st and 2nd rows where images are manipulated driven by sound inputs such as fireplace or wave sound), while
realistically dealing with temporal visual changes conditioned on changes of sound, e.g., increasing magnitude of sounds (see
second row) or wave ! fireplace (see last row). TPoS creates visually compelling and contextually relevant video sequences
in an open domain.

Abstract
In recent years, video generation has become a prominent generative tool and has drawn significant attention.
However, there is little consideration in audio-to-video generation, though audio contains unique qualities like temporal semantics and magnitude. Hence, we propose The
Power of Sound (TPoS) model to incorporate audio input
that includes both changeable temporal semantics and mag-

nitude. To generate video frames, TPoS utilizes a latent
stable diffusion model with textual semantic information,
which is then guided by the sequential audio embedding
from our pretrained Audio Encoder. As a result, this method
produces audio reactive video contents. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of TPoS across various tasks and compare its
results with current state-of-the-art techniques in the field
of audio-to-video generation. More examples are available

7822

