This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Retinexformer: One-stage Retinex-based
Transformer for Low-light Image Enhancement
Yuanhao Cai 1 , Hao Bian 1 , Jing Lin 1 ,
Haoqian Wang 1, * , Radu Timofte 2 , Yulun Zhang 3,∗
1
Tsinghua University, 2 University of Würzburg, 3 ETH Zürich

Abstract

PSNR

SMID

8.54 dB

SDSD-in
3.27 dB
PSNR

PSNR

* Haoqian Wang and Yulun Zhang are corresponding authors

SID

6.00 dB

LOL-v2-syn
4.43 dB

PSNR

Low-light image enhancement is an important yet challenging task in computer vision. It aims to improve the poor
visibility and low contrast of low-light images and restore
the corruptions (e.g., noise, artifact, color distortion, etc.)
hidden in the dark or introduced by the light-up process.
These issues challenge not only human visual perception
but also other vision tasks like nighttime object detection.
Hence, a large number of algorithms have been proposed
for low-light image enhancement. However, these existing
algorithms have their own drawbacks. Plain methods like
histogram equalization and gamma correction tend to produce undesired artifacts because they barely consider the

4.30 dB

PSNR

1. Introduction

Our Retinex-based Deep Learning Method

LOL-v2-real

PSNR

When enhancing low-light images, many deep learning
algorithms are based on the Retinex theory. However, the
Retinex model does not consider the corruptions hidden in
the dark or introduced by the light-up process. Besides,
these methods usually require a tedious multi-stage training
pipeline and rely on convolutional neural networks, showing limitations in capturing long-range dependencies. In
this paper, we formulate a simple yet principled One-stage
Retinex-based Framework (ORF). ORF first estimates the
illumination information to light up the low-light image and
then restores the corruption to produce the enhanced image.
We design an Illumination-Guided Transformer (IGT) that
utilizes illumination representations to direct the modeling
of non-local interactions of regions with different lighting
conditions. By plugging IGT into ORF, we obtain our algorithm, Retinexformer. Comprehensive quantitative and
qualitative experiments demonstrate that our Retinexformer
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on thirteen benchmarks. The user study and application on lowlight object detection also reveal the latent practical values
of our method. Code is available at https://github.
com/caiyuanhao1998/Retinexformer

Previous Retinex-based Deep Learning Methods
LOL-v1

6.60 dB

Figure 1. Our Retinexformer significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art Retinex-based deep learning methods including DUPE
(DeepUPE [49]), ReNet (RetinexNet [54]), KinD [66], and
RUAS [30] on six low-light image enhancement benchmarks.

illumination factors. Traditional cognition methods rely on
the Retinex theory [27] that assumes the color image can be
decomposed into two components, i.e., reflectance and illumination. Different from plain methods, traditional methods focus on illumination estimation but usually introduce
severe noise or distort color locally because these methods
assume that the images are noise- and color distortion-free.
This is inconsistent with real under-exposed scenes.
With the development of deep learning, convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have been applied in low-light image enhancement. These CNN-based methods are mainly
divided into two categories. The first category directly employs a CNN to learn a brute-force mapping function from
the low-light image to its normal-light counterpart, thereby
ignoring human color perception. This kind of methods lack
interpretability and theoretically proven properties. The
second category is inspired by the Retinex theory. These
methods [54, 65, 66] usually suffer from a multi-stage training pipeline. They employ different CNNs to decompose
the color image, denoise the reflectance, and adjust the illumination, respectively. These CNNs are first trained independently and then connected together to be finetuned endto-end. The training process is tedious and time-consuming.

12504

