This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PromptStyler: Prompt-driven Style Generation
for Source-free Domain Generalization
Junhyeong Cho1

Gilhyun Nam1
1

ADD

Sungyeon Kim2
2

POSTECH

3

Hunmin Yang1,3

Suha Kwak2

KAIST

https://PromptStyler.github.io

Abstract
In a joint vision-language space, a text feature (e.g., from
“a photo of a dog”) could effectively represent its relevant image features (e.g., from dog photos). Also, a recent study has
demonstrated the cross-modal transferability phenomenon
of this joint space. From these observations, we propose
PromptStyler which simulates various distribution shifts in
the joint space by synthesizing diverse styles via prompts
without using any images to deal with source-free domain
generalization. The proposed method learns to generate a
variety of style features (from “a S∗ style of a”) via learnable style word vectors for pseudo-words S∗ . To ensure that
learned styles do not distort content information, we force
style-content features (from “a S∗ style of a [class]”) to be
located nearby their corresponding content features (from
“[class]”) in the joint vision-language space. After learning
style word vectors, we train a linear classifier using synthesized style-content features. PromptStyler achieves the state
of the art on PACS, VLCS, OfficeHome and DomainNet, even
though it does not require any images for training.

Joint Vision Language Space
“a cartoon of a cat”

“a photo of a cat”

(a)

“a cartoon of a dog”

“a photo of a dog”
Image Feature

Text Feature

Decision Boundary

Joint Vision Language Space
“a S2 style of a cat”
“a S1 style of a cat”
“a S3 style of a cat”

(b)
“a S3 style of a dog”
“a S2 style of a dog”

“a S1 style of a dog”

Text Feature

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are usually trained with the assumption that training and test data are independent and identically
distributed, which makes them vulnerable to substantial distribution shifts between training and test data [23, 52]. This
susceptibility is considered as one of the major obstacles to
their deployment in real-world applications. To enhance their
robustness to such distribution shifts, Domain Adaptation
(DA) [2, 24, 32, 33, 54, 56, 57, 68] has been studied; it aims
at adapting neural networks to a target domain using target
domain data available in training. However, such a target
domain is often latent in common training scenarios, which
considerably limits the application of DA. Recently, a body
of research has addressed this limitation by Domain Generalization (DG) [3, 5, 21, 29, 35, 37, 74] that aims to improve
model’s generalization capability to any unseen domains. It
has been a common practice in DG to utilize multiple source
domains for learning domain-invariant features [61, 69], but

Decision Boundary

Figure 1: Motivation of our method. (a) Text features could
effectively represent various image styles in a joint visionlanguage space. (b) PromptStyler synthesizes diverse styles
in a joint vision-language space via learnable style word
vectors for pseudo-words S∗ without using any images.
it is unclear which source domains are ideal for DG, since
arbitrary unseen domains should be addressed. Furthermore,
it is costly and sometimes even infeasible to collect and
annotate large-scale multi-source domain data for training.
We notice that a large-scale pre-trained model might have
already observed a great variety of domains and thus can be
used as an efficient proxy of actual multiple source domains.
From this perspective, we raised a question “Could we further improve model’s generalization capability by simulating
various distribution shifts in the latent space of such a largescale model without using any source domain data?” If this

15702

