This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Lens Flare Removal with General-Purpose Pipeline
and Multiple Light Sources Recovery
Yuyan Zhou1 , Dong Liang * 1 , Songcan Chen1 , Sheng-Jun Huang1 , Shuo Yang2 , and Chongyi Li3
1

MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, College of Computer Science and Technology,
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
2
Imaging Technology Group, DJI Innovations Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China
3
School of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
{yuyanzhou, liangdong, s.chen, huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn, shuo.yang2@dji.com, lichongyi@nankai.edu.cn
https://github.com/YuyanZhou1/Improving-Lens-Flare-Removal
Huawei Mate20

iPhone 13 pro

iPhone 11

OPPO reno 4 pro

iPad 2020

Output

Input

iPad Air4

Figure 1. The proposed solution yields favorable results on the ﬂare-corrupted images captured by various devices. The real and diverse
ﬂare-corrupted images are provided in our consumer electronics test dataset. The results are produced by the deep model U-Former trained
using our solution that includes the new data synthesis pipeline and multiple light sources recovery strategy.

Abstract
When taking images against strong light sources, the resulting images often contain heterogeneous ﬂare artifacts.
These artifacts can importantly affect image visual quality
and downstream computer vision tasks. While collecting
real data pairs of ﬂare-corrupted/ﬂare-free images for training ﬂare removal models is challenging, current methods
utilize the direct-add approach to synthesize data. However,
these methods do not consider automatic exposure and tone
mapping in image signal processing pipeline (ISP), leading to the limited generalization capability of deep models
training using such data. Besides, existing methods struggle
to handle multiple light sources due to the different sizes,
shapes and illuminance of various light sources. In this
paper, we propose a solution to improve the performance
of lens ﬂare removal by revisiting the ISP and remodeling

the principle of automatic exposure in the synthesis pipeline
and design a more reliable light sources recovery strategy.
The new pipeline approaches realistic imaging by discriminating the local and global illumination through convex
combination, avoiding global illumination shifting and local
over-saturation. Our strategy for recovering multiple light
sources convexly averages the input and output of the neural network based on illuminance levels, thereby avoiding
the need for a hard threshold in identifying light sources.
We also contribute a new ﬂare removal testing dataset containing the ﬂare-corrupted images captured by ten types of
consumer electronics. The dataset facilitates the veriﬁcation
of the generalization capability of ﬂare removal methods.
Extensive experiments show that our solution can effectively
improve the performance of lens ﬂare removal and push the
frontier toward more general situations.

* Corresponding author: liangdong@nuaa.edu.cn

12969

