This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unilaterally Aggregated Contrastive Learning with Hierarchical Augmentation
for Anomaly Detection

1

Guodong Wang1,2 , Yunhong Wang2 , Jie Qin3 , Dongming Zhang4 , Xiuguo Bao4 , Di Huang1,2 *
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, NUAA, Nanjing, China
4
Natl. Comp. Net. Emer. Resp. Tech. Team/Coord. Ctr. of China, Beijing, China

{wanggd,yhwang,dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn, qinjiebuaa@gmail.com, zhdm@cert.org.cn, baoxiuguo@139.com

Abstract

Inliers

(a) RotNet

(b) DROC

90°

Anomaly detection (AD), aiming to find samples that deviate from the training distribution, is essential in safetycritical applications. Though recent self-supervised learning based attempts achieve promising results by creating
virtual outliers, their training objectives are less faithful
to AD which requires a concentrated inlier distribution as
well as a dispersive outlier distribution. In this paper,
we propose Unilaterally Aggregated Contrastive Learning
with Hierarchical Augmentation (UniCon-HA), taking into
account both the requirements above. Specifically, we explicitly encourage the concentration of inliers and the dispersion of virtual outliers via supervised and unsupervised
contrastive losses, respectively. Considering that standard
contrastive data augmentation for generating positive views
may induce outliers, we additionally introduce a soft mechanism to re-weight each augmented inlier according to its
deviation from the inlier distribution, to ensure a purified
concentration. Moreover, to prompt a higher concentration,
inspired by curriculum learning, we adopt an easy-to-hard
hierarchical augmentation strategy and perform contrastive
aggregation at different depths of the network based on the
strengths of data augmentation. Our method is evaluated
under three AD settings including unlabeled one-class, unlabeled multi-class, and labeled multi-class, demonstrating
its consistent superiority over other competitors.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD), a.k.a. outlier detection, aims
to find anomalous observations that considerably deviate
from the normality, with a broad range of applications, e.g.
defect detection [4] and medical diagnosis [45]. Due to the
* Corresponding author.

180°

°

Rotation
Virtual outliers

{90° , 180° , 270° }

0

°

270

(c) CSI
Real-world outliers

(d) UniCon-HA

90°
°

0

180°
°

270

Figure 1: The decision regions (light yellow) of RotNet
[26], DROC [49], CSI [51] and our UniCon-HA with rotation used to create virtual outliers. (a) RotNet models the
inlier distribution by predicting rotation angles through a 4way classifier; (b) DROC performs instance discrimination
within the union of inliers and their rotations, resulting in a
uniform distribution of data points; (c) CSI combines contrastive learning with a rotation classifier, enclosing a subregion for inliers; (d) Our UniCon-HA explicitly promotes
the concentration of inliers and the dispersion of rotated virtual outliers, yielding the most compact decision region.

inaccessibility of real-world outliers, it is typically required
to develop outlier detectors solely based on in-distribution
data (inliers). Conventional methods [7, 32, 30, 42, 68, 65]
leverage generative models to fit the distribution by assigning high densities to inliers; however, they make use of raw
images and are fragile caused by background statistics [42]
or pixel correlations [30], unexpectedly assigning higher
likelihoods to unseen outliers than inliers.
Alternatively, discriminative models [52, 47, 16, 43] describe the support of the training distribution using classifiers, circumventing the complicated process of density estimation. Furthermore, some studies [18, 26, 3] observe

6888

