This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Space-time Prompting for Video Class-incremental Learning
Yixuan Pei1 Zhiwu Qing2 Shiwei Zhang3∗ Xiang Wang2
Yingya Zhang3 Deli Zhao3 Xueming Qian1,4 *
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 3 Alibaba Group
4
Shaanxi Yulan Jiuzhou Intelligent Optoelectronic Technology Co., Ltd
2

{peiyixuan@stu, qianxm@mail}.xjtu.edu.cn

{qzw,wxiang}@hust.edu.cn

{zhangjin.zsw, yingya.zyy}@alibaba-inc.com

zhaodeli@gmail.com

Video Dataset 𝑉 !

Abstract
Recently, prompt-based learning has made impressive
progress on image class-incremental learning, but it still
lacks sufficient exploration in the video domain. In this
paper, we will fill this gap by learning multiple prompts
based on a powerful image-language pre-trained model,
i.e., CLIP, making it fit for video class-incremental learning (VCIL). For this purpose, we present a space-time
prompting approach (ST-Prompt) which contains two kinds
of prompts, i.e., task-specific prompts and task-agnostic
prompts. The task-specific prompts are to address the
catastrophic forgetting problem by learning multi-grained
prompts, i.e., spatial prompts, temporal prompts and comprehensive prompts, for accurate task identification. The
task-agnostic prompts maintain a globally-shared prompt
pool, which can empower the pre-trained image models
with temporal perception abilities by exchanging contexts
between frames. By this means, ST-Prompt can transfer
the plentiful knowledge in the image-language pre-trained
models to the VCIL task with only a tiny set of prompts to be
optimized. To evaluate ST-Prompt, we conduct extensive experiments on three standard benchmarks. The results show
that ST-Prompt can significantly surpass the state-of-theart VCIL methods, especially it gains 9.06% on HMDB51
dataset under the 1 × 25 stage setting.

1. Introduction
Video understanding [49, 11, 1, 32] has achieved outstanding performance with the quick development of deep
neural networks. However, training such a model heavily
depends on the currently available labeled data. When different classification tasks are presented sequentially in prac* Corresponding author.

⋯⋯

Stored Videos[35]

Stored Frames[36]

ST-Prompts (Ours)

Memory: 585.70M
Accuracy: 50.29%

Memory: 585.70M
Accuracy: 51.43%

Memory: 2.98M
Accuracy: 55.13%

Figure 1. An comparison between existing VCIL methods based
on exemplar or frame replay and our ST-Prompt. Compared to the
rehearsal-based approaches, our ST-prompt can better solve the
problem of catastrophic forgetting when only a small amount of
memory is consumed to store a tiny set of prompts.

tical applications, a crucial problem is to maintain the accuracy of the model as data arrives over time. Under this
circumstance, due to the limitations of memory and privacy, the model can just access the videos of the current
task and few even no examples of historical tasks, which
requires that the model should adapt to the current task
without catastrophic forgetting [34]. The machine learning paradigm to handle the above challenges is called Video
Class-Incremental Learning (VCIL) [35, 36, 61].
Most existing class-incremental learning approaches
have achieved remarkable performance through a rehearsal
buffer of the old tasks in both the image [40, 45, 59, 4]
and video [36, 47, 36] fields. However, these methods suffer from suboptimal performance with smaller buffer sizes
and severe catastrophic forgetting once the rehearsal buffer
is not accessed, hence leading to limited applications. To
solve this problem, several prompt-based learning methods
in image domain [54, 53, 51] are proposed to train only

11932

