This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding Self-attention Mechanism via Dynamical System Perspective
Zhongzhan Huang1 * Mingfu Liang2∗ Jinghui Qin3
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 Northwestern University, USA

Shanshan Zhong1 Liang Lin1†
3
Guangdong University of Technology

huangzhzh23,zhongshsh5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, mingfuliang2020@u.northwestern.edu,
scape1989@gmail.com, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
The self-attention mechanism (SAM) is widely used in
various fields of artificial intelligence and has successfully
boosted the performance of different models. However, current explanations of this mechanism are mainly based on intuitions and experiences, while there still lacks direct modeling for how the SAM helps performance. To mitigate this
issue, in this paper, based on the dynamical system perspective of the residual neural network, we first show that the intrinsic stiffness phenomenon (SP) in the high-precision solution of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) also widely
exists in high-performance neural networks (NN). Thus the
ability of NN to measure SP at the feature level is necessary
to obtain high performance and is an important factor in the
difficulty of training NN. Similar to the adaptive step-size
method which is effective in solving stiff ODEs, we show
that the SAM is also a stiffness-aware step size adaptor that
can enhance the model’s representational ability to measure
intrinsic SP by refining the estimation of stiffness information and generating adaptive attention values, which provides a new understanding about why and how the SAM can
benefit the model performance. This novel perspective can
also explain the lottery ticket hypothesis in SAM, design new
quantitative metrics of representational ability, and inspire
a new theoretic-inspired approach, StepNet. Extensive experiments on several popular benchmarks demonstrate that
StepNet can extract fine-grained stiffness information and
measure SP accurately, leading to significant improvements
in various visual tasks.

1. Introduction
The self-attention mechanism (SAM) [41, 15, 16, 9, 43,
4] is widely used in various artificial intelligence fields
and has successfully improved the models’ performance in
a number of vision tasks, including image classification
[22, 60, 47], object detection [37, 56, 25], instance seg* co-first author

† corresponding author

Figure 1. The feature trajectory w/ and w/o attention. The GT
trajectory, generated by the best-performing model, possesses the
inherent property of SP. The SAM, acting as a stiffness-aware
step size adaptor, effectively extracts stiffness information and
has a strong representational ability to measure the inherent SP
to closely approach a GT trajectory, leading to high performance.

mentation [8, 52], image super-resolution [64, 46, 49], etc.
However, most previous works lay emphasis on designing
a new self-attention method, and intuitively or heuristically
exploring how the self-attention mechanism helps the performance. For example, many popular channel attention
methods [22, 47, 56, 35] consider the attention values as
the soft weight of the channels, leading to the importance
reassignment of feature maps. These soft weights can also

1412

