This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ActorsNeRF: Animatable Few-shot Human Rendering with
Generalizable NeRFs
Jiteng Mu1 ,

Shen Sang2 , Nuno Vasconcelos1 ,
1
UC San Diego, 2 ByteDance

Category-level Prior

Xiaolong Wang1

Few-shot Generalization to Novel Actors with Novel Poses

Figure 1: Animatable NeRF from a few images. We present ActorsNeRF, a category-level human actor NeRF model that generalizes to
unseen actors in a few-shot setting. With only a few images, e.g., 30 frames, sampled from a monocular video, ActorsNeRF synthesizes
high-quality novel views of novel actors in the AIST++ dataset with unseen poses (shown on the right).

Abstract
While NeRF-based human representations have shown
impressive novel view synthesis results, most methods still
rely on a large number of images / views for training. In
this work, we propose a novel animatable NeRF called
ActorsNeRF. It is first pre-trained on diverse human subjects, and then adapted with few-shot monocular video
frames for a new actor with unseen poses. Building on
previous generalizable NeRFs with parameter sharing using a ConvNet encoder, ActorsNeRF further adopts two human priors to capture the large human appearance, shape,
and pose variations. Specifically, in the encoded feature
space, we will first align different human subjects in a
category-level canonical space, and then align the same
human from different frames in an instance-level canonical space for rendering. We quantitatively and qualitatively demonstrate that ActorsNeRF significantly outperforms the existing state-of-the-art on few-shot generalization to new people and poses on multiple datasets. Project
page: https://jitengmu.github.io/ActorsNeRF/.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [42]
have enabled significant progress in free-viewpoint ren-

dering of humans performing complex movements. The
possibility of achieving photo-realistic rendering is of major interest for various real-world applications in AR or
VR. However, to achieve high-quality rendering, existing approaches [33, 23, 32, 29, 42] require a combination
of synchronized multi-view videos and an instance-level
NeRF network, trained on a specific human video sequence.
While results are encouraging, the multi-view requirement
is a significant challenge to applications involving videos
in the wild. Recently, progress has been made to eliminate
this constraint, by enabling human rendering from a monocular video [48, 15]. However, these approaches still require
a large number of frames, which covers a person densely
from all viewpoints.
In this work, we consider the more practical setting
and ask the question: Can an animatable human model be
learned from just a few images? We hypothesize that this is
possible by introducing a class-level encoder, trained over
multiple people, as shown in Figure 1. This hypothesis
has been demonstrated by recent works on generalizable
NeRFs [53, 2], where an encoder network is trained across
multiple scenes or objects within the same category to construct NeRF. By parameter sharing through the encoder, the
prior learned across different scenes can be re-used to perform synthesis even with a few views. However, most approaches can only model static scenes. We investigate how
generalizable NeRF can be extended to the learning of a
18391

