This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Knowledge-Aware Federated Active Learning with Non-IID Data
Yu-Tong Cao1 , Ye Shi2 , Baosheng Yu1 , Jingya Wang2 , Dacheng Tao1
1
Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney
2
ShanghaiTech University
ycao5602@uni.sydney.edu.au, shiye@shanghaitech.edu.cn, baosheng.yu@sydney.edu.au,
wangjingya@shanghaitech.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Federated learning enables multiple decentralized
clients to learn collaboratively without sharing local data.
However, the expensive annotation cost on local clients
remains an obstacle in utilizing local data. In this paper, we propose a federated active learning paradigm to
efficiently learn a global model with a limited annotation budget while protecting data privacy in a decentralized learning manner. The main challenge faced by federated active learning is the mismatch between the active sampling goal of the global model on the server and
that of the asynchronous local clients. This becomes even
more significant when data is distributed non-IID across
local clients. To address the aforementioned challenge,
we propose Knowledge-Aware Federated Active Learning
(KAFAL), which consists of Knowledge-Specialized Active
Sampling (KSAS) and Knowledge-Compensatory Federated
Update (KCFU). Specifically, KSAS is a novel active sampling method tailored for the federated active learning
problem, aiming to deal with the mismatch challenge by
sampling actively based on the discrepancies between local
and global models. KSAS intensifies specialized knowledge
in local clients, ensuring the sampled data is informative
for both the local clients and the global model. Meanwhile,
KCFU deals with the client heterogeneity caused by limited data and non-IID data distributions by compensating
for each client’s ability in weak classes with the assistance
of the global model. Extensive experiments and analyses
are conducted to show the superiority of KAFAL over recent
state-of-the-art active learning methods. Code is available
at https://github.com/ycao5602/KAFAL.

1. Introduction
Federated learning is a decentralized paradigm that allows collaborative learning of local devices to attain a powerful global model in a central server through aggregation
without accessing local data [25, 35]. Most federated learn-

Oracle

?

Data

Client 1

: animals
: plants
: vehicles

Oracle

?

Oracle

?

Data

Data

Client 2

Server

…

Client k

…

: existing labels
: acquired labels

Figure 1. The primary federated active learning framework with
non-IID data. Each client maintains an active learning loop to
select informative data for annotation with a limited annotation
budget. We show each model’s existing labelled data in different
classes with pink bars and the newly acquired labels with green
bars. Clients specialize in different classes due to non-IID data
distributions.

ing methods consider supervised learning scenarios with
fully annotated training data on each local client. However,
the high annotation cost has been a challenge for real-world
federated learning scenarios, e.g., large-scale medical data
located in different medical institutions while medical specialists for data annotation are very limited in each institution. In this paper, we consider a new federated active learning paradigm, which aims to not only protect data privacy
but also make the most of the very limited annotation budget on each local client for decentralized model training. An
illustration of the proposed federated active learning with
non-IID data framework is shown in Fig. 1.
In federated active learning, we aim to attain a powerful
global model on the server by sampling only local data and
training the model on each local client. A straightforward
solution for federated learning is to directly apply off-theshelf active learning methods to each client. Specifically,
existing methods can mainly be categorized into diversitybased [42, 2], uncertainty-based [49, 44, 51, 45, 23, 8, 3],
and discrepancy-based. [43, 6]. Therefore, we actively sample based on either the statistics from each client model or
the downloaded global model. However, the former ap-

22279

