This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MetaF2N: Blind Image Super-Resolution by
Learning Efficient Model Adaptation from Faces
Zhicun Yin1

Ming Liu1( ) Xiaoming Li1 Hui Yang2
Longan Xiao2 Wangmeng Zuo1,3
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Shanghai Transsion Co, Ltd 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
cszcyin@outlook.com, csmliu@outlook.com, csxmli@gmail.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to their highly structured characteristics, faces
are easier to recover than natural scenes for blind image
super-resolution. Therefore, we can extract the degradation representation of an image from the low-quality and
recovered face pairs. Using the degradation representation, realistic low-quality images can then be synthesized
to fine-tune the super-resolution model for the real-world
low-quality image. However, such a procedure is timeconsuming and laborious, and the gaps between recovered
faces and the ground-truths further increase the optimization uncertainty. To facilitate efficient model adaptation towards image-specific degradations, we propose a method
dubbed MetaF2N, which leverages the contained Faces
to fine-tune model parameters for adapting to the whole
Natural image in a Meta-learning framework. The degradation extraction and low-quality image synthesis steps are
thus circumvented in our MetaF2N, and it requires only
one fine-tuning step to get decent performance. Considering the gaps between the recovered faces and groundtruths, we further deploy a MaskNet for adaptively predicting loss weights at different positions to reduce the impact of
low-confidence areas. To evaluate our proposed MetaF2N,
we have collected a real-world low-quality dataset with
one or multiple faces in each image, and our MetaF2N
achieves superior performance on both synthetic and realworld datasets. Source code, pre-trained models, and
collected datasets are available at https://github.
com/yinzhicun/MetaF2N .

1. Introduction
With the development of dataset construction, network design, and many other relevant methods, blind image super-resolution (SR) [9, 33] has acquired enormous
progress in recent years. To construct pairwise low-/highquality samples for training the image SR models, typically

one can capture low- and high-quality pairs by adjusting
the focal length of cameras [5, 55, 61] and shooting distance [8], or synthesize low-quality images via degradation
modeling [26, 51, 59]. However, these methods can only
cover a limited and biased range of degradations, which is
insufficient for real-world applications. Besides, most existing blind image SR methods [51, 59] train a static model
for all testing scenarios, greatly limiting their flexibility and
generalization ability.
In order to break the restriction of limited training sets,
self-supervised learning has been introduced to train a
model for each low-quality image, without requiring pairwise ground-truths [10, 42, 47]. Although these methods
exhibit a great deal of flexibility, they largely rely on certain priors or assumptions, showing inferior image SR performance. Recently, Li et al. [26] reached a better compromise on the requirement of ground-truths and proposed
ReDegNet by leveraging the faces contained in natural images. In specific, the face regions in a real-world lowquality natural image are processed via blind face SR methods [36, 50, 57, 63], which have achieved appealing results thanks to the highly structured characteristics of faces.
Then, the low-quality and recovered face pairs can be utilized to model the degradations in the image. Finally, more
low-quality images are synthesized with the degradation
representations for fine-tuning the SR model. With the
above design, ReDegNet [26] is flexible to process a single image or a batch of images with diverse degradations.
Although ReDegNet [26] achieves superior SR performance, especially in specific scenarios (i.e., fine-tuning
with faces within the test image), there are still several
limitations. On the one hand, the training procedure is
time-consuming and computationally intensive, where the
modules for degradation representation extraction and lowquality image synthesis are jointly optimized. Furthermore,
when the model is intended to deal with a single low-quality
image, it is difficult to determine when to terminate the
training process for avoiding under-fitting or over-fitting.

13033

