This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VQA-GNN: Reasoning with Multimodal Knowledge via Graph Neural Networks
for Visual Question Answering
Yanan Wang1 * Michihiro Yasunaga2 Hongyu Ren2 Shinya Wada1
1
KDDI Research 2 Stanford University
1

{wa-yanan,sh-wada}@kddi.com

2

Jure Leskovec2

{myasu,hyren,jure}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Visual question answering (VQA) requires systems to
perform concept-level reasoning by unifying unstructured
(e.g., the context in question and answer; “QA context”)
and structured (e.g., knowledge graph for the QA context
and scene; “concept graph”) multimodal knowledge. Existing works typically combine a scene graph and a concept graph of the scene by connecting corresponding visual
nodes and concept nodes, then incorporate the QA context
representation to perform question answering. However,
these methods only perform a unidirectional fusion from
unstructured knowledge to structured knowledge, limiting
their potential to capture joint reasoning over the heterogeneous modalities of knowledge. To perform more expressive
reasoning, we propose VQA-GNN, a new VQA model that
performs bidirectional fusion between unstructured and
structured multimodal knowledge to obtain unified knowledge representations. Specifically, we inter-connect the
scene graph and the concept graph through a super node
that represents the QA context, and introduce a new multimodal GNN technique to perform inter-modal message
passing for reasoning that mitigates representational gaps
between modalities. On two challenging VQA tasks (VCR
and GQA), our method outperforms strong baseline VQA
methods by 3.2% on VCR (Q-AR) and 4.6% on GQA, suggesting its strength in performing concept-level reasoning.
Ablation studies further demonstrate the efficacy of the bidirectional fusion and multimodal GNN method in unifying
unstructured and structured multimodal knowledge.

1. Introduction
The visual question answering (VQA) task aims to provide answers to questions about a visual scene. It is crucial in many real-world tasks including scene understanding, autonomous vehicles, search engines, and recommendation systems [1, 2, 9, 15]. To solve VQA, systems need to
*

Work done while at Stanford University.

Figure 1. Overview of VQA-GNN. Given an image and QA sentence, we obtain unstructured knowledge (e.g., QA-concept node
p and QA-context node z) and structured knowledge (e.g., scenegraph and concept-graph), and then unify them to perform bidirectional fusion for visual question answering.

perform concept-level reasoning by unifying unstructured
(e.g., the context in question and answer; “QA context”)
and structured (e.g., knowledge graph for the QA context
and scene; “concept graph”) multimodal knowledge.
Most of the high-performing VQA methods [6, 20, 26,
37, 49, 51, 52] pretrain a multimodal transformer model
on a large-scale dataset to obtain unstructured multimodal
knowledge from image and language contexts, and then
finetune the pretrained model to reason on downstream
tasks (e.g., visual commonsense reasoning (VCR) task
[50]). Existing methods (e.g., SGEITL [42]) also incorporate structured knowledge into these transformer-based
models by including a scene graph in the input of a pretrained multimodal transformer model. More recent meth-

21582

