This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UHDNeRF: Ultra-High-Deﬁnition Neural Radiance Fields
Quewei Li1 , Feichao Li1 , Jie Guo1,†, and Yanwen Guo1,†
1
National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{queweili, feichaoli}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {guojie, ywguo}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose UHDNeRF, a new framework for novel view
synthesis on the challenging ultra-high-resolution (e.g., 4K)
real-world scenes. Previous NeRF methods are not speciﬁcally designed for rendering on extremely high resolutions,
leading to burry results with notable detail-losing problems
even though trained on 4K images. This is mainly due to the
mismatch between the high-resolution inputs and the lowdimensional volumetric representation. To address this issue, we introduce an adaptive implicit-explicit scene representation with which an explicit sparse point cloud is used
to boost the performance of an implicit volume on modeling subtle details. Speciﬁcally, we reconstruct the complex
real-world scene with a frequency separation strategy that
the implicit volume learns to represent the low-frequency
properties of the whole scene, and the sparse point cloud is
used for reproducing high-frequency details. To better explore the information embedded in the point cloud, we extract a global structure feature and a local point-wise feature from the point cloud for each sample located in the
high-frequency regions. Furthermore, a patch-based sampling strategy is introduced to reduce the computational
cost. The high-ﬁdelity rendering results demonstrate the superiority of our method for retaining high-frequency details
at 4K ultra-high-resolution scenarios against state-of-theart NeRF-based solutions.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis, which aims to generate images at
new views given a sparse set of observed images, is a longstanding problem in computer graphics and vision. Very
recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [28] have demonstrated great success in this task for learning to represent
3D scenes with implicit volumetric representation. Several
following works [29, 10, 3, 18, 23, 54, 33] then improve
this method in different aspects. However, previous NeRFbased methods are typically designed for training images up
† Corresponding authors.

(a) Ours

(b) Closeups (c) Instant NGP

(d) GT

Figure 1. Visualization of our result with resolution 4032 × 3024
(a). We zoom in on the ﬁne-grained details to compare our method
with a modern NeRF-based method, i.e., Instant NGP [29] (b)-(d).

to 1K resolution. With the development of modern display
devices, ultra-high-resolution, e.g., 4K high-deﬁnition format, has become a standard for recording/displaying images
and videos. Unfortunately, even though trained on 4K images, these methods cannot reproduce ﬁne-grained details,
leading to burry results with severe detail-losing problems,
as shown in Fig. 1 (c).
The main difﬁculty preventing a NeRF model to generate ultra-high-resolution images is the mismatch between
the high-resolution inputs and the low-dimensional volumetric representation (determined by the density of samples). NeRF needs to increase the sampled locations over
the whole scene to produce higher-resolution renderings.
For instance, to generate a high-quality result of resolution
4032 × 3024, more than 12 million pixels need to be rendered. Besides, thousands of MLP evaluations should also
be conducted for each camera ray, which requires several
hours to render a single image. Obviously, achieving 4K
renderings by simply increasing the number of samples is
impractical, considering the intolerable rendering time.
To reduce the long training and inference time, some fast
rendering methods are proposed [10, 15, 52]. These methods commonly adopt a hybrid scene representation by utilizing explicit data structures, such as voxel grids [8, 24] or
point clouds [50], to cache the scene properties and synthesize novel views by the fast query. However, reconstructing
dense voxels/points to store an extremely high-resolution
3D scene requires a huge memory cost, which is also unacceptable. In short, it is not trivial to convert a NeRF model
into its ultra-high-deﬁnition version by either dense sam-

23097

