This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PIDRo: Parallel Isomeric Attention with Dynamic Routing for
Text-Video Retrieval
Peiyan Guan1 *, Renjing Pei2†, Bin Shao2 , Jianzhuang Liu2 ,
Weimian Li , Jiaxi Gu2 , Hang Xu2 , Songcen Xu2 , Youliang Yan2 , Edmund Y. Lam1†
The University of Hong Kong1 , Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab2
2

{pyguan, elam}@eee.hku.hk, {peirenjing, shaobin3, liu.jianzhuang, liweimian,
xusongcen,yanyouliang}@huawei.com, {imjiaxi, chromexbjxh}@gmail.com

Abstract
Text-video retrieval is a fundamental task with high practical value in multi-modal research. Inspired by the great
success of pre-trained image-text models with large-scale
data, such as CLIP, many methods are proposed to transfer the strong representation learning capability of CLIP to
text-video retrieval. However, due to the modality difference between videos and images, how to effectively adapt
CLIP to the video domain is still underexplored. In this paper, we investigate this problem from two aspects. First,
we enhance the transferred image encoder of CLIP for finegrained video understanding in a seamless fashion. Second,
we conduct fine-grained contrast between videos and texts
from both model improvement and loss design. Particularly,
we propose a fine-grained contrastive model equipped with
parallel isomeric attention and dynamic routing, namely
PIDRo, for text-video retrieval. The parallel isomeric attention module is used as the video encoder, which consists
of two parallel branches modeling the spatial-temporal information of videos from both patch and frame levels. The
dynamic routing module is constructed to enhance the text
encoder of CLIP, generating informative word representations by distributing the fine-grained information to the related word tokens within a sentence. Such model design
provides us with informative patch, frame and word representations. We then conduct token-wise interaction upon
them. With the enhanced encoders and the token-wise loss,
we are able to achieve finer-grained text-video alignment
and more accurate retrieval. PIDRo obtains state-of-the-art
performance over various text-video retrieval benchmarks,
including MSR-VTT, MSVD, LSMDC, DiDeMo and ActivityNet.

* This work was done during an internship at Huawei.
† Corresponding authors: Renjing Pei, Edmund Y. Lam

1. Introduction
The amount of videos on the Internet has significantly
increased recently. Efficiently finding target videos based
on text description, referred to as text-video retrieval, is of
high practical and research value. Over the past few years,
various methods have been proposed for this task [8, 14, 25,
26, 11, 12].
Recently, large-scale contrastive text-image pre-training
has achieved great success in many multi-modal text-vision
understanding tasks [34, 18, 17, 35]. One representative
method is CLIP, which trains a text encoder and an image
encoder with over 400 million image-text pairs. Inspired by
such success, some works directly adapt the pre-trained text
and image encoders to the video domain and achieve great
improvements [29, 15, 16, 13]. However, simply using the
models without considering the differences between images
and videos neglects the characteristics of videos. In this
work, we study CLIP-based text-video retrieval. In spite
of CLIP’s remarkable performance for image classification,
two major issues remain when using it in the video domain.
The first is how to enhance the transferred image encoder
for video understanding in a seamless fashion. The second
lies in how to conduct finer-grained contrast between text
and video.
For the first issue, the image encoder (a transformer) of
CLIP conducts spatial attention within each frame and does
not explore the cross-frame temporal relationship. Current
methods mainly append a temporal transformer to the image
encoder to learn the temporal information [15, 30]. However, it only conducts temporal attention in the frame-toframe fashion and lacks fine-grained temporal modeling.
Building a powerful video encoder is an important topic
for video understanding. FROZEN employs divided spacetime attention to learn the spatial-temporal information [4].
TS2-Net incorporates a token-shift module to enable patchlevel cross-frame interaction [27]. However, these methods
change the internal structure of the image encoder of text-

11164

