This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint Metrics Matter: A Better Standard for Trajectory Forecasting
Erica Weng*

Hana Hoshino
Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract

Baseline (Optimized for min ADE)

Multi-modal trajectory forecasting methods commonly
evaluate using single-agent metrics (marginal metrics),
such as minimum Average Displacement Error (ADE) and
Final Displacement Error (FDE), which fail to capture joint
performance of multiple interacting agents. Only focusing
on marginal metrics can lead to unnatural predictions,
such as colliding trajectories or diverging trajectories
for people who are clearly walking together as a group.
Consequently, methods optimized for marginal metrics lead
to overly-optimistic estimations of performance, which is
detrimental to progress in trajectory forecasting research.
In response to the limitations of marginal metrics, we
present the first comprehensive evaluation of state-of-theart (SOTA) trajectory forecasting methods with respect
to multi-agent metrics (joint metrics): JADE, JFDE, and
collision rate. We demonstrate the importance of joint
metrics as opposed to marginal metrics with quantitative
evidence and qualitative examples drawn from the ETH /
UCY and Stanford Drone datasets. We introduce a new
loss function incorporating joint metrics that, when applied
to a SOTA trajectory forecasting method, achieves a 7%
improvement in JADE / JFDE on the ETH / UCY datasets
with respect to the previous SOTA. Our results also indicate
that optimizing for joint metrics naturally leads to an improvement in interaction modeling, as evidenced by a 16%
decrease in mean collision rate on the ETH / UCY datasets
with respect to the previous SOTA. Code is available at
github.com/ericaweng/joint-metrics-matter.

1. Introduction
Because the future is inherently multi-modal, the trajectory forecasting community has adopted the use of top-K
metrics, average displacement error (ADE) and final displacement error (FDE), to evaluate and optimize methods. Under this evaluation, stochastic trajectory forecasting models generate a set of K different possible futures
* Correspondence to: eweng[at]cmu.edu

Kris Kitani

OURS (Optimized for min JADE)

Good
prediction

Bad
prediction

GT
Collision

Best
prediction

GT

Good
prediction

Figure 1: Multi-agent trajectory forecasting methods are
optimized for single-agent metrics like ADE (left panel). As
a result, within a single joint future, the method may predict
very good trajectories for some agents (e.g. the green agent),
but very bad predictions for others (e.g. the orange agent).
Our Joint AgentFormer, optimized for JADE (right panel),
encourages the predictions of all agents within a joint future
to be close to the ground-truth.

for each target sequence of a certain time length. Each possible future represents a set of x-y position predictions for
all agents in the sequence; we call each set of predictions
a “sample.” Min ADE / FDE is then calculated by finding, for each agent, the lowest-error prediction across the
K samples when compared to the ground-truth. Unfortunately, ADE / FDE do not explicitly account for interacting
futures. The future is not only multi-modal but also interacting; the future trajectories of each agent depend on one
another. For example, a car merging into a busy road may
either choose to push its way in, or wait passively for an
opening. If the car merges, other vehicles on the road will
slow down to let it in. If the car waits, others will maintain
their speed. A scenario where the car merges but the vehicles on the road maintain their speed and crash into the car
would not be a likely future.
Most trajectory forecasting methods produce predictions
for all agents in the sequence jointly, in order to better
model these interactive scenarios. However, under standard
top-K evaluation, the predictions are considered for each
agent marginally, and thus the predictions used in evaluation need not come from the same sample. A method may

20315

