This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Distillation:
Improving Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation on Reflective Surfaces
Xuepeng Shi2 Georgi Dikov1 Gerhard Reitmayr1 Tae-Kyun Kim2,3 Mohsen Ghafoorian1
1
Qualcomm 2 Imperial College London 3 KAIST
Abstract

(a) Mirror image
of light source

Self-supervised monocular depth estimation (SSMDE)
aims at predicting the dense depth maps of monocular images, by learning to minimize a photometric loss using
spatially neighboring image pairs during training. While
SSMDE offers a significant scalability advantage over supervised approaches, it performs poorly on reflective surfaces as the photometric constancy assumption of the photometric loss is violated. We note that the appearance of
reflective surfaces is view-dependent and often there are
views of such surfaces in the training data that are not
contaminated by strong specular reflections. Thus, reflective surfaces can be accurately reconstructed by aggregating the predicted depth of these views. Motivated by this
observation, we propose 3D distillation: a novel training
framework that utilizes the projected depth of reconstructed
reflective surfaces to generate reasonably accurate depth
pseudo-labels. To identify those surfaces automatically, we
employ an uncertainty-guided depth fusion method, combining the smoother and more accurate projected depth on
reflective surfaces and the detailed predicted depth elsewhere. In our experiments using the ScanNet and 7-Scenes
datasets, we show that 3D distillation not only significantly
improves the prediction accuracy, especially on the problematic surfaces, but also that it generalizes well over various underlying network architectures and to new datasets.

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation [37, 7] is the task of predicting the dense depth map of a monocular image. It is
a fundamental and challenging problem in computer vision as it bridges the gap between 2D images and the 3D
world. Supervised monocular depth estimation requires a
large number of images from diverse scenes with ground
truth depth. However, creating depth annotations involves
Email: XuepengShi@outlook.com. X. Shi did the work while interning at Qualcomm.

𝐴: projection in source view with correct depth of 𝑃
𝐵: observed light source in source image

Depth minimizing
the photometric loss

Reflective surface

Correct depth of 𝑃
𝑃
Light source

𝐵
A
Source view

Target view

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) On a reflective surface, predicting the correct
surface depth does not minimize the photometric loss [14],
due to the disparity between the projection with correct
depth A and the observed location B. (b) L→R: Image from
the ScanNet test set (scene0781 00) [4], predicted depth of
Monodepth2 [14] and MonoViT [53] which overestimates
the depth of the highlight. (c) L→R: Ground truth, predicted depth of [14, 53] with our 3D distillation.

expensive hardware and is time-consuming [12, 4, 39]. In
contrast, self-supervised monocular depth estimation (SSMDE) [11, 55, 13, 14] only requires posed images as training data, such as stereo pairs and video sequences, and is
therefore important for domains such as autonomous driving and virtual/augmented reality where the scalability of
the data acquisition for various environments and camera
setups matters. As a consequence, SSMDE has drawn much
attention in recent years [43, 42].
Fundamentally, training an SSMDE model is based on
the photometric loss [14]: given (i) the relative pose between two frames (source and target), (ii) the camera intrinsic parameters and (iii) the predicted depth map of
the target frame, one can transform the source image into

9133

