This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Guided Motion Diffusion for Controllable Human Motion Synthesis
Korrawe Karunratanakul1
1

Konpat Preechakul2

Supasorn Suwajanakorn2
2

ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Siyu Tang1

VISTEC, Thailand

https://korrawe.github.io/gmd-project/

Figure 1. Our proposed Guided Motion Diffusion (GMD) can generate high-quality and diverse motions given a text prompt and a goal
function. We demonstrate the controllability of GMD on four different tasks, guided by the following conditions: (a) text only, (b) text
and trajectory, (c) text and keyframe locations (double circles), and (d) with obstacle avoidance (red-cross areas represent obstacles). The
darker the colors, the later in time.

Abstract
Denoising diffusion models have shown great promise in
human motion synthesis conditioned on natural language
descriptions. However, integrating spatial constraints, such
as pre-defined motion trajectories and obstacles, remains
a challenge despite being essential for bridging the gap
between isolated human motion and its surrounding environment. To address this issue, we propose Guided Motion
Diffusion (GMD), a method that incorporates spatial constraints into the motion generation process. Specifically, we
propose an effective feature projection scheme that manipulates motion representation to enhance the coherency between spatial information and local poses. Together with a
new imputation formulation, the generated motion can reliably conform to spatial constraints such as global motion
trajectories. Furthermore, given sparse spatial constraints
(e.g. sparse keyframes), we introduce a new dense guidance approach to turn a sparse signal, which is susceptible
to being ignored during the reverse steps, into denser signals to guide the generated motion to the given constraints.
Our extensive experiments justify the development of GMD,
which achieves a significant improvement over state-of-theart methods in text-based motion generation while allowing
control of the synthesized motions with spatial constraints.

1. Introduction
Recently, denoising diffusion models have emerged as a
promising approach for human motion generation [11, 62,
64] outperforming other alternatives such as GAN or VAE
in terms of both quality and diversity [7, 51, 58]. Several
studies have focused on generating motion based on expressive text prompts [7, 51], or music [52, 64]. The stateof-the-art motion generation methods, such as MDM [51],
utilize classifier-free guidance to generate motion conditioned on text prompts. However, incorporating spatial constraints into diffusion models remains underexplored. Human motions consist of both semantic and spatial information, where the semantic aspect can be described using natural languages or action labels and the spatial aspect governs physical interaction with surroundings. To generate
realistic human motion in a 3D environment, both aspects
must be incorporated. Our experiments show that simply
adding spatial constraint guidance, such as global trajectories, into the state-of-the-art models or using imputation and
in-painting approaches do not yield satisfactory results.
We identify two main issues that make the motion diffusion models likely to ignore the guidance when conditioned
on spatial objectives: the sparseness of global orientation

2151

