This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C HORD: Category-level Hand-held Object Reconstruction via
Shape Deformation
Kailin Li1 ⋆ Lixin Yang1,2 ⋆ Haoyu Zhen1 Zenan Lin3
Xinyu Zhan1 Licheng Zhong1 Jian Xu4 Kejian Wu4 Cewu Lu1,2 †
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

1

2

3

Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

South China University of Technology

4

XREAL

{kailinli, siriusyang, anye zhen, kelvin34501, zlicheng, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn
3

auzenanlin@mail.scut.edu.cn

4

{jianxu, kejian}@nreal.ai

Figure 1: Examples of Hand-held Objects at Category Level. We proposed a new method C HORD which exploits the categorical shape
prior for reconstructing the shape of intra-class objects. In addition, we constructed a new dataset, C OMIC, of category-level hand-object
interaction. C OMIC encompasses a diverse collection of object instances, materials, hand interactions, and viewing directions, as illustrated.

Abstract
In daily life, humans utilize hands to manipulate objects.
Modeling the shape of objects that are manipulated by the
hand is essential for AI to comprehend daily tasks and to
learn manipulation skills. However, previous approaches
have encountered difficulties in reconstructing the precise
shapes of hand-held objects, primarily owing to a deficiency
in prior shape knowledge and inadequate data for training. As illustrated, given a particular type of tool, such as
a mug, despite its infinite variations in shape and appearance, humans have a limited number of ‘effective’ modes
and poses for its manipulation. This can be attributed to
the fact that humans have mastered the shape prior of the
‘mug’ category, and can quickly establish the corresponding relations between different mug instances and the prior,
such as where the rim and handle are located. In light of
this, we propose a new method, C HORD, for Category-level
⋆ These authors contributed equally.
† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author. He is the member of Qing Yuan
Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China, and Shanghai Qi Zhi institute.

Hand-held Object Reconstruction via shape Deformation.
C HORD deforms a categorical shape prior for reconstructing the intra-class objects. To ensure accurate reconstruction, we empower C HORD with three types of awareness:
appearance, shape, and interacting pose. In addition, we
have constructed a new dataset, C OMIC, of category-level
hand-object interaction. C OMIC contains a rich array of
object instances, materials, hand interactions, and viewing
directions. Extensive evaluation shows that C HORD outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in both quantitative and
qualitative measures. Code, model, and datasets are available at https://kailinli.github.io/CHORD

1. Introduction
In daily life, we perform complex tasks by continually manipulating a limited number of simple objects with
our hands. Understanding the physical nature of handobject interaction is crucial for AI to comprehend human
activities. This requires us to pursue a geometric representation (reconstruction) of the hand-held object, especially for manipulable tools. Many significant efforts
[26, 31, 56, 54, 57, 11, 5] have been made for reconstructing

9444

