This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Ground Instructional Articles in Videos through Narrations
Effrosyni Mavroudi,* Triantafyllos Afouras,* Lorenzo Torresani
Meta AI
{emavroudi, afourast, torresani}@meta.com

Abstract

Steps-to-Narrations-to-Video Alignment (Indirect)
NV

In this paper we present an approach for localizing steps
of procedural activities in narrated how-to videos. To deal
with the scarcity of labeled data at scale, we source the
step descriptions from a language knowledge base (wikiHow) containing instructional articles for a large variety of
procedural tasks. Without any form of manual supervision,
our model learns to temporally ground the steps of procedural articles in how-to videos by matching three modalities: frames, narrations, and step descriptions. Specifically,
our method aligns steps to video by fusing information from
two distinct pathways: i) direct alignment of step descriptions to frames, ii) indirect alignment obtained by composing steps-to-narrations with narrations-to-video correspondences. Notably, our approach performs global temporal
grounding of all steps in an article at once by exploiting
order information, and is trained with step pseudo-labels
which are iteratively refined and aggressively filtered. In
order to validate our model we introduce a new benchmark – HT-Step – obtained by manually annotating a 124hour subset of HowTo100M1 with steps sourced from wikiHow articles. Experiments on this benchmark as well as
zero-shot evaluations on CrossTask demonstrate that our
multi-modality alignment yields dramatic gains over several baselines and prior works. Finally, we show that our
inner module for matching narration-to-video outperforms
by a large margin the state of the art on the HTM-Align
narration-video alignment benchmark.

1. Introduction
Instructional videos have emerged as a popular means
for people to learn new skills and improve their abilities in
executing complex procedural activities, such as cooking
a recipe, performing home improvements, or fixing things.
In addition to being useful teaching materials for humans,
how-to videos are a promising medium for learning by ma* Equal contribution
1 A test server is

accessible at https://eval.ai/web/
challenges/challenge-page/2082.

Video Frames

SN
Steps

Narrations
SV

Steps-to-Video Alignment (Direct)
VINA

1. Wash the pumpkins

“First thing you’ll need to do
is cut off the stem.”

Video Frames

2. Cut the pumpkins

“This requires a sharp knife
and some muscle”

3. Scoop out the seeds

“Thanks for watching”

10. Puree pumpkin flesh

Narrations (ASR)

Narrated
Instructional Videos

Instruction Steps
Instructional Articles
Make Pastel De

Make Chicken

Training
Resources
(No manual
annotations)
~370k

1. Using a meat pounder or sharp knife, pound
or cut the chicken into 1/4" thick cutlets.
Chicken piccata should be thin …
2. Coat the chicken with salt and pepper. Use as
much as you desire, making sure the entire pieces
have at least ..
3. Dredge the chicken in flour, coating
completely. Dredging means coating it, and it
should be a nice …
4. In a thick-bottomed pan on medium, heat up
2 tablespoons butter and 2 tablespoons olive oil.
You could use all of one or the other, but this
mixture actually has a purpose — the two work
together to keep

Make Zuppa
1. Place the Italian sausage and crushed red
pepper into a large saucepan. Start cooking the
sausage over low heat.
2. Sauté the bacon, onions and garlic. Use the
same pan you used for the sausage, without
washing it.Cook these over low-medium heat.
3. Add the water and chicken bouillon. You
will need to heat this until it boils.Increase the
heat to medium.Cook the soup until it gets to a
full,
4. Add the sliced potatoes. These will need to
cook until they are soft and tender.At medium
heat, cook the soup with the added potatoes.

Make Hungarian
Goulash
1. Heat 2 tbsp. of vegetable oil in a pan over
medium heat. Give the oil a minute to heat up.
2. Add 1 chopped onion to the oil. Sauté the
onion until it's golden. Then, remove the pan from
the heat.
3. Add 1 tbsp. of paprika to the onion. Stir to
incorporate the ingredients.
4. Add 1 lb. of cubed beef, a pinch of salt, and 3
tbsp. of water to the pan. Stir the ingredients
again to incorporate them.
5. Heat the pan over medium heat again. Stir the
ingredients again.

1. Make mashed potatoes. Chop the potatoes into
chunks, boil until mashable, and then mash away.
Add a quarter or a half a stick of butter
2. Chop and sauté a large onion with cumin
until soft and sweet.
3. Hard boil the eggs. Peel and chop into small
pieces.
4. Pan fry two or two and a half pounds of
ground beef. Drain when almost cooked. Add
onion, paprika, salt and pepper to taste.
5. Grease a nine-by-nine-inch (23cm x 23cm)
oven dish. Good trick: If you have the paper from
a stick of butter, don't throw it out. Rub the buttery
side along the dish to…

Make Chiles
1. Make the filling. You will make two fillings:
one comprised of meat, and the other of
cheese.Meat filling
2. Roast the chile peppers. Sometimes, you
can buy the peppers already roasted, especially
in areas where …
3. Prepare the batter. This can be done while
the chiles are roasting. Place a ..
4. Cut an opening in the side of the chile.
Make it large enough that stuffing can be put in,
but not so large ..
5. Stuff the chiles. Be careful because the soft,
roasted chiles are easily torn. Begin with the
meat stuffing…

~14k

Figure 1: Our proposed Video, Instructions, and Narrations
Aligner (VINA) learns to simultaneously ground narrations
and instruction steps in how-to videos from an uncurated
set of narrated videos and a separate knowledge base of instructional articles, without any manual annotations. This is
contrary to prior work that learns how to align a video with
a single sequence of sentences by leveraging ground-truth
pairs of video-text sequences, e.g., a video and its narrations [22], or a video and an annotated, ordered list of steps
demonstrated in it [16].
chines, as they provide revealing visual demonstrations of
complex activities and show elaborate human-object interactions in a variety of domains. Motivated by this observation, in this work we look at the task of temporally localizing the steps of procedural activities in instructional videos.
This problem is foundational to the broader goal of humanprocedure understanding and advances on this task promise
to enable breakthrough applications, such as AI-powered
skill coaching and human-to-robot imitation learning.
Prior work has tackled procedural step localization by
leveraging either (a) fully-annotated datasets where the task

15201

