This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Novel View Synthesis with 3D-Aware Diffusion Models
Eric R. Chan * †1,2 , Koki Nagano* 2 , Matthew A. Chan* 2 , Alexander W. Bergman* 1 , Jeong Joon Park* 1 ,
Axel Levy1 , Miika Aittala2 , Shalini De Mello2 , Tero Karras2 , and Gordon Wetzstein1
1

Stanford University

2

NVIDIA

Abstract
We present a diffusion-based model for 3D-aware generative novel view synthesis from as few as a single input
image. Our model samples from the distribution of possible
renderings consistent with the input and, even in the presence
of ambiguity, is capable of rendering diverse and plausible
novel views. To achieve this, our method makes use of existing
2D diffusion backbones but, crucially, incorporates geometry priors in the form of a 3D feature volume. This latent
feature field captures the distribution over possible scene representations and improves our method’s ability to generate
view-consistent novel renderings. In addition to generating
novel views, our method has the ability to autoregressively
synthesize 3D-consistent sequences. We demonstrate state-ofthe-art results on synthetic renderings and room-scale scenes;
we also show compelling results for challenging, real-world
objects.

Figure 1. Our 3D-aware diffusion model synthesizes realistic novel
views from as little as a single input image. These results are
generated with the ShapeNet [12], Matterport3D [11], and Common
Objects in 3D [58] datasets.

1. Introduction
In this work, we address multiple open problems in novel
view synthesis (NVS): to design an NVS framework that
(1) operates from as little as a single image and is capable
of (2) generating long-range of sequences far from the input
views as well as (3) handling both individual objects and
complex scenes (see Fig. 1). While existing few-shot NVS
approaches, trained on a category of objects with a regression
objective, can generate geometrically consistent renderings,
i.e., sequences whose frames share a coherent scene structure,
they are ineffective in handling extrapolation and unbounded
scenes (see Fig. 2). Dealing with long-range extrapolation
(2) requires using a generative prior to deal with the innate
ambiguity that comes with completing portions of the scenes
that were unobserved in the input. In this work, we propose
a diffusion-based few-shot NVS framework that can generate
plausible and competitively geometrically consistent renderings, pushing the boundaries of NVS towards a solution that
* Equal contribution.
† Work was done during an internship at NVIDIA.

Figure 2. While regression-based models are capable of effective
view synthesis near input views (top row), they blur across ambiguity
when extrapolating. Generative approaches can continue to sample
plausible renderings far from input views (second row, third column).

can operate in a wide range of challenging real-world data.
Previous approaches to few-shot novel view synthesis
can broadly be grouped into two categories. Geometry-priorbased methods [61, 60, 48, 43, 49, 3, 104] have drawn from
work on scene representations and neural rendering [87].
While they achieve impressive results on interpolating near
14217

