This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CiteTracker: Correlating Image and Text for Visual Tracking
Xin Li1,† , Yuqing Huang1,2,† , Zhenyu He2,∗ , Yaowei Wang1,∗ , Huchuan Lu3 , and Ming-Hsuan Yang4,5
1
Peng Cheng Laboratory 2 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3
Dalian University of Technology 4 UC Merced 5 Yonsei University

Abstract
Existing visual tracking methods typically take an image patch as the reference of the target to perform tracking.
However, a single image patch cannot provide a complete
and precise concept of the target object as images are limited in their ability to abstract and can be ambiguous, which
makes it difficult to track targets with drastic variations.
In this paper, we propose the CiteTracker to enhance target modeling and inference in visual tracking by connecting
images and text. Specifically, we develop a text generation
module to convert the target image patch into a descriptive
text containing its class and attribute information, providing a comprehensive reference point for the target. In addition, a dynamic description module is designed to adapt
to target variations for more effective target representation.
We then associate the target description and the search image using an attention-based correlation module to generate the correlated features for target state reference. Extensive experiments on five diverse datasets are conducted
to evaluate the proposed algorithm and the favorable performance against the state-of-the-art methods demonstrates
the effectiveness of the proposed tracking method. The
source code and trained models will be released at https:
//github.com/NorahGreen/CiteTracker.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking aims to estimate the state (location and extent) of an arbitrary target in a video sequence
based on a specified region of the target in the initial frame
as a reference point. It is challenging to locate a target that
undergoes drastic appearance variations (e.g., changes in
pose, illumination, or occlusions) using only one target image sample since the target appearances can be significantly
different. To successfully track the target with appearance
changes, it is crucial to acquire a comprehensive representation of the target for establishing associations between the
target exemplar and the target in test frames.
† Equal contribution, ∗ corresponding author

Target image patch

‘A bike with blue color’
Text features

Associated
visual features

Visual
features

Vision-vision
inference

…

Text-vision
inference

…
Targets in the test video with variations

Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed algorithm and existing
tracking methods in terms of target modeling and association. The
left and right parts depict the typical visual tracking framework
and the proposed one, respectively. Our approach first generates
a text description of the target object and then takes the feature of
the text to estimate the target state in the test image, enabling a
more comprehensive target modeling and association.

Most existing deep trackers [2, 19, 36, 7, 39] learn an
embedded feature space, where target samples with different appearances are still close to each other, to generate a
robust representation to target variations. To build a more
comprehensive target representation and better associate the
target exemplar with the test target, several recent trackers [6, 40, 23] perform interaction of the target template
and search region in every block of their feature extraction
backbone, achieving state-of-the-art tracking performance.
However, these methods do not perform well when the target changes drastically or the given target exemplars are of
low-quality (i.e., the appearance of the target exemplar is
uncommon or the exemplar contains background noise).
The following issues arise when using an image patch
as the target reference for tracking. First, the visual representation of a target is insufficient to provide a comprehensive understanding for recognizing the target with appear-

9974

