This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fast Full-frame Video Stabilization with Iterative Optimization
Weiyue Zhao1 Xin Li2 Zhan Peng1 Xianrui Luo1 Xinyi Ye1 Hao Lu1 Zhiguo Cao1 *
1
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education; School of Artificial
Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Albany, Albany NY 12222
{zhaoweiyue, peng zhan, xianruiluo, xinyiye, hlu, zgcao}@hust.edu.cn
xli48@albany.edu

Abstract
Video stabilization refers to the problem of transforming a shaky video into a visually pleasing one. The question of how to strike a good trade-off between visual quality and computational speed has remained one of the open
challenges in video stabilization. Inspired by the analogy
between wobbly frames and jigsaw puzzles, we propose an
iterative optimization-based learning approach using synthetic datasets for video stabilization, which consists of
two interacting submodules: motion trajectory smoothing
and full-frame outpainting. First, we develop a two-level
(coarse-to-fine) stabilizing algorithm based on the probabilistic flow field. The confidence map associated with the
estimated optical flow is exploited to guide the search for
shared regions through backpropagation. Second, we take
a divide-and-conquer approach and propose a novel multiframe fusion strategy to render full-frame stabilized views.
An important new insight brought about by our iterative
optimization approach is that the target video can be interpreted as the fixed point of nonlinear mapping for video
stabilization. We formulate video stabilization as a problem
of minimizing the amount of jerkiness in motion trajectories, which guarantees convergence with the help of fixedpoint theory. Extensive experimental results are reported
to demonstrate the superiority of the proposed approach in
terms of computational speed and visual quality. The code
will be available on GitHub.

1. Introduction
With the growing popularity of short videos on social
media platforms (e.g., TikTok, Instagram), video has played
an increasingly important role in our daily life. However,
casually captured videos are often shaky and wobbly due to
* Corresponding author

https://github.com/zwyking/Fast-Stab

amateur shooting. Although it is possible to alleviate those
problems by resorting to professional equipment (e.g., dollies and steadicams), the cost of hardware-based solutions
is often expensive, making it impractical for real-world applications. By contrast, software-based or computational
solutions such as video stabilization algorithms [12] have
become an attractive alternative to improve the visual quality of shaky video by eliminating undesirable jitter.
Existing video stabilization techniques can be classified
into two categories: optimization-based and learning-based.
Traditional optimization-based algorithms [11,18,21,27,39]
have been widely studied due to their speed and robustness. The challenges of them are the occlusion caused by
changes in depth of field and the interference caused by
foreground objects on camera pose regression. Furthermore, their results often contain large missing regions at
frame borders, particularly when videos with a large camera motion. In recent years, learning-based video stabilization algorithms [6, 23, 45, 50] have shown their superiority
by achieving higher visual quality compared to traditional
methods. However, their stabilization model is too complex
for rapid computation, and its generalization property is unknown due to the scarcity of training datasets.
To overcome those limitations, we present an iterative
optimization-based learning approach that is efficient and
robust, capable of achieving high-quality stabilization results with full-frame rendering, as shown in Fig. 1. The
probabilistic stabilized network addresses the issues of occlusion and interfering objects, and achieves fast pose estimation. Then the full-frame outpainting module retains the
original field of view (FoV) without aggressive cropping.
An important new insight brought by our approach is that
the objective of video stabilization is to suppress the implicitly embedded noise in the video frames rather than the explicit noise in the pixel intensity values. This inspired us to
adopt an expectation-maximization (EM)-like approach for
video stabilization. Importantly, considering the strong redundancy of video in the temporal domain, we ingeniously

23534

