This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ADNet: Lane Shape Prediction via Anchor Decomposition
Lingyu Xiao † , Xiang Li ‡ , Sen Yang † , Wankou Yang † *
†

‡

School of Automation, Southeast University, China
IMPlus@PCALab, VCIP, CS, Nankai University, China

lyhsiao@seu.edu.cn, xiang.li.implus@njust.edu.cn, {yangsenius, wkyang}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit the limitations of anchor-based
lane detection methods, which have predominantly focused
on fixed anchors that stem from the edges of the image, disregarding their versatility and quality. To overcome the
inflexibility of anchors, we decompose them into learning
the heat map of starting points and their associated directions. This decomposition removes the limitations on
the starting point of anchors, making our algorithm adaptable to different lane types in various datasets. To enhance the quality of anchors, we introduce the Large Kernel Attention (LKA) for Feature Pyramid Network (FPN).
This significantly increases the receptive field, which is crucial in capturing the sufficient context as lane lines typically run throughout the entire image. We have named
our proposed system the Anchor Decomposition Network
(ADNet). Additionally, we propose the General Lane IoU
(GLIoU) loss, which significantly improves the performance
of ADNet in complex scenarios. Experimental results on
three widely used lane detection benchmarks, VIL-100, CULane, and TuSimple, demonstrate that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on VIL-100 and exhibits
competitive accuracy on CULane and TuSimple. Code
and models will be released on https://github.com/
Sephirex-X/ADNet.

1. Introduction
Recently, the utilisation of artificial intelligence technology for the field of autonomous driving has drawn large attention from academia and industry. As a crucial part of autonomous driving system, Advance Driver Assistance System (ADAS) requires vehicles to respond timely and accurately to changes in the environment. Lane line is a vital
part of the vehicle sensing the environment, as the ADAS
* Corresponding author

(a) Annotations

(b) Traditional

(c) Ours

Figure 1: Illustration of different dynamic anchor proposal
methods. (a) illustrates two common lane prediction scenarios. In the first row, the lane lines originate from the edges
of the image, while in the second row, the lane lines can
emanate from any location within the image. (b) proposes
anchor dispersedly [49], resulting in low anchor quality.
This anchor proposal method is adequate on first row scenarios but oversimplistic on the second (emphasised by yellow oval). The points and lines represent start points and
anchors respectively. (c) we propose anchor concentratively, possible start points are shown on activation map,
anchors can merge from the whole image, which ensures
anchor quality and flexibility.
needs the shape of lane lines to keep the vehicle on track.
With the advancement of CNN, recent studies on lane
shape detection have made great progress on either accuracy [35, 40, 49] or real-time performance [31, 32, 24].
Anchor-based methods have shown superior accuracy and
efficiency compared to other methods on popular benchmarks such as [29, 2, 37]. However there are still challenges
to the wide application of anchor-based methods.
The first issue is the flexibility of anchors. Previous
anchor-based methods [35, 21, 49, 31] have posited that
lane lines can only originate from the three edges of an
image (left, bottom, right). While this assumption leverages prior information of lane lines to achieve favourable
accuracy and speed, it is oversimplistic as lane lines do not
always start from the three edges due to the obstructions

6404

