This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Re-ReND: Real-time Rendering of NeRFs across Devices
Sara Rojas1 , Jesus Zarzar1 , Juan C. Pérez1 ,
Artsiom Sanakoyeu2 , Ali Thabet2 , Albert Pumarola2 , and Bernard Ghanem1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), 2 Meta Research

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel approach for rendering
a pre-trained Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) in real-time
on resource-constrained devices. We introduce Re-ReND,
a method enabling Real-time Rendering of NeRFs across
Devices. Re-ReND is designed to achieve real-time performance by converting the NeRF into a representation that
can be efficiently processed by standard graphics pipelines.
The proposed method distills the NeRF by extracting the
learned density into a mesh, while the learned color information is factorized into a set of matrices that represent the
scene’s light field. Factorization implies the field is queried
via inexpensive MLP-free matrix multiplications, while using a light field allows rendering a pixel by querying the
field a single time—as opposed to hundreds of queries when
employing a radiance field. Since the proposed representation can be implemented using a fragment shader, it can
be directly integrated with standard rasterization frameworks. Our flexible implementation can render a NeRF
in real-time with low memory requirements and on a wide
range of resource-constrained devices, including mobiles
and AR/VR headsets. Notably, we find that Re-ReND can
achieve over a 2.6-fold increase in rendering speed versus
the state-of-the-art without perceptible losses in quality.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [20] have revolutionized the field of novel view synthesis, as demonstrated by
their impressive capacity to reconstruct complex objects
and scenes with remarkable detail [2, 31]. The impressive performance of NeRFs casts them as a decisive tool
for capturing and representing 3D objects and scenes. As
a result, NeRFs hold great promise for countless practical applications, including video games, movies, and Augmented/Virtual Reality (AR/VR).
However, the impressive performance of NeRFs comes
with significant computational costs when rendering novel
views. This slow rendering is mainly due to two limit-

Figure 1.
Rendering NeRFs in real-time on resourceconstrained devices, such as AR/VR headsets and mobiles. We
present Re-ReND, a method for rendering a pre-trained NeRF in
real-time on a variety of devices with constrained computational
resources. Re-ReND preserves remarkable photo-metric quality
even when rendering at over 1,013 FPS on a desktop browser, or
at the capped 74 FPS of a VR headset. Please, refer to the accompanying video for a demonstration of Re-ReND’s capacities.

ing properties of NeRFs, which dramatically increase their
computational requirements. Firstly, they use a volumetric representation to model scenes [9], implying that rendering a single pixel requires hundreds of queries in space.
Secondly, they leverage a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) to
model radiance and density across space, meaning that each
of those spatial queries involves evaluating an expensive
MLP. These properties make it challenging to render NeRFs
in real-time on resource-constrained devices, which hinders
their practical deployment.
A plethora of research efforts target the efficiency of
NeRFs. A line of work focused on shortening training
times [27, 8, 21], while another looked at accelerating
rendering times [22, 26]. Notably, some methods pretabulate a NeRF’s output on a sparse grid, and achieve
real-time rendering by leveraging powerful GPUs [36,
13]. However, these methods are still incompatible with
widely-available graphics pipelines that enable rendering on
resource-constrained devices via popular frameworks such
as WebGL and OpenGL ES. This incompatibility stems

3632

