This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffPose: Multi-hypothesis Human Pose Estimation using Diffusion Models
Karl Holmquist
Bastian Wandt
Linköping University
[name.surname]@liu.se

Abstract
Traditionally, monocular 3D human pose estimation employs a machine learning model to predict the most likely
3D pose for a given input image. However, a single image can be highly ambiguous and induces multiple plausible solutions for the 2D-3D lifting step, which results in
overly confident 3D pose predictors. To this end, we propose DiffPose, a conditional diffusion model that predicts
multiple hypotheses for a given input image. Compared
to similar approaches, our diffusion model is straightforward and avoids intensive hyperparameter tuning, complex
network structures, mode collapse, and unstable training.
Moreover, we tackle the problem of over-simplification of
the intermediate representation of the common two-step approaches which first estimate a distribution of 2D joint locations via joint-wise heatmaps and consecutively use their
maximum argument for the 3D pose estimation step. Since
such a simplification of the heatmaps removes valid information about possibly correct, though labeled unlikely, joint
locations, we propose to represent the heatmaps as a set of
2D joint candidate samples. To extract information about
the original distribution from these samples, we introduce
our embedding transformer which conditions the diffusion
model. Experimentally, we show that DiffPose improves
upon the state of the art for multi-hypothesis pose estimation by 3-5% for simple poses and outperforms it by a large
margin for highly ambiguous poses.1

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation from monocular images is an
open research question in computer vision with many applications, e.g. in human-machine interaction, autonomous
driving, animation, sports, and medicine. Recent advances in deep learning-based human pose estimation show
promising results on the path to highly accurate 3D reconstructions from single images. Typically, a neural network
is trained to reconstruct the most likely 3D pose given an in1 Our code and trained models will be made available at:
https://github.com/bastianwandt/DiffPose/

Figure 1. Comparison of our approach to Sharma et al. [40] and
Wehrbein et al. [52]. While [40] produces very similar poses, even
for uncertain detections, [52] achieves a higher diversity. However,
they oversimplify heatmaps as a Gaussian and, thus, struggle with
different uncertainty distributions. Note that the densest region of
samples (red) for [40] and [52] is very similar and at a point with
low certainty. By contrast, DiffPose produces 3D poses that cover
the full uncertainty in the heatmap leading to a lower error.

put image. However, the projection from 3D to a 2D plane,
which is performed by a camera capturing a person, results
in an inevitable loss of information. This lost information
cannot be uniquely reconstructed, and therefore we argue
that a meaningful 3D human pose estimator must be able to
recover the full distribution of possible 3D poses for a given
2D pose, e.g. as a set of poses with different likelihoods.
Moreover, downstream tasks can be built to benefit from unlikely poses; for example, consider an autonomous vehicle
making decisions based on a single output versus being able
to see all possible, though less likely, outcomes. Consequently, interest in this field, called multi-hypothesis human
pose estimation, is increasing [16, 25, 35, 40, 23, 52, 29].
Some approaches estimate a small fixed-size set of poses
[16, 25, 35, 29] which are not able to fully represent the real
output distribution. Others are based on variational autoencoders [40] or normalizing flows [23, 52] and can predict an

15977

