This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Image Anonymization in the Context of Image Classification with
Neural Networks
Arcadi Llanza Carmona1,2
Amir Nakib1,2
Cyclope.ai, Paris, France
2
University Paris Est Créteil, Laboratoire LISSI, Paris, France

Nadiya Shvai1 *

1

nadiya.shvai@cyclope.ai, {arcadi.llanza-carmona, nakib}@u-pec.fr

Abstract
Deep learning based methods have become the de-facto
standard for various computer vision tasks. Nevertheless,
they have repeatedly shown their vulnerability to various
form of input perturbations such as pixels modification, region anonymization, etc. which are closely related to the
adversarial attacks. This research particularly addresses
the case of image anonymization, which is significantly important to preserve privacy and hence to secure digitized
form of personal information from being exposed and potentially misused by different services that have captured
it for various purposes. However, applying anonymization
causes the classifier to provide different class decisions before and after applying it and therefore reduces the classifier’s reliability and usability. In order to achieve a robust
solution to this problem we propose a novel anonymization procedure that allows the existing classifiers to become
class decision invariant on the anonymized images without any modification requires to apply on the classification
models. We conduct numerous experiments on the popular
ImageNet benchmark as well as on a large scale industrial
toll classification problem’s dataset. Obtained results confirm the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed method
as it obtained 0% rate of class decision change for both
datasets compared to 15.95% on ImageNet and 0.18% on
toll dataset obtained by applying the naı̈ve anonymization
approaches. Moreover, it has shown a great potential to be
applied to similar problems from different domains.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models require, in general case, a vast
load of data for training, control of performance and analysis of the models. For various reasons such as cost of labeling or necessity to do historic analysis, it might be necessary
to keep the data for a longer period of time. For numerous
* Corresponding author

automatic system based service providers such as surveillance, security, toll classification, these data often concerns
personal information including identity via face, location
with car license plates, etc. Then, saving these information
certainly raises the concern on personal privacy and hence
on securing the digitized form of personal information from
being exposed and potentially misused. As a consequence,
multiple privacy protection laws such as General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [19] in European Union, California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) in California, USA,
China Cybersecurity Law (CSL) in China, amended Act on
the Protection of Personal Information (APPI) in Japan etc.
impose severe limitations on data operations in order to protect private data of the end customer. Indeed, one potential
solution of the data saving necessity for the services vs the
restrictions imposed by the privacy preservation laws is to
remove the sensitive information (e.g., face, license plate)
from the data via anonymization. Particularly, for the image related tasks anonymization means removing sensitive
information from the image by modifying its corresponding
part (for example, by blurring). This research considers the
problem within the context of large scale image classification.
Recent research demonstrates that naı̈vely applying
anonymization effects the performance of the deep convolutional neural network (CNN) based classifiers [10]. Particularly, anonymization causes the classifier to provide different class decisions before and after applying it and hence
reduces the classifier’s reliability and usability. This creates
dual inference pipeline: classifier vs. anonymizer + classifier, where the invariance of the predicted class is not a
priori guaranteed. Fig. 1 illustrates this problem on an image from ImageNet, where the classifier predicts a different
class once the image region is anonymized.
Intuitively, the dual inference pipeline has various immediate solutions such as: (1st) developing the classifiers
directly with the anonymized data and (2nd) improve the
classifier by training it with both original and anonymized
data. Indeed, for any offline (non real-time) or time-

5074

