This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MARS: Model-agnostic Biased Object Removal without Additional Supervision
for Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Sanghyun Jo1
In-Jae Yu2
Kyungsu Kim3 *
2
OGQ, Seoul, Korea
Samsung Electronics, Suwon, Korea
3
Department of Data Convergence and Future Medicine, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Korea
{shjo.april, ijyu.phd, kskim.doc}@gmail.com
1

Abstract
Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation aims to reduce labeling costs by training semantic segmentation models using weak supervision, such as image-level class labels. However, most approaches struggle to produce accurate localization maps and suffer from false predictions
in class-related backgrounds (i.e., biased objects), such as
detecting a railroad with the train class. Recent methods
that remove biased objects require additional supervision
for manually identifying biased objects for each problematic class and collecting their datasets by reviewing predictions, limiting their applicability to the real-world dataset
with multiple labels and complex relationships for biasing. Following the first observation that biased features
can be separated and eliminated by matching biased objects with backgrounds in the same dataset, we propose a
fully-automatic/model-agnostic biased removal framework
called MARS (Model-Agnostic biased object Removal without additional Supervision), which utilizes semantically
consistent features of an unsupervised technique to eliminate biased objects in pseudo labels. Surprisingly, we show
that MARS achieves new state-of-the-art results on two popular benchmarks, PASCAL VOC 2012 (val: 77.7%, test:
77.2%) and MS COCO 2014 (val: 49.4%), by consistently
improving the performance of various WSSS models by at
least 30% without additional supervision. Code is available at https://github.com/shjo-april/MARS.

1. Introduction
Fully-supervised semantic segmentation (FSSS) [7, 8],
which aims to classify each pixel of an image, requires timeconsuming tasks and significant domain expertise in some
applications [54] to prepare pixel-wise annotations. By contrast, weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS)
with image-level supervision, which is the most economical among weak supervision, such as bounding boxes [12],
scribbles [35], and points [4], reduces the labeling cost by
* Correspondence to

More Gap

SEAM (2020)

RS+EPM (2022)

Supervised Learning

bicycle

(a) FP/FN Analysis
Ground Truth
WSSS

train

boat

(b) Per-class FP Analysis
1. Non-problematic classes (65%)
bicycle

bus

car

cat

chair

horse

cow

table

sheep

person

mbk

dog

sofa

2. Problematic classes (35%) related to biased objects
aeroplane

(c) Examples of boat and train classes

cloud and vapour trail

bird

tree, flower, and rock

boat

sea, river, lake, and dock

bottle

cup and glass

potted plant

plant

train

railway and railroad

tv/monitor

keyboard and server

(d) Analysis of Biased Problem in PASCAL VOC

Figure 1. (a) Comparison with existing WSSS studies [49, 21] and
FSSS. (b) Per-class FP analysis. (c) Examples of biased objects in
boat and train classes. (d) Quantitative analysis of biased objects
on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset. Red dotted circles illustrate
the false activation of biased objects such as railroad and sea.

more than 20× [4]. The multi-stage learning framework
is the dominant approach for training WSSS models with
image-level labels. Since this framework heavily relies on
the quality of initial class activation maps (CAMs), numerous researchers [2, 49, 28, 10, 51, 21] moderate the wellknown drawback of CAMs, highlighting the most discriminative part of an object to reduce the false negative (FN).
However, the false positive (FP) is the most crucial bottleneck to narrow the performance gap between WSSS and
FSSS in Fig. 1(a). According to per-class FP analysis in
Fig. 1(b), predicting target classes (e.g., boat) with classrelated objects (e.g., sea) are factored into increasing FP
in Fig. 1(c), besides incorrect annotations in the bicycle
class. Moreover, 35% of classes in the PASCAL VOC 2012
dataset have biased objects in Fig. 1(d). These results show
that the performance degradation of previous approaches
depends on the presence or absence of problematic classes
in the dataset. We call this issue a biased problem. We also
add examples of all classes in the Appendix.

614

