This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Test-time Personalizable Forecasting of 3D Human Poses
Qiongjie Cui1
Huaijiang Sun1 *
Jianfeng Lu1
Weiqing Li1
Bin Li 2 Hongwei Yi3 , Haofan Wang4
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Tianjin AiForward Science and Technology Co., Ltd., China
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tubingen, Germany 4 Xiaohongshu Inc
cuiqiongjie@njust.edu.cn

sunhuaijiang@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Current motion forecasting approaches typically train a
deep end-to-end model from the source domain data, and
then apply it directly to target subjects. Despite promising results, they remain non-optimal, due to privacy considerations, the test person and his/her natural properties
(e.g., behavioral trait) are typically unseen in training. In
this case, the source pre-trained model has a low ability to
adapt to these out-of-source characteristics, resulting in an
unreliable prediction. To tackle this issue, we propose a
novel helper-predictor test-time personalization approach
(H/P-TTP), which allows for a generalizable representation of out-of-source subjects to gain more realistic predictions. Concretely, the helper is preceded by explicit and implicit augmenters, where the former yields noisy sequences
to improve robustness, while the latter is to generate noveldomain data with an adversarial learning paradigm. Then,
the domain-generalizable learning is achieved where the
helper can extract cross-subject invariant-knowledge to update the predictor. At test time, given a new person, the
predictor is able to be further optimized to empower personalized capabilities to the specific properties. Extensive
experiments show that with H/P-TTP, the existing models
are significantly improved for various unseen subjects. The
project page is available at https://sites.google.
com/view/hp-ttp.

1. Introduction
Forecasting the high-fidelity future human poses, conditioned on a given historical sequence, has attracted increasing attention in recent years. In a variety of 3D vision-based
applications, such as autonomous driving and robot navigation, it offers tremendous potential, especially for tasks that
call for seamless interaction with humans [11, 9, 29].
Recent years have witnessed a proliferation in the ex* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Starting from off-the-shelf networks, we first train a
baseline model [26] on the source data, which is further optimized
and personalized to the target person during the test phase. Here,
we present an illustration of the pose sequence of various subjects, in which each 3D feature embedding is created by t-SNE.
We notice that the motion patterns of test subjects fail to match the
source one. Moreover, our prediction skeleton (blue) is closer to
the ground truth (red) against the vanilla baseline [26].

ploration of this emerging field [16, 5, 2]. In particular, ongoing efforts are being devoted to deep learning approaches, which typically train a generic model from largescale datasets, and then apply it to new test subjects and
samples during the deployment phase. We notice that these
methods have become mainstream and are now rapidly
evolving [49, 58, 24, 32, 3, 33].
Despite notable successes, the existing approaches are
sub-optimal, because the generic model cannot be adapted
to unseen personalized subjects [48, 21, 52]. To be precise,
due to data limitations or privacy concerns, unseen test persons, as well as their individual properties (e.g., age, gender,
or behavioral trait), are typically disjointed with the training. It may lead to a large distribution gap between the target and source domain [19, 42, 50], as shown in Figure 1.
For example, for the H3.6M dataset [22], a widely-adopted
data splitting strategy takes subject-5 (S5) as the test and

274

