This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised Image Denoising with Downsampled Invariance Loss and
Conditional Blind-Spot Network
Yeong Il Jang1
Keuntek Lee1
Gu Yong Park1
Seyun Kim2
Nam Ik Cho1,3
1
Department of ECE, INMC, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
2
Gauss Labs Inc.
3
IPAI, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{jyicu, leekt000, pgy9134}@snu.ac.kr, seyun.kim@gausslabs.ai, nicho@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
There have been many image denoisers using deep neural networks, which outperform conventional model-based
methods by large margins. Recently, self-supervised methods have attracted attention because constructing a large
real noise dataset for supervised training is an enormous
burden. The most representative self-supervised denoisers are based on blind-spot networks, which exclude the
receptive field’s center pixel. However, excluding any input pixel is abandoning some information, especially when
the input pixel at the corresponding output position is excluded. In addition, a standard blind-spot network fails to
reduce real camera noise due to the pixel-wise correlation
of noise, though it successfully removes independently distributed synthetic noise. Hence, to realize a more practical denoiser, we propose a novel self-supervised training
framework that can remove real noise. For this, we derive the theoretic upper bound of a supervised loss where
the network is guided by the downsampled blinded output.
Also, we design a conditional blind-spot network (C-BSN),
which selectively controls the blindness of the network to
use the center pixel information. Furthermore, we exploit a
random subsampler to decorrelate noise spatially, making
the C-BSN free of visual artifacts that were often seen in
downsample-based methods. Extensive experiments show
that the proposed C-BSN achieves state-of-the-art performance on real-world datasets as a self-supervised denoiser
and shows qualitatively pleasing results without any postprocessing or refinement.

1. Introduction
Image denoising aims to recover a clean image from
its corrupted counterpart. Recently, image denoisers using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved
great performances, significantly outperforming conven-

(a) Noisy
28.48dB / 0.9011

(b) CVF-SID [25]
34.21dB / 0.9381

(c) AP-BSN [19]
34.45dB / 0.9081

(d) C-BSN (Ours)
36.31dB / 0.9483

Figure 1. Visual comparison of denoised images on SIDD validation [2]. Our C-BSN shows better details and no artifacts without post-processing or refinement. Best viewed in pdf.

tional model-based ones [43, 44, 32]. They trained networks by minimizing the difference between the network
outputs and the ground-truth clean images. In early works,
they assumed the camera noise as an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and generated a large number of cleannoisy image pairs for the supervised training. However,
the denoisers trained with AWGN fail to generalize to realworld camera noises due to the difference between the
Gaussian and real noise distributions [10]. Specifically, real

12196

