This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Breaking Temporal Consistency:
Generating Video Universal Adversarial Perturbations Using Image Models
Hee-Seon Kim, Minji Son, Minbeom Kim, Myung-Joon Kwon, Changick Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{hskim98, ming0103, alsqja1754, kwon19, changick}@kaist.ac.kr

1. Image model-based optimization

Abstract

Feature Space

Minimize Similarity

+

As video analysis using deep learning models becomes
more widespread, the vulnerability of such models to adversarial attacks is becoming a pressing concern. In particular, Universal Adversarial Perturbation (UAP) poses a
signiﬁcant threat, as a single perturbation can mislead deep
learning models on entire datasets. We propose a novel
video UAP using image data and image model. This enables us to take advantage of the rich image data and image model-based studies available for video applications.
However, there is a challenge that image models are limited
in their ability to analyze the temporal aspects of videos,
which is crucial for a successful video attack. To address
this challenge, we introduce the Breaking Temporal Consistancy (BTC) method, which is the ﬁrst attempt to incorporate temporal information into video attacks using image models. We aim to generate adversarial videos that
have opposite patterns to the original. Speciﬁcally, BTCUAP minimizes the feature similarity between neighboring
frames in videos. Our approach is simple but effective at
attacking unseen video models. Additionally, it is applicable to videos of varying lengths and invariant to temporal
shifts. Our approach surpasses existing methods in terms
of effectiveness on various datasets, including ImageNet,
UCF-101, and Kinetics-400.

BTC-UAP

Image
Model

Image

Pseudo Video

2. Video model-based adversarial attack
Videos

+ BTC-UAP

Repeated

…
…
…
ST-UAP
…

…

Video
Model

Soccer
Juggling

Video
Model

Baby
Crawling

All Videos Sharing
repeated BTC-UAP

Figure 1: Overall illustration of Breaking Temporal
Consistency Method. We propose a novel approach to
minimize the similarity between features of consecutive
frames in video adversarial attacks. Please note that the illustrated BTC-UAP is not a real representation, but rather
serves as a visual aid. The different colors represent the low
similarity between features.
rious consequences. Despite these concerns, the problem
of adversarial attacks on video models remains largely unsolved.
Adversarial attacks can be broadly categorized into
white-box [37, 14, 29] and black-box [39, 40] attacks.
White-box attacks exploit model information to generate
adversarial examples, while black-box attacks are more
challenging due to the lack of model access. In real-world
scenarios, accessing the target model is often difﬁcult or impossible, so black-box attacks are more practical. One way
to launch black-box attacks is by leveraging the transferability of adversarial examples [39, 40, 42, 7, 24], applying
adversarial examples crafted using accessible source models to the target models. Transfer-based attacks can also be
cross-modal [40], which enables attackers to transfer adversarial examples between different modalities, such as image
to video. For most cases, crafting adversarial examples still
requires optimization for each individual adversarial example. On the other hand, Universal Adversarial Perturbations
(UAPs) [26, 37, 14, 43, 23] poses a powerful threat as a sin-

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved remarkable performance in various computer vision tasks [5, 2, 33, 13, 1],
including image and video recognition. However, there
is growing concern about the robustness and reliability of
these models, as they have been shown to be vulnerable
to adversarial attacks [34, 6, 42]. Adversarial attacks use
imperceptible perturbations to manipulate the inputs to produce inaccurate predictions. These attacks can have serious
consequences in various applications of deep neural networks, such as autonomous vehicles and surveillance cameras [35] where false activity detection [19] can cause se4325

