This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STPrivacy: Spatio-Temporal Privacy-Preserving Action Recognition
Ming Li1 Xiangyu Xu2 Hehe Fan3 Pan Zhou4 Jun Liu5 Jia-Wei Liu1
Jiahe Li1 Jussi Keppo1 Mike Zheng Shou1 * Shuicheng Yan4
1
National University of Singapore
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Zhejiang University
4
Sea AI Lab
5
Singapore University of Technology and Design
ming.li@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Existing methods of privacy-preserving action recognition (PPAR) mainly focus on frame-level (spatial) privacy
removal through 2D CNNs. Unfortunately, they have two
major drawbacks. First, they may compromise temporal
dynamics in input videos, which are critical for accurate
action recognition. Second, they are vulnerable to practical attacking scenarios where attackers probe for privacy
from an entire video rather than individual frames. To address these issues, we propose a novel framework STPrivacy
to perform video-level PPAR. For the first time, we introduce vision Transformers into PPAR by treating a video as
a tubelet sequence, and accordingly design two complementary mechanisms, i.e., sparsification and anonymization, to
remove privacy from a spatio-temporal perspective. In specific, our privacy sparsification mechanism applies adaptive token selection to abandon action-irrelevant tubelets.
Then, our anonymization mechanism implicitly manipulates
the remaining action-tubelets to erase privacy in the embedding space through adversarial learning. These mechanisms provide significant advantages in terms of privacy
preservation for human eyes and action-privacy trade-off
adjustment during deployment. We additionally contribute
the first two large-scale PPAR benchmarks, VP-HMDB51
and VP-UCF101, to the community. Extensive evaluations
on them, as well as two other tasks, validate the effectiveness and generalization capability of our framework.

1. Introduction
Action recognition has seen tremendous progress in recent years, but the increasing concerns regarding privacy
* Corresponding author. Jia-Wei Liu and Mike Zheng Shou are with
Show Lab, NUS.

2D CNN

Extract
frames
Input video

Action recognizer

2D CNN

Frame-level
privacy attack

2D CNN

Video-level
privacy attack

(a) Existing frame-level paradigm
STPrivacy
Privacy
sparsification

Privacy
anonymization

Action recognizer
Video/frame-level
privacy attack

(b) Proposed video-level algorithm
Frame-level operations

Video-level operations

Figure 1: Comparison between the existing paradigm for
PPAR and the proposed algorithm. (a) Existing methods for PPAR remove private information from individual
frames independently against a frame-level privacy recognizer. They not only neglect the temporal dynamics between frames, hurting action recognition performance, but
also leave the entire video vulnerable to privacy attacks.
(b) Our proposed algorithm addresses these issues by treating the input video as a whole to remove privacy against a
video-level privacy recognizer. It promotes action dynamics and protects both video-level and frame-level privacy.
The black rectangles in our transformed video represent the
abandoned tubelets, and the emotional faces indicate the
performance of the corresponding task.
leakage have given rise to an emerging research topic
privacy-preserving action recognition (PPAR) [38, 37, 6]. It
aims to remove private information from videos while ensuring accurate action recognition.
Current studies on PPAR [30, 19, 41, 25, 38, 37, 6]
mainly focus on frame-level privacy preservation. As illustrated in Figure 1 (a), the paradigm typically involves three
steps: 1) extracting frames from a video, 2) independently

5106

