This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UCF: Uncovering Common Features for Generalizable Deepfake Detection
Zhiyuan Yan∗1

Yong Zhang∗2
Yanbo Fan2
Baoyuan Wu†1
1
The School of Data Science,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China
2
Tencent AI Lab
{yanzhiyuan1114, zhangyong201303, fanyanbo0124}@gmail.com, wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract

Direct Classification
Input Image

Deepfake detection remains a challenging task due to
the difficulty of generalizing to new types of forgeries. This
problem primarily stems from the overfitting of existing detection methods to forgery-irrelevant features and methodspecific patterns. The latter has been rarely studied and not
well addressed by previous works. This paper presents a
novel approach to address the two types of overfitting issues
by uncovering common forgery features. Specifically, we
first propose a disentanglement framework that decomposes
image information into three distinct components: forgeryirrelevant, method-specific forgery, and common forgery
features. To ensure the decoupling of method-specific and
common forgery features, a multi-task learning strategy is
employed, including a multi-class classification that predicts the category of the forgery method and a binary classification that distinguishes the real from the fake. Additionally, a conditional decoder is designed to utilize forgery
features as a condition along with forgery-irrelevant features to generate reconstructed images. Furthermore, a
contrastive regularization technique is proposed to encourage the disentanglement of the common and specific forgery
features. Ultimately, we only utilize the common forgery
features for the purpose of generalizable deepfake detection. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that our framework
can perform superior generalization than current state-ofthe-art methods.

1. Introduction
Deepfake technology has gained significant attention in
recent years due to its ability to generate highly realistic
videos. While deepfake has the potential to be used for
various purposes, including entertainment and marketing,
it has also been misused for illegal purposes. The use of
deepfake to create false content can compromise people’s
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding Author

CNN Backbone

Feature Vector

Real/Fake

Remove the Influence of Content
Input Image
Content Vector
CNN Backbone
Forgery Vector

Real/Fake

Uncovering the Common Features
Input Image

Content Vector
CNN Backbone

Specific Forgery
Common Forgery

Real/Fake

Figure 1: Comparison among different classification methods. The first is a direct classification that uses whole features. The second approach eliminates content features to
prevent overfitting to forgery-irrelevant features. Our approach, the third one, not only removes the influence of content but also prevents overfitting to specific forgery patterns
by uncovering common features.
privacy, spread misinformation, and erode trust in digital
media, resulting in severe outcomes like reputational harm,
incitement of violence, and political instability.
As a result, developing a reliable and effective deepfake
detection algorithm is vitally essential. Recently, a large
number of detectors [58, 25, 37, 52, 36, 55, 8] have been
proposed for deepfake. Existing detectors generally perform well when the training and testing data are created
using the same forgery techniques. However, in real-world
applications, the testing data may be created using unknown
procedures, leading to differences between the training and
testing data and resulting in poor detection performance.
This phenomenon, known as the generalization problem in
deepfake detection, presents a significant challenge to the

22412

