This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

USAGE: A Unified Seed Area Generation Paradigm for Weakly Supervised
Semantic Segmentation
Zelin Peng1 , Guanchun Wang2 , Lingxi Xie3 , Dongsheng Jiang3 , Wei Shen1(B) , and Qi Tian3
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University 3 Huawei Inc.
{zelin.peng, wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn; gwang 2@stu.xidian.edu.cn;
198808xc@gmail.com; dongsheng jiang@outlook.com; tian.qi1@huawei.com

Seed area generation is usually the starting point of
weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS). Computing the Class Activation Map (CAM) from a multi-label
classification network is the de facto paradigm for seed
area generation, but CAMs generated from Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) and Transformers are prone to be
under- and over-activated, respectively, which makes the
strategies to refine CAMs for CNNs usually inappropriate
for Transformers, and vice versa. In this paper, we propose
a Unified optimization paradigm for Seed Area GEneration
(USAGE) for both types of networks, in which the objective function to be optimized consists of two terms: One
is a generation loss, which controls the shape of seed areas by a temperature parameter following a deterministic
principle for different types of networks; The other is a regularization loss, which ensures the consistency between the
seed areas that are generated by self-adaptive network adjustment from different views, to overturn false activation
in seed areas. Experimental results show that USAGE consistently improves seed area generation for both CNNs and
Transformers by large margins, e.g., outperforming stateof-the-art methods by a mIoU of 4.1% on PASCAL VOC.
Moreover, based on the USAGE-generated seed areas on
Transformers, we achieve state-of-the-art WSSS results on
both PASCAL VOC and MS COCO.

1. Introduction
The goal of weakly supervised semantic segmentation
(WSSS) is to train a semantic segmentation model under
weak supervision, i.e., image-level labels, so that the burden
of relying on pixel-level labels is largely reduced. Among
various types of weak supervision, we focus on studying
B Corresponding Author.

Under.activat.

Abstract

Feature Map

CNN

Over.activat.

Image

Trans

Seed Area Generation
(a) CAM
(b) USAGE

Figure 1. Seed area visualization. (a) CAM-based seed areas generated from a CNN (ResNet38 [48]) and a Transformer (DeiTS [42]). (b) USAGE-based seed areas (ours) generated from the
CNN and the Transformer.

WSSS under image-level labels [12, 20, 17, 18, 10, 37],
which is considered one of the most challenging scenarios
and has attracted increasing attention.
Seed area generation is usually the first step of WSSS,
which produces an initial pseudo mask based on the imagelevel labels on each training image. This is often achieved
by first optimizing a mapping between the dense feature
map of the image and the image-level labels (i.e., training
a deep neural network for multi-class classification), and
then inferring the contribution of each location on the feature map to the classification result w.r.t. each specific class.
The Class Activation Map (CAM) [28] has been the
de facto paradigm for seed area generation. However, it
is known that, based on the CAM, seed areas generated
from Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are prone to
be under-activated [3]. In addition, when the backbone
is changed from CNNs to Transformers (which have been
adopted in WSSS very recently and report state-of-theart performance [51]), the CAM is inversely prone to result in over-activated seed areas [35], as shown in Fig. 1.
Consequently, it is difficult to design a seed area generation paradigm that is appropriate for both CNN-based

624

