This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Better May Not Be Fairer: A Study on Subgroup Discrepancy
in Image Classification
Ming-Chang Chiu
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA

Pin-Yu Chen
IBM Research
Boston, MA

Xuezhe Ma
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA

mingchac@usc.edu

pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

xuezhema@isi.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we provide 20,000 non-trivial human annotations on popular datasets as a first step to bridge gap to
studying how natural semantic spurious features affect image classification, as prior works often study datasets mixing low-level features due to limitations in accessing realistic datasets. We investigate how natural background colors play a role as spurious features by annotating the test
sets of CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 into subgroups based on
the background color of each image. We name our datasets
CIFAR10-B and CIFAR100-B1 and integrate them with
CIFAR-Cs.
We find that overall human-level accuracy does not
guarantee consistent subgroup performances, and the phenomenon remains even on models pre-trained on ImageNet
or after data augmentation (DA). To alleviate this issue, we
propose FlowAug, a semantic DA that leverages decoupled
semantic representations captured by a pre-trained generative flow. Experimental results show that FlowAug achieves
more consistent subgroup results than other types of DA
methods on CIFAR10/100 and on CIFAR10/100-C. Additionally, it shows better generalization performance.
Furthermore, we propose a generic metric, MacroStd,
for studying model robustness to spurious correlations,
where we take a macro average on the weighted standard
deviations across different classes. We show MacroStd being more predictive of better performances; per our metric, FlowAug demonstrates improvements on subgroup discrepancy. Although this metric is proposed to study our
curated datasets, it applies to all datasets that have subgroups or subclasses. Lastly, we also show superior out-ofdistribution results on CIFAR10.1.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs, e.g., [25, 19]), properly
trained via empirical risk minimization (ERM), have been
1 Dataset is released at https://github.com/charismaticchiu/CIFAR-B

demonstrated to significantly improve benchmark performances in a wide range of application domains. However,
minimizing empirical risk over finite or biased datasets often results in models latching on to spurious correlations
that do not show a robust relationship between the input data
and output labels. Moreover, benchmark evaluations based
solely on average accuracy may overlook these critical issues. For instance, Fig. 1 shows that on CIFAR10, even
though a standard ERM model reaches human-level test accuracy (red line), if we dive deeper into each class and compute their respective worst test accuracy stratified by background colors, they are inconsistent across the ten classes
and the degradation from total accuracy is huge (black line)
for some. Such inconsistency and discrepancy have huge
real-world implications, suggesting DNN models may make
biased decisions against or in favor of specific spurious factors, such as certain background colors.
Researchers have been working in different directions
to understand the effect of spurious correlations, including
model over-parameterization [35], causality [1] and information theory [27, 53]. Various techniques have emerged
over the years to address this challenge, among which
DA [41] has stood out for its simplicity and effectiveness.
DA shows better generalization results in various machine
learning tasks than other approaches [52, 50, 47, 18, 46, 39].
These augmentation methods, however, are often based on
heuristic and coarse image processing techniques such as
flipping, rotating, blurring, or manipulating images by mixing attributes from other inputs [52, 50, 11, 21] (Fig. 2);
therefore, they can only address limited aspects of spurious
correlations, for which we will show an example in § 2. To
address this limitation, instead of mixing low-level features,
we seek to augment the training set by learning semantic
deep representations and then using them to generate new
images.
In this paper, as the very first step towards comprehensive evaluation of subgroup performance against semantically meaningful and realistic spurious correlations in image classification, we conduct a case study experiment to

4956

