This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Removing Anomalies as Noises for Industrial Defect Localization
Fanbin Lu1
Xufeng Yao1
Chi-Wing Fu1
Jiaya Jia 1,2
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
SmartMore
{fblu21, xfyao, cwfu, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Unsupervised anomaly detection aims to train models
with only anomaly-free images to detect and localize unseen anomalies. Previous reconstruction-based methods
have been limited by inaccurate reconstruction results. This
work presents a denoising model to detect and localize the
anomalies with a generative diffusion model. In particular,
we introduce random noise to overwhelm the anomalous
pixels and obtain pixel-wise precise anomaly scores from
the intermediate denoising process. We find that the KL divergence of the diffusion model serves as a better anomaly
score compared with the traditional RGB space score. Furthermore, we reconstruct the features from a pre-trained
deep feature extractor as our feature level score to improve
localization performance. Moreover, we propose a gradient denoising process to smoothly transform an anomalous
image into a normal one. Our denoising model outperforms
the state-of-the-art reconstruction-based anomaly detection
methods for precise anomaly localization and high-quality
normal image reconstruction on the MVTec-AD benchmark.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection is a critical computer vision task that
has great application values in industry and medicine. Despite its importance, collecting and annotating anomalous
data can be prohibitively expensive. Unsupervised anomaly
detection recently garnered significant attention. Different
from few-shot segmentation [12, 33, 32], it aims to learn
normal data distribution without access to anomalous samples and ground-truth annotations in training. At inference,
anomalies are detected and localized based on their deviation from the learned distribution of normal data.
Classical reconstruction-based unsupervised anomaly
detection methods [1, 2, 5, 20] assume the autoencoder
model trained with only normal data fail to reconstruct
anomalous regions. However, this approach is not without
limitations, as some anomalies can still be reconstructed,
leading to the inferior performance of these classical methods. DRAEM [40] proposes to generate pseudo anomalies

(a) Input & G.T. (b) DRAEM

(c) UniAD

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Comparing reconstructed normal images (rows 1
& 3) and anomaly detection results (rows 2 & 4) produced
by different methods. Our method can produce high-quality
reconstructions without obvious artifacts (DRAEM [40])
and blurring (UniAD [36]) and locate anomalies more precisely.

to train an autoencoder to reconstruct the anomalous data
to be anomaly-free. However, it performs poorly when the
real anomalies differ significantly from the pseudo ones.
Denoising autoencoders [17] are used for medical anomaly
detection. The anomaly score is measured naively by the
difference between the input and reconstructed images in
pixel space. The reconstruction from noisy images is challenging and introduces great noise to the results, making
it unsuitable for complex industrial anomaly detection and
localization. Recently, methods [18, 22, 36, 37] propose
transformer structures for the reconstruction model to prevent the autoencoder from collapsing into an identity func-

16166

