This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SLCA: Slow Learner with Classifier Alignment for Continual Learning
on a Pre-trained Model
Gengwei Zhang1 *, Liyuan Wang2 *, Guoliang Kang3,4 , Ling Chen1 , Yunchao Wei5,6†
1
University of Technology Sydney 2 Tsinghua University
3
Beihang University 4 Zhongguancun Laboratory
5
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
6
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network
{zgwdavid, kgl.prml, wychao1987}@gmail.com; wly19@mail.tsinghua.org.cn; ling.chen@uts.edu.au

Abstract
The goal of continual learning is to improve the performance of recognition models in learning sequentially arrived data. Although most existing works are established on
the premise of learning from scratch, growing efforts have
been devoted to incorporating the benefits of pre-training.
However, how to adaptively exploit the pre-trained knowledge for each incremental task while maintaining its generalizability remains an open question. In this work, we
present an extensive analysis for continual learning on a
pre-trained model (CLPM), and attribute the key challenge
to a progressive overfitting problem. Observing that selectively reducing the learning rate can almost resolve this issue in the representation layer, we propose a simple but extremely effective approach named Slow Learner with Classifier Alignment (SLCA), which further improves the classification layer by modeling the class-wise distributions
and aligning the classification layers in a post-hoc fashion. Across a variety of scenarios, our proposal provides
substantial improvements for CLPM (e.g., up to 49.76%,
50.05%, 44.69% and 40.16% on Split CIFAR-100, Split
ImageNet-R, Split CUB-200 and Split Cars-196, respectively), and thus outperforms state-of-the-art approaches by
a large margin. Based on such a strong baseline, critical
factors and promising directions are analyzed in-depth to
facilitate subsequent research. Code has been made available at: https://github.com/GengDavid/SLCA.

1. Introduction
Continual learning aims to learn effectively from sequentially arrived data, behaving as if they were observed
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

simultaneously. Current efforts are mainly based on the
premise of learning from scratch, attempting to mitigate
catastrophic forgetting [27] of previously-learned knowledge when adapting to each incremental task. However,
the success of large-scale pre-training has revolutionized
the training paradigm of deep neural networks. The pretraining stage brings both strong knowledge transfer and
robustness to catastrophic forgetting for downstream continual learning [42], which tends to be more significant as
the scale of pre-training increases [30, 28]. Therefore, continual learning on a pre-trained model (CLPM) turns out to
be an emerging direction and receives growing attention.
For CLPM, the pre-trained knowledge is usually expressed by the representation layer, adapted to a sequence of
incremental tasks. There are two major strategies to leverage the pre-trained knowledge [42]: (1) fine-tune the representations, or (2) keep the representations fixed while learning a few additional parameters (e.g., adaptor [16], prompt
[24], instruction [8], etc.). Although (2) is becoming dominant in natural language processing (NLP) [18], the choice
of (1) and (2) remains an open question for continual learning in computer vision (CV). The recently proposed promptbased approaches, such as L2P [45] and DualPrompt [44],
followed the second strategy and reported to be far superior to the traditional continual learning baselines of finetuning the representation layer. On the other hand, since
the large amount of pre-training data are typically unlabeled and may also arrive incrementally, it seems more reasonable to use self-supervised pre-training than supervised
pre-training [5, 42], also regarding that (upstream) continual learning in a self-supervised manner is generally more
robust to catastrophic forgetting [17, 26, 9].
In this work, however, we present an extensive analysis to reconsider the current progress and technical route
for CLPM in CV. Specifically, CLPM poses a critical challenge for continual learning that the pre-trained knowledge

19148

