This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COMPASS: High-Efficiency Deep Image Compression with Arbitrary-scale
Spatial Scalability
Jongmin Park
KAIST

Jooyoung Lee
ETRI

Munchurl Kim*
KAIST

jm.park@kaist.ac.kr

leejy1003@etri.re.kr

mkimee@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1: Visual comparison results of spatially scalable image compression methods for arbitrary scale factors. The
image of Layer 2 is reconstructed from the image of Layer 1 with scale factor 2.0× for each method. The ‘acc. bits’ indicates
the accumulated bits up to the corresponding layers.

Abstract
Recently, neural network (NN)-based image compression studies have actively been made and has shown impressive performance in comparison to traditional methods.
However, most of the works have focused on non-scalable
image compression (single-layer coding) while spatially
scalable image compression has drawn less attention although it has many applications. In this paper, we propose
a novel NN-based spatially scalable image compression
method, called COMPASS, which supports arbitrary-scale
spatial scalability. Our proposed COMPASS has a very flexible structure where the number of layers and their respective scale factors can be arbitrarily determined during in-

ference. To reduce the spatial redundancy between adjacent
layers for arbitrary scale factors, our COMPASS adopts an
inter-layer arbitrary scale prediction method, called LIFF,
based on implicit neural representation. We propose a combined RD loss function to effectively train multiple layers. Experimental results show that our COMPASS achieves
BD-rate gain of -58.33% and -47.17% at maximum compared to SHVC and the state-of-the-art NN-based spatially
scalable image compression method, respectively, for various combinations of scale factors. Our COMPASS also
shows comparable or even better coding efficiency than the
single-layer coding for various scale factors.

* Corresponding author.

12826

