This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ICE-NeRF: Interactive Color Editing of NeRFs via
Decomposition-Aware Weight Optimization
Jae-Hyeok Lee

Dae-Shik Kim
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea

{heuyklee, daeshik}@kaist.ac.kr

Proposed Concept Overview

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have gained considerable attention for their high-quality results in 3D scene reconstruction and rendering. Recently, there have been active studies on various tasks such as novel view synthesis
and scene editing. However, editing NeRFs is challenging
as accurately decomposing the desired area of 3D space
and ensuring the consistency of edited results from different angles is difficult. In this paper, we propose ICE-NeRF,
an Interactive Color Editing framework that performs color
editing by taking a pre-trained NeRF and a rough user mask
as input. Our proposed method performs the entire color
editing process in only under a minute using a partial finetuning approach. To perform effective color editing, we address two issues: (1) the entanglement of the implicit representation that causes unwanted color changes in undesired
areas when learning weights, and (2) the loss of multi-view
consistency when fine-tuning for a single or a few views.
To address these issues, we introduce two techniques: Activation Field-based Regularization (AFR) and Single-mask
Multi-view Rendering (SMR). The AFR performs weight
regularization during fine-tuning based on the assumption
that not all weights have an equal impact on the desired
area. The SMR maps the 2D mask to 3D space through
inverse projection and renders it from other views to generate multi-view masks. ICE-NeRF not only enables welldecomposed, multi-view consistent color editing but also
significantly reduces processing time compared to existing
methods.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [16] is a 3D reconstruction method that utilizes multiple 2D images taken from various angles to generate photorealistic reconstructions. Due
to its high-quality results, NeRF has gained considerable
attention in various fields [31, 1, 28, 15]. With the grow-

Recoloring
User
Masking

Recoloring Results

PaletteNeRF

PaletteNeRF + Semantic‐guide

Our Method
RecolorNeRF
Detailed Results for Undesired Area

Reference

PaletteNeRF

PaletteNeRF +
Semantic‐guide

Our Method

Figure 1. Concept overview and color editing results: We compare
our method with the state-of-the-art NeRF color editing methods,
PaletteNeRF [14] and RecolorNeRF [10]. While PaletteNeRF and
RecolorNeRF effectively change the colors of the target object,
they also inadvertently cause unwanted color alterations in areas
that should remain unchanged.

ing interest in NeRFs, there is an increasing demand for
techniques that can modify the contents of the 3D scenes
learned by NeRFs [14, 10, 27, 29]. Similar to how images
and videos are edited to suit user preferences, NeRFs are

3491

