This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cloth2Body: Generating 3D Human Body Mesh from 2D Clothing
∗

†

†

Lu Dai1,2 , Liqian Ma2 , Shenhan Qian3 , Hao Liu1 , Ziwei Liu4 , Hui Xiong1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
ZMO AI Inc.
3
Technical University of Munich
4
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

†

ldaiae@connect.ust.hk liqianma.scholar.outlook.com shenhan.qian@tum.de
ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg {liuh,xionghui}@ust.hk

Figure 1: In our Cloth2Body problem, our model takes a 2D clothing image as input and produces 3D human body of various poses, which can fit
into the cloth pixel-wise when rendered back to the image plane, as shown in (a),(b) and (c). This framework also allows users to manipulate body
figure within cloth size constraints. (c′ ) is a shape variation from (c) but still in the same clothing and pose. (c′′ ) is an application of our methods
where a stable diffusion module consumes our output and generates human image.

Abstract
In this paper, we define and study a new Cloth2Body
problem which has a goal of generating 3d human body
meshes from a 2D clothing image. Unlike the existing
human mesh recovery problem, Cloth2Body needs to address new and emerging challenges raised by the partial
observation of the input and the high diversity of the output. Indeed, there are three specific challenges. First, how
to locate and pose human bodies into the clothes. Second, how to effectively estimate body shapes out of various clothing types. Finally, how to generate diverse and
plausible results from a 2D clothing image. To this end,
we propose an end-to-end framework that can accurately
estimate 3D body mesh parameterized by pose and shape
from a 2D clothing image. Along this line, we first utilize
Kinematics-aware Pose Estimation to estimate body pose
parameters. 3D skeleton is employed as a proxy followed

by an inverse kinematics module to boost the estimation
accuracy. We additionally design an adaptive depth trick
to align the re-projected 3D mesh better with 2D clothing
image by disentangling the effects of object size and camera extrinsic. Next, we propose Physics-informed Shape
Estimation to estimate body shape parameters. 3D shape
parameters are predicted based on partial body measurements estimated from RGB image, which not only improves
pixel-wise human-cloth alignment, but also enables flexible user editing. Finally, we design Evolution-based pose
generation method, a skeleton transplanting method inspired by genetic algorithms to generate diverse reasonable
poses during inference. As shown by experimental results
on both synthetic and real-world data, the proposed framework achieves state-of-the-art performance and can effectively recover natural and diverse 3D body meshes from 2D
images that align well with clothing.

* Work partially conducted during an internship at ZMO AI Inc.
† Corresponding author

15007

