This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Temporal Concurrency for Video-Language Representation Learning
Heng Zhang1,2† Daqing Liu3
Zezhong Lv1,2
Bing Su1,2‡ Dacheng Tao4
1
Gaoling School of Articial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
JD Explore Academy, JD.com 4 The University of Sydney
zhangheng@ruc.edu.cn, {liudq.ustc,zezhonglv0306,subingats,dacheng.tao}@gmail.com

Abstract
Paired video and language data is naturally temporal
concurrency, which requires the modeling of the temporal
dynamics within each modality and the temporal alignment
across modalities simultaneously. However, most existing
video-language representation learning methods only focus
on discrete semantic alignment that encourages aligned semantics to be close in the latent space, or temporal context dependency that captures short-range coherence, failing in building the temporal concurrency. In this paper, we
propose to learn video-language representations by modeling video-language pairs as Temporal Concurrent Processes (TCP) via a process-wised distance metric learning framework. Specically, we employ the soft Dynamic
Time Warping (DTW) to measure the distance between two
processes across modalities and then optimize the DTW
costs. Meanwhile, we further introduce a regularization
term that enforces the embeddings of each modality approximating a stochastic process to guarantee the inherent dynamics. Experimental results on three benchmarks
demonstrate that TCP stands as a state-of-the-art method
for various video-language understanding tasks, including
paragraph-to-video retrieval, video moment retrieval, and
video question-answering. Code is available at https:
//github.com/hengRUC/TCP.

1. Introduction
Video-Language Representation Learning [33, 42, 26,
48, 46] is a fundamental problem of multimodal intelligence, which has demonstrated great practical value in various real-world applications such as video captioning [29,
40], video question answering [46, 26, 57], and video retrieval [7, 17, 16]. Essentially, a video-language pair can
be seen as two temporal sequences where each sequence is
† Research Intern at JD Explore Academy.
‡ Corresponding author.

coherent and change smoothly, and the two sequences are
concurrently aligned with each other over time. Therefore,
different from single-modality representation learning, e.g.,
video or text, that requires capturing the temporal dynamics
along time [42, 26, 48, 13], multi-modality learning further
appeals to the temporal alignment across two concurrent
modalities. We refer to the property of requiring modeling of both temporal dynamics and temporal alignment in
video-language learning as temporal concurrency.
Pioneer works [32, 1, 28, 54, 50] for video-language representation learning typically concentrate on the semantic
alignment by discrete cross-modal matching (Figure 1(a))
that encourages paired video clips and sentence [32] to be
close in the common latent space [1, 28, 54, 50]. However,
the imposition of pulling discrete semantics together without accounting for the temporal dynamics of each individual
modality disrupts the inherent temporal coherence of unimodal representations and temporal concurrency between
two modalities. Thereby leads to a sub-optimal representation with limited generalization [18]. Recently, an emerging line of endowing temporal dynamics is to capture the
temporal context dependency (Figure 1(b)), by global representation alignment across modalities [48], long-form video
encoding with video Transformers [45], or temporal order
modeling by shufe discriminations [25, 10, 21]. Despite
incorporating temporal constraints to capture temporal context, these methods have limited efcacy in capturing subtle
and long-range dependencies due to the neglect of temporal
coherence over the entire sequence of data. The incomplete
modeling of temporal dynamics undermines temporal concurrency and leads to unsatisfactory performance.
In a nutshell, video-language representation learning
entails the temporal concurrency with two intrinsic patterns: 1) intra-modal temporal dynamics that indicate the
sequential representations should adhere to coherent constraints, and 2) cross-modal temporal alignment that requires both global (video-paragraph) and local (i.e., video
clip-sentence) semantic alignments over time. Based on
the above insights, we propose to model the video-language

15568

