This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised Cross-view Representation Reconstruction for
Change Captioning
Yunbin Tu1 , Liang Li2,6 *, Li Su1,3 *, Zheng-Jun Zha4 , Chenggang Yan5,6 , Qingming Huang1,2,3
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, ICT, CAS, Beijing, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
5
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
6
Lishui Institute of Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
tuyunbin22@mails.ucas.ac.cn, liang.li@ict.ac.cn, {suli,qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn

<Before>

Abstract
Change captioning aims to describe the difference between a pair of similar images. Its key challenge is how
to learn a stable difference representation under pseudo
changes caused by viewpoint change. In this paper, we
address this by proposing a self-supervised cross-view
representation reconstruction (SCORER) network. Concretely, we first design a multi-head token-wise matching
to model relationships between cross-view features from
similar/dissimilar images. Then, by maximizing crossview contrastive alignment of two similar images, SCORER
learns two view-invariant image representations in a selfsupervised way. Based on these, we reconstruct the representations of unchanged objects by cross-attention, thus
learning a stable difference representation for caption generation. Further, we devise a cross-modal backward reasoning to improve the quality of caption. This module reversely models a “hallucination” representation with the
caption and “before” representation. By pushing it closer
to the “after” representation, we enforce the caption to be
informative about the difference in a self-supervised manner. Extensive experiments show our method achieves the
state-of-the-art results on four datasets. The code is available at https://github.com/tuyunbin/SCORER.

1. Introduction
Change captioning is a new task of vision and language,
which requires not only understanding the contents of two
similar images, but also describing their difference with nat* Corresponding authors

<After>

<Change Captions>

(a)

the people on the stairs
have disappeared

(b)

remove the man behind
the newlyweds

(c)

(d)

the tiny cyan shiny
ball behind the cyan
rubber sphere moved
the other gray block the
same size as the cyan
metal cylinder moved

Figure 1. The examples of change captioning. (a) is from a surveillance scene with underlying illumination change. (b) is from an
image editing scene. (c) shows that with both object move and
moderate viewpoint change. (d) shows that with both object move
and extreme viewpoint change. Changed objects and referents are
shown in red and green boxes, respectively.

ural language. In real world, this task brings a variety of applications, such as generating elaborated reports about monitored facilities [8, 10] and pathological changes [18, 14].
While single-image captioning is already regarded as a
very challenging task, change captioning carries additional
difficulties. Simply locating inconspicuous differences is
one such challenge (Fig. 1 (a) (b)). Further, in a dynamic
environment, it is common to acquire two images under different viewpoints, which leads to pseudo changes about objects’ scale and location (Fig. 1 (c) (d)). As such, change

2805

