This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PEANUT: Predicting and Navigating to Unseen Targets
Albert J. Zhai, Shenlong Wang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{azhai2, shenlong}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Efficient ObjectGoal navigation (ObjectNav) in novel
environments requires an understanding of the spatial and
semantic regularities in environment layouts. In this work,
we present a straightforward method for learning these
regularities by predicting the locations of unobserved objects from incomplete semantic maps. Our method differs
from previous prediction-based navigation methods, such
as frontier potential prediction or egocentric map completion, by directly predicting unseen targets while leveraging
the global context from all previously explored areas. Our
prediction model is lightweight and can be trained in a supervised manner using a relatively small amount of passively collected data. Once trained, the model can be incorporated into a modular pipeline for ObjectNav without the
need for any reinforcement learning. We validate the effectiveness of our method on the HM3D and MP3D ObjectNav
datasets. We find that it achieves the state-of-the-art on both
datasets, despite not using any additional data for training.
Code is available at https:// ajzhai.github.io/ PEANUT.

1. Introduction
Embodied visual navigation refers to a range of tasks that
involve an agent navigating within the physical world based
on visual sensory input [13]. One such task that has recently
gained popularity is ObjectGoal navigation, also known as
ObjectNav [2]. Here, the agent is placed in an unknown
environment and is tasked with navigating to a specific object category (e.g. “toilet”). ObjectNav is a fundamentally
important task for embodied AI because it tests both scene
understanding and long-term memory. It has immediate applications for helping people with disabilities find objects
in their homes. It is also a necessary precursor for many
other semantic tasks, such as instruction following [1] and
question answering [12].
In ObjectNav, the agent is placed in a random location in
an unknown environment and is given access to RGB-D observations, its own pose, and a target category. An episode
is considered successful if the agent stops near an object

Where can I find a bed?

Prediction

Ground
Truth

Figure 1. Explicit Prediction for ObjectNav. To find a semantic
target in a novel environment, an agent may make explicit guesses
about where the target might be. Humans excel at this type of
reasoning and can generate a diverse set of reasonable guesses instantaneously. On the right is a top-down map representing the
parts of the environment that have been observed. Yellow circles
represent multiple human guesses as to where a bed might be.

of the target category within a given time limit. In order
to perform this task efficiently, the agent must leverage priors about environment layouts while searching for the target. For example, imagine that you observe the image in
Figure 1 and your target category is “bed”. The room on
the right does not have any visible furniture but has a good
chance to be a bedroom. On the other hand, the room on
the left has what appears to be a mirror above a countertop,
suggesting that it is a bathroom that probably does not contain a bed. The room directly in front could be a bedroom,
but it is farther away than the other two. Thus, it would be a
good idea to look inside the room on the right first and the
room directly in front second. An ideal ObjectNav agent
should be able to make such predictions about unexplored
areas and reason about the uncertainty in its predictions to
plan efficient search routes.
Existing methods for ObjectNav can be divided into two
categories: end-to-end learning methods and modular methods. End-to-end methods aim to learn a policy that directly
maps sensor observations to actions. The policy is usually
modeled as a recurrent neural network and learned either using reinforcement learning [40, 45, 30, 26, 14] or imitation
learning [38]. Such methods are flexible in the policies that
they can produce, but they require large amounts of data, incur high computational costs (especially for RL), and lack

10926

