This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fine-grained Visible Watermark Removal
Li Niu*, Xing Zhao, Bo Zhang, Liqing Zhang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{ustcnewly,1033874657,bo-zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Visible watermark removal aims to erase the watermark
from watermarked image and recover the background image, which is a challenging task due to the diverse watermarks. Previous works have designed dynamic network
to handle various types of watermarks adaptively, but they
ignore that even the watermarked region in a single image can be divided into multiple local parts with distinct
visual appearances. In this work, we advance imagespecific dynamic network towards part-specific dynamic
network, which discovers multiple local parts within the watermarked region and handle them adaptively. Specifically,
we propose a query-based multi-task framework, in which
part query embeddings are jointly used in two branches to
predict part masks and restore watermarked parts. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our finegrained watermark removal network.

1. Introduction
Overlaying visible watermark on a digital image has
been a prevalent way to claim copyright and declare ownership. As its reverse process, visual watermark removal
[33, 56] has attracted more and more research interest,
which can verify and promote the resilience of overlaid
watermarks. Specifically, visible watermark removal aims
to erase the watermark and reconstruct the watermark-free
(background) image. One major challenge of watermark
removal task is that the watermarks are very diversified, in
terms of different locations, patterns, transparencies, and so
on. Recent works [33, 56] realize this issue and develop dynamic networks to cope with diversified watermarks adaptively. For example, [33] extracts the feature of watermarked region and appends it to original feature map as extra guidance. [56] also extracts the feature of watermarked
region, but uses it to generate dynamic convolution kernel to
manipulate the original feature map. Although [33, 56] have
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Two examples of watermarked images associated with
their background images, watermark masks, and watermarks. Visible watermark removal aims to erase the watermark and reconstruct the background image.

achieved significant improvement over previous methods by
adaptively coping with various types of watermarks, they
still treat the watermarked region in an image as a whole,
disregarding the fact that even the watermarked region in a
single image could be divided into multiple parts with vastly
distinct appearances. For example, the watermarked region
in Figure 1(a) consists of one pattern and two lines of texts,
and the watermarked region in Figure 1(b) consists of one
symbol, one line of text, and extra curves. Moreover, when
a watermark is overlaid on a background image with certain
transparency, one part (e.g., one line of text) in the watermarked region could also exhibit diverse colors due to the
colorful background, which makes the appearance of watermarked region even more complicated.
In this work, inheriting the spirit of previous works
[33, 56], we take a further step along the path of dynamic
network. Specifically, we not only cope with the watermarked regions in different images adaptively, but also cope
with different watermarked parts in one image adaptively,
which advances image-specific dynamic network towards
part-specific dynamic network. We adopt the multi-task
framework used in previous works [33, 56], which contains
one encoder and two encoders. The mask decoder accounts

12770

