This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAPConNet: Self-supervised 3D Pose Transfer with Mesh and Point
Contrastive Learning
Jiaze Sun1 * Zhixiang Chen2
1

Imperial College London

2

University of Sheffield

3

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology

Pose transfer

Abstract
3D pose transfer is a challenging generation task that
aims to transfer the pose of a source geometry onto a target geometry with the target identity preserved. Many prior
methods require keypoint annotations to find correspondence between the source and target. Current pose transfer methods allow end-to-end correspondence learning but
require the desired final output as ground truth for supervision. Unsupervised methods have been proposed for graph
convolutional models but they require ground truth correspondence between the source and target inputs. We present
a novel self-supervised framework for 3D pose transfer
which can be trained in unsupervised, semi-supervised, or
fully supervised settings without any correspondence labels.
We introduce two contrastive learning constraints in the latent space: a mesh-level loss for disentangling global patterns including pose and identity, and a point-level loss for
discriminating local semantics. We demonstrate quantitatively and qualitatively that our method achieves state-ofthe-art results in supervised 3D pose transfer, with comparable results in unsupervised and semi-supervised settings.
Our method is also generalisable to unseen human and animal data with complex topologies† .

1. Introduction
3D pose transfer [35, 40, 47, 33] is a challenging generation task in which the pose of a source geometry is transferred to a target geometry whilst preserving the identity
of the target geometry (see top half of Figure 1). This has
many potential applications in areas including animation,
human modelling, virtual reality, and more. It also provides a more affordable way of generating synthetic 3D data
which can be expensive to produce in the real world.
One of the main challenges of 3D pose transfer is that
current methods still put certain requirements on their training data making it difficult to collect and expensive to an* Corresponding author email: j.sun19@imperial.ac.uk.
† Code: https://github.com/justin941208/MAPConNet.

Tae-Kyun Kim1,3

Pose input

Identity input

Warped output

Correspondence

(A)

Refinement

(B)

(C)

Mesh contrastive learning

(B)

Final output

Point contrastive learning

(B)
(C)

(A)

(C)
(A)

Identity

(B)

(C)

Pose

Figure 1. Overview of our framework. Top: our pose transfer
pipeline. Bottom: our contrastive learning scheme, with a meshlevel loss for disentangling global pose and identity and a pointlevel loss for discriminating local semantics.

notate. One requirement is having correspondence labels,
which are pairs of vertices that correspond to each other semantically between two point clouds or meshes. Many prior
pose transfer methods either require ground truth correspondence [35, 4, 2, 43, 47] or simply neglect the issue [40]. Requiring ground truth correspondence is costly, and neglecting correspondence would adversely impact model performance. [33] proposed learning a correspondence module
based on optimal transport in an end-to-end fashion through
the pose transfer task. However, their method is supervised
and requires the mesh with the desired pose and identity as
ground truth. This puts another requirement on the dataset:
having multiple subjects performing exactly the same set
of poses, which is unfeasible. [47] proposed an unsupervised approach for registered meshes which only requires
each subject to perform multiple poses and they do not have
to align exactly across subjects – a more practical requirement for real datasets [6, 22]. However, their approach is
based on graph convolutional networks (GCNs) and ARAP
deformation which require ground truth correspondence.
We propose a self-supervised framework (Figure 1) for
3D pose transfer with Mesh And Point Contrastive learning, MAPConNet, requiring no correspondence labels or

14452

