This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rehearsal-Free Domain Continual Face Anti-Spoofing:
Generalize More and Forget Less
Rizhao Cai1
Yawen Cui2
Zhi Li3
Zitong Yu4,5 *
6
7
Haoliang Li
Yongjian Hu
Alex Kot1
1

Rapid-Rich Object Search (ROSE) Lab, NTU-PKU Joint Research Institute, Nanyang Technological University
University of Oulu 3 Bytedance Ltd. 4 School of Computing and Information Technology, Great Bay University
5
Great Bay Institute for Advanced Study 6 City University of Hong Kong 7 South China University of Technology
2

rzcai@ntu.edu.sg, yawen.cui@oulu.fi, zhi.li.2023@bytedance.com, yuzitong@gbu.edu.cn
haoliang.li@cityu.edu.hk, eeyjhu@scut.edu.cn, eackot@ntu.edu.sg

Domain sequence

Abstract

Session 0 - Base

Face Anti-Spoofing (FAS) is recently studied under the
continual learning setting, where the FAS models are expected to evolve after encountering data from new domains.
However, existing methods need extra replay buffers to store
previous data for rehearsal, which becomes infeasible when
previous data is unavailable because of privacy issues. In
this paper, we propose the first rehearsal-free method for
Domain Continual Learning (DCL) of FAS, which deals
with catastrophic forgetting and unseen domain generalization problems simultaneously. For better generalization to unseen domains, we design the Dynamic Central
Difference Convolutional Adapter (DCDCA) to adapt Vision Transformer (ViT) models during the continual learning sessions. To alleviate the forgetting of previous domains without using previous data, we propose the Proxy
Prototype Contrastive Regularization (PPCR) to constrain
the continual learning with previous domain knowledge
from the proxy prototypes. Simulating practical DCL scenarios, we devise two new protocols which evaluate both
generalization and anti-forgetting performance. Extensive experimental results show that our proposed method
can improve the generalization performance in unseen domains and alleviate the catastrophic forgetting of previous
knowledge. The code and protocol files are released on
https://github.com/RizhaoCai/DCL-FAS-ICCV2023.

1. Introduction
Face recognition (FR) has been widely used in identity
authentication because of its convenience. However, face
recognition-based authentication systems are threatened by
face spoofing attacks [48, 22, 63]. To protect FR systems
* Corresponding author

Train

...

Session 1 - Domain increment

Session 2 - Domain increment

...

...

...
No rehearsal

No rehearsal

...

Model

Evaluation on
cumulative
seen domains

Evaluation on
unseen domain

...
...

...

...
...

...

Figure 1. The rehearsal-free DCL consists of a sequence of learning sessions. The FAS model is initially trained on a large-scale
base domain and then continually adapts to new domains in the
following continual sessions. For each continual session, only a
few data of new domain is available for training and previous data
is NOT available. After the DCL, the model is tested on all previous domains and extra unseen domains.

from spoofing attacks, various Face Anti-Spoofing (FAS)
techniques are deployed to detect spoofing faces and reject
malicious attempts [24, 23]. Although recent FAS methods based on deep learning and neural networks achieve
exquisite accuracy in intra-domain testing, the performance
of existing methods heavily relies on the diversity of the
training data and degrades severely if there are domain
shifts between the training and testing data domains [26].
The cross-domain problem hence becomes the most challenging issue of state-of-the-art FAS research.
To tackle the cross-domain problem, domain generalization [50, 16, 61] and adaption [26, 13] techniques for
FAS have been extensively studied in recent years. Domain generalization-based methods aim to develop a generalized FAS model with training data from multiple source
domains. Despite improving the generalization to some ex-

8037

