This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MOSE: A New Dataset for Video Object Segmentation in Complex Scenes
Henghui Ding1
Chang Liu1 Shuting He1
1
Nanyang Technological University

Xudong Jiang1 Philip H.S. Torr 2 Song Bai3
2
University of Oxford 3 ByteDance

https://henghuiding.github.io/MOSE

Figure 1. Examples of video clips from the coMplex video Object SEgmentation (MOSE) dataset. The selected target objects are
masked in orange ◼. The most notable feature of MOSE is complex scenarios, including the disappearance-reappearance of objects,
small/inconspicuous objects, heavy occlusions, crowded scenarios, etc. For example, the target player in the 2nd row turns around when
reappearing in the 4th and 5th columns after disappearing in the 3rd column, bringing challenges in re-identifying him. Most videos in
MOSE contain crowded and occluded objects with the target object seldom being the salient one. The goal of MOSE dataset is to provide
a platform that promotes the development of more comprehensive and robust video object segmentation algorithms.

Abstract
Video object segmentation (VOS) aims at segmenting a
particular object throughout the entire video clip sequence.
The state-of-the-art VOS methods have achieved excellent
performance (e.g., 90+%  & ) on existing datasets. However, since the target objects in these existing datasets
are usually relatively salient, dominant, and isolated, VOS
under complex scenes has rarely been studied. To revisit
VOS and make it more applicable in the real world, we
collect a new VOS dataset called coMplex video Object
SEgmentation (MOSE) to study the tracking and segmenting objects in complex scenarios. MOSE contains 2,149
video clips and 5,200 objects from 36 categories, with
431,725 high-quality object segmentation masks. The most
notable feature of MOSE dataset is complex scenes with
crowded and occluded objects. The target objects in the
videos are commonly occluded by others and disappear
in some frames. To analyze the proposed MOSE dataset,
we benchmark 18 existing VOS methods under 4 different settings on the proposed MOSE dataset and conduct
comprehensive comparisons. The experiments show that
henghui.ding@gmail.com

current VOS algorithms cannot well perceive objects in
complex scenes. For example, under the semi-supervised
VOS setting, the highest  & by existing state-of-the-art
VOS methods is only 59.4% on MOSE, much lower than
their ∼90%  & performance on DAVIS. The results reveal
that although excellent performance has been achieved on
existing benchmarks, there are unresolved challenges under
complex scenes and more efforts are desired to explore these
challenges in the future.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) [73, 74, 97] aims at
segmenting a particular object, e.g., the dominant objects
or the objects indicated by users, throughout the entire
video sequence. It is one of the most fundamental and
challenging computer vision tasks and has a crucial role
in many piratical applications that involve video analysis
and understanding, e.g., self-driving vehicle, augmented
reality, video editing, etc. There are many different settings
for VOS, for example, semi-supervised VOS [4, 71] that
gives the first-frame mask of the target object, unsupervised
VOS [14, 33] that automatically finds primary objects, and

20224

