This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ShapeScaffolder: Structure-Aware 3D Shape Generation from Text
Xi Tian
University of Bath
Bath, UK

Yong-Liang Yang
University of Bath
Bath, UK

Qi Wu
University of Adelaide
Adelaide, Australia

xt275@bath.ac.uk

y.yang@cs.bath.ac.uk

qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

wooden

brown
blue

We present ShapeScaffolder, a structure-based neural
network for generating colored 3D shapes based on text
input. The approach, similar to providing scaffolds as internal structural supports and adding more details to them,
aims to capture finer text-shape connections and improve
the quality of generated shapes. Traditional text-to-shape
methods often generate 3D shapes as a whole. However,
humans tend to understand both shape and text as being
structure-based. For example, a table is interpreted as being composed of legs, a seat, and a back; similarly, texts
possess inherent linguistic structures that can be analyzed
as dependency graphs, depicting the relationships between
entities within the text. We believe structure-aware shape
generation can bring finer text-shape connections and improve shape generation quality. However, the lack of explicit shape structure and the high freedom of text structure
make cross-modality learning challenging. To address these
challenges, we first build the structured shape implicit fields
in an unsupervised manner. We then propose the part-level
attention mechanism between shape parts and textual graph
nodes to align the two modalities at the structural level. Finally, we employ a shape refiner to add further detail to
the predicted structure, yielding the final results. Extensive
experimentation demonstrates that our approaches outperform state-of-the-art methods in terms of both shape fidelity
and shape-text matching. Our methods also allow for partlevel manipulation and improved part-level completeness.

1. Introduction
The advance of 3D representation learning and generative models has sparked increasing interest in 3D shape
generation. However, text-guided shape generation remains
a challenging task. Many current approaches generate the
3D shape as a whole when no part information is utilized,
while others treat text as a simple collection of words in order to provide finer guidance. Both shape and text, however,
possess inherent internal structures that can be leveraged to

curved

plush
chair
cushion

armrests

seat

Text Graph

Structure

brown wooden chair with
curved armrests and a blue
plush seat cushion
Input Text

Coarse

Fine

Figure 1. Text to shape generation with structure awareness. Raw
description generates the initial coarse shape with structures. Further correspondence is built between shape parts and text graph
nodes for fine-grained refinement.

improve the alignment between the two modalities.
Humans are born with a sense of physical understanding
of the world [3]. Studies have shown that the human visual system perceives objects as hierarchical arrangements
of parts [4], comprising high-level structural properties and
low-level details. In addition, humans use language to describe objects, including their appearance, structure, and
functions. It has been discovered that language, shaped by
the human brain over time, has evolved to have hierarchical linguistic structures in order to convey more complex
meanings [10]. This suggests that structure-based reasoning is present in both the visual and language modalities.
While this is intuitive and effortless for humans, it is a challenge for intelligent algorithms to understand the structural
connection between these two modalities.
In this research, we aim to augment shape generation
from text with an awareness of structure in both shape and
language modalities. This would allow for shape generation to be guided not only by high-level descriptions, such
as a sentence but also refined with part-level guidance from
semantic text entities. This process is similar to how humans create visual artworks: sketching an idea’s gist and
then progressively refining the details. However, there are

2715

