This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Explicit Motion Disentangling for Efficient Optical Flow Estimation
Changxing Deng1∗ , Ao Luo2∗ , Haibin Huang3 , Shaodan Ma1 , Jiangyu Liu2 , Shuaicheng Liu4,2
1
University of Macau 2 Megvii Technology 3 Kuaishou Technology
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

†

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for optical flow estimation that achieves a good balance between
performance and efficiency. Our approach involves disentangling global motion learning from local flow estimation,
treating global matching and local refinement as separate
stages. We offer two key insights: First, the multi-scale
4D cost-volume based recurrent flow decoder is computationally expensive and unnecessary for handling small displacement. With the separation, we can utilize lightweight
methods for both parts and maintain similar performance.
Second, a dense and robust global matching is essential
for both flow initialization as well as stable and fast convergence for the refinement stage. Towards this end, we
introduce EMD-Flow, a framework that explicitly separates global motion estimation from the recurrent refinement stage. We propose two novel modules: Multi-scale
Motion Aggregation (MMA) and Confidence-induced Flow
Propagation (CFP). These modules leverage cross-scale
matching prior and self-contained confidence maps to handle the ambiguities of dense matching in a global manner,
generating a dense initial flow. Additionally, a lightweight
decoding module is followed to handle small displacements,
resulting in an efficient yet robust flow estimation framework. We further conduct comprehensive experiments on
standard optical flow benchmarks with the proposed framework, and the experimental results demonstrate its superior
balance between performance and runtime. Code is available at https://github.com/gddcx/EMD-Flow.

1. Introduction
Optical flow represents the 2D motion field between successive video frames. It is a fundamental computer vision task and has various downstream applications, e.g.
video frame interpolation [13], video super-resolution [8],
visual tracking [33] and motion detection [26]. Different
from traditional energy-based or matching-based optimiza∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding Author.

Figure 1: Comparison with state-of-the-art methods in
terms of inference accuracy (F1-all), runtime (s) and
model size (M). All models are trained on “C + T”, and
evaluated on KITTI-15 [25] (image size 375×1242) with
a single NVIDIA A100 card. Our EMD-Flow models not
only demonstrate substantial performance enhancements
compared to state-of-the-art methods but also achieve significant reductions in computational overhead.

tions, deep learning based methods [30, 15] have made
great progress by introducing the cost-volume based regression paradigm in a pyramid structure. Recently, the
recurrent regression framework [32] has become a mainstream approach for optical flow, and advanced methods
like attention-based operations [18, 21, 38], graph models [23], and latent cost-volume augmentation [12] have
been developed to improve its performance. However, these
methods often require extra computational resources and
consume significant inference time, limiting their application in real-world scenarios. Therefore, a critical question
arises: can we improve the accuracy of flow estimation
while maintaining high runtime efficiency?
To understand the trade-off between accuracy and runtime efficiency, we empirically analyze the recurrent pre-

9521

