This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sign Language Translation with Iterative Prototype
Huijie Yao1
1

Wengang Zhou1,2, * Hao Feng1

Hezhen Hu1

Hao Zhou1

Houqiang Li1,2, *

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{yaohuijie,haof,alexhu,zhouh156}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Prototype

Abstract
Encoder

This paper presents IP-SLT, a simple yet effective framework for sign language translation (SLT). Our IP-SLT
adopts a recurrent structure and enhances the semantic representation (prototype) of the input sign language video via
an iterative refinement manner. Our idea mimics the behavior of human reading, where a sentence can be digested
repeatedly, till reaching accurate understanding. Technically, IP-SLT consists of feature extraction, prototype initialization, and iterative prototype refinement. The initialization module generates the initial prototype based on the
visual feature extracted by the feature extraction module.
Then, the iterative refinement module leverages the crossattention mechanism to polish the previous prototype by aggregating it with the original video feature. Through repeated refinement, the prototype finally converges to a more
stable and accurate state, leading to a fluent and appropriate translation. In addition, to leverage the sequential
dependence of prototypes, we further propose an iterative
distillation loss to compress the knowledge of the final iteration into previous ones. As the autoregressive decoding process is executed only once in inference, our IP-SLT is ready
to improve various SLT systems with acceptable overhead.
Extensive experiments are conducted on public benchmarks
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the IP-SLT.

1. Introduction
Sign language translation (SLT) aims to automatically
generate spoken language translations based on sign language videos, which holds both social significance and academic value. On the one hand, a high-quality SLT system can greatly facilitate communication between deafmute and hearing individuals [4, 11, 12, 41]. On the other
hand, SLT as an interdisciplinary research topic necessitates
a comprehensive understanding of computer vision [31, 13,
36, 19] and natural language processing [43, 40], given its
* Corresponding authors: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li

Decoder

Text

Decoder

Text

(a) The Previous Pipeline
Prototype#k

Encoder
╳

Prototype#k-1

Iterative
Refinement

(b) Our IP-SLT Pipeline

Figure 1. Illustration of the pipeline of the previous works and our
IP-SLT. (a) The previous studies rely on a one-pass forward process to generate the final translation. (b) To mitigate the vision-text
gap, we introduce the iterative refinement module into the original
SLT system. The refinement module updates the current prototype
conditioned on the sign language video, which can be run iteratively to obtain a better representation of the semantic meaning of
the sign language video.

involvement with vision and text modalities. As a result,
SLT has emerged as a vital research topic, garnering increasing attention [5, 49, 31, 2, 21, 20, 42].
SLT is a challenging task, which faces a tough domain
gap between the input video and output text, as well as a
limited dataset scale due to costly data collection and annotation [49, 7, 44, 21]. Since SLT is typically viewed as
a sequence-to-sequence mapping problem, the existing SLT
systems [23, 5, 7] commonly adopt the one-pass forward
pipeline based on encoder-decoder architecture [40, 30] (as
shown in Fig. 1 (a)). In such a framework, the encoder
transforms the sign video into its semantic representation
(prototype), which is then fed into the decoder to obtain the
final translation. However, due to the inherent gap between
vision and text, it may be hard to conduct such mapping
within the vanilla one-pass architecture.
In this study, we present IP-SLT with the iterative prototype to boost sign language translation (as shown in Fig. 1
(b)), which is inspired by the human reading process. During this process, we note that repeatedly digging into the

15592

