This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tiled Multiplane Images for Practical 3D Photography
Numair Khan

Lei Xiao

Douglas Lanman

numairkhan@meta.com

lei.xiao@meta.com

doug.lanman@meta.com

1. Monocular Depth

2. CNN

Tiled Multiplane Image
3. Novel
View

Figure 1: An overview of our 3D photography method. Left: Using a single RGB image and an estimated monocular depth
map, the scene is recreated as a tiled grid of many small MPIs. Middle: A visualization of a 2×2 tiled grid of MPIs, each
with three RGBA layers. Right: Novel views are rendered by warping and compositing each MPI tile into the target camera’s
frustum. The 768×1152 pixel image shown is generated using a 7×11 grid of 4-layer MPIs.

Abstract
The task of synthesizing novel views from a single image has useful applications in virtual reality and mobile
computing, and a number of approaches to the problem
have been proposed in recent years. A Multiplane Image
(MPI) estimates the scene as a stack of RGBA layers, and
can model complex appearance effects, anti-alias depth errors and synthesize soft edges better than methods that use
textured meshes or layered depth images. And unlike neural radiance fields, an MPI can be efficiently rendered on
graphics hardware. However, MPIs are highly redundant
and require a large number of depth layers to achieve plausible results. Based on the observation that the depth complexity in local image regions is lower than that over the
entire image, we split an MPI into many small, tiled regions, each with only a few depth planes. We call this representation a Tiled Multiplane Image (TMPI). We propose a
method for generating a TMPI with adaptive depth planes
for single-view 3D photography in the wild. Our synthesized results are comparable to state-of-the-art single-view
MPI methods while having lower computational overhead.

1. Introduction
The novel view synthesis (NVS) problem involves using
a set of input images to generate views from new and unseen camera positions, allowing three dimensional interaction with photos. This is a long-studied problem, with early
work relying on interpolation within dense structured image
sets [20, 11, 8]. The specialized rigs commonly required to
capture the large number of images restricted these methods to lab settings [46]. However, the potential applications
offered by novel view synthesis on modern mobile and VR
devices has kindled wide interest in the problem, and encouraged researchers to seek methods that make the technology more accessible. The term 3D photography refers
to the use of novel view synthesis in everyday capture settings, often from a single image.
Over the past few years a number of proposed scene representations have leveraged the great strides being made in
learning-based techniques to achieve more accurate synthesis with fewer constraints. The most recent of these are neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [26, 50] which represent the
scene as multi-layer perceptrons. Their results define the
high bar of novel view synthesis. However, this high quality has a significant data and computational cost.

10454

