This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distracting Downpour:
Adversarial Weather Attacks for Motion Estimation
Jenny Schmalfuss
Lukas Mehl
Andrés Bruhn
Institute for Visualization and Interactive Systems, University of Stuttgart
firstname.lastname@vis.uni-stuttgart.de

Frame I1

Abstract
Current adversarial attacks on motion estimation, or optical flow, optimize small per-pixel perturbations, which are
unlikely to appear in the real world. In contrast, adverse
weather conditions constitute a much more realistic threat
scenario. Hence, in this work, we present a novel attack on
motion estimation that exploits adversarially optimized particles to mimic weather effects like snowflakes, rain streaks
or fog clouds. At the core of our attack framework is a
differentiable particle rendering system that integrates particles (i) consistently over multiple time steps (ii) into the
3D space (iii) with a photo-realistic appearance. Through
optimization, we obtain adversarial weather that significantly impacts the motion estimation. Surprisingly, methods that previously showed good robustness towards small
per-pixel perturbations are particularly vulnerable to adversarial weather. At the same time, augmenting the training with non-optimized weather increases a method’s robustness towards weather effects and improves generalizability at almost no additional cost. Our code is available
at https://github.com/cv-stuttgart/DistractingDownpour.

1. Introduction
Adversarial attacks that pose a severe threat to neural
networks have recently been introduced in the context of
optical flow. There, the goal is to compute the pixel-wise
2D motion f between two consecutive frames I1 and I2 of
an image sequence over time. Current attacks on optical
flow [1, 17, 31, 36, 37] modify these two frames in the 2D
space and consequently ignore the actual 3D geometry of
the scene as well as the objects moving within. Moreover,
when modifying pixels, they impose bounds on the perturbation’s Lp norm rather than imposing visual constraints,
which yields attacked images that lack naturalism. Therefore, robustness analyses with these attacks might not necessarily reflect the robustness of optical flow methods in the

Frame I2

Optical flow

Original

Adversarial fog

Adversarial snow

Adversarial rain

Adversarial sparks

Figure 1. Weather attacks with adversarial fog, snow, rain and
sparks to perturb optical flow estimation with GMA [15]. Our
weather attacks obey the 3D geometry and camera motion, which
is visible in the dynamic motion blur.

real world – where perturbations are more likely to appear
in the form of weather phenomena.
This work investigates whether naturally occurring
weather effects like snow, rain or fog can be manipulated to
serve as adversarial samples for motion estimation. However, simulating weather in this context requires special
care: First, the motion of weather elements should be consistent with the 3D geometry of the scene. Snowflakes
should disappear behind objects and their falling distance
should appear larger when closer to the camera. Second,
their motion should be coherent in time. A raindrop should
fall from top to bottom over the first and second frame, and
a fog cloud between two objects should remain there – even
if the camera moved or rotated.
Taking all this into account, we propose an adversarial attack framework that augments images with particlebased weather effects that feature a high degree of realism:
We create weather particles with a view-consistent 3D motion over time, insert them into the 3D scene in a depthaware manner, and ensure photo-realism through visual ef-

10106

