This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantics-Consistent Feature Search for
Self-Supervised Visual Representation Learning
Kaiyou Song

Shan Zhang Zimeng Luo Tong Wang
Megvii Technology

Jin Xie

{songkaiyou, zhangshan, luozimeng, wangtong, xiejin}@megvii.com

Abstract
In contrastive self-supervised learning, the common way
to learn discriminative representation is to pull different
augmented “views” of the same image closer while pushing
all other images further apart, which has been proven to
be effective. However, it is unavoidable to construct undesirable views containing different semantic concepts during
the augmentation procedure. It would damage the semantic
consistency of representation to pull these augmentations
closer in the feature space indiscriminately. In this study, we
introduce feature-level augmentation and propose a novel
semantics-consistent feature search (SCFS) method to mitigate this negative effect. The main idea of SCFS is to adaptively search semantics-consistent features to enhance the
contrast between semantics-consistent regions in different
augmentations. Thus, the trained model can learn to focus on meaningful object regions, improving the semantic
representation ability. Extensive experiments conducted on
different datasets and tasks demonstrate that SCFS effectively improves the performance of self-supervised learning
and achieves state-of-the-art performance on different downstream tasks.1

1. Introduction
Due to the tremendous potential in learning discriminative
feature representation without using data annotations, selfsupervised learning, including contrastive learning [16, 5]
and masked image modeling (MIM) [1, 15, 38] has received
much attention in the representation learning field. Contrastive learning, as a type of discriminative self-supervised
learning method, is heavily studied and has shown remarkable progress in the computer vision field in recent years.
It aims at pulling different augmented “views” of the same
image (positive pairs) closer while pushing diverse images
(negative pairs) far from each other. To this end, a contrastive
1 Code: https://github.com/skyoux/scfs

Data augs

(a)

wood_rabbit wood_rabbit water_snake

(b)

Data augs

colobus

telescope

(c)

colobus

frilled_lizard

Feature
Aug

Data
Aug

ambulance

(d)

ambulance telescope

(e)

Figure 1. Semantic inconsistency of over-augmentation. (a) shows
three augmentations of two images, in which the third augmentation
is over-augmented and contains only background. (b) shows category probability distributions of the corresponding images in (a),
which are obtained from a supervised pre-trained ResNet50 [18]
model. (c)(d)(e) show three different samples of an image (the dataaugmented image, the original image, and the semantics-consistent
feature-augmented sample generated by Eq. (7) in this study) and
their corresponding probability distributions, which point out that
the over-augmented image generates different category with the
original image, while the feature-augmented sample gets a balanced
category probability.

loss between the features of different views extracted from
an encoder network is employed to train the encoder network
end-to-end. According to whether the negative pairs are used,
current contrastive learning can be generally divided into
two categories.
The first category [16, 5] utilizes both positive pairs and
negative pairs for contrast. MoCo [16, 7] uses a momentum
update mechanism to maintain a memory bank of negative
examples. SimCLR [5, 6] directly trains a single encoder
network with a large batch size to ensure sufficient positive
and negative samples for learning. Based on MoCo and Sim-

16099

