This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Class-incremental Continual Learning for Instance Segmentation with
Image-level Weak Supervision
Yu-Hsing Hsieh1

Guan-Sheng Chen1 Shun-Xian Cai1 Ting-Yun Wei1
Huei-Fang Yang2 Chu-Song Chen1 *
1
Dept. Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
Dept. Information Management, National Sun Yat-sen University, Taiwan
{r10922024,r10922052,r11922081,r10922010,chusong}@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Instance segmentation requires labor-intensive manual
labeling of the contours of complex objects in images for
training. The labels can also be provided incrementally
in practice to balance the human labor in different time
steps. However, research on incremental learning for instance segmentation with only weak labels is still lacking. In
this paper, we propose a continual-learning method to segment object instances from image-level labels. Unlike most
weakly-supervised instance segmentation (WSIS) which relies on traditional object proposals, we transfer the semantic knowledge from weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) to WSIS to generate instance cues. To address the background shift problem in continual learning,
we employ the old class segmentation results generated by
the previous model to provide more reliable semantic and
peak hypotheses. To our knowledge, this is the first work
on weakly-supervised continual learning for instance segmentation of images. Experimental results show that our
method can achieve better performance on Pascal VOC and
COCO datasets under various incremental settings1 .

hfyang@mis.nsysu.edu.tw

CL for WSSS Pred.

Location Cue Extractor
PG

Segmenter

Semantic-aware
Synthetic
Selective Distillation Center & Offset Maps

Previous-step
Segmenter

Figure 1. Our weakly-supervised incremental learning model. Assuming “horse” is the old class and “person” is the current during
CL, our model leverages semantic knowledge yielded by CL for
WSSS to produce synthetic center and offset labels for the current
person class. Semantic-aware selective distillation is employed to
preserve knowledge of the old horse class to achieve CL for WSIS.

Continual learning (CL) aims to continually learn from
data provided in sequential sessions while avoiding catastrophic forgetting [37, 19]. It has gained significant attention since incrementally learning a model is useful in many
applications. CL has two main scenarios. The first, taskincremental CL [33, 54], assumes that we know the task indices of the input data during inference. The second, classincremental CL [5, 45, 44, 59], assumes that the task index
is inaccessible for inference and we aim to classify the data
labels of all seen tasks, which is more generally applicable.

Based on the image labels, previous CL works mainly
devote to image classification of sequential tasks. In this
paper, we take a step forward in class-incremental CL and
learn instance segmentation (IS) models from the image
labels only. To learn an IS model, previous works often
need pixel-level boundary annotations of training objects.
Recently, methods that can learn instance segmenters incrementally are developed in CL [23, 10]. However, they
need expensive pixel-wise supervisions at each incremental learning step. Our approach, on the other hand, requires
only cheaper image-level labels that are easily available. To
our knowledge, this is the first CL study using weakly supervised image labels for subsequent IS model learning.

* corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/AI-Application-and-Integration-Lab/CL4WSIS

On the other hand, IS has been studied for a long time
and has made significant progress [18, 8, 26, 29, 38]. Many

1. Introduction

1250

