This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Human Part-wise 3D Motion Context Learning
for Sign Language Recognition

1

Taeryung Lee1
Yeonguk Oh2
Kyoung Mu Lee1,2
2
IPAI, Dept. of ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{trlee94, namepllet, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose P3D, the human part-wise motion context learning framework for sign language recognition. Our main contributions lie in two dimensions: learning the part-wise motion context and employing the pose
ensemble to utilize 2D and 3D pose jointly. First, our
empirical observation implies that part-wise context encoding benefits the performance of sign language recognition. While previous methods of sign language recognition
learned motion context from the sequence of the entire pose,
we argue that such methods cannot exploit part-specific motion context. In order to utilize part-wise motion context, we
propose the alternating combination of a part-wise encoding Transformer (PET) and a whole-body encoding Transformer (WET). PET encodes the motion contexts from a part
sequence, while WET merges them into a unified context. By
learning part-wise motion context, our P3D achieves superior performance on WLASL compared to previous stateof-the-art methods. Second, our framework is the first to
ensemble 2D and 3D poses for sign language recognition.
Since the 3D pose holds rich motion context and depth information to distinguish the words, our P3D outperformed
the previous state-of-the-art methods employing a pose ensemble.

1. Introduction
Understanding and translating sign language is essential
due to the huge potential benefit to society. Sign language
recognition (SLR) can be considered as a specific kind of
action recognition (AR) since both tasks aim to classify human motion. However, SLR has a characteristic that is distinguished from AR; Actions mainly focus on the motion of
the human body, while the SLR system should be aware of
more detailed information such as hand gestures and facial
expressions. Thus, a specified system for SLR will provide
further gain over using the AR models on SLR.
Previous approaches on SLR problem are mainly cat-

RGB video

3D Human Pose Estimation

Expressive 3D human pose

P3D

“Angry”
Figure 1. Overall pipeline of proposed system. We first extract
expressive 3D human pose from RGB video using off-the-shelf
pose estimation methods [5, 36]. The expressive 3D human pose
consists of 2D pose, 3D pose and facial expression. Then our proposed P3D predicts the word from the expressive 3D human pose.

egorized into RGB-based [1, 4, 31] and pose-based methods [25, 29, 45, 47, 50]. Pose-based methods are known to
have the advantage over RGB-based approaches in terms of
the robustness on domain gap [14, 37]. For that, we aimed
to enhance the performance of SLR, while preserving the
benefits inherent in the pose-based approach.
Although recent pose-based SLR methods have shown
noticeable progress, there are two main limitations of existing methods. First, they utilize only whole-body representation (e.g., skeleton) to understand the motion context of human [20, 30, 47]. Since such approaches overlook the detailed motion context within a specific part

20740

