This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NIR-assisted Video Enhancement via Unpaired 24-hour Data
Muyao Niu, Zhihang Zhong, Yinqiang Zheng*
The University of Tokyo
muyao.niu@gmail.com, {zhong@is.s, yqzheng@ai}.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Low-light video enhancement in the visible (VIS) range
is important yet technically challenging, and it is likely to
become more tractable by introducing near-infrared (NIR)
information for assistance, which in turn arouses a new
challenge on how to obtain appropriate multispectral data
for model training. In this paper, we defend the feasibility
and superiority of NIR-assisted low-light video enhancement results by using unpaired 24-hour data for the first
time, which significantly eases data collection and improves
generalization performance on in-the-wild data. By accounting for different physical characteristics between unpaired daytime and nighttime videos, we first propose to
turn daytime NIR & VIS into ”nighttime mode”. Specifically, we design a heuristic yet physics-inspired relighting algorithm to produce realistic pseudo nighttime NIR,
and use a resampling strategy followed by a noiseGAN for
nighttime VIS conversion. We further devise a temporalaware network for video enhancement that extracts and
fuses bi-directional temporal streams and is trained using
real daytime videos and pseudo nighttime videos. We capture multi-spectral data using a co-axial camera and contribute Fulltime Multi-Spectral Video Dataset (FMSVD),
the first dataset including aligned 24-hour NIR & VIS
videos. Compared to alternative methods, we achieve significantly improved video quality as well as generalization ability on in-the-wild data in terms of both evaluation
metrics and visual judgment. Codes and Data Available:
https://github.com/MyNiuuu/NVEU .

1. Introduction
Visually pleasing videos under well-illuminated conditions are essential for human perception as well as highlevel computer vision tasks. In practice, however, many
videos are captured under sub-optimal conditions due to environmental constraints, leading to poor visibility, structural
degradation, and unpredictable noise interference.
So far, a large number of algorithms have been proposed
* Corresponding author

Figure 1: Light source and distribution differences between daytime and nighttime. During daytime, both NIR
and VIS come from sunlight and skylight, which share similar spatial distribution (a), and the VIS and NIR images are
bright and more uniform (b). During nighttime, the camera
is equipped with NIR LEDs in a co-located setting (c), thus
the intensity distribution of nighttime NIR images depends
heavily on object distance and surface direction. The VIS
images are much darker due to weak illuminants like moonlight and manmade lamps (d).
to enhance images/videos in the visible (VIS) range. Supervised methods [41, 59, 62, 5, 61, 4, 70] provide remarkable performance by denoising and enhancing the low-light
inputs. However, in-the-wild image pairs for supervised
training are laborsome to obtain, which basically needs different camera settings for low-light/normal image pairs of
completely static objects. Capturing video pairs for moving
objects is more involved, which requires complex systems,
such as the coaxial imaging system with ND filters [24] and
repeatable mechatronic motion tracks [58], making the process harder and less practical. Existing unsupervised methods [18, 25, 44] need no image pairs for training, but their
capability in tackling noise tends to be undermined.
In addition to the severely degraded VIS image, it is

10778

