This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Essential Matrix Estimation using Convex Relaxations in Orthogonal Space
Arman Karimian and Roberto Tron
Boston University
{armandok,tron}@bu.edu

Abstract
We introduce a novel method to estimate the essential
matrix for two-view Structure from Motion (SfM). We show
that every 3 × 3 essential matrix can be embedded in a 4 × 4
rotation having its bottom right entry fixed to zero; we call
the latter the quintessential matrix. This embedding leads to
rich relations with the space of 4-D rotations, quaternions,
and the classical twisted-pair ambiguity in two-view SfM.
We use this structure to derive a succession of semidefinite
relaxations that require fewer parameters than the existing
non-minimal solvers and yield faster convergence with certifiable optimality. We then exploit the low-rank geometry
of these relaxations to reduce them to an equivalent optimization on a Riemannian manifold and solve them via the
Riemannian Staircase method. The experimental evaluation
confirms that our algorithm always finds the globally optimal
solution and outperforms the existing non-minimal methods.
We make our implementations open source.1 .

1. Introduction
A cornerstone of geometric perception is finding the relative pose between two images using 2D-2D point correspondences. It constitutes the basic building block in many
structure-from-motion (SfM), visual odometry, and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) systems. Relative
pose estimation is a complex problem since the relation between the coordinates of the correspondences is intrinsically
nonlinear and has ambiguous solutions. Also, the most natural cost function, the reprojection error, is known to have
many local minima. The traditional approach to estimating
the relative pose between calibrated cameras passes through
the essential matrix, a rank-two matrix with two identical
singular values that encode the epipolar constraint between
corresponding images in the two views [32].
Without information about the translation scale, the relative pose problem has five degrees of freedom, and finding a
solution requires at least five correspondences. Most existing
1 https://github.com/armandok/QME

solvers can only handle a fixed number of correspondences
as input. These so-called minimal solvers are usually paired
with a hypothesize-and-test framework such as RANSAC to
find the maximum consensus set of inlier matches. When
inliers are found, a non-minimal solver is needed to finetune the estimated solution and reduce the influence of noise.
Therefore, solvers’ real-time performance and low processing and memory requirements are essential.
This paper introduces an intuitive algebraic characterization of the space of essential matrices. We show that the
space of 4-D rotations with the bottom right entry set to zero
double covers the space of essential matrices and uniquely
encode epipolar configurations up to scale. We call such
rotations quintessential matrices. We show that they share
an intuitive connection with the well-known twisted-pair
ambiguity, i.e., four different epipolar configurations exist
for the same (unsigned) essential matrix. We also explore
the relationship between quintessential matrices and unit
quaternions and show that the space of two orthonormal
quaternions double covers the space of quintessential matrices. We use these findings to present two semidefinite relaxations of the essential matrix estimation problem and show
that a Burer-Monteiro factorization of these spaces lives
on Riemannian manifolds. We then design a Riemannian
truncated-Newton trust-region method to solve this reduction
efficiently.

2. Related Work
Two-view Structure from Motion (SfM), epipolar geometry, and the essential matrix are a fundamental textbook
topic in computer vision geometry [11, 19, 22]. The typical
formulation aims to find the essential matrix given pairs of
image points that are matched across the two images. Initial algorithms were based on linear relaxations (the Direct
Linear Transform, [19]) or minimal algorithms (which use a
minimum of point correspondences [16, 25]). These solution
have typically been paired with RANSAC [12] to improve
the robustness to outliers. Successive solutions followed
different instances of the problem, e.g., using optimization
on manifolds (to minimize more meaningful objective functions, which, however, lead to many local minima, [20, 23]),

17142

