This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Counting Crowds in Bad Weather
Zhi-Kai Huang1*

Wei-Ting Chen1,2*

1 National Taiwan University

Yuan-Chun Chiang1

2 Stanford University

3 UC Merced

Abstract

Sy-Yen Kuo1

Ming-Hsuan Yang3,4,5

4 Google Research

5 Yonsei University

110
100

1. Introduction
Crowd counting aims to estimate the number of persons in
a scene. With the advances of deep learning and construction
of large-scale datasets [69, 19, 45, 54], this topic has become
an important topic with numerous applications. State-ofthe-art approaches are mainly based on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) [22, 24, 31, 57, 50, 13, 1, 27, 29] and
transformers [48, 47, 37, 26]. While these approaches count
crowds effectively on normal images, they typically do not
perform well under adverse weather conditions such as haze,
rain, and snow. However, adverse weather is a common and
inevitable scenario that causes large appearance variations
of crowd scenes, thereby significantly affecting the performance of methods developed for clear weather. As shown
in Figure 1, the state-of-the-art crowd counting method [29]
* indicates equal contribution.

90
80
MAE

Crowd counting has recently attracted significant attention in the field of computer vision due to its wide applications to image understanding. Numerous methods have
been proposed and achieved state-of-the-art performance
for real-world tasks. However, existing approaches do not
perform well under adverse weather such as haze, rain, and
snow since the visual appearances of crowds in such scenes
are drastically different from those images in clear weather
of typical datasets. In this paper, we propose a method for robust crowd counting in adverse weather scenarios. Instead
of using a two-stage approach that involves image restoration and crowd counting modules, our model learns effective
features and adaptive queries to account for large appearance variations. With these weather queries, the proposed
model can learn the weather information according to the
degradation of the input image and optimize with the crowd
counting module simultaneously. Experimental results show
that the proposed algorithm is effective in counting crowds
under different weather types on benchmark datasets. The
source code is available in our project page.

70

Clear

60

Adverse

50

Avg

40
30
MAN

Unified + MAN

AWCC-Net

Method

Figure 1. Performance of State-of-the-art crowd counting
methods under adverse and clear weather on the JHUCrowd++ [45] dataset using mean absolute error (MAE). The
MAN method [29] achieves low MAE in clear scenes but high MAE
in adverse weather. On the other hand, the two-stage method, based
on Unified [8] and MAN [29]), performs slightly better in adverse
weather but slightly worse in clear scenes. Overall, the proposed
AWCC-Net performs favorably in both scenarios.

performs well only under good weather conditions. Thus,
it is of great importance to develop robust crowd counting
methods for adverse weather conditions.
To solve the crowd counting problem under adverse
weather, a plausible solution is to consider a two-stage
model. Specifically, this strategy pre-processes images using the state-of-the-art image restoration modules [8, 49] and
then applies the state-of-the-art crowd counting method [29].
However, this two-stage method may not perform well due
to several factors. First, adopting existing image restoration
methods does not always facilitate the crowd counting task
significantly since these methods are designed to restore image contents rather than visual classification or regression.
As shown in Figure 1, a two-stage approach does not address this problem effectively. Second, this strategy requires
to collect and label images under adverse weather conditions
for the restoration process. In addition, a two-stage strategy
may increase computational complexity significantly.
In this work, we propose a method based on a trans-

23308

