This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GridPull: Towards Scalability in Learning Implicit Representations from 3D
Point Clouds
Chao Chen1

Yu-Shen Liu1 ∗ Zhizhong Han2

1 School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2 Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA

chenchao19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning implicit representations has been a widely used
solution for surface reconstruction from 3D point clouds. The latest methods infer a distance or occupancy field
by overfitting a neural network on a single point cloud.
However, these methods suffer from a slow inference due
to the slow convergence of neural networks and the extensive calculation of distances to surface points, which limits them to small scale points. To resolve the scalability issue in surface reconstruction, we propose GridPull to
improve the efficiency of learning implicit representations
from large scale point clouds. Our novelty lies in the fast
inference of a discrete distance field defined on grids without using any neural components. To remedy the lack of
continuousness brought by neural networks, we introduce a
loss function to encourage continuous distances and consistent gradients in the field during pulling queries onto
the surface in grids near to the surface. We use uniform grids for a fast grid search to localize sampled queries,
and organize surface points in a tree structure to speed up
the calculation of distances to the surface. We do not rely on learning priors or normal supervision during optimization, and achieve superiority over the latest methods in terms of complexity and accuracy. We evaluate our
method on shape and scene benchmarks, and report numerical and visual comparisons with the latest methods to justify our effectiveness and superiority. The code is available at
https://github.com/chenchao15/GridPull.

1. Introduction
It is vital to reconstruct surfaces from 3D point clouds for
downstream applications. A widely used strategy is to learn
∗ The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This work was supported

by National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFC3800600), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62272263, 62072268), and in part
by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data.

h312h@wayne.edu

implicit representations [59, 62, 26, 10, 91, 77, 54, 68, 88]
from 3D point clouds in a data-driven manner. With the
learned implicit representations, we can reconstruct surfaces in meshes by running the marching cubes algorithm [48]. By learning priors from large scale datasets during
training, previous methods [57, 21, 31, 46, 78, 73, 17] generalize the learned priors to either global implicit functions [89, 80, 8, 32, 6, 50] or local ones for unseen point clouds. However, the generalization ability limits their performances on large structure or geometry variations of training
samples.
More recent methods [23, 12, 2, 100, 3, 95, 4, 49, 14,
65, 35] achieved better generalization by directly overfitting neural networks on single unseen point clouds. They
rely on extensive calculations of distances between queries
and surface points to probe the space, which supervises
neural networks to converge to a distance or occupancy
field [49, 23, 2, 100, 3, 11, 52, 83, 40]. However, this inference procedure is time consuming due to the extensive
distance calculations and the slow convergence of neural
networks. This demerit makes these methods hard to scale
up to large scale point clouds for surface reconstruction.
To address the scalability challenge, we propose GridPull to speed up the learning of implicit function from large
scale point clouds. GridPull does not require learned priors
or point normal, and directly infers a distance field from a
point cloud without using any neural components. We infer
the distance field on grids near the surface, which reduces
the number of grids we need to infer. Moreover, we organize surface points in a tree structure to speed up the nearest
neighbor search for the calculation of distances to the surface. Specifically, we infer the discrete distance field by
pulling queries onto the surface in grids of interests. Our
loss function encourages continuous distances and consistent gradients in the field, which makes up the lack of continuousness brought by neural networks. We justify our effectiveness and highlight our superiority by numerical and
visual comparisons with the latest methods on the widely
used benchmarks. Our contributions are listed below.

18322

