This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SoDaCam: Software-defined Cameras via Single-Photon Imaging
Varun Sundar†

Andrei Ardelean‡

Tristan Swedish§

vsundar4@cs.wisc.edu

a.ardelean@epfl.ch

tristan@ubicept.com

Claudio Bruschini‡

Edoardo Charbon‡

{claudio.bruschini, edoardo.charbon}@epfl.ch
†

University of Wisconsin-Madison

‡

Mohit Gupta†,§
mohitg@cs.wisc.edu

École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne

Abstract
Reinterpretable cameras are defined by their postprocessing capabilities that exceed traditional imaging. We
present “SoDaCam” that provides reinterpretable cameras at the granularity of photons, from photon-cubes acquired by single-photon devices. Photon-cubes represent
the spatio-temporal detections of photons as a sequence
of binary frames, at frame-rates as high as 100 kHz. We
show that simple transformations of the photon-cube, or
photon-cube projections, provide the functionality of numerous imaging systems including: exposure bracketing,
flutter shutter cameras, video compressive systems, event
cameras, and even cameras that move during exposure.
Our photon-cube projections offer the flexibility of being
software-defined constructs that are only limited by what
is computable, and shot-noise. We exploit this flexibility to
provide new capabilities for the emulated cameras. As an
added benefit, our projections provide camera-dependent
compression of photon-cubes, which we demonstrate using
an implementation of our projections on a novel compute
architecture that is designed for single-photon imaging.

1. Introduction
Throughout the history of imaging, sensing technologies
and the corresponding processing have developed hand-inhand. In fact, sensing technologies have, to some extent, defined the scope of processing captured data. In the film era,
instances of such processing included dodging and burning.
The advent of digital cameras provided processing at the
granularity of pixels and paved the way for modern computer vision. Light field cameras [34, 78], by sampling the
plenoptic function [2], allowed post-capture processing at
∗ Corresponding author: Varun Sundar. This research was supported in

parts by NSF CAREER award 1943149, NSF award CNS-2107060, and
the Swiss National Science Foundation grant 200021 166289. We also
thank Paul Mos for providing access to SwissSPAD2 acquisition software.

§

Ubicept

the granularity of light rays, enabling novel functionalities
such as refocusing photos after-capture. The logical limit
of post-capture processing, given the fundamental quantization of light, would be at the level of individual photons.
What would imaging look like if we could perform computational processing on individual photons?
In this work, we show that photon data captured by a
new class of single-photon detectors, called single-photon
avalanche diodes (SPADs), makes it possible to emulate a
wide range of imaging modalities such as exposure bracketing [12], video compressive systems [38, 55] and event
cameras [52, 60]. A user then has the flexibility to choose
one (or even multiple) of these functionalities post-capture
(Fig. 1 (top)). SPAD arrays can operate as extremely high
frame-rate photon detectors (∼100 kHz), producing a temporal sequence of binary frames called a photon-cube [16].
We show that computing photon-cube projections, which
are simple linear and shift operations, can reinterpret the
photon-cube to achieve novel post-capture imaging functionalities in a software-defined manner (Fig. 1 (middle)).
As case studies, we emulate three distinct imagers: highspeed video compressive imaging; event cameras which respond to dynamic scene content; and motion projections
which emulate sensor motion, without any real camera
movement. Fig. 1 (bottom) shows the outputs of these cameras that are derived from the same photon-cube.
Computing photon-cube projections. One way to obtain photon-cube projections is to read the entire photoncube off the SPAD array and then perform relevant computations off-chip; we adopt this strategy for our experiments
in Secs. 6.1 and 6.2. While reasonable for certain applications, reading out photon-cubes requires an exorbitant databandwidth, which can be up to 100 Gbps for a 1 MPixel
array—well beyond the capacity of existing data peripherals. Such readout considerations will become center stage
as large-format SPAD arrays are fabricated [48, 49].
An alternative is to avoid transferring the entire photon-

8165

