This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAMo: Leveraging Memory and Attention for
Monocular Video Depth Estimation
Rajeev Yasarla, Hong Cai, Jisoo Jeong, Yunxiao Shi, Risheek Garrepalli, and Fatih Porikli
Qualcomm AI Research*
{ryasarla, hongcai, jisojeon, yunxshi, rgarrepa, fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
We propose MAMo, a novel memory and attention framework for monocular video depth estimation. MAMo can
augment and improve any single-image depth estimation
networks into video depth estimation models, enabling them
to take advantage of the temporal information to predict
more accurate depth. In MAMo, we augment model with
memory which aids the depth prediction as the model
streams through the video. Specifically, the memory stores
learned visual and displacement tokens of the previous time
instances. This allows the depth network to cross-reference
relevant features from the past when predicting depth on
the current frame. We introduce a novel scheme to continuously update the memory, optimizing it to keep tokens
that correspond with both the past and the present visual
information. We adopt attention-based approach to process
memory features where we first learn the spatio-temporal
relation among the resultant visual and displacement memory tokens using self-attention module. Further, the output
features of self-attention are aggregated with the current visual features through cross-attention. The cross-attended
features are finally given to a decoder to predict depth
on the current frame. Through extensive experiments on
several benchmarks, including KITTI, NYU-Depth V2, and
DDAD, we show that MAMo consistently improves monocular depth estimation networks and sets new state-of-theart (SOTA) accuracy. Notably, our MAMo video depth estimation provides higher accuracy with lower latency, when
comparing to SOTA cost-volume-based video depth models.

1. Introduction
Depth plays a fundamental role in 3D perception. Therefore, accurate depth estimation is critical in various applications, such as autonomous driving, AR/VR, and robotics.
While it is possible to measure depth using LiDAR or Timeof-Flight (ToF) sensors, these sensors are expensive, consume a lot of power, require extensive calibration, and cannot generate reliable measurements for certain surfaces. On
* Qualcomm AI Research, an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

Figure 1. Our proposed MAMo (bottom) enables video depth estimation efficiently in a streaming fashion, by leveraging memory
and attention. Monocular depth estimation fails to leverage temporal information (top), while existing cost-volume-based video
depth models are computationally expensive (middle). For instance, for each inference, they require multiple image warping
operations as well as significant memory usage and heavy computation to construct the cost volume(s).

the other hand, inferring depth from camera images has
recently become an cost-efficient and promising alternative. Traditional approaches [42, 14, 35] utilize stereo vision and/or structure-from-motion to estimate depth, which,
however, have limited accuracy. By leveraging deep learning, researchers have achieved significantly more accurate
image-based depth estimation [11, 13, 3, 38, 62].
Using deep neural networks to infer depth from a single camera image, i.e., monocular depth estimation,1 has
1 In this paper, we refer to depth estimation based on a single image
as monocular depth estimation and depth estimation using consecutive
frames captured by the same monocular camera as video depth estimation.

8754

