This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Combating Noisy Labels with Sample Selection
by Mining High-Discrepancy Examples
Xiaobo Xia1 , Bo Han2 , Yibing Zhan3 , Jun Yu4 *, Mingming Gong5 , Chen Gong6 , Tongliang Liu1
1
The University of Sydney 2 Hong Kong Baptist University
3
JD Explore Academy 4 University of Science and Technology of China
5
The University of Melbourne 6 Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Abstract
The sample selection approach is popular in learning
with noisy labels. The state-of-the-art methods train two
deep networks simultaneously for sample selection, which
aims to employ their different learning abilities. To prevent
two networks from converging to a consensus, their divergence should be maintained. Prior work presents that the
divergence can be kept by locating the disagreement data on
which the prediction labels of the two networks are different. However, this procedure is sample-inefficient for generalization, which means that only a few clean examples can
be utilized in training. In this paper, to address the issue,
we propose a simple yet effective method called CoDis. In
particular, we select possibly clean data that simultaneously
have high-discrepancy prediction probabilities between two
networks. As selected data have high discrepancies in probabilities, the divergence of two networks can be maintained
by training on such data. In addition, the condition of
high discrepancies is milder than disagreement, which allows more data to be considered for training, and makes
our method more sample-efficient. Moreover, we show that
the proposed method enables to mine hard clean examples
to help generalization. Empirical results show that CoDis
is superior to multiple baselines in the robustness of trained
models.

1. Introduction
Learning with noisy labels can be dated back to more
than three decades ago [1], and still is one of the hottest
problems in weakly supervised learning. The reason is that,
in our daily life, noisy labels are unavoidable such as crowd
sourcing [67, 32] and web queries [39, 58]. However, the
combination of noisy labels and deep networks is rather
pessimistic, since deep networks have strong learning capacities and can fully memorize given noisy labels, leading
* Corresponding author (harryjun@ustc.edu.cn).

to poor generalization [88, 60, 9, 24, 35, 89, 11, 65, 78, 71,
33]. General-purpose regularization such as dropout and
weight decay cannot address this issue well [80].
Fortunately, even though deep networks can fit anything
given for training eventually, they learn patterns first [2]:
this suggests that deep networks can gradually memorize
the data, moving from clean data to mislabeled data. The
sample selection approach therefore was proposed to handle
noisy labels [21, 16, 47, 76], which is also our focus in this
paper. The works on sample selection try to select possibly
clean data out of noisy ones, and then use them to update the
deep networks. Intuitively, if the training data can become
less noisy, better generalization can be achieved.
As the idea of self-teaching sample selection is argued
to have the inferiority of accumulated errors caused by the
sample-selection bias [16], some advanced algorithms were
proposed, which maintain two deep networks, working in a
cooperative manner [76, 40, 31, 63]. The key component
making the cooperative sample selection works better than
the self-teaching one, is that two different networks have
different learning abilities and can filter different types of
errors introduced by noisy labels. That is to say, when each
network selects clean data for its peer network for updates,
the error flows coming from the biased selection, can be
reduced by peer networks mutually [16].
To keep the different learning abilities of two networks,
prior work [79] utilizes a simple strategy called “Update
by Disagreement”. In more detail, two networks feed forward and predict all data first, and only keep prediction
disagreement data, i.e., the data with different prediction
labels from two networks. Then, each network selects its
clean data from such disagreement data to the peer network. At first glance, this method can use less noisy data
and meanwhile maintain the different learning abilities of
two networks. However, its sample selection procedure is
sample-inefficient for network weight updates. It is because
the condition of disagreement is somewhat strong in sample
selection, which makes that the sample size of prediction
disagreement data is often small, especially when the label

1833

