This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BANSAC: A dynamic BAyesian Network for adaptive SAmple Consensus
Valter Piedade
Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisboa
valter.piedade@tecnico.ulisboa.pt

Abstract
RANSAC-based algorithms are the standard techniques
for robust estimation in computer vision. These algorithms
are iterative and computationally expensive; they alternate between random sampling of data, computing hypotheses, and running inlier counting. Many authors tried different approaches to improve efficiency. One of the major improvements is having a guided sampling, letting the
RANSAC cycle stop sooner. This paper presents a new
adaptive sampling process for RANSAC. Previous methods
either assume no prior information about the inlier/outlier
classification of data points or use some previously computed scores in the sampling. In this paper, we derive
a dynamic Bayesian network that updates individual data
points’ inlier scores while iterating RANSAC. At each iteration, we apply weighted sampling using the updated scores.
Our method works with or without prior data point scorings. In addition, we use the updated inlier/outlier scoring for deriving a new stopping criterion for the RANSAC
loop. We test our method in multiple real-world datasets
for several applications and obtain state-of-the-art results.
Our method outperforms the baselines in accuracy while
needing less computational time. The code is available at
https://github.com/merlresearch/bansac.

1

Introduction

Outliers are one of the primary causes of poor performance in computer vision. Robust estimators are essential
since imaging sensors suffer from several types of noise and
distortions. Removing outliers is one of the initial and more
relevant steps in many computer vision tasks, such as relative pose estimation [12, 28, 32, 35, 39, 50], camera localization [10, 42, 43, 51], and mapping [22, 26, 29, 36, 44, 45].
The gold-standard robust estimator is RANSAC (RANdom
SAmple Consensus), introduced in [23]. RANSAC-based
algorithms are iterative methods that, at each iteration: sample minimal sets, estimate a model, and run inlier counting.
The output is the solution with the largest consensus.
The original RANSAC dates back to 1981. Over the

Pedro Miraldo
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs
miraldo@merl.com

Initialization

10th iteration

100th iteration

1000th iteration

Figure 1. We run BANSAC in a homography estimation problem. We took a pair from the HPatches dataset [2] and show the
updated inlier probabilities of data points (feature matches with
color code at the right) over iterations. In the first row, from left
to right, we show the probabilities at the start and iteration 10.
The second row shows iterations 100 and 1000. For visualization
purposes, we show only 250 randomly chosen matches.

years, many authors changed the original loop to alleviate some of its limitations. All these alternatives focus on
improving the sampling process, getting a better hypothesis, improving the stopping criteria, or changing the inlier counting. Most modifications add significant gains in
computational efficiency. This paper focuses on improving the sampling efficiency even further. The main question
we want to tackle in this paper is: Will changing the scoring weights over iterations help in sampling and defining
the stopping criteria? To answer this question, we propose
BANSAC, a new sampling strategy for the RANSAC loop.
Figure 1 illustrates our approach.
Previous methods such as [4, 11, 16, 37, 47, 48] focus
on exploiting scoring priors or considering some geometric relationships. However, the best-performing methods

3738

