This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffuMask: Synthesizing Images with Pixel-level Annotations for Semantic
Segmentation Using Diffusion Models
Weijia Wu1,3 ,
1

Zhejiang University

aeroplane
dog

Yuzhong Zhao2 ,
2

bicycle
person

Mike Zheng Shou3 *, Hong Zhou1∗ ,

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

bird
sheep

3

boat

bottle

bus

sofa

train

potted plant

Chunhua Shen1,4

National University of Singapore

car

cat

chair

cow

4

Ant Group

motorbike

background

(a) Synthesizing Images with Pixel-level Annotations for Semantic Segmentation

Prompt: A photograph of Eiffel Tower

Prompt: A painting of a highly detailed Ultraman

Prompt: A road sign shows Mask

(b) Open-Vocabulary Image and Semantic Mask Generation

Figure 1 – DiffuMask synthesizes photo-realistic images and high-quality mask annotations by exploiting the attention maps of
the diffusion model. Without human effort for localization DiffuMask is capable of producing high-quality semantic masks.

Abstract
Collecting and annotating images with pixel-wise labels
is time-consuming and laborious. In contrast, synthetic
data can be freely available using a generative model (e.g.,
DALL-E, Stable Diffusion). In this paper, we show that
it is possible to automatically obtain accurate semantic
masks of synthetic images generated by the Off-the-shelf
Stable Diffusion model, which uses only text-image pairs
during training. Our approach, termed DiffuMask, exploits the potential of the cross-attention map between text
and image, which is natural and seamless to extend the
text-driven image synthesis to semantic mask generation.
DiffuMask uses text-guided cross-attention information to

localize class/word-specific regions, which are combined
with practical techniques to create a novel high-resolution
and class-discriminative pixel-wise mask. The methods
help to significantly reduce data collection and annotation
costs. Experiments demonstrate that the existing segmentation methods trained on synthetic data of DiffuMask can
achieve a competitive performance over the counterpart
of real data (VOC 2012, Cityscapes). For some classes
(e.g., bird), DiffuMask presents promising performance,
close to the state-of-the-art result of real data (within 3%
mIoU gap). Moreover, in the open-vocabulary segmentation (zero-shot) setting, DiffuMask achieves new state-ofthe-art results on the Unseen classes of VOC 2012. The
project website can be found at DiffuMask.

∗ Corresponding author

1206

