This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LPFF: A Portrait Dataset for Face Generators Across Large Poses
Yiqian Wu1
Jing Zhang1
Hongbo Fu2
Xiaogang Jin1 *
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
City University of Hong Kong
onethousand@zju.edu.cn,jing z99@163.com,hongbofu@cityu.edu.hk,jin@cad.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing face generators exhibit exceptional performance on faces in small to medium poses (with respect to
frontal faces) but struggle to produce realistic results for
large poses. The distorted rendering results on large poses
in 3D-aware generators further show that the generated
3D face shapes are far from the distribution of 3D faces
in reality. We find that the above issues are caused by the
training dataset’s pose imbalance. To this end, we present
LPFF, a large-pose Flickr face dataset comprised of 19,590
high-quality real large-pose portrait images. We utilize our
dataset to train a 2D face generator that can process largepose face images, as well as a 3D-aware generator that can
generate realistic human face geometry. To better validate
our pose-conditional 3D-aware generators, we develop a
new FID measure to evaluate the 3D-level performance.
Through this novel FID measure and other experiments, we
show that LPFF can help 2D face generators extend their
latent space and better manipulate the large-pose data, and
help 3D-aware face generators achieve better view consistency and more realistic 3D reconstruction results.

1. Introduction
Since the first introduction by Goodfellow in 2014, generative adversarial networks (GANs) [11] have significantly
advanced the performance of 2D high-resolution image
generation. GANs can accomplish a variety of downstream image editing tasks, particularly face modification
[2, 16, 42, 43], thanks to the excellent image quality and semantic features in its latent space. Recently, plenty of 3Daware generators [12, 30, 5, 52, 35, 9, 41, 40] have been proposed to learn 3D-consistent face portrait generation from
2D image datasets. 3D-aware generators can describe and
represent geometry in their latent space while rendering objects from different camera perspectives using volumetric
rendering. Researchers carefully designed generator archi* Corresponding author.

(
a
)Our
s

(
b
)EG3
D

Figure 1: Image and shape samples generated by EG3D
models [5] trained with the same training strategy but using different datasets (our new dataset LPFF and FFHQ for
(a) and FFHQ for (b)). The generators are conditioned by
the average camera parameters. Shapes are iso-surfaces extracted from the corresponding density fields using marching cubes. Our dataset helps reduce distorted, “seam”,
“wall-mounted”, and blurry artifacts exhibited in (b).

tectures and training strategies to accelerate training, reduce
memory overheads, and increase rendering resolution.
Both the existing 2D and 3D approaches, however, are
unable to process large-pose face data. Regarding 2D face
generators, those large-pose data are actually outside of
their latent space, which prevents them from generating reasonable large-pose data, thus causing at least two problems.
First, as shown in Fig. 2 (left), moving the latent code along
the yaw pose editing direction will cause it to reach the edge
of the latent space before faces become profile. Second, as
shown by the results of image inversion in Fig. 2 (right),
it is challenging to project large-pose images to the latent
space, let alone perform semantic modification on them.
One of the goals of 3D-aware generators is to model realistic human face geometry, but existing 3D-aware generators
trained on 2D image datasets still have difficulty producing
realistic geometry. This issue is more serious when render-

20327

