This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain Specified Optimization for Deployment Authorization
Haotian Wang*, Haoang Chi∗ , Wenjing Yang, Zhipeng Lin, Mingyang Geng, Long Lan
National University of Defense Technology
wanghaotian13@nudt.edu.cn, haoangchi618@gmail.com, {wenjing.yang,long.lan}@nudt.edu.cn

Jing Zhang, Dacheng Tao
The University of Sydney
jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
ܲ௎మ

Risk

This paper explores Deployment Authorization (DPA)
as a means of restricting the generalization capabilities of
vision models on certain domains to protect intellectual
property. Nevertheless, the current advancements in DPA
are predominantly confined to fully supervised settings. Such
settings require the accessibility of annotated images from
any unauthorized domain, rendering the DPA approaches
impractical for real-world applications due to its exorbitant
costs.
To address this issue, we propose Source-Only Deployment Authorization (SDPA), which assumes that only authorized domains are accessible during training phases, and
the model’s performance on unauthorized domains must be
suppressed in inference stages. Drawing inspiration from distributional robust statistics, we present a lightweight method
called Domain-Specified Optimization (DSO) for SDPA that
degrades the model’s generalization over a divergence ball.
DSO comes with theoretical guarantees on the convergence
property and its authorization performance. As a complementary of SDPA, we also propose Target-Combined Deployment Authorization (TPDA), where unauthorized domains are partially accessible, and simplify the DSO method
to a perturbation operation on the pseudo predictions, referred to as Target-Dependent Domain-Specified Optimization (TDSO). We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed DSO and TDSO methods through extensive experiments on six image benchmarks, achieving dominant performance on both SDPA and TDPA settings.

* Indicates equal contribution.

Risk

Risk

ܲ௎ర

ܲ௎య

Divergence Ball

Centroid

ܲௌ

ߩ

ܲ௎భ

ܲ௎భ

ܲ௎య

ܲௌ

ߩ

Authorized Domain
ܲ௎మ

ܲ௎ర

Unauthorized Domains Close to ࡼࡿ

Unauthorized Domains Far From ࡼࡿ
Radius of the Divergence Ball

Figure 1: Our domain specified optimization is designed
for maximizing the risk over unauthorized domains (e.g.,
PU1 and PU2 as framed yellow triangles) close to the authorized domain Ps , and minimizing the risk on PS as the
centroid (risk quantifies the consistency between the learning model and the domain). Besides, unauthorized domains
far away from the authorized domain (e.g., PU3 and PU4
as framed blue squares) are not considered, as the model
trained on PS naturally generalizes poorly on them.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable progress in a variety of vision applications [4, 7, 47, 48, 51, 38] with tremendous commercial values [22, 41, 20, 40]. However, training
a deep model from scratch is non-trivial, as it contains abundant knowledge including a professional tuning process [7],
large-scale image datasets with exhaustive annotations [9],
and expensive computational resources [2]. Therefore, the intellectual property (IP) protection/authorization of the knowledge embodied in a pre-trained deep model has been raised
as a matter of increasing concern [46, 43].
Previous studies on IP protection/authorization consist of
two branches, including authorizations of the model owner
and the model user [43], respectively. In addition to addressing who can own or use the model, a data-centric authorization problem known as deployment authorization (DPA) has
been proposed [43]. DPA aims to address which data can

5095

