This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Making and Breaking of Camouflage
Hala Lamdouar1
Weidi Xie1,2
1
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

Andrew Zisserman1
2
CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

{lamdouar,weidi,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Not all camouflages are equally effective, as even a partially visible contour or a slight color difference can make
the animal stand out and break its camouflage. In this paper,
we address the question of what makes a camouflage successful, by proposing three scores for automatically assessing its effectiveness. In particular, we show that camouflage
can be measured by the similarity between background and
foreground features and boundary visibility. We use these
camouflage scores to assess and compare all available camouflage datasets. We also incorporate the proposed camouflage score into a generative model as an auxiliary loss
and show that effective camouflage images or videos can
be synthesised in a scalable manner. The generated synthetic dataset is used to train a transformer-based model
for segmenting camouflaged animals in videos. Experimentally, we demonstrate state-of-the-art camouflage breaking
performance on the public MoCA-Mask benchmark.

1. Introduction
Camouflage has long been a subject of interest and fascination for the scientific community, especially evolutionary biologists who consider it as an excellent example of
species adaptation. In order to confuse predators or to hide
from prey, and increase their chances of survival in their
natural habitat, animals have developed numerous camouflage mechanisms, e.g., disruptive coloration and background matching. Some species have even evolved to develop an adaptive camouflage, e.g., an arctic fox loses its
white fur to better match the brown grey of the new season’s
landscape. Perhaps the most dramatic camouflage adaptation is the cuttlefish; it changes its patterns dynamically and
rapidly as it moves from one spot to the other, constantly
adapting and improving its camouflage.
This search for optimal camouflage has inspired numerous works in the computer vision community, such
as [12, 27], that tackled camouflage as a problem of optimal
texture synthesis, making 3D objects non-detectable in a
given scene. Others have addressed camouflage as a highly

Figure 1: The three images depict the same animal, an Arctic fox, as it adapts its appearance to better blend with the
changing landscape of the new season. While images a and
c exhibit better background similarity than image b, the fox
boundary is more visible in image a than image c. We assess
the effectiveness of camouflage by measuring the degree of
ambiguity it creates with respect to its background.
challenging object segmentation task in [9, 15, 20, 23]. Efforts have been made in collecting large scale camouflage
datasets [9, 20] with costly annotation. In fact, camouflaged
animals often exhibit complex shapes and thin structures
that add to the boundary ambiguity and make the annotation highly time-consuming. Fan et al. report up to 60min
per image to provide accurate pixel-level annotations for
their dataset COD10K [9]. While another line of research
turned to camouflage breaking in sequences by taking advantage of motion cues [1, 5, 18, 19, 40], the camouflage
data scarcity is even more extreme for videos. Recently,
Sim2Real [18, 39] training has shown to be very effective
for motion segmentation. By training on the optical flows of
synthetic videos, these models can generalise to real videos
without suffering from the domain gaps.
In this paper, we start by asking the question: ªwhat
are the properties of a successful camouflage ?º To answer this question, we investigate three scoring functions
for quantifying the effectiveness of camouflage, namely,
reconstruction fidelity score (SRf ), boundary score (Sb )
and intra-image FrÂechet score (dF ). These scores are later
adopted for two critical roles, (i) they are used to assess
the relevance of existing camouflage datasets and act as
quality-indicator in collecting new camouflage data; (ii)
1832

