This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RankMatch: Fostering Confidence and Consistency in
Learning with Noisy Labels
Ziyi Zhang1,2 , Weikai Chen3 , Chaowei Fang4 , Zhen Li5 , Lechao Chen6 , Liang Lin2 , Guanbin Li2,7 *
1
National Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China, 3 Tencent America
4
Xidian Univiersity, 5 The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), 6 Zhejiang Lab
7
Research Institute, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
zhangziyi@lamda.nju.edu.cn, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Not Confident

Abstract

Weekly augmented

Training Image 1 labeled with `cat’

Cat

Learning with noisy labels (LNL) is one of the most
important and challenging problems in weakly-supervised
learning. Recent advances adopt the sample selection strategy to mitigate the interference of noisy labels and use
small-loss criteria to select clean samples. However, the
one-dimensional loss is an over-simplified metric that fails
to accommodate the complex feature landscape of various
samples, and, hence, is prone to introduce classification errors during sample selection. In this paper, we propose
RankMatch, a novel LNL framework that investigates additional dimensions of confidence and consistency in order to combat noisy labels. Confidence-wise, we propose a
novel sample selection strategy based on confidence representation voting instead of the widely-used small-loss criterion. This new strategy is capable of increasing sample selection quantity without sacrificing labeling accuracy.
Consistency-wise, instead of the widely adopted feature distance metric for measuring the consistency of inner-class
samples, we advocate that the rank of principal features is
a much more robust indicator. Based on this metric, we
propose rank contrastive loss, which strengthens the consistency of similar samples regardless of their labels and
facilitates feature representation learning. Experimental
results on noisy versions of CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, Clothing1M and WebVision have validated the superiority of our
approach over existing state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of DNNs stems from the availability of large-scale datasets. However, it is highly laborious to obtain massive data with high-quality annotations.
* Corresponding author.

similar

deer

dog

cat

Model
(Trained with noisy labels)

Validation image

deer

dog

cat

Inconsistent

similar

Deer
Strongly augmented

deer

dog

cat

Training Image 2 labeled with `deer’

deer

dog

cat

Figure 1: Motivation of RankMatch. After being trained
with noisy labels, the model is validated by the augmented
images. Noisy labels leads to high-entropy outputs, which
lack confidence. We advocate for the use of confidence criterion for sample selection, as the confident samples are
more likely to have clean labels. Moreover, The weakly
augmented image is similar to training Image 1 (classified as ‘dog’), while the strongly augmented one is similar to training Image 2 (classified as ‘deer’). Considering
the model tends to produce similar predictions for similar
images, the two views of the same image have inconsistent predictions. Consequently, we introduce the rank contrastive loss to enhance the semantic consistency.

Hence, training DNNs using inexpensive samples from the
search engine or machine annotation [27, 33, 11] has become an attractive alternative. However, these methods inevitably introduce erroneous labels, which cause poor performance as DNNs can easily overfit to noises [58]. Hence,
learning with noisy labels (LNL) has become an important
yet challenging task.
Sample selection is a widely adopted strategy in LNL
that identifies clean samples from the dataset to alleviate
the negative impact of noisy labels. The small-loss criterion is a popular sample selection strategy, which regards

1644

