This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Aria Digital Twin: A New Benchmark Dataset for Egocentric 3D Machine
Perception
Xiaqing Pan
Nicholas Charron
Chen Kong
Omkar Parkhi

Yongqian Yang
Scott Peters
Thomas Whelan
Richard Newcombe
Yuheng (Carl) Ren
Meta Reality Labs

{xiaqingp, nickcharron, yongqian, scpeters, twhelan, chenk, omkar, newcombe, carlren}@meta.com

Abstract
We introduce the Aria Digital Twin (ADT) 1 - an egocentric dataset captured using Aria glasses with extensive object, environment, and human level ground truth. This ADT
release contains 200 sequences of real-world activities conducted by Aria wearers in two real indoor scenes with 398
object instances (344 stationary and 74 dynamic). Each
sequence consists of: a) raw data of two monochrome camera streams, one RGB camera stream, two IMU streams; b)
complete sensor calibration; c) ground truth data including
continuous 6-degree-of-freedom (6DoF) poses of the Aria
devices, object 6DoF poses, 3D eye gaze vectors, 3D human poses, 2D image segmentations, image depth maps;
and d) photo-realistic synthetic renderings. To the best of
our knowledge, there is no existing egocentric dataset with
a level of accuracy, photo-realism and comprehensiveness
comparable to ADT. By contributing ADT to the research
community, our mission is to set a new standard for evaluation in the egocentric machine perception domain, which
includes very challenging research problems such as 3D object detection and tracking, scene reconstruction and understanding, sim-to-real learning, human pose prediction while also inspiring new machine perception tasks for augmented reality (AR) applications. To kick start exploration
of the ADT research use cases, we evaluated several existing
state-of-the-art methods for object detection, segmentation
and image translation tasks that demonstrate the usefulness
of ADT as a benchmarking dataset.

1. Introduction
Egocentric data has become increasingly important to
the machine perception community in the past several years
due to the rapid emergence of AR applications. Such applications require the co-existence of the real-world space
and a virtual space along with a contextual awareness of
1 Download dataset and tools: https://www.projectaria.com/datasets/adt/

the real surroundings. Complete contextual awareness cannot be achieved without a full and accurate 3D digitization
of three fundamental elements in the real-world space: humans, objects and the environment. Every object and environmental component, including lighting, room structure
and layout, has to be precisely digitized to unlock consistent rendering of the virtual space within the real world.
Dynamic object motion needs to be tracked in 3D to update the state of the space via physical interactions. The
state of the human wearing AR glasses should be estimated
and intersected with the digital space to derive the interaction in both physical and virtual spaces. Achieving all of
this requires solutions to a number of core problems such
as 3D object detection, human pose estimation, and scene
reconstruction, where data is the key component.
Existing datasets that aim at progressing the field of AR
do not focus holistically on the problem space, but rather
on specific sub-problems. A significant amount of progress
in large scale static scene datasets [7, 36, 6] has helped to
advance 3D scene understanding tasks such as static object
detection, scene reconstruction and room layout estimation.
Although the photo-realism of these reconstructed scenes
is continuously improving [37], these datasets lack the motion of objects introduced by hand interactions that commonly occur in egocentric AR scenarios. Object-centric
datasets [1, 42] that include increasingly complex occlusions between objects, also require that objects be stationary to facilitate the annotation process. Dynamic object
datasets [11, 12, 15] capture hand-object interaction but
the data is captured in controlled, simplified environments.
Egocentric human motion datasets [30, 45] capture 3D human poses with annotation of 3D joint positions but without the digitization of the environment. Most importantly,
none of the discussed datasets leverage an AR-style sensing
device that captures the unique challenges with egocentric
data such as fast ego motion, sub-optimal viewpoint, lowpower sensing hardware, etc. Although some egocentric
datasets [13, 38, 10] have emerged recently, they present
only either narrative annotation or 2D object annotation

20133

