This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Continuous Sign Language Recognition with Cross-Lingual Signs
Fangyun Wei
Microsoft Research Asia

Yutong Chen
Microsoft Research Asia

fawe@microsoft.com

chenytjudy@gmail.com

Abstract
This work dedicates to continuous sign language recognition (CSLR), which is a weakly supervised task dealing
with the recognition of continuous signs from videos, without any prior knowledge about the temporal boundaries between consecutive signs. Data scarcity heavily impedes the
progress of CSLR. Existing approaches typically train CSLR
models on a monolingual corpus, which is orders of magnitude smaller than that of speech recognition. In this work,
we explore the feasibility of utilizing multilingual sign language corpora to facilitate monolingual CSLR. Our work
is built upon the observation of cross-lingual signs, which
originate from different sign languages but have similar visual signals (e.g., hand shape and motion). The underlying
idea of our approach is to identify the cross-lingual signs in
one sign language and properly leverage them as auxiliary
training data to improve the recognition capability of another. To achieve the goal, we first build two sign language
dictionaries containing isolated signs that appear in two
datasets. Then we identify the sign-to-sign mappings between two sign languages via a well-optimized isolated sign
language recognition model. At last, we train a CSLR model
on the combination of the target data with original labels
and the auxiliary data with mapped labels. Experimentally,
our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on two
widely-used CSLR datasets: Phoenix-2014 and Phoenix2014T.

1. Introduction
Sign languages are visual-spatial signals for communication among deaf communities. These languages are primarily expressed through hand shape but are also greatly
aided by the movement of the body, head, mouth, and eyes.
Sign language recognition, which aims to establish communication between hearing people and deaf people, can be
roughly categorized into two sorts: isolated sign language
recognition (ISLR) [49, 26, 19, 27] and continuous sign language recognition (CSLR) [24, 8, 22, 47, 46, 10]. ISLR is
a supervised classification task—it requires models to recognize and classify isolated signs from videos. In contrast,

DGS: SONNE (Sun)

CSL: 灯 (Light)
(a) Cross-lingual signs usually have distinct meanings.

DGS: KALT (Cold)

CSL: 冷 (Cold)
(b) Cross-lingual signs occasionally convey the same meaning.

Figure 1: Cross-lingual signs are those that originate from
different sign languages but have similar visual signals (e.g.
hand shape and motion). We show two examples identified by our approach from a German sign language (DGS)
dataset and a Chinese sign language (CSL) dataset.
CSLR is a weakly supervised task dedicated to the recognition of continuous signs from videos, without any prior
knowledge about the temporal boundaries between consecutive signs. The objective of this work is to develop a CSLR
framework, with the assistance of an ISLR model and multilingual corpus.
In contrast to the promising achievements in automatic
speech recognition [28, 2, 35, 41], the lack of large-scale
training data heavily impedes the progress of CSLR. In
general, training a satisfying speech recognition model requires thousands of hours of training data [20, 34]. However, existing sign language datasets [23, 6, 44] are orders of magnitude smaller, containing only fewer than 20

23612

