This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Snow Removal in Video: A New Dataset and A Novel Method
Haoyu Chen1 , Jingjing Ren1 , Jinjin Gu2 , Hongtao Wu1 ,
Xuequan Lu3 , Haoming Cai4 , Lei Zhu1,5
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
5

La Trobe University

4

2

The University of Sydney

The University of Maryland

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Project page:

https://haoyuchen.com/VideoDesnowing

Abstract
Snowfall is a common weather phenomenon that can
severely affect computer vision tasks by obscuring objects
and scenes. However, existing deep learning-based snow
removal methods are designed for single images only. In
this paper, we target a more complex task – video snow
removal, which aims to restore the clear video from the
snowy video. To facilitate this task, we propose the ﬁrst
high-quality video dataset, which simulates realistic physical characteristics of snow and haze using a rendering engine and augmentation techniques. We also develop a deep
learning framework for video snow removal. Speciﬁcally,
we propose a snow-query temporal aggregation module and
a snow-aware contrastive learning loss function. The module aggregates features between video frames and removes
snow effectively, while the loss function helps identify and
eliminate snow features. We conduct extensive experiments
and demonstrate that our proposed dataset is more realistic than previous datasets, and the models trained on it
achieve better performance in real-world snowing images.
Our proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art video
and image-based methods on both synthetic and real snowy
videos.

1. Introduction
Snowfall is a common weather phenomenon that can signiﬁcantly affect visibility in photographs, interfering with
and reducing the accuracy of computer vision tasks such as
target detection [34], tracking [14], and autonomous driving
[33]. Image and video restoration [39, 23, 48, 37, 46, 7, 5,
26, 40, 43, 42, 41, 45, 31] is a widely studied direction, but
research on image and video snow removal is still limited.
Removing snow is crucial for improving accuracy and robustness of computer vision tasks. Additionally, snow can
obstruct objects, decreasing image and video quality. Snow

removal is a challenging task that requires distinguishing
snowﬂake regions from the background and restoring obscured scenes, complicated by the complex geometric shape
and texture of snowﬂakes. Moreover, snowfall often comes
with haze, which further obscures the images.
Contrast with single image, the video provides richer information about the dynamic features of the scene, i.e., a
consecutive frame sequence on the temporal dimension. Although recent image snow removal algorithms [25, 11, 12,
50, 8, 10] have achieved good results, applying these algorithms directly to video snow removal is inappropriate
because image algorithms ignore temporal information in
video frames and this information could be very useful to
improve snow removal outcomes. As such, it is signiﬁcant
to conduct in-depth research and exploration for snow video
data. Previous studies have explored some aspects of video
desnowing, such as methods based on non-deep learning
[32, 18] or online learning [22]. However, deep learningbased video desnowing remains an under-researched area.
A major challenge for applying deep learning methods is
the lack of high-quality video desnowing datasets. In the
era of powerful deep learning, this becomes an urgent problem that needs to be addressed. In fact, the lack of appropriate datasets has signiﬁcantly slowed down the progress of
deep learning-based video snow removal research, which
has been a bottleneck in this ﬁeld.
To this end, we present the ﬁrst high-quality annotated
video dataset for video snow removal: Realistic Video
DeSnowing Dataset (RVSD). RVSD contains a total of 110
pairs of videos. Each pair contains snowy and hazy videos
and corresponding snow-free and haze-free ground truth
videos. Unlike previous image datasets that simulate snow
using Photoshop, we use a rendering engine and various
augmentation techniques to generate snow with diverse and
realistic physical properties. This results in more realistic
and varied synthesized videos, which improve the model’s
performance on real-world data. To further enhance the
model’s performance, we also consider the effect of haze

13211

