This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DPS-Net: Deep Polarimetric Stereo Depth Estimation
Chaoran Tian1

Weihong Pan1
Zimo Wang1
Mao Mao1
Guofeng Zhang1
Hujun Bao1
Ping Tan2
Zhaopeng Cui1 *
1
2
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Stereo depth estimation usually struggles to deal with
textureless scenes for both traditional and learning-based
methods due to the inherent dependence on image correspondence matching. In this paper, we propose a novel neural network, i.e., DPS-Net, to exploit both the prior geometric knowledge and polarimetric information for depth
estimation with two polarimetric stereo images. Specifically, we construct both RGB and polarization correlation
volumes to fully leverage the multi-domain similarity between polarimetric stereo images. Since inherent ambiguities exist in the polarization images, we introduce the isodepth cost explicitly into the network to solve these ambiguities. Moreover, we design a cascaded dual-GRU architecture to recurrently update the disparity and effectively
fuse both the multi-domain correlation features and the isodepth cost. Besides, we present new synthetic and real polarimetric stereo datasets for evaluation. Experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-ofthe-art stereo depth estimation methods.

1. Introduction
Stereo depth estimation is a classical computer vision
task, playing an important role in many applications, e.g.,
autonomous driving, robotics, and VR/AR. Traditional
methods [16, 21, 27, 33, 36, 44, 47] often solve a perpixel depth by finding pixelwise correspondences across input images, which thus normally struggle to handle textureless areas. Recently, many methods [5, 6, 15, 20, 46, 14]
have been proposed to exploit deep learning techniques and
achieved promising results. Thanks to their learned shape
priors, these methods can generate smooth results in textureless regions. But the recovered depth at textureless regions is unreliable since the correspondence is intrinsically
ambiguous.
To reconstruct textureless objects, some previous methods exploit additional shape cues, such as photometric
* Corresponding author.

stereo [12, 30, 32, 50], shape-from-shading [35, 31, 40],
and shape-from-polarization [1, 18, 28, 29, 31, 2]. Among
them, the polarization constraint is passive and provides
strong information on local surface orientations. Thus, it
attracts more and more attention for 3D reconstruction and
has been integrated with multi-view stereo [8, 49], SLAM
[43], stereo normal estimation [13] and stereo depth estimation [51, 25]. These methods combine multi-view triangulation with the surface normal estimated from the polarization, and therefore improve the 3D reconstruction at textureless regions. However, these methods usually assume
a smooth surface or controlled illumination, which is normally limited to object-level scenarios or specific capturing
environments. Moreover, these methods struggle to handle
the inherent azimuth or zenith angle ambiguities [7] in the
surface estimation from the polarization images, e.g., relying on a pre-computed coarse depth or assuming known
reflection types.
In this paper, we aim to design an end-to-end neural
network to predict the depth from polarimetric stereo images, which learns to exploit the polarization information
for accurate depth estimation of complex scenes. However, it is nontrivial to design such a model due to the following challenges. First, since the polarimetric and photometric domains maintain different characters of the scene,
a straightforward combination may not fully exploit the
multi-domain information. Moreover, similar to traditional
polarimetric 3D modeling methods, we need to solve the inherent ambiguities in the polarization information, including the azimuth and zenith angle ambiguities. Lastly, there
are few real polarimetric stereo datasets that are sufficient
for network training.
To deal with these challenges, we propose a novel DPSNet with a cascaded dual-GRU (Gated Recurrent Unit)
module that tightly integrates the polarization constraints
and learned shape priors for robust polarimetric stereo depth
estimation. Specifically speaking, to better exploit the
multi-domain knowledge, we first extract per-pixel features
and construct both RGB and polarization correlation volume pyramids for stereo matching, and explicitly introduce
the geometric constraint from the polarization into the net-

3569

