This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Converted Spiking Neural Network for 3D and 2D Classification
‡

‡

Yuxiang Lan1 , Yachao Zhang2 , Xu Ma3 , Yanyun Qu1 , Yun Fu3
1
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
3
Department of ECE, Northeastern University
lanyuxiang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yachaozhang@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have attracted enormous research interest due to their low-power and biologically plausible nature. Existing ANN-SNN conversion methods can achieve lossless conversion by converting a welltrained Artificial Neural Network (ANN) into an SNN. However, converted SNN requires a large amount of time steps
to achieve competitive performance with the well-trained
ANN, which means a large latency. In this paper, we propose an efficient unified ANN-SNN conversion method for
point cloud classification and image classification to significantly reduce the time step to meet the fast and lossless ANN-SNN transformation. Specifically, we first adaptively adjust the threshold according to the activation state
of spiking neurons, ensuring a certain proportion of spiking neurons are activated at each time step to reduce the
time for accumulation of membrane potential. Next, we use
an adaptive firing mechanism to enlarge the range of spiking output, getting more discrimination features in short
time steps. Extensive experimental results on challenging
point cloud and image datasets demonstrate that the suggested approach significantly outmatches state-of-the-art
ANN-SNN conversion based methods.

1. Introduction
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) have achieved a phenomenal triumph in many Artificial Intelligence (AI) tasks
such as 3D understanding [18, 30, 28], and image recognition [25, 6, 11, 8, 31]. However, the trend of significant
growth in computational cost has also emerged with the
rapid development of this field. State-of-the-art ANN models usually have billions of parameters, which consumes
such a huge amount of computation that renders performing
on-device inference challenging [1, 16]. Such a situation
stimulates the demand for deploying more power-efficient
‡ Corresponding Author

Figure 1. The inference conversion rate (%) for 3D classification
and 2D classification. Conversion rate refers to the ratio of the performance of SNN to ANN. (A) presents the experimental results
of Pointnet++ framework on ModelNet-10 data set. SNN Calibration is our implementation of point cloud classification using the
official open-source code. (B) shows the experimental results using ResNet20 as the framework on CIFAR-10 dataset.

networks in real-world applications [20]. Therefore, recent
works have paid more attention to SNNs due to their lowpower and biologically plausible nature [7, 9].
SNN transmits information by spike trains, which extend
in the additional time dimension, and each spiking neuron in
SNN triggers a spike when its accumulated membrane potential reaches the given upper bound, otherwise, it would

9211

