This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Building Vision Transformers with Hierarchy Aware Feature Aggregation
Yongjie Chen1,2
1

Hongmin Liu1,2 * Haoran Yin3

Bin Fan1,2

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology Beijing
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, University of Science and Technology Beijing
3
Horizon Robotics

yongjie_chen@xs.ustb.edu.cn, hmliu_82@163.com, haoran.yin@horizon.ai, bin.fan@ieee.org

Abstract
Thanks to the excellent global modeling capability of attention mechanisms, the Vision Transformer has achieved
better results than ConvNet in many computer tasks. However, in generating hierarchical feature maps, the Transformer still adopts the ConvNet feature aggregation scheme.
This leads to the problem that the semantic information
of the grid area of image becomes confused after feature
aggregation, making it difficult for attention to accurately
model global relationships. To address this, we propose the
Hierarchy Aware Feature Aggregation framework (HAFA).
HAFA enhances the extraction of local features adaptively
in shallow layers where semantic information is weak, while
is able to aggregate patches with similar semantics in deep
layers. The clear semantic information of the aggregated
patches, enables the attention mechanism to more accurately model global information at the semantic level. Extensive experiments show that after using the HAFA framework, significant improvements have been achieved relative
to the baseline models in image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation tasks.

1. Introduction
The success of Transformer [37, 7, 18] in natural language processing (NLP) has inspired the research of Vision
Transformer in the field of computer vision [9]. Benefiting
from the excellent global modeling and asymmetric data
processing abilities of Transformer, Vision Transformers
have witnessed new state of the arts in various vision tasks
like image classification [9, 24, 34, 42, 35], object detection
[2, 59, 11, 54] and semantic segmentation [55, 44, 31, 38].
Compared to Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets), Transformers inherently have better global model-

Figure 1. Comparison of feature aggregation based on Fixed Grids
and the proposed Hierarchy Aware Feature Aggregation (HAFA).
Left: An image is conceptualized into multiple fixed grids. In
the shallow layers, the sampling center is fixed at the grid center,
while in the deep layers, the semantic information is fragmented
across multiple grids, leading to inaccurate semantic segmentation. Right: In the shallow layers, HAFA adaptively changes
the sampling center through learning, enhancing local information
perception. In the deep layers, HAFA aggregates semantic similar
patches to ensure the integrity of semantic information. Compared
to the fixed grids in the left figure, HAFA performs better in semantic segmentation due to its hierarchy aware way of conducting
adaptive feature aggregation.

* Hongmin Liu is the corresponding author

5908

