This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrastive Model Adaptation for Cross-Condition Robustness
in Semantic Segmentation
David Bruggemann

Christos Sakaridis
Tim Brödermann
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Luc Van Gool

{brdavid, csakarid, timbr, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Standard unsupervised domain adaptation methods
adapt models from a source to a target domain using labeled source data and unlabeled target data jointly. In
model adaptation, on the other hand, access to the labeled source data is prohibited, i.e., only the source-trained
model and unlabeled target data are available. We investigate normal-to-adverse condition model adaptation
for semantic segmentation, whereby image-level correspondences are available in the target domain. The target
set consists of unlabeled pairs of adverse- and normalcondition street images taken at GNSS-matched locations.
Our method—CMA—leverages such image pairs to learn
condition-invariant features via contrastive learning. In
particular, CMA encourages features in the embedding
space to be grouped according to their condition-invariant
semantic content and not according to the condition under
which respective inputs are captured. To obtain accurate
cross-domain semantic correspondences, we warp the normal image to the viewpoint of the adverse image and leverage warp-confidence scores to create robust, aggregated
features. With this approach, we achieve state-of-the-art semantic segmentation performance for model adaptation on
several normal-to-adverse adaptation benchmarks, such as
ACDC and Dark Zurich. We also evaluate CMA on a newly
procured adverse-condition generalization benchmark and
report favorable results compared to standard unsupervised
domain adaptation methods, despite the comparative handicap of CMA due to source data inaccessibility. Code is
available at https://github.com/brdav/cma.

1. Introduction
Adverse visual conditions, such as fog, heavy rain, or
snowfall, represent a challenge for autonomous systems expected to navigate “in the wild”. To achieve full autonomy, systems require perception algorithms that perform
robustly in every condition. However, due to their in-

Contrastive
Embedding Space

Adverse Condition

Same
Location
Warp

Anchor
Positive
Normal Condition

Negative

Figure 1. CMA exploits image-level correspondences to learn
condition-invariant features. Two images of the same location
(but captured under different visual conditions) are encoded, and
the normal-condition image features are warped to get spatially
aligned with the adverse-condition image features. Our contrastive
loss then creates an embedding space where patches of adverse
features (black) are closer to their corresponding normal patches
(green) than to other adverse patches (red).

frequent occurrence, inclement weather conditions are often underrepresented in common, finely annotated outdoor
datasets (e.g., BDD100K [44] or Mapillary Vistas [28]).
As a result, state-of-the-art recognition methods are biased towards “normal” visual conditions (i.e., daytime and
clear weather), which causes them to fail for edge cases.
Furthermore—in particular for detailed, pixel-level tasks
like semantic segmentation—high-quality annotations for
adverse-condition images are difficult and expensive to obtain. In fact, they require specialized annotation protocols
due to ambiguities arising from aleatoric uncertainty [33].
To bypass these issues, researchers have investigated unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) from normal to adverse
conditions as an alternative to full supervision [6, 11, 14,
30, 41], where a model is jointly trained on labeled sourcedomain data and unlabeled target-domain data.
This paper instead targets the more general problem
of source-free domain adaptation—also known as model
adaptation—for semantic segmentation. In model adapta-

11378

