This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OccFormer: Dual-path Transformer for Vision-based
3D Semantic Occupancy Prediction
Yunpeng Zhang
PhiGent Robotics

Zheng Zhu*
PhiGent Robotics

Dalong Du
PhiGent Robotics

yunpengzhang97@gmail.com

zhengzhu@ieee.org

dalong.du@phigent.ai

Abstract
The vision-based perception for autonomous driving has
undergone a transformation from the bird-eye-view (BEV)
representations to the 3D semantic occupancy. Compared
with the BEV planes, the 3D semantic occupancy further
provides structural information along the vertical direction.
This paper presents OccFormer, a dual-path transformer
network to effectively process the 3D volume for semantic
occupancy prediction. OccFormer achieves a long-range,
dynamic, and efficient encoding of the camera-generated
3D voxel features. It is obtained by decomposing the heavy
3D processing into the local and global transformer pathways along the horizontal plane. For the occupancy decoder, we adapt the vanilla Mask2Former for 3D semantic occupancy by proposing preserve-pooling and classguided sampling, which notably mitigate the sparsity and
class imbalance. Experimental results demonstrate that OccFormer significantly outperforms existing methods for semantic scene completion on SemanticKITTI dataset and for
LiDAR semantic segmentation on nuScenes dataset. Code
is available at https://github.com/zhangyp15/
OccFormer.

1. Introduction
The accurate perception of 3D surroundings constitutes
the foundation of modern autonomous driving systems.
Though LiDAR-based methods [23, 44, 62, 43, 39, 53],
with explicit depth measurements, have been dominating
the leading performance on public datasets [15, 3, 46, 2],
vision-based approaches still offer advantages in terms of
cost-effectiveness, stability, and generality. The past years
have witnessed the prosperity of Bird-Eye-View representations for vision-based 3D perception. With the multiview camera images as input, various attempts for 2D-to3D transformation [38, 30, 19, 28] have been proposed for
applications including 3D object detection [19, 30, 33], semantic map construction [38, 60, 42, 37], and motion pre* Corresponding author.

diction [18, 1, 58]. Considering these tasks require either
rigid bounding boxes or BEV-oriented predictions, the collapse of 3D scenes into 2D ground planes has demonstrated
an excellent trade-off between performance and efficiency.
However, the holistic understanding of the 3D scene, especially for real-world obstacles with variable shapes, can
hardly be recovered with the condensed BEV feature maps.
To this end, this paper focuses on building a fine-grained
3D representation, namely 3D semantic occupancy, for the
surrounding environment with multi-view images.
The task of 3D semantic occupancy prediction aims
to reconstruct the surrounding 3D environment with finegrained geometry and semantics, which is also known as
3D semantic scene completion when the LiDAR point cloud
is taken as input. For the driving scenes, most existing
methods [43, 11, 8, 25, 50] still rely on the expensive LiDAR sensors for explicit depth measurements. The seminar
work MonoScene [4] proposed the first monocular framework for 3D semantic occupancy prediction. It first constructs the 3D feature with sight projection and then processes it with a classical 3D UNet. However, the 3D convolution suffers from several limitations. First, it reasons
the semantics within a relatively fixed receptive field, while
different semantic classes may distribute following various
patterns. Also, its spatial invariance cannot well process
the sparse and discontinuous 3D features, generated from
the state-of-the-art practices for image-to-3D transformation [38, 19, 28]. Finally, the 3D convolution filters can
consume massive parameters. Therefore, we believe a longrange, dynamic, and efficient method for encoding 3D features is needed to pave the way.
Inspired by the widespread success of vision transformers [13, 34] in various vision tasks [5, 59, 16, 54, 34, 29],
we are motivated to utilize the attention mechanism for
building the encoder-decoder network for 3D semantic occupancy prediction. For the encoder part, we propose the
dual-path transformer block to unleash the capacity of selfattention while limiting the quadratic complexity. Specifically, the local path operates along each 2D BEV slice with
the shared windowed attention to capture the fine-grained

9433

