This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Animal3D: A Comprehensive Dataset of 3D Animal Pose and Shape
Jiacong Xu1
Yi Zhang1
Jiawei Peng1
Wufei Ma1
Artur Jesslen11
Pengliang Ji3
Qixin Hu4
Jiehua Zhang5
Qihao Liu1
Jiahao Wang1
Wei Ji6
Chen Wang7
1
1
8
9
Xiaoding Yuan
Prakhar Kaushik
Guofeng Zhang
Jie Liu
Yushan Xie2
Yawen Cui5
Alan Yuille1
Adam Kortylewski10,11
1

Johns Hopkins University
5
HUST
University of Oulu
9
City University of Hong Kong
4

2

3
East China Normal University
Beihang University
7
8
University of Alberta
Tsinghua University
UCLA
10
11
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
University of Freiburg
6

Abstract
Accurately estimating the 3D pose and shape is an essential step towards understanding animal behavior, and
can potentially benefit many downstream applications, such
as wildlife conservation. However, research in this area
is held back by the lack of a comprehensive and diverse
dataset with high-quality 3D pose and shape annotations.
In this paper, we propose Animal3D, the first comprehensive dataset for mammal animal 3D pose and shape estimation. Animal3D consists of 3379 images collected from
40 mammal species, high-quality annotations of 26 keypoints, and importantly the pose and shape parameters of
the SMAL [50] model. All annotations were labeled and
checked manually in a multi-stage process to ensure highest
quality results. Based on the Animal3D dataset, we benchmark representative shape and pose estimation models at:
(1) supervised learning from only the Animal3D data, (2)
synthetic to real transfer from synthetically generated images, and (3) fine-tuning human pose and shape estimation
models. Our experimental results demonstrate that predicting the 3D shape and pose of animals across species remains a very challenging task, despite significant advances
in human pose estimation. Our results further demonstrate
that synthetic pre-training is a viable strategy to boost the
model performance. Overall, Animal3D opens new directions for facilitating future research in animal 3D pose and
shape estimation, and is publicly available.

1. Introduction
Accurately estimating the 3D pose and shape of animals
is a crucial step toward understanding their behavior and
has a wide range of applications in fields such as wildlife
conservation, animal ecology, and biomechanics. 3D ani-

mal pose and shape estimation involves the reconstruction
of the 3D structure of an animal from a single 2D image,
which is a challenging task due to the complex shapes and
poses of animals in the wild. Previous works in this area
have primarily focused on specific animals, such as humans
[16, 17] or dogs [37, 45], which limits the generalization
ability of the models to other animals. Therefore, there is
a need for a diverse dataset of animals to allow for more
generalizable and robust models to be developed.
In this paper, we propose Animal3D, the first benchmark
for mammal animal 3D pose and shape estimation. Animal3D is a comprehensive dataset consisting of 3379 highquality images collected from 40 mammal species. The images were carefully selected from existing datasets, in particular PartImageNet [11] and COCO [24], to ensure that
they represent a diverse range of animals, including primates, ungulates, carnivores, and rodents (Figure 1). The
diversity of animal species included in the dataset ensures
that the models are not limited to specific animals and can
be applied to a wide range of species. Each image was annotated with 26 keypoints, which were carefully labeled and
checked in a mutli-stage process to ensure high-quality annotations that can be used for further research. Based on the
keypoint annotation and the available segmentation masks
in PartImageNet and COCO, we annotate the 3D shape and
pose by fitting the SMAL [50] model to the data. SMAL
is a widely used model for 3D animal pose and shape estimation and similarly structured as the SMPL [26] model,
hence supporting wide applicability of our annotations.
Using the Animal3D dataset, we benchmark representative shape and pose estimation models at three levels: (1)
supervised learning for animal pose estimation, (2) synthetic to real transfer from synthetically generated images,
and (3) fine-tuning human pose and shape estimation models. Based on our experimental results we provide an anal19099

