This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Feature Representation Learning for Domain-generalized
Cross-domain Image Retrieval
Conghui Hu
Can Zhang
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
conghui@nus.edu.sg

can.zhang@u.nus.edu

Train

Abstract
Cross-domain image retrieval has been extensively studied due to its high practical value. In recently proposed
unsupervised cross-domain image retrieval methods, efforts
are taken to break the data annotation barrier. However,
applicability of the model is still confined to domains seen
during training. This limitation motivates us to present
the first attempt at domain-generalized unsupervised crossdomain image retrieval (DG-UCDIR) aiming at facilitating image retrieval between any two unseen domains in an
unsupervised way. To improve domain generalizability of
the model, we thus propose a new two-stage domain augmentation technique for diversified training data generation. DG-UCDIR also shares all the challenges present
in the unsupervised cross-domain image retrieval, where
domain-agnostic and semantic-aware feature representations are supposed to be learned without external supervision. To accomplish this, we introduce a novel crossdomain contrastive learning strategy by utilizing phase
image as a proxy to mitigate the domain gap. Extensive experiments are carried out using PACS and DomainNet dataset, and consistently illustrate the superior performance of our framework compared to existing state-ofthe-art methods. Our source code is available at https:
//github.com/conghui1002/DG-UCDIR.

1. Introduction
Cross-domain image retrieval finds a variety of applications in online shopping [15, 31], law enforcement [18, 20],
etc. Most existing cross-domain image retrieval algorithms
[27, 32] heavily rely on category and pair annotations to
drive explicit semantic-aware and domain-invariant feature
learning for retrieval. One emerging research direction for
reducing data labeling cost is unsupervised cross-domain
image retrieval (UCDIR) [9, 10], where human annotation
is no longer necessary for model training and the trained
model can be employed to conduct retrieval between seen

gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg

Art painting

Giraffe

Guitar

Test
Photo

Paired

Paired

Sketch

Cartoon

Giraffe

Guitar

Figure 1. Illustration of DG-UCDIR. Given only unlabeled training domain data, the objective of DG-UCDIR is to facilitate retrieval between unseen domains.

domains. However, even the raw image can be laborintensive to acquire for some domains such as sketch. As
reported in [6], the median drawing time for one non-expert
sketch in the TU-Berlin dataset is 86 seconds. This largely
motivates us to investigate the domain-generalized unsupervised cross-domain image retrieval (DG-UCDIR) that
sidesteps both data labeling and collection barriers, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Specifically, our ultimate goal is to
leverage only unlabeled data from a pair of seen domains,
e.g., art painting and real photo, to train a feature extractor
which is capable of projecting imagery input from any unseen domain, e.g., sketch and cartoon, into a domain invariant shared feature space. Images from one unseen domain,
e.g., sketch, can then be used as queries to conduct retrieval
of the same category data from another unseen domain, e.g.,
cartoon. Consequently, DG-UCDIR is particularly valuable
for those domains with data scarcity bottleneck.
Nevertheless, DG-UCDIR is an extremely challenging
task due to the requirements of: 1) Novel domain generalizability. Given data from only the seen domain, we aim
to facilitate image retrieval across to unseen domains, i.e.,
endow trained model with domain generalizability. Both
existing supervised [32] and unsupervised [9] cross-domain
image retrieval methods are not suited for direct testing
on the novel domains since they are designed for specific domain pairs and thus is highly susceptible to fail-

11016

