This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SKiT: a Fast Key Information Video Transformer
for Online Surgical Phase Recognition
Yang Liu, Jiayu Huo, Jingjing Peng, Rachel Sparks,
Prokar Dasgupta, Alejandro Granados, Sebastien Ourselin*
King’s College London
{yang.9.liu, firstname.lastname}@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper introduces SKiT, a fast Key information
Transformer for phase recognition of videos. Unlike previous methods that rely on complex models to capture longterm temporal information, SKiT accurately recognizes
high-level stages of videos using an efficient key pooling operation. This operation records important key information
by retaining the maximum value recorded from the beginning up to the current video frame, with a time complexity
of O(1). Experimental results on Cholec80 and AutoLaparo surgical datasets demonstrate the ability of our model
to recognize phases in an online manner. SKiT achieves
higher performance than state-of-the-art methods with an
accuracy of 92.5% and 82.9% on Cholec80 and AutoLaparo, respectively, while running the temporal model eight
times faster ( 7ms v.s. 55ms) than LoViT, which uses ProbSparse to capture global information. We highlight that the
inference time of SKiT is constant, and independent from the
input length, making it a stable choice for keeping a record
of important global information, that appears on long surgical videos, essential for phase recognition. To sum up, we
propose an effective and efficient model for surgical phase
recognition that leverages key global information. This has
an intrinsic value when performing this task in an online
manner on long surgical videos for stable real-time surgical recognition systems.

1. Introduction
Surgical Artificial Intelligence uses data to understand
surgical workflows, evaluate surgeon performance, and provide assistance to surgeons in real time[30]. One of the core
tasks towards achieving these aims is the recognition of the
transitions of high-level stages of surgery, a problem coined
Surgical Phase Recognition [15]. Accurate predictions of
what surgical phase a part of a video relates to might ben* Corresponding author

efit the provision of automated and improved feedback for
trainees [12, 24], the potential to optimize surgical workflows [32], and the retrospective review of a particular phase
from surgical video. While past and future information is
used for phase recognition of a particular video frame in an
offline manner, only past information is used for classifying in an online manner the phase where the last (current)
video frame locates. Although online recognition is more
challenging, it could help alert surgeons [33] and support
decision-making [8] in real-time during surgery. This paper
focuses on online phase recognition.
Early work in surgical phase recognition proposed workflow recovery models using Dynamic Time Warping with
temporal registration [1], graphical probabilistic models
based on Hidden Markov Models (HMM) [2, 3], rulebased interpretation models for context-awareness using
ontologies [23], and machine learning models for phase
recognition using Support Vector Machines and Random
Forests [15]. Although these methods are mathematically
rigorous, the use of hand-crafted features is specific to the
surgery type and leads to a design that is not fully generalisable. Deep learning brought in new methods for surgical phase recognition, which allows for more sophisticated
spatio-temporal feature extraction mechanisms. While additional information, such as surgical tools presence, is considered by other methods in a multi-task learning manner to
improve accuracy [21, 37], annotation requirements limit
their influence on online recognition.
Online surgical phase recognition requires models that
can capture long-range temporal dependencies since the duration of surgical videos could range from 40 minutes to a
few hours. Single-task surgical phase recognition models
that add temporality can be broadly categorized into three
types which use recurrent neural networks (RNN) [34],
convolution neural networks (CNN) [27], or Transformers [39]. However, while RNNs, including Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM), struggle with modelling long-term
dependencies due to their sequential nature, CNN-based
methods such as Temporal Convolutional Networks (TCNs)

21074

