This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Density-invariant Features for Distant Point Cloud Registration
Quan Liu
Hongzi Zhu*
Yunsong Zhou
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Hongyang Li
Shanghai AI Lab

{liuquan2017, hongzi, zhouyunsong}@sjtu.edu.cn

hy@opendrivelab.com

Shan Chang
Donghua University

Minyi Guo
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

changshan@dhu.edu.cn

guo-my@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Predator & Ours @ 10m Succeed

Density
𝑑1

Feature

Space

Density
Density

Feature

Predator @ 50m Fails
𝐿𝑎

𝐿𝑏

Attract

Density
𝑑2

𝐿𝑎

Space

Space

Attract

Space

Ours @ 50m Succeeds

𝐿𝑏

(a) Density-mismatch

(b) Registration results

(c) Pair-wise Contrastive Learning

(d) Group-wise Contrastive Learning (ours)

Figure 1: Motivation. (a) A schematic diagram of the density d of point clouds produced by two LiDARs La and Lb . Their
densities diverge when two LiDARs drift from short-range to long-range scenario. (b) State-of-the-art method Predator [20]
fails to register distant point clouds (middle) while our method succeeds (bottom). (c) Traditional Pair-wise Contrastive
Learning takes a pair of positive samples (marked with the gray plane) from two point clouds, and pull positive features
together, which suffer from negative density correlation given a fixed pair of distant point clouds. (d) Our Group-wise
Contrastive Learning takes multiple positive samples (marked with the gray plane) from a point cloud series, and contract the
feature distance between all positive examples.

Abstract
Registration of distant outdoor LiDAR point clouds is
crucial to extending the 3D vision of collaborative autonomous vehicles, and yet is challenging due to small
overlapping area and a huge disparity between observed
point densities. In this paper, we propose Group-wise Contrastive Learning (GCL) scheme to extract density-invariant
geometric features to register distant outdoor LiDAR point
clouds. We mark through theoretical analysis and experiments that, contrastive positives should be independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.), in order to train densityinvariant feature extractors. We propose upon the conclusion a simple yet effective training scheme to force the feature of multiple point clouds in the same spatial location
(referred to as positive groups) to be similar, which naturally avoids the sampling bias introduced by a pair of point
* Corresponding author

clouds to conform with the i.i.d. principle. The resulting
fully-convolutional feature extractor is more powerful and
density-invariant than state-of-the-art methods, improving
the registration recall of distant scenarios on KITTI and
nuScenes benchmarks by 40.9% and 26.9%, respectively.
Code is available at https://github.com/liuQuan98/GCL.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration is the cornerstone technique for
various computer vision tasks such as SLAM [29, 30], scene
flow estimation [26, 27], and early/late fusion in 3D scene
understanding [55, 53, 22, 56]. Due to the complex scenarios and the large scale of outdoor point clouds, point cloud
registration in driving scenarios is a more challenging and
rewarding task than indoor scenes, which can help expand
the perceptual field of collaborative vehicles for enhancing
the driving safety. In such scenarios, point cloud registration should be accurate enough even when dealing with ex-

18215

