This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Modal Learning with 3D Deformable Attention for Action Recognition
Sangwon Kim Dasom Ahn Byoung Chul Ko*
Keimyung University
{eddiesangwonkim, tommydasomahn}@gmail.com, niceko@kmu.ac.kr

Abstract
An important challenge in vision-based action recognition is the embedding of spatiotemporal features with two
or more heterogeneous modalities into a single feature. In
this study, we propose a new 3D deformable transformer
for action recognition with adaptive spatiotemporal receptive fields and a cross-modal learning scheme. The 3D deformable transformer consists of three attention modules:
3D deformability, local joint stride, and temporal stride attention. The two cross-modal tokens are input into the 3D
deformable attention module to create a cross-attention token with a reflected spatiotemporal correlation. Local joint
stride attention is applied to spatially combine attention and
pose tokens. Temporal stride attention temporally reduces
the number of input tokens in the attention module and supports temporal expression learning without the simultaneous use of all tokens. The deformable transformer iterates
L-times and combines the last cross-modal token for classification. The proposed 3D deformable transformer was
tested on the NTU60, NTU120, FineGYM, and PennAction
datasets, and showed results better than or similar to pretrained state-of-the-art methods even without a pre-training
process. In addition, by visualizing important joints and
correlations during action recognition through spatial joint
and temporal stride attention, the possibility of achieving an
explainable potential for action recognition is presented.

1. Introduction
Spatiotemporal feature learning is a crucial part of action recognition, which aims to fuse not only the spatial
features of each frame but also the temporal correlation between input sequences. Previous studies on action recognition [19, 6, 5, 42, 9, 48] investigated the application of
3D convolutional kernels with an additional temporal space
beyond the 2D spatial feature space. Since then, 3D convolutional neural networks (CNN) have achieved a promising performance and have eventually become the de facto
* Corresponding author

and

(a) Full Attention

(b) 3D Deformable Attention

Figure 1: Comparison between (a) Full attention and
(b) the proposed 3D deformable attention. Full attention
considers all tokens against a specific query in a complete
sequence. By contrast, 3D deformable attention considers
only intense tokens with adaptive receptive fields.
standard for various action recognition tasks using sequential data. Vision transformers (ViTs) for action recognition,
which have peaked in popularity, have recently been used to
explore a 3D token embedding to fuse the temporal space
within a single token. However, ViTs-based action recognition methods [1, 34] are limited in that they can only conduct spatiotemporal feature learning within restricted receptive fields.
To avoid this problem, several studies [15, 57, 47] have
been conducted to allow more flexible receptive fields for
deep learning models. Deformable CNN leverages dynamic
kernels to capture the intense object regions. First, they
determine the deformable coordinates using embedded features. The kernel is then applied to the features extracted
from the deformable coordinates. Deformable ViTs [47, 57]
encourage the use of an existing attention module to learn
deformable features. The query tokens are projected onto
the coordinates to obtain deformable regions from the key
and value tokens. The deformed value tokens are then applied to the attention map, which is generated through a
scaled dot product of the input query and deformed key tokens. These methods suggest a new approach that can overcome the limitations of existing standardized feature learning. However, despite some impressive results, these studies are still limited in that they are only compatible with
the spatial dimensions. Therefore, as a primary challenge,
there is a need for the development of novel and deformable

10265

