This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Multiview Clustering by Contrasting Cluster Assignments
Jie Chen1 , Hua Mao2 , Wai Lok Woo2 , Xi Peng1 *
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
2
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Northumbria University
chenjie2010@scu.edu.cn; {hua.mao,wailok.woo}@northumbria.ac.uk;
pengx.gm@gmail.com

Abstract
Multiview clustering (MVC) aims to reveal the underlying structure of multiview data by categorizing data samples into clusters. Deep learning-based methods exhibit
strong feature learning capabilities on large-scale datasets.
For most existing deep MVC methods, exploring the invariant representations of multiple views is still an intractable
problem. In this paper, we propose a cross-view contrastive
learning (CVCL) method that learns view-invariant representations and produces clustering results by contrasting the cluster assignments among multiple views. Specifically, we first employ deep autoencoders to extract viewdependent features in the pretraining stage. Then, a clusterlevel CVCL strategy is presented to explore consistent semantic label information among the multiple views in the
fine-tuning stage. Thus, the proposed CVCL method is
able to produce more discriminative cluster assignments by
virtue of this learning strategy. Moreover, we provide a theoretical analysis of soft cluster assignment alignment. The
extensive experimental results obtained on several datasets
demonstrate that the proposed CVCL method outperforms
several state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Multiview data are usually represented by different types
of features or collected from multiple sources. All views
share the same semantic information contained in the multiview data. Simultaneously, the data information derived
from multiple views is complementary [6, 36]. The goal of
multiview clustering (MVC) is to divide data samples into
different groups according to their distinct feature information.
MVC has attracted increasing attention for many machine learning tasks, including feature selection [36], scene
recognition [23] and information retrieval [8, 41, 5]. The ex* Corresponding author

isting literature involving traditional machine learning techniques can be roughly divided into four categories, including subspace learning-based methods [5, 26], nonnegative
matrix factorization (NMF)-based methods [32, 9], graph
learning-based methods [6, 11], and multiple kernel-based
methods [16, 17]. These traditional shallow models often
exhibit limited capabilities to conduct feature representation
learning on large-scale datasets [31].
A number of deep learning-based methods have been
proposed to alleviate the above problems [28, 37, 13, 21,
39, 42, 14, 35]. The goal of these deep MVC methods is
to learn a more discriminative consensus representation by
transforming each view with a corresponding view-specific
encoder network. For example, Xie et al. [35] proposed
a deep embedding-based clustering method that simultaneously learns feature representations and cluster assignments
using deep neural networks. Li et al. [14] proposed a deep
adversarial MVC method that learns the intrinsic structure
embedded in multiview data. Zhou et al. [42] proposed
an end-to-end adversarial attention network that makes use
of adversarial learning and an attention mechanism to align
latent feature distributions and evaluate the importance of
different modalities. These methods yield significantly improved clustering performance. However, they fail to consider the semantic label consistency among multiple views,
which may lead to difficulty in learning consistent cluster
assignments.
Recently, contrastive learning has been integrated into
deep learning models to learn discriminative representations of multiple views [12, 7]. Most existing contrastive
learning-based methods attempt to maximize the mutual information contained among the assignment distributions of
multiple views [37, 30, 3]. For example, Yang et al. [38]
took advantage of the available data pairs as positive samples and randomly chose some cross-view samples as negative samples for MVC. In particular, the term “cross-view”
means that any two views among multiple views are involved in the contrastive learning process. Caron et al. [3]
presented an unsupervised visual feature learning method

16752

