This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond the limitation of monocular 3D detector via knowledge distillation
Yiran Yang1,2,∗, Dongshuo Yin1,2,∗, Xuee Rong1,2 , Xian Sun1,2 , Wenhui Diao 1†, Xinming Li1
1
Key Laboratory of Network Information System Technology,
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yangyiran19, yindongshuo19, rongxuee19}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
{sunxian, diaowh}@aircas.ac.cn, 13911729321@139.com

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) is a promising approach
that facilitates the compact student model to learn dark
knowledge from the huge teacher model for better results.
Although KD methods are well explored in the 2D detection
task, existing approaches are not suitable for 3D monocular
detection without considering spatial cues. Motivated by
the potential of depth information, we propose a novel distillation framework that validly improves the performance
of the student model without extra depth labels. Specifically, we first put forward a perspective-induced feature
imitation, which utilizes the perspective principle (the farther the smaller) to facilitate the student to imitate more
features of farther objects from the teacher model. Moreover, we construct a depth-guided matrix by the predicted
depth gap of teacher and student to facilitate the model
to learn more knowledge of farther objects in prediction
level distillation. The proposed method is available for advanced monocular detectors with various backbones, which
also brings no extra inference time. Extensive experiments
on the KITTI and nuScenes benchmarks with diverse settings demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms
the state-of-the-art KD methods.

1. Introduction
With the development of autonomous driving, 3D object detection has become a popular field. In general, multiview-based[39, 20, 15, 14, 26, 27, 21, 42] and LiDAR-based
approaches[17, 45] show impressive performance. But considering the massive expensive equipment demand of the
above methods, monocular vision methods have attracted
more attention in recent years. Moreover, lightweight mod∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1: The statistics for object depth and area in KITTI.
We set a 3m length in a bin, and the number and area represent the object amount and average pixel area, respectively.
The logarithmic scale is used for area coordinates.
els [47, 33] are more favored for practical deployments due
to the constraints of hardware resources and the need for
real-time. But a lightweight 3D monocular detector usually has a weak feature extraction ability and an inaccuracy
depth estimation, which results in a not satisfying performance.
To tackle the issue, knowledge distillation (KD) [12] is
proposed to facilitate the compact student model to learn
implicit knowledge from the huge teacher model. KD
can indeed improve the performance of the student model
without extra inference costs, which motivates researchers
to propose better distillation techniques in classification
[1, 16, 5, 49, 22, 44] and detection [4, 19, 37, 35, 10, 8]
task. Moreover, some 3D distillation methods [7, 13] also
adopt the LiDAR data as the input for the teacher model to
guide the student. But there is a cost associated with the
acquisition of LiDAR data. Therefore, an interesting idea
naturally arises: can we only use a vision-based strategy to
optimize the student model like 2D distillation approaches?
2D distillation methods perform poorly on 3D tasks ow-

9077

