This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Automated Knowledge Distillation via Monte Carlo Tree Search
Lujun Li1† * Peijie Dong2† Zimian Wei2 Ya Yang3
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 National University of Defense Technology
3
City University of Hong Kong
1

lilujunai@gmail.com1 {dongpeijie, weizimian16}@nudt.edu.cn, 3 yya9@outlook.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present Auto-KD, the first automated
search framework for optimal knowledge distillation design.
Traditional distillation techniques typically require handcrafted designs by experts and extensive tuning costs for
different teacher-student pairs. To address these issues, we
empirically study different distillers, finding that they can
be decomposed, combined, and simplified. Based on these
observations, we build our uniform search space with advanced operations in transformations, distance functions,
and hyperparameters components. For instance, the transformation parts are optional for global, intra-spatial, and
inter-spatial operations, such as attention, mask, and multiscale. Then, we introduce an effective search strategy based
on the Monte Carlo tree search, modeling the search space
as a Monte Carlo Tree (MCT) to capture the dependency
among options. The MCT is updated using test loss and
representation gap of student trained by candidate distillers
as the reward for better exploration-exploitation balance. To
accelerate the search process, we exploit offline processing
without teacher inference, sparse training for student, and
proxy settings based on distillation properties. In this way,
our Auto-KD only needs small costs to search for optimal
distillers before the distillation phase. Moreover, we expand
Auto-KD for multi-layer and multi-teacher scenarios with
training-free weighted factors. Our method is promising
yet practical, and extensive experiments demonstrate that it
generalizes well to different CNNs and Vision Transformer
models and attains state-of-the-art performance across a
range of vision tasks, including image classification, object
detection, and semantic segmentation. Code is provided at
https://github.com/lilujunai/Auto-KD.

1. Introduction
Various visual tasks [18, 34, 53] have been successfully
tackled by Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). Despite the ap* Corresponding author, † equal contribution.

Transforms Search
sample

fs, ft

H,W

B

H,W

B

Weight Search

H,W

multi-scale
C

C

G-L2

Distance Search

local

channel
C

C

H,W

B

KL

C

H,W

B

B

H/2,W/2

L2

3000

2.5

1

0.1

0.1
5

SP

ICKD

CWD

LKD

LR

Figure 1. Illustration on distiller search space on intermediate features. Recent sadvancements in distillation methods (e.g., SP [69],
ICKD [49], CWD [64], LKD [42] and LR [55]) can be searched
with various options of transforms, distances and weights search.

pealing performance, the prevailing DNNs usually have large
numbers of parameters, leading to heavy costs of memory
and computation. Conventional techniques such as pruning
weights from networks [19, 36] and quantizing networks
to use low-bit parameters [10, 57, 85] have proven to be
effective for mitigating this computational burden. Recently,
Knowledge Distillation (KD) [70, 24], another promising
solution family to train compact yet accurate models, has
attracted increasing attention. The objective of knowledge
distillation (KD) is to transfer the acquired knowledge from a
high-capacity DNN model (i.e., teacher) to a lower-capacity
target DNN model (i.e., student), effectively balancing accuracy and efficiency during runtime.
Problem Statement: While numerous KD methods [54,
66, 82] have been proposed, one major challenge is the sensitivity of their performance to hyperparameters and teacherstudent architecture pairs. Different hyperparameters, such
as the weighted factor used in the loss function, can have a
significant impact on the final performance of the distilled
student model (see Figure 2 (Left)). Similarly, the same
distiller performs quite differently under various teachers
(see Figure 2 (Right)). Therefore, the practical usage of KD

17413

