This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tracing the Origin of Adversarial Attack for Forensic Investigation and
Deterrence
Han Fang1 Jiyi Zhang1 Yupeng Qiu1 Jiayang Liu1
Ke Xu2 Chengfang Fang2 Ee-Chien Chang1, *
1
National University of Singapore 2 Huawei International
{fanghan, ljyljy}@nus.edu.sg

{jiyizhang, qiu yupeng}@u.nus.edu

{xuke64, fang.chengfang}@huawei.com

changec@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. In this paper, we take the role of investigators who
want to trace the attack and identify the source, that is, the
particular model which the adversarial examples are generated from. Techniques derived would aid forensic investigation of attack incidents and serve as deterrence to potential
attacks. We consider the buyers-seller setting where a machine learning model is to be distributed to various buyers
and each buyer receives a slightly different copy with the
same functionality. A malicious buyer generates adversarial examples from a particular copy Mi and uses them to
attack other copies. From these adversarial examples, the
investigator wants to identify the source Mi . To address
this problem, we propose a two-stage separate-and-trace
framework. The model separation stage generates multiple
copies of a model for the same classification task. This process injects unique features into each copy so that adversarial examples generated have distinct and traceable features.
We give a parallel structure which pairs a unique tracer
with the original classification model in each copy and a
variational autoencoder (VAE)-based training method to
achieve this goal. The tracing stage takes in adversarial examples and a few candidate models, and identifies the likely
source. Based on the unique features induced by the tracer,
we could effectively trace the potential adversarial copy by
considering the output logits from each tracer. Empirical
results show that it is possible to trace the origin of the adversarial example and the mechanism can be applied to a
wide range of architectures and datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. By introducing specific perturbations on input sam* Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Buyers-seller setting. The seller has multiple
models Mi , i ∈ [1, m] that are to be distributed to different buyers. A malicious buyer batt attempts to attack the
victim buyers bvic s by generating the adversarial examples
with his own model Matt .
ples, the network model could be misled to give wrong
predictions even when the perturbed sample looks visually
close to the clean image [4, 8, 21, 27]. There are many existing works on defending against such attacks [9, 12, 16, 20].
Unfortunately, although current defenses could mitigate the
attack to some extent, the threat is still far from being completely eliminated. In this paper, we look into the forensic aspect: from the adversarial examples, can we determine which model the adversarial examples were generated
from? Techniques derived could aid forensic investigation
of attack incidents and provide deterrence to future attacks.
We consider a buyers-seller setting [28], which is similar to the buyers-seller setting in digital copyright protection [19].
Buyers-seller Setting. Under this setting, the seller S distributes m classification models Mi , i ∈ [1, m] to different
buyers bi ’s as shown in Fig. 1. These models are trained for
a same classification task using a same training dataset. The
models are made accessible to the buyer as black boxes, for
instance, the models could be embedded in hardware such
as FPGA and ASIC, or are provided in a Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) platform. Hence, the buyer only
has black-box access, which means that he can only query
the model for the hard label. In addition, we assume that
the buyers do not know the training datasets. The seller has

4335

