This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRF-Det: Learning Geometry-Aware Volumetric Representation
for Multi-View 3D Object Detection
Chenfeng Xu1 Bichen Wu2 Ji Hou2,∗ Sam Tsai2 Ruilong Li1 Jialiang Wang2 Wei Zhan1
Zijian He2 Peter Vajda2 Kurt Keutzer1 Masayoshi Tomizuka1
1

University of California, Berkeley

2

Meta AI

Nerf-Det
3D
Detection
Multi-View Images

Geometry

Rays from the
Novel View

3D Object Detection

NeRF
Novel View RGB and Depth
Rendering

Figure 1: NeRF-Det aims to detect 3D objects with only RGB images as input. To enhance detection, we propose to embed
a NeRF branch with our designed synergy. The two joint branches share the same geometry representation and are trained
end-to-end, which helps achieve state-of-the-art accuracy on mutli-view indoor RGB-only 3D detection, and additionally
enables a generalizable novel view synthesis on new scenes without per-scene optimization.

Abstract
We present NeRF-Det, a novel method for indoor 3D detection with posed RGB images as input. Unlike existing
indoor 3D detection methods that struggle to model scene
geometry, our method makes novel use of NeRF in an endto-end manner to explicitly estimate 3D geometry, thereby
improving 3D detection performance. Specifically, to avoid
the significant extra latency associated with per-scene optimization of NeRF, we introduce sufficient geometry priors
to enhance the generalizability of NeRF-MLP. Furthermore, we subtly connect the detection and NeRF branches
through a shared MLP, enabling an efficient adaptation of
NeRF to detection and yielding geometry-aware volumetric
representations for 3D detection. Our method outperforms
state-of-the-arts by 3.9 mAP and 3.1 mAP on the ScanNet
and ARKITScenes benchmarks, respectively. We provide
extensive analysis to shed light on how NeRF-Det works.
This work was done when Chenfeng was an intern at Meta.
∗ Corresponding author.

As a result of our joint-training design, NeRF-Det is able to
generalize well to unseen scenes for object detection, view
synthesis, and depth estimation tasks without requiring
per-scene optimization. Code is available at https:
//github.com/facebookresearch/NeRF-Det.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we focus on the task of indoor 3D object
detection using posed RGB images. 3D object detection is
a fundamental task for many computer vision applications
such as robotics and AR/VR. The algorithm design depends
on input sensors. In the past few years, most 3D detection
works focus on both RGB images and depth measurements
(depth images, point-clouds, etc.). While depth sensors are
widely adopted in applications such as autonomous driving, they are not readily available in most AR/VR headsets
and mobile phones due to cost, power dissipation, and form
factor constraints. Excluding depth input, however, makes
3D object detection significantly more challenging, since
we need to understand not only the semantics, but also the

23320

