This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TaskExpert: Dynamically Assembling Multi-Task Representations
with Memorial Mixture-of-Experts
Hanrong Ye and Dan Xu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong
{hyeae, danxu}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Learning discriminative task-specific features simultaneously for multiple distinct tasks is a fundamental problem in multi-task learning. Recent state-of-the-art models consider directly decoding task-specific features from
one shared task-generic feature (e.g., feature from a backbone layer), and utilize carefully designed decoders to produce multi-task features. However, as the input feature
is fully shared and each task decoder also shares decoding parameters for different input samples, it leads to a
static feature decoding process, producing less discriminative task-specific representations. To tackle this limitation, we propose TaskExpert, a novel multi-task mixtureof-experts model that enables learning multiple representative task-generic feature spaces and decoding task-specific
features in a dynamic manner. Specifically, TaskExpert introduces a set of expert networks to decompose the backbone feature into several representative task-generic features. Then, the task-specific features are decoded by using dynamic task-specific gating networks operating on the
decomposed task-generic features. Furthermore, to establish long-range modeling of the task-specific representations from different layers of TaskExpert, we design a multitask feature memory that updates at each layer and acts as
an additional feature expert for dynamic task-specific feature decoding. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
TaskExpert clearly outperforms previous best-performing
methods on all 9 metrics of two competitive multi-task
learning benchmarks for visual scene understanding (i.e.,
PASCAL-Context and NYUD-v2). Codes and models will
be made publicly available.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of deep learning models,
many computer vision tasks can be effectively handled by
deep networks, which strongly motivates researchers to de-

Task-Generic
Backbone Feature
Multi-Task
Feature Memory

Decompose

...

Expert 1

...

Expert K

Task T
Task 1

...

...
Task Gating

...

Read

Assemble
Task-Specific
Feature Map 1

...

Task-Specific
Feature Map T

Write

Figure 1: Motivative illustration of TaskExpert for dynamical decoding discriminative task-specific representations. A
set of K expert networks decompose the task-generic backbone feature into K representative feature spaces. Then,
the feature activations of an input from the multiple expert
networks are dynamically assembled by the Task Gating
network, to produce task-specific features for the T tasks.
TaskExpert further performs long-range modeling of taskspecific representations by designing a multi-task feature
memory. It is updated at the current layer based on the
assembled task-specific representations, and is used as an
additional feature expert in the next layer.
velop unified multi-task networks to perform joint learning and inference on multiple distinct tasks [1, 2, 3, 4].
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) can avoid repetitive training of
single-task models and is able to simultaneously generate
predictions for different tasks with only one-time inference.
On the other hand, as different computer vision tasks usually share a basic common understanding of input images,
learning multiple tasks concurrently can help improve the
representation power of each task and boost the overall performance of multi-task models [5, 6].
Learning discriminative task-specific features is a funda-

21828

