This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SHACIRA: Scalable HAsh-grid Compression
for Implicit Neural Representations
Sharath Girish
University of Maryland

Abhinav Shrivastava
University of Maryland

Kamal Gupta
University of Maryland

sgirish@cs.umd.edu

abhinav@cs.umd.edu

kampta@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Implicit Neural Representations (INR) or neural fields
have emerged as a popular framework to encode multimedia signals such as images and radiance fields while retaining high-quality. Recently, learnable feature grids proposed
by Müller et al. [1] have allowed significant speed-up in
the training as well as the sampling of INRs by replacing
a large neural network with a multi-resolution look-up table of feature vectors and a much smaller neural network.
However, these feature grids come at the expense of large
memory consumption which can be a bottleneck for storage and streaming applications. In this work, we propose
SHACIRA, a simple yet effective task-agnostic framework
for compressing such feature grids with no additional posthoc pruning/quantization stages. We reparameterize feature
grids with quantized latent weights and apply entropy regularization in the latent space to achieve high levels of compression across various domains. Quantitative and qualitative results on diverse datasets consisting of images, videos,
and radiance fields, show that our approach outperforms
existing INR approaches without the need for any large
datasets or domain-specific heuristics. Our project page is
available at https://shacira.github.io.

1. Introduction
In today’s digital age, large quantities of data in different
modalities (images, audio, video, 3D) is created and transmitted every day. Compressing this data with minimal loss
of information is hence an important problem and a number
of techniques have been developed in the last few decades
to address this challenging problem. While the conventional methods such as JPEG [5] for images, HEVC [6] for
videos excel at encoding signals in their respective domains,
coordinate-based implicit neural representations (INR) or
Neural Fields [7] have emerged as a popular alternative
for representing complex signals because of their ability
to capture high frequency details, and adaptability for diverse domains. INRs are typically multi layer perceptrons
(MLPs) optimized to learn a scalar or vector field. They

Figure 1: We demonstrate the effectiveness of SHACIRA for two
tasks. The left column shows a gigapixel image at 21450 × 56718
resolution (cropped for visualization) encoded using InstantNGP [1], JPEG2000 [2], and SHACIRA (ours). The right column
reconstructs NeRF [3] from 2D images and their camera poses
using Instant-NGP [1], VQAD [4], and SHACIRA. For each example, we zoom into two crops to compare different methods. We
show overall PSNR and size required by each method. SHACIRA
can capture high-resolution details with a smaller storage size in a
task-agnostic way (only 2D/3D examples shown here).

17513

