This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalizable Neural Fields as Partially Observed Neural Processes
Jeffrey Gu
ICME
Stanford, CA

Kuan-Chieh Wang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford, CA

Serena Yeung
Department of Computer Science
Stanford, CA

jeffgu@stanford.edu

wangkua1@stanford.edu

syyeung@stanford.edu

Abstract
Neural fields, which represent signals as a function parameterized by a neural network, are a promising alternative to traditional discrete vector or grid-based representations. Compared to discrete representations, neural representations both scale well with increasing resolution, are
continuous, and can be many-times differentiable. However,
given a dataset of signals that we would like to represent,
having to optimize a separate neural field for each signal is
inefficient, and cannot capitalize on shared information or
structures among signals. Existing generalization methods
view this as a meta-learning problem and employ gradientbased meta-learning to learn an initialization which is then
fine-tuned with test-time optimization, or learn hypernetworks to produce the weights of a neural field. We instead
propose a new paradigm that views the large-scale training
of neural representations as a part of a partially-observed
neural process framework, and leverage neural process
algorithms to solve this task. We demonstrate that this
approach outperforms both state-of-the-art gradient-based
meta-learning approaches and hypernetwork approaches.

1. Introduction
Neural fields, also known as neural implicit representations or coordinate-based neural networks, have shown
great promise as an alternative to traditional discrete representations. Neural fields consider signals and other objects
as functions (fields) mapping coordinates to values, and approximate these functions with neural networks. They have
been used to represent a myriad of signals including 3D objects/scenes [25, 34], CT scans [35], and 3D human motion [36]. This approach has several advantages over discrete representations, including being continuous and having non-zero derivatives [32] (depending on the choice of
neural network architecture), and scale much more efficiently than traditional grid-based representations with increasing resolution [1, 4, 15, 23, 28, 29, 34].
Typically, the field quantities are not themselves directly

observable, but partial sensor observations are available.
The function relating the field quantities to sensor observations is called the forward map. The most common algorithm for training neural fields is thus follows the following
paradigm [37]: first, coordinates are sampled and passed
through a neural network to predict the corresponding field
quantities. Then the forward map maps the field quantities
to the sensor domain, where we can calculate a reconstruction loss between the neural network’s predictions and our
ground-truth partial observations in the sensor domain. This
reconstruction loss is then used to supervise the training of
the neural field (see Figure 1).
However, one of the major drawbacks of this neural field
training paradigm is that it is computationally expensive
for a large dataset of signals, since a separate neural network must be trained from scratch for each signal, requiring a large amount of memory and computation [20], which
we will henceforth refer to as the neural field generalization problem. Previous approaches to this problem include
conditioning, hypernetworks [3], and gradient-based metalearning [20, 35]. The first two approaches [11, 31, 32]
seek to directly learn some or all of the parameters of a
neural field. The third approach views the problem as a
meta-learning problem, where each individual signal is considered a different task [20, 31, 35], and apply standard
gradient-based meta-learning algorithms such as MAML
[9] or Reptile [26] to find a parameter initialization that
can be quickly fine-tuned for any specific signal. Previous results are mixed: [31] finds that gradient-based metalearning can outperform concatenation and MLP hypernetworks, whereas [3] finds that hypernetworks with a vision transformer [6] encoder can outperform gradient-based
meta-learning [35] on tasks where the available partial observations are 2D images.
However, gradient based meta-learning suffers from
many problems, such as underfitting on large datasets and
hyperparameter sensitivity. Recent research [12] finds that
neural processes, another meta-learning framework, are
more flexible and efficient for complex visual regression
tasks, which we hypothesize will carry over to the neural

5330

