This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Reconstruction of Relightable Human Model from Monocular Video
Wenzhang Sun
Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing, China

Yunlong Che
AI2 Robotics
Beijing, China

Han Huang
AI2 Robotics
Beijing, China

swzlx1996@163.com

yunlongche@126.com

huang.h92@outlook.com

Yandong Guo
AI2 Robotics
Beijing, China
yandong.guo@live.com

Abstract
Creating relightable and animatable human characters
from monocular video at a low cost is a critical task for digital human modeling and virtual reality applications. This
task is complex due to intricate articulation motion, a wide
range of ambient lighting conditions, and pose-dependent
clothing deformations. In this paper, we introduce a novel
self-supervised framework that takes a monocular video of
a moving human as input and generates a 3D neural representation capable of being rendered with novel poses under arbitrary lighting conditions. Our framework decomposes dynamic humans under varying illumination into neural fields in canonical space, taking into account geometry
and spatially varying BRDF material properties. Additionally, we introduce pose-driven deformation fields, enabling
bidirectional mapping between canonical space and observation. Leveraging the proposed appearance decomposition and deformation fields, our framework learns in a selfsupervised manner. Ultimately, based on pose-driven deformation, recovered appearance, and physically-based rendering, the reconstructed human figure becomes relightable
and can be explicitly driven by novel poses. We demonstrate
significant performance improvements over previous works
and provide compelling examples of relighting from monocular videos of moving humans in challenging, uncontrolled
capture scenarios.

1. Introduction
Capturing the human appearance under varying poses,
viewpoints, and environmental lighting is essential. This
capability enables a range of applications from digital 3D
human creation to immersive experiences for X-R experiences. Traditional pipelines, utilizing specialized equip-

Figure 1. Given a monocular human motion video as input, our
framework enables human relighting under novel illuminations
and poses.

ment for multi-view human scanning [12, 10, 16], rely on
expensive hardware and are not feasible in uncontrolled environments, making them unsuitable for individual users.
In contrast, recent neural rendering methods such as NeRF
[27] and its variants [51, 49, 14, 48, 28, 24, 24] have
achieved significant progress in generating realistic human
rendering effects. These methods are simple yet effective,
offering a promising alternative to traditional pipelines. It
has been demonstrated that the human body can be represented as neural fields, enabling control and relighting,
which expands the potential for creating more flexible and
adaptive virtual human models.
Different from existing methods that rely on multi-view
static scans [21, 53, 8], we focus on the problem of relighting dynamic humans using only a single monocular video.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, we model the dynamic human body
by employing a neural human appearance field and a pose-

397

