This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Group DETR: Fast DETR Training with Group-Wise One-to-Many Assignment
Qiang Chen1∗ , Xiaokang Chen2 * , Jian Wang1 , Shan Zhang3
Kun Yao1 , Haocheng Feng1 , Junyu Han1 , Errui Ding1 , Gang Zeng2 , Jingdong Wang1†
1
Baidu VIS
2
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), School of IST, Peking University
3
Australian National University
{chenqiang13,wangjian33}@baidu.com
{fenghaocheng,hanjunyu,dingerrui,wangjingdong}@baidu.com
{pkucxk,gang.zeng}@pku.edu.cn, shan.zhang@anu.edu.au
52

Abstract

50.1

49.7

49.4

48.1

1. Introduction
Detection Transformer (DETR) [2] conducts end-toend object detection without the need of many hand* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

46.7
45.8
44.5
43.7

mAP

Detection transformer (DETR) relies on one-to-one assignment, assigning one ground-truth object to one prediction, for end-to-end detection without NMS post-processing.
It is known that one-to-many assignment, assigning one
ground-truth object to multiple predictions, succeeds in detection methods such as Faster R-CNN and FCOS. While
the naive one-to-many assignment does not work for DETR,
and it remains challenging to apply one-to-many assignment for DETR training. In this paper, we introduce
Group DETR, a simple yet efficient DETR training approach that introduces a group-wise way for one-to-many
assignment. This approach involves using multiple groups
of object queries, conducting one-to-one assignment within
each group, and performing decoder self-attention separately. It resembles data augmentation with automaticallylearned object query augmentation. It is also equivalent
to simultaneously training parameter-sharing networks of
the same architecture, introducing more supervision and
thus improving DETR training. The inference process is the
same as DETR trained normally and only needs one group
of queries without any architecture modification. Group
DETR is versatile and is applicable to various DETR variants. The experiments show that Group DETR significantly speeds up the training convergence and improves
the performance of various DETR-based models. Code will
be available at https://github.com/Atten4Vis/
GroupDETR.

43.3

42

DETR-DC5
Conditional DETR-DC5
DAB-DETR-DC5
DAB-Deformable-DETR
DINO

32

0

12

50

500

Epochs

Figure 1. Group DETR accelerates the training process for
DETR variants. The training convergence curves are obtained
on COCO val2017 [24] with ResNet-50 [13]. Dashed and bold
curves correspond to the baseline models and the Group DETR
counterparts. Best viewed in color.

crafted components, such as non-maximum suppression
(NMS) [14] and anchor generation [33, 23, 32]. The architecture consists of a CNN [13] and transformer encoder [37], and a transformer decoder that consists of selfattention, cross-attention and FFNs, followed by class and
box prediction FFNs. During training, one-to-one assignment, where one ground-truth object is assigned to one single prediction, is applied for learning to only promote the
predictions assigned to ground-truth objects, and demote
the duplicate predictions.
This work explores the solutions to accelerate the DETR
training process. Previous solutions contain two main lines.
The one line is to modify cross-attention so that informative image regions are selected for effectively and efficiently
collecting the information from image features. Example
methods include sparse sampling, through deformable attention [47], and spatial modulations with modifying object
queries [8, 30, 4, 40, 43, 25, 9]. The other line is to stabilize one-to-one assignment during training, e.g., feeding
ground-truth bounding boxes with noises into transformer

6633

