This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Background Music Generation: Dataset, Method and Evaluation
Yue Liao1†
Chenxi Bao1,2
Baisen Wang1 *
Zhaokai Wang1 *
Le Zhuo1 *
Stanley Peng1
Songhao Han1
Aixi Zhang3
Fei Fang3
Si Liu1
1
2
3
Beihang University
Edinburgh College of Art, University of Edinburgh
Alibaba Group
zhuole1025@gmail.com, {wzk1015, wbs2788}@buaa.edu.cn, liaoyue.ai@gmail.com

Abstract
Music is essential when editing videos, but selecting music manually is difficult and time-consuming. Thus, we seek
to automatically generate background music tracks given
video input. This is a challenging task since it requires
music-video datasets, efficient architectures for video-tomusic generation, and reasonable metrics, none of which
currently exist. To close this gap, we introduce a complete
recipe including dataset, benchmark model, and evaluation
metric for video background music generation. We present
SymMV, a video and symbolic music dataset with various
musical annotations. To the best of our knowledge, it is the
first video-music dataset with rich musical annotations. We
also propose a benchmark video background music generation framework named V-MusProd, which utilizes music
priors of chords, melody, and accompaniment along with
video-music relations of semantic, color, and motion features. To address the lack of objective metrics for videomusic correspondence, we design a retrieval-based metric
VMCP built upon a powerful video-music representation
learning model. Experiments show that with our dataset, VMusProd outperforms the state-of-the-art method in both
music quality and correspondence with videos. We believe our dataset, benchmark model, and evaluation metric will boost the development of video background music generation. Our dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/zhuole1025/SymMV .

1. Introduction
Music plays a crucial role when creating videos, improving the overall quality of videos and enhancing the immersion for viewers. With the rapid growth of social platforms,
the needs to find suitable music for videos extend from professional fields, e.g., soundtrack production in the film industry, to amateur usages like video blogs and TikTok short
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

videos. However, finding proper music for videos and making alignments are difficult and may even bring copyright
issues. Thus, automatically generating background music
for videos is of great value to a wide range of creators.
Recently, tremendous progress has been made with textto-image systems [37, 39], revealing the powerful generative
capacity of state-of-the-art models. Though available to
the same family of generative models, the area of videoto-music generation is still in the preliminary stage. We
attribute this to the following three key challenges from
the aspects of dataset, method, and evaluation, respectively:
(1) Large-scale datasets of high-quality music with paired
videos are absent and cumbersome to collect. (2) Videomusic correspondence is complex and tricky to integrate
effectively into current generative models. (3) There is a
lack of objective metrics to evaluate the correspondence
between video and music. We give detailed explanations and
provide the corresponding solutions for each challenge in
the rest of our paper. Our framework is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Existing video-music datasets [20, 32, 56] are either limited in size or weak in video-music correspondence due
to noisy data pairs. More importantly, these datasets only
include music in audio format, which is complex, computationally expensive, and difficult to impose control signals
from videos. On the contrary, symbolic music, representing
music in discrete sequence [24, 21], contains rich semantic
information and helps to explore video-music relationships.
To fill this gap, we introduce a novel video and symbolic
music dataset named Symbolic Music Videos (SymMV). It
contains piano covers of popular music with their official
music videos carefully collected from the Internet. Overall, it
contains 1140 video-music pairs of more than 10 genres with
a total length of 76.5 hours. As an advantage of symbolic
music, we provide chord, melody, accompaniment, and other
metadata for each music. The detailed annotations allow
model to decouple the music generation process into stages
and better control the generated music. Note that music in
SymMV is of high quality and can also be directly used for
unconditional music generation without video modality.
We then explore the method for video background music

15637

