This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BaRe-ESA: A Riemannian Framework for Unregistered Human Body Shapes
Emmanuel Hartman1 , Emery Pierson2,4 , Martin Bauer1,3 , Nicolas Charon3 , Mohamed Daoudi4,5
Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida, USA 1 ,
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria2
University of Houston, Houston, Texas, USA3
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, Institut Mines-Télécom, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, Lille, F-59000, France4 ,
IMT Nord Europe, Institut Mines-Télécom, Univ. Lille, Centre for Digital Systems, Lille, F-59000, France5

Abstract
We present Basis Restricted Elastic Shape Analysis
(BaRe-ESA), a novel Riemannian framework for human
body scan representation, interpolation and extrapolation.
BaRe-ESA operates directly on unregistered meshes, i.e.,
without the need to establish prior point to point correspondences or to assume a consistent mesh structure. Our
method relies on a latent space representation, which is
equipped with a Riemannian (non-Euclidean) metric associated to an invariant higher-order metric on the space of
surfaces. Experimental results on the FAUST and DFAUST
datasets show that BaRe-ESA brings significant improvements with respect to previous solutions in terms of shape
registration, interpolation and extrapolation. The efficiency
and strength of our model is further demonstrated in applications such as motion transfer and random generation of
body shape and pose.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade there has been an increased interest in analyzing the morphological variability of the human
anatomy. In particular, the issue of modeling and retrieving changes in full body shape and pose has a wide range
of graphics applications spanning from 3D human modeling, to augmented and virtual reality for animated films and
computer games. In these applications one is interested in
a framework that allows for operations such as shape interpolation [16], – the task of finding a plausible deformation
between two given body scans – shape extrapolation, – the
task of finding a plausible deformation given a body scan
and a corresponding initial deformation (movement) – and
random shape generation. Furthermore, one is interested in
This work was supported by ANR projects 16-IDEX-0004 (ULNE)
and by ANR-19-CE23-0020 (Human4D); by NSF grants DMS-1912037,
DMS-1953244, DMS-1945224 and DMS-1953267, and by FWF grant
FWF-P 35813-N. Corresponding Author: M. Bauer (bauer@math.fsu.edu)

obtaining a natural disentanglement of changes in the pose
and in the shape of the human body [15], which in turn will
allow for operations such as motion transfer [5].
Motivation: A major challenge in the context of human
body shape analysis is the registration problem, i.e. raw
scans of human bodies are usually not equipped with any
point correspondences and will, in general, not even admit a consistent mesh structure. Traditionally this issue has
been tackled by finding new representations of the meshes
with a consistent mesh structure and estimated point correspondences using an external framework such as functional maps [38, 35]. This data preprocessing step is then
followed with an independent framework for the analysis
of parametrized shapes, such as the As-Rigid-As-Possible
(ARAP) energy [45] or the as isometric as possible energy [27]. In recent years, in the context of general functional data analysis, it has been shown that such a separation into registration and subsequent analysis can introduce a significant bias into the resulting statistical analysis, and it has been acknowledged that a significant increase
in performance can be obtained by using an unified approach [46, 25].
Contribution: Towards this aim we introduce a new
pipeline that quantifies geometric differences between unregistered human body scans, i.e., that does not require prior
point correspondences or consistent parametrization across
the dataset. Furthermore, we are not only interested in a
pure metric comparison of two individuals, but also in estimating plausible deformation processes from one human
body to the other. To that end, we introduce a transformation model that allows to disentangle changes in the pose
and in the shape of the human body so as to obtain realistic
ways to interpolate from one scan to another, extrapolate a
given motion or transpose it to a new individual and even
to generate visually plausible random pose and shapes; see
Figure 1 for a schematic visualization of our framework. It
is important to highlight that, through the use of the varifold
representation and kernel metrics, our approach does not re14181

