This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ALWOD: Active Learning for Weakly-Supervised Object Detection
Yuting Wang1 , Velibor Ilic2 , Jiatong Li1 , Branislav Kisačanin3,2 , and Vladimir Pavlovic1
1

2

Rutgers University, NJ, USA
The Institute for Artificial Intelligence Research and Development of Serbia, Novi Sad, Serbia
3
Nvidia Corporation, TX, USA
yw632@rutgers.edu, velibor.ilic@ivi.ac.rs, jiatong.li@rutgers.edu,
b.kisacanin@ieee.org, vladimir@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Object detection (OD), a crucial vision task, remains
challenged by the lack of large training datasets with precise object localization labels. In this work, we propose ALWOD, a new framework that addresses this problem by fusing active learning (AL) with weakly and semisupervised object detection paradigms. Because the performance of AL critically depends on the model initialization, we propose a new auxiliary image generator strategy that utilizes an extremely small labeled set, coupled
with a large weakly tagged set of images, as a warm-start
for AL. We then propose a new AL acquisition function,
another critical factor in AL success, that leverages the
student-teacher OD pair disagreement and uncertainty to
effectively propose the most informative images to annotate. Finally, to complete the AL loop, we introduce a new
labeling task delegated to human annotators, based on selection and correction of model-proposed detections, which
is both rapid and effective in labeling the informative images. We demonstrate, across several challenging benchmarks, that ALWOD significantly narrows the gap between
the ODs trained on few partially labeled but strategically
selected image instances and those that rely on the fullylabeled data. Our code is publicly available on https:
//github.com/seqam-lab/ALWOD.

1. Introduction
Object detection (OD) is a critical vision problem. To
solve it, many fully-supervised object detection (FSOD)
methods have been developed to build deep neural network
architectures with high detection performance [35, 15, 3]
and fast inference [33, 34]. Typically, these networks
are trained on large fully-annotated (FA) data, which require humans to manually identify, with accurate bounding boxes and category labels, each object in an im-

age. However, manual annotation of a large dataset is
time-consuming [44], limiting the scalability of FSOD
as the number of images, categories, and objects grows.
To address this, many weakly-supervised object detection
(WSOD) methods [2, 45, 19, 51] have been developed.
WSOD aims to reduce the object annotation cost by leveraging cheaper, weakly-annotated (WA) data, where an image instance is tagged according to the objects present in it,
without the need to specify bounding boxes for each object.
Existing WSOD methods often struggle to distinguish
between object parts and objects, or between objects and
groups of objects [36]. The performance of WSOD methods
lags behind that of FSODs since WSODs rely on weaker annotation signals. Recently proposed semi-supervised [32,
43, 50] and few-shot [1, 29] learning approaches demonstrated that a good trade-off between annotation effort and
detection performance can be achieved by first fully annotating a set of random images, followed by training the detector on a combination of large WA and small FA data.
Active learning (AL) methods [53, 5, 54, 49] aim to further
reduce the size of the FA sets using acquisition functions
to select the most informative images for human labeling.
AL methods can be either warm-start, which begin with a
labeled set and iteratively select informative samples with
feedback from the model, or cold-start, which select all informative samples at once without the need for an initial
labeled set. Our work focuses on the warm-start setting.
To reduce the annotation cost and maximize the detection performance, we introduce an Active Learning for
Weakly-Supervised Object Detection (ALWOD) framework
that combines semi-supervised learning with active learning
by dynamically augmenting the semi-supervised set with a
small set of actively selected and then fully annotated images, as illustrated in Fig. 1. However, traditional warmstart AL methods commence with an FSOD model trained
on a random set of FA data [5, 8], typically hundreds or
thousands of images, or a WSOD model trained on a large

6459

