This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3DHacker: Spectrum-based Decision Boundary Generation
for Hard-label 3D Point Cloud Attack
Yunbo Tao1* Daizong Liu2* Pan Zhou1 Yulai Xie1† Wei Du1 Wei Hu2†
1
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security,
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
{tyb666, panzhou, ylxie, weidu666}@hust.edu.cn

dzliu@stu.pku.edu.cn

3D Point Cloud Classification Model

Abstract
With the maturity of depth sensors, the vulnerability of
3D point cloud models has received increasing attention in
various applications such as autonomous driving and robot
navigation. Previous 3D adversarial attackers either follow the white-box setting to iteratively update the coordinate perturbations based on gradients, or utilize the output
model logits to estimate noisy gradients in the black-box
setting. However, these attack methods are hard to be deployed in real-world scenarios since realistic 3D applications will not share any model details to users. Therefore,
we explore a more challenging yet practical 3D attack setting, i.e., attacking point clouds with black-box hard labels,
in which the attacker can only have access to the prediction label of the input. To tackle this setting, we propose
a novel 3D attack method, termed 3D Hard-label attacker
(3DHacker), based on the developed decision boundary algorithm to generate adversarial samples solely with the
knowledge of class labels. Specifically, to construct the
class-aware model decision boundary, 3DHacker first randomly fuses two point clouds of different classes in the spectral domain to craft their intermediate sample with high
imperceptibility, then projects it onto the decision boundary via binary search. To restrict the final perturbation
size, 3DHacker further introduces an iterative optimization
strategy to move the intermediate sample along the decision boundary for generating adversarial point clouds with
smallest trivial perturbations. Extensive evaluations show
that, even in the challenging hard-label setting, 3DHacker
still competitively outperforms existing 3D attacks regarding the attack performance as well as adversary quality.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [37, 10], which are indistin∗ Equal contributions.

† Corresponding authors.

forhuwei@pku.edu.cn

Input Layer

Hidden Layer

Output Layer

Label

...
Plane

...
...
Source Point Cloud

...

...

...

...

...
Model Details

Output Logits

Hard-Label Black-Box Attacker
Minimized
convex
Distance
Optimize
Local
Optimum

Decision
Boundary

Adversarial
Point Cloud
on decision
boundary
Other
Adversarial
Point Clouds

3D Point Cloud Feature Space

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. Our 3D hard-label setting
cannot access any model details of the hidden layer or the logits
of the output layer. To tackle this setting, we develop a spectrumbased decision boundary algorithm to iteratively optimize the best
adversarial sample only with the knowledge of the predicted label.

guishable from legitimate ones by adding trivial perturbations but often lead to incorrect model prediction. Many
efforts have been made into attacks on the 2D image field
[7, 30, 21, 39]. However, in addition to image-based 2D
attacks, 3D point cloud attacks are also crucial in various safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving
[5, 49, 14], robotic grasping [41, 56], and face challenges in
realistic scenarios.
Existing 3D point cloud attack methods [38, 54, 57, 43]
generally delve into achieving high attack success rate and
maintaining the imperceptibility of adversarial examples.
However, these 3D attack methods still suffer from two
main limitations: (1) Most of them are deployed in whitebox setting where the attackers have the full knowledge
of victim models including network structure and weights.

14340

