This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VertexSerum: Poisoning Graph Neural Networks for Link Inference
Ruyi Ding*, Shijin Duan*, Xiaolin Xu, Yunsi Fei
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
{ding.ruy, duan.s, x.xu, y.fei}@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have brought superb
performance to various applications utilizing graph structural data, such as social analysis and fraud detection. The
graph links, e.g., social relationships and transaction history, are sensitive and valuable information, which raises
privacy concerns when using GNNs. To exploit these vulnerabilities, we propose VertexSerum, a novel graph poisoning attack that increases the effectiveness of graph link
stealing by amplifying the link connectivity leakage. To
infer node adjacency more accurately, we propose an attention mechanism that can be embedded into the link detection network. Our experiments demonstrate that VertexSerum signiﬁcantly outperforms the SOTA link inference attack, improving the AUC scores by an average of
9.8% across four real-world datasets and three different
GNN structures. Furthermore, our experiments reveal the
effectiveness of VertexSerum in both black-box and online learning settings, further validating its applicability
in real-world scenarios. The source code is available at
https://github.com/RollinDing/VertexSerum.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been widely
adopted in various domains, such as ﬁnancial fraud detection [25], social network analysis [19], and heart-failure
prediction [6], thanks to their capabilities to model highdimensional features and complex structural relationships
between entities [30]. However, with the increasing use of
graph data, concerns about data privacy are also growing
[1, 7, 27]. This is particularly relevant in industries such
as ﬁnance and healthcare, where sensitive relationships are
often embedded in graph-structured data.
Recently, there has been a rise in privacy attacks on
GNNs [11, 28] that infer link existence between nodes in
graphs by only querying the graph model, thus posing a
threat to the conﬁdentiality of GNNs. For a graph node pair,

the similarity of their posterior distributions (abbreviated as
“posteriors” [11]) is measured to deduce the link existence.
For instance, in federated learning scenario [10], where different parties keep private data locally but contribute to the
GNN training in the cloud based on their data, a malicious
contributor can infer the link belonging to other contributors
by querying trained GNN models. In this context, the risks
of link information leakage lie in the joint training of GNNs
and the available GNN inference APIs on graph data.
In this work, we identiﬁed a limitation of the existing
link-inferring attacks: they do not perform well if the interested node pairs are from the same category (intra-class).
This is due to the high similarity of the posterior distributions between node pairs in the same category. To overcome
this limitation, we propose a novel approach to signiﬁcantly
improve link inference attacks, particularly on intra-class
node pairs, by allowing a malicious contributor to poison
the graph during GNN training in an unnoticeable way.
This paper proposes a novel privacy-breaching data poisoning attack on GNNs, VertexSerum1 , with a new analysis strategy. The attack aims to amplify the leakage of
private link information by modifying nodes/vertices. This
work makes the following contributions:
1. We propose a new evaluation metric, intra-class AUC
score, for link inference attacks, by considering only
node pairs from the same class. It overcomes the bias
in prior works not differentiating between inter-class and
intra-class, bringing valuable insights for our approach.
2. We introduce the ﬁrst privacy-breaching data poisoning
attack on GNNs, which injects adversarial noise into a
small portion (< 10%) of the training graph to amplify
the graph’s link information leakage. We constructively
employ a self-attention-based network to train the link
detector and propose a pre-training strategy to overcome
the overﬁtting issue of limited training data.
3. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed link
inference attack on popular GNN structures and graph
datasets. The attack improves the link stealing AUC
score by 9.8% compared to the SOTA method in [11].

* These authors contributed equally to this work.

1 The name is inspired by Veritaserum in the Harry Potter series.

4532

