This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MDCS: More Diverse Experts with Consistency Self-distillation for Long-tailed
Recognition
Qihao Zhao1,2 , Chen Jiang1 , Wei Hu1 , Fan Zhang1 *, Jun Liu2
1
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China
2
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
{zhaoqh,jiangchen,huwei,zhangf}@mail.buct.edu.cn, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract

Medium

Model Var

Few

Class index

Test Acc

Recently, multi-expert methods have led to significant
improvements in long-tail recognition (LTR). We summarize
two aspects that need further enhancement to contribute to
LTR boosting: (1) More diverse experts; (2) Lower model
variance. However, the previous methods didn’t handle
them well. To this end, we propose More Diverse experts
with Consistency Self-distillation (MDCS) to bridge the gap
left by earlier methods. Our MDCS approach consists of
two core components: Diversity Loss (DL) and Consistency Self-distillation (CS). In detail, DL promotes diversity
among experts by controlling their focus on different categories. To reduce the model variance, we employ KL divergence to distill the richer knowledge of weakly augmented
instances for the experts’ self-distillation. In particular,
we design Confident Instance Sampling (CIS) to select the
correctly classified instances for CS to avoid biased/noisy
knowledge. In the analysis and ablation study, we demonstrate that our method compared with previous work can
effectively increase the diversity of experts, significantly reduce the variance of the model, and improve recognition
accuracy. Moreover, the roles of our DL and CS are mutually reinforcing and coupled: the diversity of experts benefits from the CS, and the CS cannot achieve remarkable results without the DL. Experiments show our MDCS outperforms the state-of-the-art by 1% ∼ 2% on five popular longtailed benchmarks, including CIFAR10-LT, CIFAR100-LT,
ImageNet-LT, Places-LT, and iNaturalist 2018. The code is
available at https://github.com/fistyee/MDCS

Many

Data distribution

Class index

Weakly

Strongly

w/ CS

Figure 1. We evaluate a ResNet-32 model based on Balanced
Softmax [41, 35] with weakly/strongly augmentation. All experiments were performed with an Imbalanced Factor (IF) of 100
on the CIFAR100-LT dataset. Top: model variance [51]. The
model trained with weakly augmented instances has a higher variance, whereas the model trained with strongly augmented instances is better than weak augmentation. Bottom: Test accuracy.
In the case of training on weakly/strongly augmented instances,
the model supervised with one-hot labels presents lower accuracy.
In contrast, our CS transfers richer knowledge from weakly augmented instances, preventing the model from overfitting instances
as well as reducing the model variance and improving recognition
accuracy. It indicates that the prediction of the weakly augmented
model could provide richer supervision knowledge to the strongly
augmented instances better than its one-hot label.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable progress in a
range of computer vision (CV) tasks, such as image recog* The Corresponding author is with the College of Information Science
and Technology and the Interdisciplinary Research Center for Artificial
Intelligence, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China

nition [17, 14, 64, 30, 63], object detection [45, 12], and
action recognition [46]. Despite advances in deep technologies and computational capability, great success is also
highly dependent on well-designed large datasets such as
ImageNet [13] and Places [67], where each category has

11597

