This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PlankAssembly: Robust 3D Reconstruction from Three Orthographic Views
with Learnt Shape Programs
Wentao Hu1,2†∗ Jia Zheng3∗ Zixin Zhang4∗ Xiaojun Yuan4 Jian Yin1,2 Zihan Zhou3
1
Sun Yat-Sen University 2 Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing
3
Manycore Tech Inc. 4 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
https://manycore-research.github.io/PlankAssembly

Front

Abstract
In this paper, we develop a new method to automatically convert 2D line drawings from three orthographic
views into 3D CAD models. Existing methods for this problem reconstruct 3D models by back-projecting the 2D observations into 3D space while maintaining explicit correspondence between the input and output. Such methods
are sensitive to errors and noises in the input, thus often
fail in practice where the input drawings created by human designers are imperfect. To overcome this difficulty, we
leverage the attention mechanism in a Transformer-based
sequence generation model to learn flexible mappings between the input and output. Further, we design shape programs which are suitable for generating the objects of interest to boost the reconstruction accuracy and facilitate CAD
modeling applications. Experiments on a new benchmark
dataset show that our method significantly outperforms existing ones when the inputs are noisy or incomplete.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we tackle a long-standing problem in
computer-aided design (CAD), namely 3D object reconstruction from three orthographic views. In today’s product
design and manufacturing industry, 2D engineering drawings are commonly used by designers to realize, update, and
share their ideas, especially during the initial design stages.
But to enable further analysis (e.g., finite element analysis) and manufacturing, these 2D designs must be manually
realized as 3D models in CAD software. Therefore, if a
method can automatically convert the 2D drawings into 3D
models, it would greatly facilitate the design process and
improve overall efficiency.
As the most popular way to describe an object in 2D
† Work done during internship at Manycore Tech Inc.
∗ Equal contributions.

Top

Side

Figure 1. An illustration of various input drawings. From top to
bottom: clean inputs, noisy inputs, and visible inputs. We use
solid and dashed lines to represent the visible and hidden lines,
respectively. In noisy line drawings (the second row), we use blue
lines to represent noisy lines and highlight the missing lines using
the red circle.

drawings, an orthographic view is the projection of the object onto the plane that is perpendicular to one of the three
principal axes (Figure 1). Over the past few decades, 3D
reconstruction from three orthographic views has been extensively studied, with significant improvements in terms
of the types of applicable objects and computational efficiency [25, 10, 19, 37, 38, 28, 18, 21, 8, 9]. However, to the
best of our knowledge, these techniques have not enjoyed
wide adoption in CAD software and commercial products.
Among the challenges faced by existing methods in practice, their sensitivity to errors and missing components in
the drawings is arguably the most critical one. To understand this issue, we note that almost all existing methods
follow a standard procedure for 3D reconstruction, which
consists of the following steps: (i) generate 3D vertices
from 2D vertices; (ii) generate 3D edges from 3D vertices;

18495

