This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

T RAJ PAC: Towards Robustness Verification of Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction
Models
Liang Zhang1,2 , Nathaniel Xu1 , Pengfei Yang1 , Gaojie Jin1B , Cheng-Chao Huang3 , Lijun Zhang1,2B
1

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, CAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Nanjing Institute of Software Technology, ISCAS, Nanjing, China
{zhangliang,gaojie,zhanglj}@ios.ac.cn
B
Corresponding Author

Abstract
Robust pedestrian trajectory forecasting is crucial to
developing safe autonomous vehicles. Although previous
works have studied adversarial robustness in the context of
trajectory forecasting, some significant issues remain unaddressed. In this work, we try to tackle these crucial
problems. Firstly, the previous definitions of robustness
in trajectory prediction are ambiguous. We thus provide
formal definitions for two kinds of robustness, namely label robustness and pure robustness. Secondly, as previous
works fail to consider robustness about all points in a disturbance interval, we utilise a probably approximately correct (PAC) framework for robustness verification. Additionally, this framework can not only identify potential counterexamples, but also provides interpretable analyses of the
original methods. Our approach is applied using a prototype tool named T RAJ PAC. With T RAJ PAC, we evaluate the robustness of four state-of-the-art trajectory prediction models — Trajectron++, MemoNet, AgentFormer, and
MID — on trajectories from five scenes of the ETH/UCY
dataset and scenes of the Stanford Drone Dataset. Using
our framework, we also experimentally study various factors that could influence robustness performance.

1. Introduction
Forecasting the movements of people based on their past
states is a crucial task in both human behavior comprehension and self-driving systems [47]. This task is commonly
referred to as pedestrian trajectory prediction. Although
current methods [49, 89, 5, 22, 67, 57, 55] for predicting human trajectory have achieved remarkable results, they still
face security risks due to their susceptibility to adversarial
attacks. As Fig. 1 shows, even a slight and hardly percepti-

neighbours trajectories
true trajectory
original prediction
adversarial trajectories

Figure 1. An example of adversarial attacks

ble alteration in the previous state can lead to a significant
variation in the prediction result.
Several works [95, 11, 37, 12, 98, 74] in the literature
study the robustness of trajectory prediction models through
the lens of adversarial attack and defense. However, many
of these methods are directly translated from problems in
image classification and still do not fully consider the specific circumstances of trajectory prediction tasks. As such,
they have several overlooked shortcomings for benchmarking the robustness in forecasting problems. To this end,
this work endeavors to both theoretically and experimentally analyse and mend these flaws.
The first problem is the current research does not provide an exact and formal definition of robustness for trajectory prediction tasks. They emphasise that the adversarial trajectory is “natural and feasible” [95] or “close to the
nominal trajectories” [11] but lacks a mathematical definition for what constitutes robustness (i.e., notion of robustness radius). Unlike the robustness of classification tasks,
trajectory prediction is framed as a regression problem. As
such, directly translating the definition of robustness from
image classification to trajectory prediction is nontrivial.
I.e., at what level of alignment between the prediction and
ground truth can the model be deemed robust? For this reason, we provide a formal definition (Sect. 3.2) that explicitly defines the acceptable perturbation radius of historical
trajectories. Our definition formally unifies the semantic

8327

