This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMST-ViT: Climate Change-aware Crop Yield Prediction via Multi-Modal
Spatial-Temporal Vision Transformer
Fudong Lin1 , Summer Crawford2 , Kaleb Guillot2 , Yihe Zhang2 , Yan Chen3 , Xu Yuan1 *,
Li Chen2 , Shelby Williams2 , Robert Minvielle2 , Xiangming Xiao4 , Drew Gholson5 , Nicolas Ashwell5 ,
Tri Setiyono6 , Brenda Tubana7 , Lu Peng8 , Magdy Bayoumi2 , Nian-Feng Tzeng2
1
University of Delaware, 2 University of Louisiana at Lafayette, 3 University of Connecticut,
4
University of Oklahoma, 5 Mississippi State University, 6 Louisiana State University,
7
LSU AgCenter, 8 Tulane University

Abstract
Precise crop yield prediction provides valuable information for agricultural planning and decision-making processes. However, timely predicting crop yields remains
challenging as crop growth is sensitive to growing season
weather variation and climate change. In this work, we develop a deep learning-based solution, namely Multi-Modal
Spatial-Temporal Vision Transformer (MMST-ViT), for predicting crop yields at the county level across the United
States, by considering the effects of short-term meteorological variations during the growing season and the longterm climate change on crops. Specifically, our MMST-ViT
consists of a Multi-Modal Transformer, a Spatial Transformer, and a Temporal Transformer. The Multi-Modal
Transformer leverages both visual remote sensing data and
short-term meteorological data for modeling the effect of
growing season weather variations on crop growth. The
Spatial Transformer learns the high-resolution spatial dependency among counties for accurate agricultural tracking. The Temporal Transformer captures the long-range
temporal dependency for learning the impact of long-term
climate change on crops. Meanwhile, we also devise a novel
multi-modal contrastive learning technique to pre-train our
model without extensive human supervision. Hence, our
MMST-ViT captures the impacts of both short-term weather
variations and long-term climate change on crops by leveraging both satellite images and meteorological data. We
have conducted extensive experiments on over 200 counties
in the United States, with the experimental results exhibiting that our MMST-ViT outperforms its counterparts under
three performance metrics of interest. Our dataset and code
are available at https://github.com/fudong03/
MMST-ViT.

* Corresponding author: Dr. Xu Yuan (xyuan@udel.edu)

1. Introduction
Accurate crop yield prediction is essential for agricultural planning and advisory processes [26], informed economic decisions [2], and global food security [36]. However, predicting crop yields precisely is challenging as it
requires to consider the effects of i) short-term weather
variations, governed by the meteorological data during the
growing season, and ii) long-term climate change, governed
by historical meteorological factors, on crops simultaneously. Meanwhile, precise crop tracking relies on highresolution remote sensing data. While process-based prediction approaches [44, 11, 25, 54] exist, they often suffer from high inaccuracies due to their strong assumptions on management practices [15]. On the other hand,
motivated by the recent success of deep neural networks
[29, 19, 50, 12, 20, 56, 37, 32, 18, 30, 8], deep learning
(DL)-based methods have been widely adopted for crop
yield predictions, due to their effectiveness in accurate agricultural tracking [27, 26] and their potent capabilities in
capturing the spatial and temporal variation of meteorological data [28, 15].
So far, DL-based solutions for crop yield predictions can
be roughly grouped into two categories, i.e., remote sensing data-based and meteorological data-based approaches.
The former [27, 26, 53, 13, 17, 47, 10] employs such remote sensing data as satellite images, unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-based imagery data, or vegetation indices to estimate the annual crop yield, while the latter [16, 1, 36, 42,
48] predicts the crop yield by using meteorological parameter data, including temperature, precipitation, vapor pressure deficit, etc. However, the former overlooks the direct
impact of meteorological parameters on crop growth, while
the latter lacks high-resolution remote sensing data for accurate agricultural tracking.
A recent study [39] has reported that the long-term
climate change would gradually decrease the crop yield.

5774

