This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Segment Every Reference Object in Spatial and Temporal Spaces
Jiannan Wu1 ,

Yi Jiang2 ,

Bin Yan3 ,

Huchuan Lu3 ,

Zehuan Yuan2 ,

Ping Luo1,4

1

The University of Hong Kong 2 ByteDance
3
Dalian University of Technology 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract
The reference-based object segmentation tasks, namely
referring image segmentation (RIS), referring video object segmentation (RVOS), and video object segmentation
(VOS), aim to segment a specific object by utilizing either
language or annotated masks as references. Despite significant progress in each respective field, current methods
are task-specifically designed and developed in different directions, which hinders the activation of multi-task capabilities for these tasks. In this work, we end the current
fragmented situation and propose UniRef to unify the three
reference-based object segmentation tasks with a single architecture. At the heart of our approach is the multiwayfusion for handling different task with respect to their specified references. And a unified Transformer architecture is
then adopted for performing instance-level segmentation.
With the unified designs, UniRef can be jointly trained on
a broad range of benchmarks and can flexibly perform multiple tasks at runtime by specifying the corresponding references. We evaluate the jointly trained network on various
benchmarks. Extensive experimental results indicate that
our proposed UniRef achieves state-of-the-art performance
on RIS and RVOS, and performs competitively on VOS with
a single network.

1. Introduction
The reference-guided object segmentation aims at segmenting the specified object with the given references
(e.g., language or first-frame mask annotation). The
three representative tasks include referring image segmentation (RIS) [94], referring video object segmentation
(RVOS) [34] and semi-supervised video object segmentation (VOS) [61]. They are the fundamental tasks for
vision understanding and have wide applications in image/video editing, video surveillance, etc. Over time, many
advanced methods have ballooned in their respective fields
and rapidly improves the state-of-the-art performance.
Despite witnessing the significant progress, these tasks
are separately tackled with specialized designed models.

Output Mask

UniRef

Multiway-Fusion

Mask
Reference

Images

Image+M

Image+M+L

Image+L

VOS

RVOS

RIS

Language
Reference

Figure 1: A single, jointly trained UniRef can perform
three different reference-based tasks by specifying the corresponding references. ‘L’ and ‘M’ represent language and
mask reference, respectively.
In that regard, the individual methods need extra training
time and produce different sets of model weights on each
task. This would cause expensive computational cost and
yield redundant parameters. More importantly, the independent designs prevent the synergy and facilitation of different tasks. We argue that the current fragmented situation is unnecessary as the three tasks have essentially the
same definition in a high-level aspect: they all use the references (language or first-frame annotated mask) as guidance
to perform the per-pixel segmentation of the target object.
This motivates us to build a unified model within the same
parameters which can perform different tasks at runtime by
specifying the corresponding references.
Towards the unification of reference-based object segmentation tasks, it poses great challenges in connecting
the isolated landscapes as a whole: (i) The mainstream
methods in different fields vary greatly. RIS and RVOS
methods [91, 29, 86, 66] mostly focus on the deep crossmodal fusion of vision and language information. While
the space-time memory network for pixel-level matching
has long dominated the VOS domain [59, 16, 88, 15]. (ii)
Previous RVOS and VOS tasks are solved in two dif-

2538

