This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-based Image Translation with Label Guidance for Domain Adaptive
Semantic Segmentation
Duo Peng1 Ping Hu2 Qiuhong Ke3 Jun Liu1, *
Singapore University of Technology and Design 2 Boston University
3
Monash University
duo peng@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, pinghu@bu.edu, qiuhong.ke@monash.edu, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg
1

Abstract

Existing Methods

guide

Translation
Model

Translating images from a source domain to a target domain for learning target models is one of the most common strategies in domain adaptive semantic segmentation
(DASS). However, existing methods still struggle to preserve
semantically-consistent local details between the original
and translated images. In this work, we present an innovative approach that addresses this challenge by using sourcedomain labels as explicit guidance during image translation. Concretely, we formulate cross-domain image translation as a denoising diffusion process and utilize a novel Semantic Gradient Guidance (SGG) method to constrain the
translation process, conditioning it on the pixel-wise source
labels. Additionally, a Progressive Translation Learning
(PTL) strategy is devised to enable the SGG method to work
reliably across domains with large gaps. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our approach over
state-of-the-art methods.

Semantic
Consistency

Ours
Translation
Model

(a) Architecture Comparison
༃
༄

༅

Source Semantics
༃

༄

༄

༄

༅

༃

༄

༅

༅

Existing Method
༃

༃

༅

Ours

༃

༄

Road

Side.W

Build

Wall

Fence

Pole

Sky

Person

Rider

Car

Truck

Bus

༅

Tr. Light Tr. Sign

Train

Motor

Veg.

Terrain

Bike

N/A

(b) Results Comparison

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vision
task that aims to assign a semantic category to each pixel
in an image. In the past decade, fully supervised methods
[47, 59, 29, 84] have achieved remarkable progress in semantic segmentation. However, the progress is at the cost
of a large number of dense pixel-level annotations, which
are signiﬁcantly labor-intensive and time-consuming to obtain [3, 47]. Facing this problem, one alternative is to leverage synthetic datasets, e.g., GTA5 [57] or SYNTHIA [60],
where the simulated images and corresponding pixel-level
labels can be generated by the computer engine freely. Although the annotation cost is much cheaper than manual
labeling, segmentation models trained with such synthetic
datasets often do not work well on real images due to the
large domain discrepancy.
* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. (a) Architecture comparison between different image
translation methods for DASS. Existing methods mainly translate
images based on the input image. Our method further introduces
the source semantic label to guide the translation process, making
the translated content semantically consistent with the source label (as well as the source image). (b) Results comparison in detail.
First row: the source semantic label. Second row: the translated
image of an existing method [16], which is a state-of-the-art image
translation method based on GAN. Third row: the translated image
of our method. The translated image of the existing method shows
unsatisfactory local details (e.g., in case x of the second row, the
trafﬁc light and its surrounding sky are translated into building).
In contrast, our method preserves details in a ﬁne-grained manner.

The task of domain adaptive semantic segmentation
(DASS) aims to address the domain discrepancy problem
by transferring knowledge learned from a source domain
to a target one with labels provided for the source domain

808

