This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Out-Of-Distribution Detection: A Model-Specific Perspective
Reza Averly
The Ohio State University

Wei-Lun Chao
The Ohio State University

averly.1@osu.edu

chao.209@osu.edu

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection aims to identify test
examples that do not belong to the training distribution and
are thus unlikely to be predicted reliably. Despite a plethora
of existing works, most of them focused only on the scenario
where OOD examples come from semantic shift (e.g., unseen
categories), ignoring other possible causes (e.g., covariate
shift). In this paper, we present a novel, unifying framework
to study OOD detection in a broader scope. Instead of detecting OOD examples from a particular cause, we propose
to detect examples that a deployed machine learning model
(e.g., an image classifier) is unable to predict correctly. That
is, whether a test example should be detected and rejected
or not is “model-specific”. We show that this framework
unifies the detection of OOD examples caused by semantic
shift and covariate shift, and closely addresses the concern
of applying a machine learning model to uncontrolled environments. We provide an extensive analysis that involves a
variety of models (e.g., different architectures and training
strategies), sources of OOD examples, and OOD detection
approaches, and reveal several insights into improving and
understanding OOD detection in uncontrolled environments.

1. Introduction
Equipping a model with the capability to identify “what it
does not know” is critical for reliable machine learning. Take
image classification as an example. While state-of-the-art
neural network models [11, 6, 17, 24] could perform fairly
well on “in-distribution (ID)” data that belong to the training
distribution, their accuracy often degrades drastically when
facing data with covariate shift (e.g., different image domains
or styles) [46] or semantic shift (e.g., novel categories) [22].
It is thus crucial to detect data on which the models cannot
perform well and reject them from being classified.
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection [13], which aims to
identify test examples drawn from a distribution different
from the training distribution, is a promising paradigm toward such a goal. OOD detection has attracted significant
attention lately, with a plethora of methods being developed

Figure 1: Model-Specific Out-of-Distribution (MS-OOD) Detection, using ImageNet [34, 4] as an example. The blue, purple,
and yellow regions denote in-distribution (ID), covariate shift (COOD), and semantic shift (S-OOD) data, respectively, each with its
datasets and representative images. Given an ImageNet classifier,
the shaded red region denotes the correctly classified images (called
the acceptance region). A robust classifier would have its acceptance region cover the ID and C-OOD data as much as possible.
Using this framework, we can separate test data into model-specific
acceptance (MS-A) and rejection (MS-R) cases, corresponding to
the shaded red region and its complement. The goal of MS-OOD
D ETECTION is to detect the MS-R cases (i.e., examples misclassified by the classifier).

[50, 35]. However, most of them focus solely on detecting
examples with semantic shift, which arguably limits their
applicability in uncontrolled environments where other kinds
of OOD examples (e.g., with covariate shift) may appear.
In this paper, we thus attempt to expand the scope of OOD
detection to further include covariate shift. At first glance,
one may treat OOD examples with covariate shift (denoted
as C-OOD) the same as OOD examples with semantic shift
(denoted as S-OOD) — i.e., to detect and reject as many of
them as possible. However, unlike S-OOD examples, which
the deployed classifier can never classify correctly, C-OOD
examples have a chance to be correctly classified, as their
label space is covered by the classifier. For instance, if the covariate shift is small (e.g., ImageNet [34] as ID; ImageNetV2
as C-OOD [32]), many of the C-OOD examples will likely
be correctly classified. Even if the covariate shift is more
pronounced (e.g., ImageNet-Sketch [42]), a robust classifier
(e.g., with the CLIP-pre-trained backbone [30]) is likely to

1453

