This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Minimal Solutions to Uncalibrated Two-view Geometry with Known Epipoles
Gaku Nakano
NEC Corporation
1753 Shimonumabe, Kawasaki, Japan
g-nakano@nec.com

Abstract
This paper proposes minimal solutions to uncalibrated
two-view geometry with known epipoles. Exploiting the
epipoles, we can reduce the number of point correspondences needed to find the fundamental matrix together with
the intrinsic parameters: the focal length and the radial lens
distortion. We define four cases by the number of available
epipoles and unknown intrinsic parameters, then derive a
closed-form solution for each case formulated as a higherorder polynomial in a single variable. The proposed solvers
are more numerically stable and faster by orders of magnitude than the conventional 6- or 7-point algorithms. Moreover, we demonstrate by experiments on the human pose
dataset that the proposed method can solve two-view geometry even with 2D human pose, of which point localization
is noisier than general feature point detectors.

1. Introduction
Solving the two-view geometry of uncalibrated cameras
is one of the basic tasks for many computer vision applications such as the structure-from-motion [1, 31], VisualSLAM [6, 26], and novel view synthesis [4, 25]. The goal
of this problem is to find the fundamental matrix and the intrinsic parameters of the two cameras from point correspondences. Since point correspondences are generally contaminated by outliers, many efforts have been devoted to develop
efficient and numerically stable solvers that can be incorporated into RANSAC [9] to extract a set of inlier point pairs.
It is known that the fundamental matrix with an unknown
focal length and known principal points can be determined
by six point correspondences. Stewénius et al. [34] first developed a minimal solution to this problem by manually deriving Gröbner basis. Then, other methods were proposed
based on various approaches, e.g. the hidden variable technique [23], the polynomial eigenvalue problem [19], the
automatic generator [21]. Following the success of the 6point algorithms, research interests have been expanded to
deal with the radial lens distortion. Jiang et al. [15] and

Kuang et al. [18] showed that the fundamental matrix with
both unknown focal length and unknown radial distortion
can be solved by seven point correspondences. However,
with more intrinsic parameters to be estimated, new issues
arise in terms of numerical stability and computational efficiency. The root cause is that those methods assume general
conditions with no restrictions on the camera motion and
thus cannot reduce the number of point correspondences.
To address the above issue, we assume that two cameras are mutually observed, as shown in Fig. 1. This is
not a rare and limited situation but occurs in real applications. For example, multiple cameras are installed to capture human behaviors from 360◦ views in dataset creation
(Figs. 2a and 2b). In dynamic scenes such as multi-agent
Visual-SLAM, robots collaboratively create a single map
of a wide area (Fig. 2c). Visual-SLAM can also be applied to calibrate camera networks consisting of fixed and
moving cameras (Fig. 2d). In those scenarios, epipoles or
2D positions of the camera center are directly obtainable
from images. Epipoles constrain a fundamental matrix to
be rank-deficient, thus reducing the number of point correspondences. Nistér [27] showed a theory for finding a
relative rotation of calibrated cameras with a single epipole.
Ito et al. [14] utilized epipole(s) for fundamental matrix estimation, then Sato [30] generalized it to three- and fourview geometry. However, both methods are based on the
DLT algorithm [11], thus not minimal solutions. They also
do not address how to find the intrinsic parameters.
In this paper, we propose minimal solutions utilizing
epipole(s) to determine a fundamental matrix with unknown
intrinsic camera parameters: focal length and radial lens
distortion. The proposed method has four variations depending on the number of available epipoles and the number of unknown parameters to be estimated. Moreover, we
introduce a simple regularization term to fix the epipoles
during the non-linear optimization, which is conducted on
inliers after RANSAC. Through exhaustive experiments, we
show that the proposed algorithms provide more reliable estimations than the conventional methods while achieving a
significant acceleration by orders of magnitude.

13361

