This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Domain Adaptive Detection with Network Stability Analysis
Wenzhang Zhou1,3∗ , Heng Fan2,∗ , Tiejian Luo1,3 , Libo Zhang1,3,†
1
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas, Denton, USA
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

Abstract
Domain adaptive detection aims to improve the generality of a detector, learned from the labeled source domain, on
the unlabeled target domain. In this work, drawing inspiration from the concept of stability from the control theory
that a robust system requires to remain consistent both externally and internally regardless of disturbances, we propose a novel framework that achieves unsupervised domain
adaptive detection through stability analysis. In specific, we
treat discrepancies between images and regions from different domains as disturbances, and introduce a novel simple
but effective Network Stability Analysis (NSA) framework
that considers various disturbances for domain adaptation.
Particularly, we explore three types of perturbations including heavy and light image-level disturbances and instancelevel disturbance. For each type, NSA performs external
consistency analysis on the outputs from raw and perturbed
images and/or internal consistency analysis on their features, using teacher-student models. By integrating NSA
into Faster R-CNN, we immediately achieve state-of-the-art
results. In particular, we set a new record of 52.7% mAP
on Cityscapes-to-FoggyCityscapes, showing the potential of
NSA for domain adaptive detection. It is worth noticing,
our NSA is designed for general purpose, and thus applicable to one-stage detection model (e.g., FCOS) besides the
adopted one, as shown by experiments. Code is released at
https://github.com/tiankongzhang/NSA.

1. Introduction
Benefited by deep neural networks [27, 49, 13], object detection has witnessed considerable progress in recent
years [28, 33, 43, 51, 62, 10]. Modern detectors are usually
trained and tested on large-scale annotated datasets [8, 34].
Despite excellence, they easily degenerate when applied to
∗ The two authors make equal contributions and are co-first authors.
† Corresponding author: Libo Zhang (libo@iscas.ac.cn).

…

HID

NSAHID

…

LID

ht
lig a nc e
b
tur
dis

heavy
disturbance

NSAInsD

in
dis s ta nc
tur
e
ba n
Original Image
ce

NSALID

…

InsD

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed NSA framework that applies
the specially designed NSAHID , NSALID and NSAInsD for different disturbances including HID, LID and InsD, respectively.

images from a new target domain, which heavily limits their
practical applications. To mitigate this, a naive solution is
to collect a dataset for the new target domain to re-train a
detector. Nevertheless, dataset creation is a nontrivial task
that needs a large amount of labor. Besides, a new target
domain could be arbitrary and it is impossible to collect
datasets for all new target domains. To deal with this, researchers explore unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
detection, aiming to transfer knowledge learned from an annotated source domain to an unlabeled target domain.
Existing UDA detection can be generally classified into
three families. The first branch focuses on aligning feature
distributions of different domains to reduce their gap using,
e.g., adversarial learning [5, 46, 64] and maximum mean
discrepancy [35, 36, 37]. Despite effectiveness, these approaches may suffer from three limitations. First, they usually require both source and target datasets for training, restraining their usage. Besides, they are problematic with local misalignment, principally because of unknown internal
distribution of feature space distribution due to the lack of
target domain annotations. Finally, a large amount of useful
information among samples for different domain datasets

6986

