This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-regulating Prompts: Foundational Model Adaptation without Forgetting
Muhammad Uzair Khattak1∗
Syed Talal Wasim1∗ Muzammal Naseer1
Salman Khan1,2 Ming-Hsuan Yang4,5 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,3
1

3

Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI 2 Australian National University
Linköping University 4 University of California, Merced 5 Google Research

Abstract
Prompt learning has emerged as an efficient alternative
for fine-tuning foundational models, such as CLIP, for various downstream tasks. Conventionally trained using the
task-specific objective, i.e., cross-entropy loss, prompts tend
to overfit downstream data distributions and find it challenging to capture task-agnostic general features from the
frozen CLIP. This leads to the loss of the model’s original
generalization capability. To address this issue, our work
introduces a self-regularization framework for prompting
called PromptSRC (Prompting with Self-regulating Constraints). PromptSRC guides the prompts to optimize for
both task-specific and task-agnostic general representations using a three-pronged approach by: (a) regulating prompted representations via mutual agreement maximization with the frozen model, (b) regulating with selfensemble of prompts over the training trajectory to encode
their complementary strengths, and (c) regulating with textual diversity to mitigate sample diversity imbalance with
the visual branch. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first regularization framework for prompt learning
that avoids overfitting by jointly attending to pre-trained
model features, the training trajectory during prompting,
and the textual diversity. PromptSRC explicitly steers
the prompts to learn a representation space that maximizes performance on downstream tasks without compromising CLIP generalization. We perform extensive experiments on 4 benchmarks where PromptSRC overall performs favorably well compared to the existing methods.
Our code and pre-trained models are publicly available at:
https://github.com/muzairkhattak/PromptSRC.

1. Introduction
Vision-Language (VL) models, such as CLIP [35] and
ALIGN [20], have demonstrated remarkable generalization capabilities for downstream tasks. These VL models
* Joint first authors.

uzair.khattak@mbzuai.ac.ae

are trained on large-scale web data with a contrastive loss,
which allows them to encode open-vocabulary concepts by
aligning pairs of images and texts in a shared embedding
space. The resulting model is suited for downstream tasks
such as open-vocabulary image recognition [23], object detection [11], and image segmentation [29].
Prompt learning has emerged as a more efficient alternative to fine-tuning large-scale models, as shown in recent studies [58, 59, 3, 17, 40, 28]. This approach introduces a few learnable prompt vectors to adapt models like
CLIP for downstream tasks while keeping the pre-trained
model weights fixed. However, since the prompts are optimized with respect to the task-specific objective [59], such
as the cross-entropy loss for ImageNet [6] classification, the
prompted model tends to overfit to the task-specific data
distribution as the training progresses. This can result in
the prompted model losing the original generalization capability of the frozen CLIP model towards new tasks. Therefore, learning prompts that can model both task-specific and
task-agnostic representations remain a major challenge for
adapting foundational VL models.
This work seeks to self-regulate prompts to address the
issue of prompt overfitting. To this end, we propose a selfregularizing framework that guides the prompts to jointly
optimize for both task-specific and task-agnostic general
representations using a three-pronged approach. a) Regulating via Mutual Agreement Maximization: We observe
that generalizable zero-shot knowledge is preserved within
frozen pre-trained VL model features but they lack taskspecific knowledge. In contrast, prompts achieve better
adaptation to a given task but with reduced generalizability to new tasks. Therefore, we propose to regulate learned
prompts by maximizing the agreement between prompted
and frozen VL model features while adapting them to the
downstream task. b) Regulating with the Self-ensemble:
In the early epochs, prompts act are not mature to capture
contextual information. As the training progresses, prompts
tend to become more task-specific. Therefore we deploy a
weighted prompt aggregation technique to prompts during
training to regulate them using their self-ensemble over the

15190

