This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-view Semantic Alignment for Livestreaming Product Recognition
Wenjie Yang*, Yiyi Chen*, Yan Li, Yanhua Cheng, Xudong Liu, Quan Chen†, Han Li
Kuaishou Technology
wenjie.yang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {chenyiyi,liyan26,chengyanhua,liuxudong,chenquan06,lihan08}@kuaishou.com

Live-streaming

Abstract

Livestreaming Product Recognition (LPR) [3, 9, 11] is
one of the significant machine learning application in the ecommerce industry. Its goal is to recognize products a salesperson presents in a live commerce clip through contentbased video-to-image retrieval. The real-time and accurate
recognition of livestreaming products can facilitate the online product recommendation, and thereby improve the purchasing efficiency of consumers.
The task of LPR involves two fundamental processes:
multimodal-based intended product identification and shop

clip #k

⋯

(d)
The toe of these boots is a little thinner for a delicate
look. The upper left corner of the toe is more western
style, and it is more inclined to match casual clothes,
and the leather is genuine leather.

Small inter-class variation
Ground-truth
Product

clip #N

(a)
You can buy a down jacket in my livestreaming shop.
I have a set of white duck down jackets with a limited
time and limited benefit price of 179, free shipping,
shipping insurance, and free trial for seven days.
Background Intent
product
product

Multimodal
Intent Product
Identification

t

1. Introduction

⋯

uc
od
Pr l
o p va
S h t r ie
Re

Live commerce is the act of selling products online
through live streaming. The customer’s diverse demands for
online products introduce more challenges to Livestreaming Product Recognition. Previous works have primarily
focused on fashion clothing data or utilize single-modal input, which does not reflect the real-world scenario where
multimodal data from various categories are present. In
this paper, we present LPR4M, a large-scale multimodal
dataset that covers 34 categories, comprises 3 modalities
(image, video, and text), and is 50× larger than the largest
publicly available dataset. LPR4M contains diverse videos
and noise modality pairs while exhibiting a long-tailed distribution, resembling real-world problems. Moreover, a
cRoss-vIew semantiC alignmEnt (RICE) model is proposed
to learn discriminative instance features from the image
and video views of the products. This is achieved through
instance-level contrastive learning and cross-view patchlevel feature propagation. A novel Patch Feature Reconstruction loss is proposed to penalize the semantic misalignment between cross-view patches. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of RICE and provide
insights into the importance of dataset diversity and expressivity. The dataset and code are available at https:
//github.com/adxcreative/RICE.

clip #1

(c)

(b)

Figure 1. The pipeline of LPR. A livestreaming consists of many
clips introducing different products. We show two clip examples
with ASR text in (a) and (d). In (b), the intended product refers to
the product the salesperson is introducing, and the other products
on the screen are indicated as the distracted background products.
(c) presents a shop with hundreds of images, some with subtle visual differences called small inter-class variations. The LPR aims
to identify the clip’s intended product using the ASR text prompt,
then retrieve the ground-truth product from the shop images.

product retrieval. This task poses significant challenges in
real-world scenarios, including (1) the need to distinguish
intended products from the cluttered background products
in a livestreaming frame, exemplified in Fig. 1 (b), (2) the
requirement for models to capture sufficient fine-grained
features to match the ground-truth (GT) image accurately
in the shop, where there are many images with subtle visual
nuances, (3) the heterogeneous video-to-image and crossdomain livestream-to-shop problem, and (4) the appearance changes of products in the livestreaming domain due
to articulated deformations, occlusions, diverse background
clutters, and significant illumination variations, making it
a highly intricate task to match the clip to the GT image in
the shop. Various datasets have emerged in the computer vision community to study this task, including AsymNet [3],
WAB1 , and MovingFashion [9]. However, AsymNet and
MovingFashion lack crucial text modal, which provides essential auxiliary information for identifying intended products. Furthermore, the data scale of WAB is relatively small,
with only 70K pairs, and only provides fashion clothing
data, diverging from the real-world scenario.
In order to narrow the gap between existing datasets

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

1 https://tianchi.aliyun.com/competition/entrance/231772/information

13404

