This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Simple Baselines for Interactive Video Retrieval with Questions and Answers
Kaiqu Liang
Princeton University

Samuel Albanie
University of Cambridge

kl2471@princeton.edu

sma71@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
To date, the majority of video retrieval systems have been
optimized for a “single-shot” scenario in which the user
submits a query in isolation, ignoring previous interactions
with the system. Recently, there has been renewed interest in interactive systems to enhance retrieval, but existing
approaches are complex and deliver limited gains in performance. In this work, we revisit this topic and propose several
simple yet effective baselines for interactive video retrieval
via question-answering. We employ a VideoQA model to
simulate user interactions and show that this enables the productive study of the interactive retrieval task without access
to ground truth dialogue data. Experiments on MSR-VTT,
MSVD, and AVSD show that our framework using questionbased interaction significantly improves the performance
of text-based video retrieval systems. Code is available at
https://github.com/kevinliang888/IVR-QA-baselines.

Questioner

the cartoon show for kids

VideoQA

What is the character?
squidward
What is the squidward doing?
talking on phone

Figure 1: Interactive video retrieval with questions and
answers. We revisit interactive video retrieval with a simple framework that employs Video Question Answering
(VideoQA) to simulate user responses, sidestepping the need
to collect dialogue data for development and evaluation.

1. Introduction
Given the surging popularity of video content, there is a
pressing need to develop tools that enable users to search
video collections accurately and efficiently. The text-video retrieval task aims to meet this need by ranking videos among
a gallery according to how well they match a given text query.
This task has seen tremendous progress in recent years, benefiting from large-scale pretraining datasets [47, 41], multimodal architectures [46, 38, 17] and robust optimisation
strategies for cross-modal representation learning [45].
Much of the work to date has focused on a “single-shot”
scenario in which a user submits a single query in isolation.
While this may be applicable in some scenarios, there are
many in which it would be useful to allow refinements to
the initial ranking (particularly when the pool of valid responses to the initial query is large). To a large degree, this
focus single-shot systems can be explained by practicality:
obtaining the data required to develop and evaluate interactive retrieval systems is extremely challenging. User studies
that engage individuals in interactive sessions are difficult
to scale, while production data from product deployments is

challenging to adapt to the development of new systems.
Although it has received less attention, the topic of interactive retrieval is far from new—it has been studied for more
than two decades [53]. Following an initial query, various
mechanisms have been offered to the user to enable them
to refine results: relevance scores [53] (corresponding to
highly relevant, irrelevant, etc.), relative attributes [29] (e.g.
“shiner than these”), natural language descriptions [19, 57]
(e.g. “unlike the given result, the one I want has fur on the
back”) and question-answer dialog [13, 43] (e.g. “Q: are
there any people in the shot?” A: No”).
Among dialogue-based approaches, the recent work of
Madasu et al. [43] highlighted the potential of questionanswering with free-form text questions to enhance video
retrieval performance. At the heart of this approach is a
question-generating system that probes the user for more
details about their desired target in order to refine the retrieval ranking. In such a framework, user responses can
be simulated by employing a question-answering model to
synthesise plausible answers to the questions (Fig. 1). Our

11091

