This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling Coarse-to-Fine Semantic Matching Knowledge
for Weakly Supervised 3D Visual Grounding
Zehan Wang*

Haifeng Huang* Yang Zhao Linjun Li
Yichen Zhu
Aoxiong Yin Zhou Zhao†
Zhejiang University

Xize Cheng

{wangzehan01, huanghaifeng, zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
3D visual grounding involves finding a target object in a
3D scene that corresponds to a given sentence query. Although many approaches have been proposed and achieved
impressive performance, they all require dense objectsentence pair annotations in 3D point clouds, which are
both time-consuming and expensive. To address the problem that fine-grained annotated data is difficult to obtain,
we propose to leverage weakly supervised annotations to
learn the 3D visual grounding model, i.e., only coarse
scene-sentence correspondences are used to learn objectsentence links. To accomplish this, we design a novel semantic matching model that analyzes the semantic similarity between object proposals and sentences in a coarse-tofine manner. Specifically, we first extract object proposals and coarsely select the top-K candidates based on feature and class similarity matrices. Next, we reconstruct the
masked keywords of the sentence using each candidate one
by one, and the reconstructed accuracy finely reflects the semantic similarity of each candidate to the query. Additionally, we distill the coarse-to-fine semantic matching knowledge into a typical two-stage 3D visual grounding model,
which reduces inference costs and improves performance by
taking full advantage of the well-studied structure of the existing architectures. We conduct extensive experiments on
ScanRefer, Nr3D, and Sr3D, which demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
3D Visual grounding (3DVG) refers to the process of localizing an object in a scene based on a natural language
sentence. The 3DVG task has recently gained attention
due to its numerous applications. Despite the significant
progress made in this area [3, 4, 40, 41, 17, 38], all these
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. (a). 3D visual grounding aims to find the objectsentence pair from the whole scene. The fully supervised setting
requires all the dense ground-truth object-sentence labels for training, while the weakly supervised method only needs the coarse
scene-sentence annotations. (b). Coarse-to-Fine Semantic Matching Model (bottom) analyzes the matching score of each proposal
to the sentence, and the semantic matching knowledge is distilled
to the two-stage 3DVG architecture (upper).

approaches require bounding box annotations for each sentence query, which are laborious and expensive to obtain.
For example, it takes an average of 22.3 minutes to annotate a scene in the ScanNet-v2 dataset [6]. Thus, we focus
on weakly supervised training for 3DVG, which only requires scene-sentence pairs for training. This problem is
meaningful and realistic since obtaining scene-level labels
is much easier and can be scaled effectively.
However, weakly supervised 3DVG poses two challenges. Firstly, a 3D point cloud can contain numerous objects of various categories, and a sentence query may contain multiple objects besides the target object to aid in localization. Without knowledge of the ground-truth objectsentence pair, it is difficult to learn to link the sentence to

2662

