This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DataDAM: Efficient Dataset Distillation with Attention Matching
Ahmad Sajedi1 ,* Samir Khaki1∗ , Ehsan Amjadian2,3 , Lucy Z. Liu2 , Yuri A. Lawryshyn1 ,
and Konstantinos N. Plataniotis1
1
2
3
University of Toronto
Royal Bank of Canada (RBC)
University of Waterloo
{ahmad.sajedi,samir.khaki}@mail.utoronto.ca
Code: https://github.com/DataDistillation/DataDAM

Abstract
Researchers have long tried to minimize training costs
in deep learning while maintaining strong generalization
across diverse datasets. Emerging research on dataset distillation aims to reduce training costs by creating a small
synthetic set that contains the information of a larger real
dataset and ultimately achieves test accuracy equivalent to
a model trained on the whole dataset. Unfortunately, the
synthetic data generated by previous methods are not guaranteed to distribute and discriminate as well as the original
training data, and they incur significant computational costs.
Despite promising results, there still exists a significant performance gap between models trained on condensed synthetic sets and those trained on the whole dataset. In this
paper, we address these challenges using efficient Dataset
Distillation with Attention Matching (DataDAM), achieving
state-of-the-art performance while reducing training costs.
Specifically, we learn synthetic images by matching the spatial attention maps of real and synthetic data generated by
different layers within a family of randomly initialized neural networks. Our method outperforms the prior methods
on several datasets, including CIFAR10/100, TinyImageNet,
ImageNet-1K, and subsets of ImageNet-1K across most of
the settings, and achieves improvements of up to 6.5% and
4.1% on CIFAR100 and ImageNet-1K, respectively. We also
show that our high-quality distilled images have practical
benefits for downstream applications, such as continual learning and neural architecture search.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been highly successful in various fields,
including computer vision and natural language processing,
due to the use of large-scale datasets and modern Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) [12, 19, 14, 21].
* Equal contribution

Figure 1: (a) Data distribution of the distilled images on the CIFAR10 dataset with 50 images per class (IPC50) for CAFE [43]
and DataDAM. (b) Performance comparison with state-of-the-art
methods on the CIFAR10 dataset for varying IPCs.

However, extensive infrastructure resources for training,
hyperparameter tuning, and architectural searches make
it challenging to reduce computational costs while maintaining comparable performance. Two primary approaches
to address this issue are model-centric and data-centric.
Model-centric methods involve model compression techniques [20, 47, 1, 49, 35], while data-centric methods concentrate on constructing smaller datasets with enough information for training, which is the focus of this paper. A
traditional data-centric approach is the coreset selection
method, wherein we select a representative subset of an
original dataset [33, 8, 4, 37, 40]; however, these methods have limitations as they rely on heuristics to generate a
coarse approximation of the whole dataset, which may lead
to a suboptimal solution for downstream tasks like image

17097

