This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DS-Fusion: Artistic Typography via Discriminated and Stylized Diffusion
Maham Tanveer, Yizhi Wang, Ali Mahdavi-Amiri, Hao Zhang
Simon Fraser University
[mta122, ywa439, amahdavi, haoz]@sfu.ca

UNI

AFE L

ORN W NE

SLAND ME MAID

NAKE

MP

ASE

Figure 1. Single-letter artistic typographies generated fully automatically by our network. Each result is produced from a prompt consisting
of a word, e.g., “unicorn”, and a letter in the word, e.g., “C”, to be stylized based on the semantics of the word and the input font.

Abstract
We introduce a novel method to automatically generate
an artistic typography by stylizing one or more letter fonts
to visually convey the semantics of an input word, while
ensuring that the output remains readable. To address an
assortment of challenges with our task at hand including
conflicting goals (artistic stylization vs. legibility), lack of
ground truth, and immense search space, our approach utilizes large language models to bridge texts and visual images for stylization and build an unsupervised generative
model with a diffusion model backbone. Specifically, we
employ the denoising generator in Latent Diffusion Model
(LDM), with the key addition of a CNN-based discriminator
to adapt the input style onto the input text. The discriminator uses rasterized images of a given letter/word font as real
samples and the output of the denoising generator as fake
samples. Our model is coined DS-Fusion for discriminated
and stylized diffusion. We showcase the quality and versatility of our method through numerous examples, qualitative and quantitative evaluation, and ablation studies. User
studies comparing to strong baselines including CLIPDraw,
DALL-E 2, Stable Diffusion, as well as artist-crafted typographies, demonstrate strong performance of DS-Fusion.
Code is available at https://ds-fusion.github.io/.

1. Introduction
We explore the artistic-creative potential of automated
generative processes modeled by modern neural networks.

Specifically, we are interested in the generation of artistic
typography. According to Wikipedia, typography is the art
and technique of arranging type to make written language
legible, readable, and appealing when displayed. Artistic
typography represents a style of typography that goes beyond the basic function of conveying information through
text and seeks to create a visual impact on the reader. It involves using typography as a form of artistic expression and
allows designers to create eye-catching typographic designs
that express a message visually and creatively.
In this paper, we aim to automatically generate an artistic
typography by stylizing one or more letter fonts, to visually
convey the semantics of an input word, while ensuring that
the output typography is readable; see Figure 1 for such examples referred to as “word-as-image” [3, 27, 34, 9]. It is
an arduous task to combine semantics and text in a legible
and artistic manner for several reasons. First, the goal of
incorporating the aesthetics of a style in an abstract and creative way into a letter or word can conflict with the desire
to maintain readability of the original word/letter. Second,
what a good artistic typography is can be a subjective matter. Without a universally accepted “ground truth”, a viable
learning approach will have to be unsupervised. Last but
not least, semantics can be depicted in numerous ways. For
instance, to indicate the presence of a lion, one can use the
entire face, the tail, or the whole animal. There is a vast
range of lion images, icons, and shapes that are accessible,
making it nearly impossible to manually search, deform,
and substitute them. While experienced artists and designers are capable of producing beautiful semantic typography,

374

