This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What does CLIP know about a red circle?
Visual pr mpt engineering for VLMs
Aleksandar Shtedritski Christian Rupprecht Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
{suny, chrisr, vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Large-scale Vision-Language Models, such as CLIP,
learn powerful image-text representations that have found
numerous applications, from zero-shot classification to textto-image generation. Despite that, their capabilities for
solving novel discriminative tasks via prompting fall behind
those of large language models, such as GPT-3. Here we explore the idea of visual prompt engineering for solving computer vision tasks beyond classification by editing in image
space instead of text. In particular, we discover an emergent ability of CLIP, where, by simply drawing a red circle around an object, we can direct the model’s attention to
that region, while also maintaining global information. We
show the power of this simple approach by achieving stateof-the-art in zero-shot referring expressions comprehension
and strong performance in keypoint localization tasks. Finally, we draw attention to some potential ethical concerns
of large language-vision models.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT-2/3 [7, 39]
and ChatGPT [1] have demonstrated surprising emerging
behaviours. For example, these models can perform language translation without being explicitly trained for it, in
a zero-shot manner. This can be partially explained by
the fact that occurrences of the desired behaviours, such as
translating between two languages, naturally occur in their
enormous training corpus, which is, essentially, the Internet.
Interesting emergent behaviours have been observed in
large Vision-Language Models (VLMs) like CLIP [38] too.
For example, CLIP can be used for zero-shot classification by checking the compatibility of a given image with
prompts such as “an image of a X”, where X is one of a set
of class hypotheses to be tested.
Emergent behaviours are elicited by supplying suitably
crafted inputs to the VLMs, often called prompts. As in the
example above, researchers have mostly focused on engi-

The cow that is the smallest

The white little lamb

right eye

mouth

nose

forehead

Figure 1: Visual Prompt Engineering. We draw multiple
annotations over an image and have CLIP choose the correct
one given a caption. Here we show predictions for the given
expressions. Top: Examples from RefCOCOg on referring
expressions detection. Bottom: Example from SPair71k on
keypoint localization.

neering textual prompts, manipulating the textual input of
the model. This approach is inspired by LLMs, where manipulating the textual modality is the only available option.
However, VLMs are inherently multimodal and offer the
possibility of manipulating both modalities, textual and visual. While the textual modality is the natural choice for
expressing semantics, the visual modality can be better for
expressing geometric properties such as location.
In this paper, we thus explore visual prompt engineering 1 . We do so with two goals. The first goal is to contribute one more practical tool for extracting useful information from VLMs in a zero-shot manner. We demonstrate this by obtaining state-of-the-art zero-shot results in
referring expressions comprehension by engineering visual
prompts. The second goal is to characterise interesting and
1 Note the difference between visual prompt tuning, a setting previously
explored, where the prompts are task-specific learnable tokens, and visual
prompt engineering, where we apply a fixed augmentation in pixel space.

11987

