This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVQNet: Sparse Voxel-Adjacent Query Network
for 4D Spatio-Temporal LiDAR Semantic Segmentation
Xuechao Chen1 * Shuangjie Xu2 * Xiaoyi Zou3 Tongyi Cao3 Dit-Yan Yeung2 † Lu Fang1 †
1
Tsinghua University 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 Deeproute.ai

Abstract
LiDAR-based semantic perception tasks are critical yet
challenging for autonomous driving. Due to the motion of
objects and static/dynamic occlusion, temporal information
plays an essential role in reinforcing perception by enhancing and completing single-frame knowledge. Previous approaches either directly stack historical frames to the current frame or build a 4D spatio-temporal neighborhood using KNN, which duplicates computation and hinders realtime performance. Based on our observation that stacking
all the historical points would damage performance due
to a large amount of redundant and misleading information, we propose the Sparse Voxel-Adjacent Query Network
(SVQNet) for 4D LiDAR semantic segmentation. To take
full advantage of the historical frames high-efficiently, we
shunt the historical points into two groups with reference to
the current points. One is the Voxel-Adjacent Neighborhood
carrying local enhancing knowledge. The other is the Historical Context completing the global knowledge. Then we
propose new modules to select and extract the instructive
features from the two groups. Our SVQNet achieves stateof-the-art performance in LiDAR semantic segmentation of
the SemanticKITTI benchmark and the nuScenes dataset.

1. Introduction
Serving as a robust 3D perception solution, LiDARbased perception is under enthusiastic exploration by researchers, among which 3D LiDAR semantic segmentation,
aiming at assigning a category label to each point in the
whole LiDAR scene at the semantic level, is of great significance in autonomous driving and robotics. Recently, a large
number of literature [33, 43, 45, 28, 13, 19] concentrates on
semantic segmentation within a single frame. However, the
information in a single frame is affected by multiple factors:
1) occlusion problems caused by obstacles or the movement of ego-car, leading to incomplete information of the
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors

Historical
Context

Voxel‐Adjacent

Voxel‐Adjacent
Neighborhood
Current frame Points
Voxel‐Adjacent Historical Points
Historical Context Points

Figure 1. 4D spatio-temporal LiDAR points for a truck. We shunt
the historical points into 1) Voxel-Adjacent points that lie in the
voxel containing current frame points; 2) The remaining points
named Historical Context points whose features will be adaptively
fused to complete the missing features in the current frame.

occluded objects; and 2) ambiguity between similar point
clusters, for example, the fence looks similar to one side
of a big truck, which severely degrades the performance of
single-frame based LiDAR semantic segmentation.
To eliminate the distortion within the single frame, the
use of sequential knowledge has attracted widespread attention [24, 44, 42, 1, 39] as the LiDAR continuously transmits and receives sensory data. Therefore, 4D Spatiotemporal information (LiDAR video) is increasingly playing an essential role in reinforcing perception by enhancing
and completing single-frame knowledge. Classic temporal
methods [1, 48] directly stack frames in the last few timestamps by adding additional channel t to the coordinates
xyz of each point, which is quite straightforward but superimposing all historical points without any selection brings
redundancy, masking the useful temporal knowledge and
weakens the benefits of the time series.
To model spatio-temporal relationship instead of stacking all frames, approaches based on KNN or radius neighbors query [21, 4, 31, 37] apply point-wise nearest neighbor
search methods to extract instructive features across time
and space. However, these approaches will not only fail
when the target object is moving at high speed but also bear
the high complexity of searching algorithms that lead to the

8569

