This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Grounded Entity-Landmark Adaptive Pre-training
for Vision-and-Language Navigation
Yibo Cui1,2 , Liang Xie∗1,2 , Yakun Zhang1,2 , Meishan Zhang3 , Ye Yan1,2 , Erwei Yin∗1,2
1
Defense Innovation Institute, Chinese Academy of Military Science
2
Tianjin Artificial Intelligence Innovation Center 3 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
https://github.com/CSir1996/VLN-GELA

Abstract
Cross-modal alignment is one key challenge for Visionand-Language Navigation (VLN). Most existing studies
concentrate on mapping the global instruction or single
sub-instruction to the corresponding trajectory. However,
another critical problem of achieving fine-grained alignment at the entity level is seldom considered. To address this
problem, we propose a novel Grounded Entity-Landmark
Adaptive (GELA) pre-training paradigm for VLN tasks. To
achieve the adaptive pre-training paradigm, we first introduce grounded entity-landmark human annotations into the
Room-to-Room (R2R) dataset, named GEL-R2R. Additionally, we adopt three grounded entity-landmark adaptive pretraining objectives: 1) entity phrase prediction, 2) landmark bounding box prediction, and 3) entity-landmark semantic alignment, which explicitly supervise the learning of
fine-grained cross-modal alignment between entity phrases
and environment landmarks. Finally, we validate our model
on two downstream benchmarks: VLN with descriptive instructions (R2R) and dialogue instructions (CVDN). The
comprehensive experiments show that our GELA model
achieves state-of-the-art results on both tasks, demonstrating its effectiveness and generalizability.

1. Introduction
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) [3] is an important task in the Embodied Vision community, which has
gained great attention [66, 40, 50]. It aims to ask an agent to
reach the target location inside photo-realistic environments
by following natural language instructions. In VLN, crossmodal alignment is one critical step to accurately make the
action decision for the agent [60], since matching the mentioned landmarks (objects or scenes) with visual observations can help the comprehensive understanding of the en∗ Corresponding author.

Instruction: Go past the table tennis table, and turn right. Head straight
down the hall until you reach a circle design on the floor. Wait there.

I find the table
tennis table.

Figure 1. An illustration of an embodied agent navigating in a
3D photo-realistic environment. The agent is expected to navigate based on environment landmarks that correspond to the entity
phrase in the instruction.

vironments and instructions [60, 15, 68]. However, most of
the available datasets could only provide the coarse-grained
text-image alignment signals [15], i.e., instruction-level correspondences to the complete trajectories, where finer ones
are required to learn the cross-modality alignment for wellperformed navigation [18, 67, 47, 43, 57].
A large part of previous works [66, 11, 40, 50] has concentrated on the global alignment of instructions and trajectories, which matches instructions to the overall temporal
visual trajectory via reinforcement learning [60], auxiliary
reasoning [66], or transformer-based matching pre-training
[7, 50, 40]. Others [18, 67, 15] have attempted to align
sub-instructions and sub-trajectories locally. At this granularity, the agents are designed to segment long instruction
[67, 18] and determine which sub-instruction to focus on.
To guide local cross-modal alignment, He et al. [15] introduced the Landmark-RxR dataset by human-annotating
sub-instructions and sub-trajectories alignment. They ad-

12043

