This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Task Learning with Knowledge Distillation for Dense Prediction
Yangyang Xu1
1

Yibo Yang3

Lefei Zhang1,2 *

Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan, China
3
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
yangyangxu@whu.edu.cn, yibo.yang@kaust.edu.sa, zhanglefei@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
While multi-task learning (MTL) has become an attractive topic, its training usually poses more difﬁculties than
the single-task case. How to successfully apply knowledge distillation into MTL to improve training efﬁciency
and model performance is still a challenging problem. In
this paper, we introduce a new knowledge distillation procedure with an alternative match for MTL of dense prediction based on two simple design principles. First, for memory and training efﬁciency, we use a single strong multitask model as a teacher during training instead of multiple
teachers, as widely adopted in existing studies. Second, we
employ a less sensitive Cauchy-Schwarz (CS) divergence
instead of the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence and propose a CS distillation loss accordingly. With the less sensitive divergence, our knowledge distillation with an alternative match is applied for capturing inter-task and intratask information between the teacher model and the student
model of each task, thereby learning more ”dark knowledge” for effective distillation. We conducted extensive experiments on dense prediction datasets, including NYUD-v2
and PASCAL-Context, for multiple vision tasks, such as semantic segmentation, human parts segmentation, depth estimation, surface normal estimation, and boundary detection. The results show that our proposed method decidedly
improves model performance and the practical inference efﬁciency.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) has become an increasingly
popular approach in the ﬁeld of computer vision, where
the objective is to train a single model to perform multiple
tasks simultaneously. MTL can provide several advantages
over traditional single-task learning, including improved efﬁciency and generalization. First, the shared feature repre* Corresponding author.

21550

sentations can be learned more efﬁciently than task-speciﬁc
representations, reducing the overall training time compared to training multiple models independently. Second,
the shared feature representations learned across tasks can
capture more generalizable information in the data, leading
to improved performance on all tasks. For those reasons,
the MTL approach has been used extensively in various machine learning problems, such as natural language processing [11], computer vision [3] and speech recognition [4].
Speciﬁcally, in this paper, we focus on dense (pixel-wise)
prediction vision tasks [49, 15, 23, 41, 20, 21, 29, 48], such
as semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, depth estimation, surface normal estimation, saliency estimation,
object detection and boundary detection from images.
A march of works [32, 46, 9, 3, 52, 2, 56, 53] aims
to develop novel MTL architectures and construct efﬁcient shared representation in the multi-taskdense prediction ﬁeld, which leverages the encoder-decoder architecture. In these frameworks, an encoder is considered to generate a shared feature and then use a decoder to perform
multi-task of dense predictions. In the pursuit of better performance, current MTL models are often designed to be
deeper and wider, resulting in increasingly larger models.
[3, 56] and [53, 24] demonstrate that better performance can
be obtained by utilizing a larger backbone network. However, such a heavy model can be more demanding for computation and storage. It has been challenging to design an
effective MTL framework that can learn these tasks efﬁciently. In this paper, we pose and study the question, how
can the knowledge from a large size MTL model be transferred to a small MTL model without increasing its size?
Recently, knowledge distillation (KD) [13] has been explored as a method to improve the MTL of dense prediction
tasks, such as semantic segmentation, depth estimation, and
surface normal prediction. Some studies [30, 12, 16, 1]
leverage the unique logit of each task to provide taskspeciﬁc information to the student model during knowledge transfer. The essence of knowledge distillation lies

