This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prior-guided Source-free Domain Adaptation for Human Pose Estimation
Dripta S. Raychaudhuri1,2∗ Calvin-Khang Ta1 Arindam Dutta1 Rohit Lal1 Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1
1
2
University of California, Riverside
AWS AI Labs
{drayc001@, cta003@, adutt020@, rlal011@, amitrc@ece.}ucr.edu

Labeled source dataset

Source model

Abstract
Domain adaptation methods for 2D human pose estimation typically require continuous access to the source data
during adaptation, which can be challenging due to privacy, memory, or computational constraints. To address
this limitation, we focus on the task of source-free domain
adaptation for pose estimation, where a source model must
adapt to a new target domain using only unlabeled target
data. Although recent advances have introduced source-free
methods for classification tasks, extending them to the regression task of pose estimation is non-trivial. In this paper,
we present Prior-guided Self-training (POST), a pseudolabeling approach that builds on the popular Mean Teacher
framework to compensate for the distribution shift. POST
leverages prediction-level and feature-level consistency between a student and teacher model against certain image
transformations. In the absence of source data, POST utilizes a human pose prior that regularizes the adaptation process by directing the model to generate more accurate and
anatomically plausible pose pseudo-labels. Despite being
simple and intuitive, our framework can deliver significant
performance gains compared to applying the source model
directly to the target data, as demonstrated in our extensive
experiments and ablation studies. In fact, our approach
achieves comparable performance to recent state-of-the-art
methods that use source data for adaptation.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation is a fundamental task in computer vision that involves determining the precise locations
of keypoints, such as joints, on a human body in an image or
video [1]. The growing need for pose estimation in various
applications such as action recognition [2], human-computer
interaction [3], and video surveillance [4] has driven the
rapid development of highly accurate deep learning tech* Currently at AWS AI Labs. Work done while the author was at UCR.

Pose co-ordinates

Auxiliary pose dataset

Train parametric prior
on set of plausible poses

Images

Adaptation

Unlabeled target dataset

Prior drives adaptation in
absence of source images

Figure 1. Problem setup. Existing UDA methods for pose estimation rely on a labeled source dataset while adapting to an unlabeled
target dataset. However, privacy concerns surrounding the use of
personally identifiable information in these labeled datasets, as well
as the significant storage and computational requirements, can limit
access to such data. Hence, our work focuses on source-free UDA
of pose estimation models.

niques. However, the challenge of obtaining large annotated
datasets for training, compounded with the susceptibility to
a performance decline in the face of data distribution shifts
still poses limitations for current pose estimation models.
To overcome these limitations, recent studies have focused on unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) of pose
estimators [5, 6]. UDA allows for transferring a pose estimation model trained on a source domain, where labeled
data is available, to a target domain where labeled data is
unavailable. Despite improved and robust pose estimation,
the requirement of simultaneous access to both source and
target domains during adaptation hinders real-world implementation. For instance, the labeled source data may not
be accessible post-deployment due to privacy or proprietary
issues. This is particularly relevant for human pose datasets,
which contain personally identifiable information (PII) [7].
Furthermore, adaptation using the entire source data might

14996

