This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Integrating Boxes and Masks: A Multi-Object Framework for
Unified Visual Tracking and Segmentation

1

Yuanyou Xu1,2†, Zongxin Yang1 , Yi Yang1‡
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University, China 2 Baidu Research, China
{yoxu, zongxinyang, yangyics}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Tracking any given object(s) spatially and temporally is
a common purpose in Visual Object Tracking (VOT) and
Video Object Segmentation (VOS). Joint tracking and segmentation have been attempted in some studies but they often lack full compatibility of both box and mask in initialization and prediction, and mainly focus on single-object
scenarios. To address these limitations, this paper proposes a Multi-object Mask-box Integrated framework for
unified Tracking and Segmentation, dubbed MITS. Firstly,
the unified identification module is proposed to support
both box and mask reference for initialization, where detailed object information is inferred from boxes or directly
retained from masks. Additionally, a novel pinpoint box
predictor is proposed for accurate multi-object box prediction, facilitating target-oriented representation learning.
All target objects are processed simultaneously from encoding to propagation and decoding, as a unified pipeline for
VOT and VOS. Experimental results show MITS achieves
state-of-the-art performance on both VOT and VOS benchmarks. Notably, MITS surpasses the best prior VOT competitor by around 6% on the GOT-10k test set, and significantly improves the performance of box initialization
on VOS benchmarks. The code is available at https:
//github.com/yoxu515/MITS.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking (VOT) [57, 23, 32, 33] and video
object segmentation (VOS) [63, 84, 79, 37] are two critical
tasks in computer vision. Visual object tracking involves
identifying and tracking specific object(s) in a video stream
over time. Video object segmentation aims to segment given
object(s) in a video sequence and separate it from the background. Both tasks are essential for applications such as
video surveillance and autonomous driving.
† Yuanyou Xu worked on this at his Baidu Research internship.
‡ Yi Yang is the corresponding author.

A

Separate

Reference
Mask

Box2Mask
Model

Ensemble

VOS Model

Bounding
Box

Reference
Boxes Separate

Multi-Object Integrated
Tracking and Segmentation
(MITS, Ours)

VOT Model

B

VOS Methods for VOS: A-C
VOS Methods for VOT: B-A-C-D

Bounding
Box

Ensemble

C

Predicted
Mask

Box2Mask
Model

Predicted
Boxes
D

MITS for VOS: A-C
MITS for VOT: B-D

VOT Methods for VOT: B-D
VOT Methods for VOS: A-B-D-C

Figure 1. We propose a Multi-object Mask-box Integrated framework for unified Tracking and Segmentation (MITS). Compared
with VOT or VOS methods, our framework integrates both boxes
and masks for initialization and prediction in a unified manner,
without any extra model for box-to-mask conversion, and supports
processing multiple objects simultaneously for VOT and VOS.

In VOT, object sizes and positions are indicated with
boxes as box representation, while in VOS object shapes
and contours are marked with pixel-level masks as mask
representation. Despite their differences, VOT and VOS
share similarities. Both tasks require the ability to identify
and locate the target object in a video stream accurately in
spatial dimension, and to be robust against challenges such
as occlusion and fast motion in temporal dimension.
In view of the similarity, tracking and segmentation may
have unified multi-knowledge representations [90] and have
been explored jointly in some works. 1) Unification. A
straightforward solution is to perform conversion between
boxes and masks to utilize VOT methods on VOS or VOS
methods on VOT. A mask can be converted to a box easily,
but generating a mask from a box is hard. Some methods
were proposed to address the box-to-mask estimation problem [47, 88, 101]. However, separate but not unified models
hinder end-to-end training and are inconvenient to manage
in practical applications. 2) Compatibility. Several studies
have attempted to unify these two tasks into a single frame-

9738

