This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Monocular 3D Object Detection with Bounding Box Denoising in 3D by Perceiver
Xianpeng Liu1 *, Ce Zheng2 , Kelvin Cheng1 , Nan Xue3 , Guo-Jun Qi4,5 , Tianfu Wu1
1
North Carolina State University 2 University of Central Florida 3 Ant Group
4
OPPO Seattle Research Center, USA 5 Westlake University
{xliu59, kbcheng, tianfu wu}@ncsu.edu; cezheng@knights.ucf.edu;
xuenan@ieee.org; guojunq@gmail.com

https://xianpeng919.github.io/monoxiver

Abstract
The main challenge of monocular 3D object detection is
the accurate localization of 3D center. Motivated by a new
and strong observation that this challenge can be remedied
by a 3D-space local-grid search scheme in an ideal case,
we propose a stage-wise approach, which combines the information flow from 2D-to-3D (3D bounding box proposal
generation with a single 2D image) and 3D-to-2D (proposal
verification by denoising with 3D-to-2D contexts) in a topdown manner. Specifically, we first obtain initial proposals
from off-the-shelf backbone monocular 3D detectors. Then,
we generate a 3D anchor space by local-grid sampling from
the initial proposals. Finally, we perform 3D bounding
box denoising at the 3D-to-2D proposal verification stage.
To effectively learn discriminative features for denoising
highly overlapped proposals, this paper presents a method
of using the Perceiver I/O model [20] to fuse the 3D-to-2D
geometric information and the 2D appearance information.
With the encoded latent representation of a proposal, the
verification head is implemented with a self-attention module. Our method, named as MonoXiver, is generic and can
be easily adapted to any backbone monocular 3D detectors.
Experimental results on the well-established KITTI dataset
and the challenging large-scale Waymo dataset show that
MonoXiver consistently achieves improvement with limited
computation overhead.

1. Introduction
Detecting and locating objects in 3D using a single image, known as monocular 3D object detection, is a highly
challenging task due to its ill-posed nature. However, the
practical applications of low-cost system setups in fields
such as self-driving cars and robotic manipulation have led
* Work partially conducted during an internship of X. Liu at OPPO Seattle Research Center, USA in 2022.

to the development of robust monocular 3D object detection systems, making it a prominent research topic in the
computer vision community.
Although significant progress has been achieved in this
field [37], accurate 3D center localization remains a major challenge for state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods as indicated in [39]. Most of these methods follow a bottom-up
paradigm, where a single 2D image is used to directly predict 3D bounding boxes (2D-to-3D) with or without extra
information (e.g. LiDAR). However, due to the inherent
depth ambiguity of this task, relying solely on bottom-up
2D-to-3D paradigms may not be enough to completely address this challenge.
In this paper, we observe that bottom-up 2D-to-3D predicted 3D bounding boxes are able to provide informative priors for monocular 3D object detection. We propose to leverage these contexts to improve detection performance in a top-down manner. Our proposed approach is
motivated by a strong empirical upper-bound analysis with
SOTA bottom-up monocular 3D object detectors.
The empirical upper-bound experiment. We analyze vehicle detection performance on the well-established KITTI
validation set [5–7]. We start with the recently proposed
MonoCon [30] because it achieves SOTA performance with
a very simple design. By using MonoCon’s prediction results as bottom-up 3D anchors, we sample 3D bounding box
proposals along both the x and z axes (i.e., in the bird-eye’s
view) with a simple strategy. First, we define a 2D local grid
with a range (e.g., 2 meter) and a stride (e.g., 0.1 meter).
For each bottom-up anchor, with its center located at the
local-grid origin, we replicate the anchor at each grid vertex
without changing its size, orientation and prediction score.
We use all the generated 3D bounding boxes as top-down
proposals and compute the empirical upper-bound of 3D detection performance by searching for the best match within
top-down proposals for each ground-truth 3D object bounding box based on 3D Intersection-over-Union (3D IoU).
A strong observation from the experiment. As shown

6436

