This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MixPath: A Unified Approach for One-shot Neural Architecture Search
Xiangxiang Chu

Shun Lu

Xudong Li

Bo Zhang

cxxgtxy@gmail.com, lushun19s@ict.ac.cn, lixudong16@mails.ucas.edu.cn, zhangboyd@qq.com

Abstract
Blending multiple convolutional kernels is proved advantageous in neural architecture design. However, current
two-stage neural architecture search methods are mainly limited to single-path search spaces. How to efficiently search
models of multi-path structures remains a difficult problem.
In this paper, we are motivated to train a one-shot multi-path
supernet to accurately evaluate the candidate architectures.
Specifically, we discover that in the studied search spaces,
feature vectors summed from multiple paths are nearly multiples of those from a single path. Such disparity perturbs the
supernet training and its ranking ability. Therefore, we propose a novel mechanism called Shadow Batch Normalization
(SBN) to regularize the disparate feature statistics. Extensive
experiments prove that SBNs are capable of stabilizing the
optimization and improving ranking performance. We call
our unified multi-path one-shot approach as MixPath, which
generates a series of models that achieve state-of-the-art
results on ImageNet.

1. Introduction
Complete automation in neural network design is one of
the most important research directions of automated machine
learning [32, 22]. Among various mainstream paradigms,
one-shot approaches [13, 8, 19] make use of a weight-sharing
mechanism that reduces a large amount of computational
cost, but these approaches mainly focus on searching for
single-path networks. Observing that a multi-path structure
is beneficial for model performance as in Inception [30]
and ResNeXT [37], it is necessary to incorporate multi-path
structure into the search space. Noticeably, exploring multipath search space is made possible in one-stage approaches
like [9] and [26]. However, it poses a challenge for twostage methods to train a one-shot supernet that can accurately
predict the performance of its multi-path submodels.
Although FairNAS [8] largely alleviates the ranking difficulty in the single-path case with a fairness strategy, it is
inherently difficult to apply the same method in a multi-path
scenario. It should be emphasized that the most critical point
of the two-stage NAS is that the supernet can rank submod-

O1

Input Tensor

O2

O1 +O2

SBN 1 SBN 2

3×3
conv

5×5
conv

7×7
conv

9×9
conv

1, 

w/o SBN

2,  22

2
1

,  2

Output Tensor

Unchosen path
m=2

Chosen path

MixPath m =2
m=1
3×3

5×5

7×7

9×9

3×3

5×5

7×7

9×9

O1

O2

O3

O4

O1

O2

O3

O4

1×1 conv
SBN1

SBN2

1×1 conv
SBN1 SBN2

Figure 1: Top Left: Options in a demo block, where at most
m paths can be chosen. Bottom: An example of MixPath supernet training with Shadow Batch Normalizations (SBNs).
Note 1x1 Conv is not a must. SBNs are standard BNs, except
that SBNs are applied w.r.t the number of activated paths.
E.g., SBN1 is used whenever only m′ = 1 path is activated,
SBN2 for m′ = 2 paths. Top Right: SBNs catch each
of the statistics in two modes (red for m′ = 1, green for
m′ = 2), however, a single BN (black) can’t capture both.
els as accurately as possible. However, we find that a vanilla
training of a multi-path supernet (e.g. randomly pick a multipath submodel to train at each step) is not stable to provide a
confident ranking because of changing statistics during the
sampling process. Therefore, we dive into its real causes
and undertake a unified approach to tackle this issue. Our
contributions can be summarized as follows.
• We propose a unified approach for multi-path (say at
most m paths are allowed) one-shot NAS, as opposed to
the current single-path methods. From this perspective,
current one-shot methods [13, 8] become one of our
special cases when m = 1.
• We disclose why a vanilla multi-path training fails, and
we propose a novel yet lightweight mechanism, called
shadow batch normalization (SBN, see Fig. 1), to stabi-

5972

