This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DomainDrop: Suppressing Domain-Sensitive Channels for
Domain Generalization

1

Jintao Guo1,2 Lei Qi3,∗ Yinghuan Shi1,2,∗
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
National Institute of Healthcare Data Science, Nanjing University
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
guojintao@smail.nju.edu.cn, qilei@seu.edu.cn, syh@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown impressive
performance in computer vision tasks over the past few
years. However, this performance often degrades when the
test data follows a different distribution from the training
data [29]. This issue, known as domain shift [39], has
* Corresponding authors: Yinghuan Shi and Lei Qi. The work is supported by NSFC Program (62222604, 62206052, 62192783), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Project (2023T160100), Jiangsu Natural Science Foundation Project (BK20210224), and CCF-Lenovo Bule Ocean Research Fund.

Numbers of Channels

Deep Neural Networks have exhibited considerable success in various visual tasks. However, when applied to unseen test datasets, state-of-the-art models often suffer performance degradation due to domain shifts. In this paper, we introduce a novel approach for domain generalization from a novel perspective of enhancing the robustness of channels in feature maps to domain shifts. We observe that models trained on source domains contain a substantial number of channels that exhibit unstable activations across different domains, which are inclined to capture domain-specific features and behave abnormally when
exposed to unseen target domains. To address the issue,
we propose a DomainDrop framework to continuously enhance the channel robustness to domain shifts, where a
domain discriminator is used to identify and drop unstable channels in feature maps of each network layer during forward propagation. We theoretically prove that our
framework could effectively lower the generalization bound.
Extensive experiments on several benchmarks indicate that
our framework achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to other competing methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/lingeringlight/DomainDrop.

35

Baseline
DomainDrop

30
25

Channels with
Unstable Activations

20
15
10
5
0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

Magnitude of Standard Deviations

1.6

Figure 1. The robustness of channel to domain shifts. We investigate channel robustness using the histogram of activations based
on their standard deviation across different domains. We experiment on PACS [29] with sketch as the target domain and analyze
the representations from the last residual block of ResNet-18. For
each channel, averaged activations are computed across all samples from each domain, and the standard deviation is calculated on
domain dimension to indicate its robustness to domain shifts.

greatly impaired the applications of DNNs [32, 61], as training and test data often come from different distributions
in reality. To address this issue, domain adaptation (DA)
has been widely studied under the assumption that some
labeled or unlabeled target domain data can be observed
during training [13, 58]. Despite their success, DA models
cannot guarantee their performance on unknown target domains that have not been seen during training, which makes
them unsuitable for some real-world scenarios where target
data are not always available [57, 47]. Therefore, domain
generalization (DG) is proposed as a more challenging yet
practical setting, which aims to utilize multiple different but
related source domains to train a model that is expected to
generalize well on arbitrary unseen target domains [71, 55].
The core idea of existing DG methods is to learn domaininvariant feature distribution P (F (X)) across domains
for the robustness of conditional distribution P (Y |F (X)),

19114

