This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pseudo-label Alignment for Semi-supervised Instance Segmentation
Jie Hu1† , Chen Chen1† , Liujuan Cao1 ,* Shengchuan Zhang1 , Annan Shu2 ,
Guannan Jiang2 , and Rongrong Ji1
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
2
Contemporary Amperex Technology Co. Limited

Abstract
Pseudo-labeling is significant for semi-supervised instance segmentation, which generates instance masks and
classes from unannotated images for subsequent training.
However, in existing pipelines, pseudo-labels that contain
valuable information may be directly filtered out due to
mismatches in class and mask quality. To address this issue, we propose a novel framework, called pseudo-label
aligning instance segmentation (PAIS), in this paper. In
PAIS, we devise a dynamic aligning loss (DALoss) that adjusts the weights of semi-supervised loss terms with varying class and mask score pairs. Through extensive experiments conducted on the COCO and Cityscapes datasets, we
demonstrate that PAIS is a promising framework for semisupervised instance segmentation, particularly in cases
where labeled data is severely limited. Notably, with just
1% labeled data, PAIS achieves 21.2 mAP (based on MaskRCNN) and 19.9 mAP (based on K-Net) on the COCO
dataset, outperforming the current state-of-the-art model,
i.e., NoisyBoundary with 7.7 mAP, by a margin of over 12
points. Code is available at: https://github.com/
hujiecpp/PAIS.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised instance segmentation aims to alleviate the significant burden of human labeling by utilizing
a small amount of labeled data in conjunction with abundant unlabeled data [35, 47, 50]. Existing semi-supervised
instance segmentation pipelines typically generate pseudolabels from unlabeled images, which are then used to
train the models together with labeled images. Therefore, pseudo-labels play a crucial role in semi-supervised
instance segmentation. The generation of pseudo-masks,
pseudo-classes, and pseudo-boxes from unlabeled images
improves the model training. However, current semi-

supervised instance segmentation frameworks do not fully
leverage the potential of such pseudo-labels. Specifically,
pseudo-labels with mismatched class and mask scores are
often filtered out by fixed thresholds, leading to the exclusion of valuable information that could aid the model training. For instance, pseudo-labels with high-quality masks
but low class scores would be filtered out by a class threshold, resulting in the loss of the pixel-level information.
In this paper, we present a new semi-supervised framework, termed pseudo-label aligning for instance segmentation (PAIS), aiming to improve the utilization of filtered
pseudo-labels. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the main challenge
of PAIS lies in the mismatched scores between pseudoclasses and pseudo-masks. The classification score and
mask intersection over union (IoU) are misaligned in assessing the quality of pseudo-labels. As a result, masks
with high IoUs would be filtered out due to low classification scores, and vice versa. In the mean time, lowering the threshold of both scores introduces incorrect
classes or low-quality masks into the semi-supervised training. To overcome this dilemma, we propose a dynamic
aligning loss (DALoss) that softly re-weights the classification and the segmentation losses based on the quality
of different pseudo-labels. Specifically, DALoss penalizes
low-score pseudo-labels rather than filtering them and promotes high-score ones, to adjust their contribution to the
final loss function. Our experiments on the COCO and
Cityscape datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed PAIS framework. Specifically, with only 1% labeled
data, PAIS achieves 21.2 mAP and 19.9 mAP on the COCO
dataset using Mask-RCNN [13] and K-Net [53], respectively. This outperforms the current state-of-the-art model,
NoisyBoundary [47], by more than 12 points.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel pseudo-label aligning framework
for semi-supervised instance segmentation, called
PAIS, which unleashes the potential of utilizing pixellevel pseudo-labels in semi-supervised instance segmentation. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge,

* Corresponding author. † Equal contribution.

16337

