This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RefEgo: Referring Expression Comprehension Dataset
from First-Person Perception of Ego4D

1

Naoki Katsura2,1
Eri Onami3,1
Shuhei Kurita1 *
2
3
RIKEN
University of Tsukuba
Nara Institute of Science and Technology

shuhei.kurita@riken.jp,

n-a-katsura@mercari.com,

Abstract
Grounding textual expressions on scene objects from
first-person views is a truly demanding capability in developing agents that are aware of their surroundings and
behave following intuitive text instructions. Such capability is of necessity for glass-devices or autonomous robots to
localize referred objects in the real-world. In the conventional referring expression comprehension tasks of images,
however, datasets are mostly constructed based on the webcrawled data and don’t reflect diverse real-world structures
on the task of grounding textual expressions in diverse objects in the real world. Recently, a massive-scale egocentric video dataset of Ego4D was proposed. Ego4D covers around the world diverse real-world scenes including
numerous indoor and outdoor situations such as shopping,
cooking, walking, talking, manufacturing, etc. Based on
egocentric videos of Ego4D, we constructed a broad coverage of the video-based referring expression comprehension dataset: RefEgo. Our dataset includes more than 12k
video clips and 41 hours for video-based referring expression comprehension annotation. In experiments, we combine the state-of-the-art 2D referring expression comprehension models with the object tracking algorithm, achieving the video-wise referred object tracking even in difficult
conditions: the referred object becomes out-of-frame in the
middle of the video or multiple similar objects are presented
in the video.

1. Introduction
It is a truly demanding task to identify surrounding objects in real world scenes from video clips of egocentric
viewpoints with free-form language supervisions. Such a
task is necessary for glass-devices or autonomous robots
that help with daily-life tasks and communicate with us in
language because they need to understand the intuitive expressions of languages and ground them into the surround* Corresponding author.

onami.eri.ob6@is.naist.jp

1

2

3

4

5

6

Figure 1. Sample frames of RefEgo for “the large white bowl with
broccoli inside that is used to load the pan of broccoli.” The referred object of the bowl in green and other bowls in brown.

ing world. It is an ultimate goal for the referring expression
comprehension (REC) or shortly “visual grounding” task
because it maps the referred entities in text to the corresponding objects identified and tracked from the observed
sequence of images.
Extensive efforts are being made in 2D image reference
expression comprehension [12, 21, 33, 19]. Recent semisupervised approaches contribute to the open-vocabulary
object detection from 2D images [11, 35]. However, compared to these extensive studies on 2D image referring expression comprehension, we notice that comparably less
efforts are taken in video-based referring expression comprehension [16, 13, 24]. Video clips in such datasets are
mostly collected in the Internet and aren’t suitable for the
real-world daily-task understandings. The number of video
clips are also limited. Ideally, video clips for such tasks are
collected in embedded form in our daily lives and cover variety domains such as walking streets, shopping, chatting
with others, staying in indoor, cleaning laundries, or cooking foods, when we pursue general purpose models in our
daily scenes. However, it was nearly prohibitive to create
datasets on such tasks because of the lack of the collection
of real-world setting egocentric videos.
Recently, Ego4D [9], a massive-scale collection of egocentric video and annotation is proposed. Ego4D videos are
gathered by 931 unique participants in 74 locations world-

15214

