This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

First Session Adaptation: A Strong Replay-Free Baseline for
Class-Incremental Learning
Aristeidis Panos
University of Cambridge

Yuriko Kobe
University of Cambridge

ap2313@cam.ac.uk

yk384@cam.ac.uk

Daniel Olmeda Reino
Toyota Motor Europe

Rahaf Aljundi
Toyota Motor Europe

daniel.olmeda.reino@toyota-europe.com

rahaf.al.jundi@toyota-europe.com

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
In Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) an image classification system is exposed to new classes in each learning
session and must be updated incrementally. Methods approaching this problem have updated both the classification
head and the feature extractor body at each session of CIL.
In this work, we develop a baseline method, First Session
Adaptation (FSA), that sheds light on the efficacy of existing CIL approaches, and allows us to assess the relative
performance contributions from head and body adaption.
FSA adapts a pre-trained neural network body only on the
first learning session and fixes it thereafter; a head based on
linear discriminant analysis (LDA), is then placed on top of
the adapted body, allowing exact updates through CIL. FSA
is replay-free i.e. it does not memorize examples from previous sessions of continual learning. To empirically motivate FSA, we first consider a diverse selection of 22 imageclassification datasets, evaluating different heads and body
adaptation techniques in high/low-shot offline settings. We
find that the LDA head performs well and supports CIL outof-the-box. We also find that Featurewise Layer Modulation
(FiLM) adapters are highly effective in the few-shot setting,
and full-body adaption in the high-shot setting. Second, we
empirically investigate various CIL settings including highshot CIL and few-shot CIL, including settings that have previously been used in the literature. We show that FSA significantly improves over the state-of-the-art in 15 of the 16
settings considered. FSA with FiLM adapters is especially
performant in the few-shot setting. These results indicate
that current approaches to continuous body adaptation are
not working as expected. Finally, we propose a measure

that can be applied to a set of unlabelled inputs which is
predictive of the benefits of body adaptation.

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) is needed to bring machine
learning models to many real-life applications. After a
model is trained on a given set of data, and once deployed
in its test environment, it is likely that new classes will
naturally emerge. For example, in an autonomous driving
scenario, new types of road transportation and traffic signage can be encountered. The deployed model needs to
efficiently acquire this new knowledge with minimal cost
(e.g. annotation requirements) without deteriorating the performance on existing classes of objects. The process of efficiently acquiring new knowledge while preserving what is
already captured by the model is what continual learning
methods target.
Continual learning can be mainly divided into task incremental learning and class incremental learning. Task
incremental learning (TIL) sequentially learns independent
sets of heterogeneous tasks and is out of this paper’s scope.
Class incremental learning (CIL), in contrast, assumes that
all classes (already learnt and future ones) form part of a single classification task. In class-incremental learning, data
arrive in a sequence of sessions with new classes appearing
as the sessions progress. Critically, the data in each session cannot be stored in its entirety and cannot be revisited.
The goal is to train a single classification model under these
constraints.
In both task incremental and class incremental learning,

18820

