This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Breaking The Limits of Text-conditioned 3D Motion Synthesis with Elaborative
Descriptions
Yijun Qian1,2 , Jack Urbanek1 , Alexander G. Hauptmann2 , Jungdam Won3 *
META AI1 , Carnegie Mellon University2 , Seoul National University3
yijunq@meta.com,jju@meta.com,alex@cs.cmu.edu,jungdam@imo.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Given its wide applications, there is increasing focus on
generating 3D human motions from textual descriptions.
Differing from the majority of previous works, which regard
actions as single entities and can only generate short sequences for simple motions, we propose EMS, an elaborative motion synthesis model conditioned on detailed natural language descriptions. It generates natural and smooth
motion sequences for long and complicated actions by factorizing them into groups of atomic actions. Meanwhile,
it understands atomic-action level attributes (e.g., motion
direction, speed, and body parts) and enables users to generate sequences of unseen complex actions from unique sequences of known atomic actions with independent attribute
settings and timings applied. We evaluate our method on
the KIT Motion-Language and BABEL benchmarks, where
it outperforms all previous state-of-the-art with noticeable
margins.

1. Introduction
Generating 3D human motions has been widely used in
many areas, such as in film and game industries to animate
characters in the scene or in sports and medical applications to analyze and explain the movement of players and
patients, respectively. Many of these tasks have resorted
to motion data, which require laborious manual work by
animators or high recording costs. Furthermore, existing
tools often are not user-friendly and require extensive training in advance of using the tools. Recently, attention to
generating 3D human motions conditioned on natural language descriptions (i.e., text-to-motion) has grown in the
vision and graphics community as an alternative method
that can provide high-quality and flexible results from one
of the most intuitive and comfortable interfaces for people,
which is a textual description. The task, however, is challenging, given the diversity of language descriptions and
* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. The majority of previous works are conditioned on
the ambiguous action-level description, which prevents them from
generating motion sequences with detailed controls (e.g., they
can’t explicitly generate motions of lifting things up in place or
at another location). On the other hand, our model conditioned on
the atomic action-level description can easily generate motion sequences with detailed controls.

complexity of 3D human motion synthesis. Many recent
works have attempted to make progress in this space. The
earliest works [13, 28] focus on generating motions conditioned on a single action label (i.e., a word); however,
action labels contain limited semantic representations and
can’t guide detailed motion generation as a result. The following works [23, 10, 2] naturally go further by encoding
longer natural language descriptions as text input. The most
recent works [17, 29, 39, 6] either focus on improving the
generalization of extracted semantic representations or improving the generation quality of the motion synthesis module. To the best of our knowledge, all of them try to generate a single latent vector to describe the whole textual input
then forward it to a decoder for motion synthesis. If regarding generated motions as a ”visualized” language, previous works are similar to seq-to-seq methods designed for
sentence-to-sentence translation. It works well when the
natural language input contains limited semantic information which can be fully covered by a single sentence. How-

2306

