This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SINC: Self-Supervised In-Context Learning for Vision-Language Tasks
Yi-Syuan Chen1 , Yun-Zhu Song1 , Cheng Yu Yeo1 , Bei Liu2 , Jianlong Fu2 , and Hong-Han Shuai1
1

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, 2 Microsoft Research Asia
{yschen.ee09,yzsong.ee07,boyyeo123.ee08,hhshuai}@nycu.edu.tw
{Bei.Liu,jianf}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Large Pre-trained Transformers exhibit an intriguing capacity for in-context learning. Without gradient updates,
these models can rapidly construct new predictors from
demonstrations presented in the inputs. Recent works promote this ability in the vision-language domain by incorporating visual information into large language models that
can already make in-context predictions. However, these
methods could inherit issues in the language domain, such
as template sensitivity and hallucination. Also, the scale
of these language models raises a significant demand for
computations, making learning and operating these models resource-intensive. To this end, we raise a question:
“How can we enable in-context learning without relying on
the intrinsic in-context ability of large language models?”.
To answer it, we propose a succinct and general framework, Self-supervised IN-Context learning (SINC), that introduces a meta-model to learn on self-supervised prompts
consisting of tailored demonstrations. The learned models can be transferred to downstream tasks for making incontext predictions on-the-fly. Extensive experiments show
that SINC outperforms gradient-based methods in various
vision-language tasks under few-shot settings. Furthermore, the designs of SINC help us investigate the benefits of
in-context learning across different tasks, and the analysis
further reveals the essential components for the emergence
of in-context learning in the vision-language domain.

1. Introduction
Large language models such as GPT-3 [6] are able to perform in-context learning (ICL): given a prompt consisting
of a series of demonstrations and a query data as input, the
model can generate the corresponding prediction without
any parameter updates. Meanwhile, recent works show that
large vision-language (VL) models [2, 67] can also possess
such an ability. Specifically, these models can rapidly in-

Figure 1. Illustration of SINC. A meta-model is introduced for
acquiring in-context ability given features extracted from general models. During pre-training, the meta-model is learned on
prompts constructed in a self-supervised manner. Our designs
jointly enable the transfer of in-context ability to the downstream.

corporate multimodal information with few demonstrations
for tackling a variety of downstream tasks, such as image
captioning [9], visual question answering [22], and fast concept binding [6]. Behind the success, the shared scheme of
these approaches is to incorporate visual information into
large language models via proposed modules. In particular, the in-context ability of these VL models would significantly rely on the language side. As such, the issues in
the language domain could be inherited, such as template
sensitivity [40, 52] and hallucination [27]. Previous studies [19, 2, 6, 56, 67] also indicate that the in-context ability
scales with the model sizes and barely emerges in smaller
models [6]. This property requires current methods to be
built upon large language models for leveraging in-context
demonstrations. Although previous works typically freeze
language models for training efficiency, the language mod-

15430

