This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging Intrinsic Properties for Non-Rigid Garment Alignment
Siyou Lin

Boyao Zhou

linsy21@mai1s.tsinghua.edu.cn

Zerong Zheng Hongwen Zhang
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

bzhou22@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

zhanghongwen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Yebin Liu

zrzheng1995@foxmail.com

liuyebin@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We address the problem of aligning real-world 3D data
of garments, which benefits many applications such as texture learning, physical parameter estimation, generative
modeling of garments, etc. Existing extrinsic methods typically perform non-rigid iterative closest point and struggle
to align details due to incorrect closest matches and rigidity constraints. While intrinsic methods based on functional
maps can produce high-quality correspondences, they work
under isometric assumptions and become unreliable for
garment deformations which are highly non-isometric. To
achieve wrinkle-level as well as texture-level alignment, we
present a novel coarse-to-fine two-stage method that leverages intrinsic manifold properties with two neural deformation fields, in the 3D space and the intrinsic space, respectively. The coarse stage performs a 3D fitting, where
we leverage intrinsic manifold properties to define a manifold deformation field. The coarse fitting then induces
a functional map that produces an alignment of intrinsic embeddings. We further refine the intrinsic alignment
with a second neural deformation field for higher accuracy. We evaluate our method with our captured garment
dataset, GarmCap. The method achieves accurate wrinklelevel and texture-level alignment and works for difficult
garment types such as long coats. Our project page is
https://jsnln.github.io/iccv2023 intrinsic/index.html.

1. Introduction
The research into building realistic animatable human
avatars has drawn increasing attention in the past few years.
Recent developments have demonstrated that compared
with full-body avatars [8, 24, 26, 29, 31, 43, 63, 64], methods utilizing accurately aligned garment scans to explicitly
model garments produce much more realistic geometric deformations and/or rendering results [15, 18, 55, 56], and
enable or improve a number of downstream tasks such as
retargeting [38], texture learning [55, 56], pose-driving gar-

Deform

Source shape

Align

Aligned

Target shape

Figure 1. Our method can align deformed versions of a garment
to the extent that both texture patterns and geometric details are
accurately matched. Various types of garments can be handled,
including difficult ones such as coats.

ment animation [18] and virtual try-on [9, 32].
In this paper, we focus on the problem of aligning garments. Existing methods for aligning garments are mostly
extrinsic [6, 30, 38, 52, 55, 56, 61]. These methods directly
operate in the extrinsic space, i.e., the 3D space, typically
by fitting a template shape to target shapes in a non-rigid
iterative closest point (ICP) manner. Extrinsic methods easily suffer from incorrect point matches, making it difficult
to align details and even the overall shape. This problem
becomes more severe for garments, due to their complex
deformations as well as articulated motions.
On the other hand, intrinsic methods [2, 12, 19, 27, 33,
37, 42] leverage intrinsic manifold properties, most commonly the eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami operator
(LBO) [35], which are independent of the extrinsic shape
and therefore also free from incorrect matches in the extrinsic space. These high-dimensional intrinsic embeddings
are also smoother than their extrinsic counterparts, and

14485

