This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Unifying Medical Vision-and-Language Pre-training via Soft Prompts
Zhihong Chen1,2∗
Benyou Wang1,2†
1

Shizhe Diao3∗

Guanbin Li4†

Xiang Wan2

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 2 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 4 Sun Yat-sen University
zhihongchen@link.cuhk.edu.cn
wangbenyou@cuhk.edu.cn

sdiaoaa@connect.ust.hk

liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

wanxiang@sribd.com

1. Introduction

Medical vision-and-language pre-training (Med-VLP)
has shown promising improvements on many downstream
medical tasks owing to its applicability to extracting generic
representations from medical images and texts. Practically,
there exist two typical types, i.e., the fusion-encoder type
and the dual-encoder type, depending on whether a heavy
fusion module is used. The former is superior at multi-modal
tasks owing to the sufficient interaction between modalities;
the latter is good at uni-modal and cross-modal tasks due to
the single-modality encoding ability. To take advantage of
these two types, we propose an effective yet straightforward
scheme named PTUnifier to unify the two types. We first unify
the input format by introducing visual and textual prompts,
which serve as DETR-like queries that assist in extracting
features when one of the modalities is missing. By doing
so, a single model could serve as a foundation model that
processes various tasks adopting different input formats (i.e.,
image-only, text-only, and image-text-pair). Furthermore,
we construct a prompt pool (instead of static ones) to improve diversity and scalability, enabling queries conditioned
on different input instances. Experimental results show that
our approach achieves competitive results on a broad range
of tasks, spanning uni-modal tasks (i.e., image/text classification and text summarization), cross-modal tasks (i.e., imageto-text generation and image-text/text-image retrieval), and
multi-modal tasks (i.e., visual question answering), demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach. Note that the
adoption of prompts is orthogonal to most existing Med-VLP
approaches and could be a beneficial and complementary
extension to these approaches.1

Medical data is multi-modal in general, among which
vision and language are two critical modalities. It includes
visual data (e.g., radiography, magnetic resonance imaging,
and computed tomography) and textual data (e.g., radiology reports, and medical texts). More importantly, such
images and texts are pair-collected in routine clinical practice (e.g., X-ray images and their corresponding radiology
reports). Medical vision-and-language pre-training (MedVLP) aims to learn generic representation from large-scale
medical image-text pairs and then transfer it to various medical tasks, which is believed to be beneficial in addressing
the data scarcity problem in the medical field.
Recently, substantial progress has been made toward research on Med-VLP [65, 32, 20, 43, 8]. In general, most
existing Med-VLP models can be classified into two types:
the dual-encoder type and the fusion-encoder type, where
the former encodes images and texts separately to learn unimodal/cross-modal representations following a shallow interaction layer (i.e., an image-text contrastive layer), and the
latter performs an early fusion of the two modalities through
the self-attention/co-attention mechanisms to learn multimodal representations.2 For dual-encoders, the purpose of
existing studies [65, 20, 45, 59, 56, 60, 3] is to develop labelefficient algorithms to learn effective uni-modal/cross-modal
representations since large-scale manually labeled datasets
are difficult and expensive to obtain for medical images.
The learned representations can improve the effectiveness
of uni-modal (i.e., vision-only or language-only) tasks3 and
the efficiency of cross-modal (i.e., image-to-text or text-toimage) retrieval tasks significantly. For fusion-encoders,
2 Although the terminologies “cross-modal” and “multi-modal” have been

* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding authors.
1 The

source code is available
zhjohnchan/ptunifier.

at

https://github.com/

used interchangeably in the literature, we treat them as terms with different
meanings in this paper.
3 It is worth noting that most existing studies only conduct the evaluation on
the vision-only tasks and disregard the language-only tasks although the
text representations are simultaneously learned.

23403

