This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tracking without Label: Unsupervised Multiple Object Tracking via Contrastive
Similarity Learning
Sha Meng*, Dian Shao*, Jiacheng Guo, Shan Gao†
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
{mengsha,gjc1}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {shaodian,gaoshan}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised learning is a challenging task due to the
lack of labels. Multiple Object Tracking (MOT), which
inevitably suffers from mutual object interference, occlusion, etc., is even more difficult without label supervision.
In this paper, we explore the latent consistency of sample features across video frames and propose an Unsupervised Contrastive Similarity Learning method, named
UCSL, including three contrast modules: self-contrast,
cross-contrast, and ambiguity contrast. Specifically, i) selfcontrast uses intra-frame direct and inter-frame indirect
contrast to obtain discriminative representations by maximizing self-similarity. ii) Cross-contrast aligns cross- and
continuous-frame matching results, mitigating the persistent negative effect caused by object occlusion. And iii) ambiguity contrast matches ambiguous objects with each other
to further increase the certainty of subsequent object association through an implicit manner. On existing benchmarks,
our method outperforms the existing unsupervised methods
using only limited help from ReID head, and even provides
higher accuracy than lots of fully supervised methods.

1. Introduction
As a basic task in computer vision, Multiple Object
Tracking (MOT) is widely applied in a variety of fields, including robot navigation, intelligent surveillance, and other
aspects [36, 33]. Currently, one of the most popular tracking paradigms is joint detection and re-identification (ReID)
embeddings. In the case of supervision, ReID is regarded as
a classification task. To keep track of objects, many works
[39, 45] utilize appearance features for object association,
where the representation ability of the ReID head will directly affect the accuracy of the object association.
However, due to limitations in various conditions such as
labeled datasets, to meet the needs of researchers, there has
been a growing requirement to annotate tracking datasets,
*Equal Contribution. †Corresponding Author

ReID Embeddings
w/o label

w/ label

classification
1

2

3

4

5

clustering

w/o label

contrast

6

ID labels

Pseudo label

Classifier

Classifier

UCSL(ours)

Figure 1. Supervised and Unsupervised MOT. In the joint detection and ReID embeddings framework, to obtain discriminative
embeddings for tracking, the left branch is a usual method of supervised MOT training, i.e., given labels, it is trained as an object
classification task. The middle branch is a common method of
unsupervised training, i.e., it is processed by clustering, and targets with high similarity are regarded as the same class. The right
branch is the proposed method with contrast similarity learning to
improve the similarity of the same objects without label information.

which is costly and time-consuming. Therefore, unsupervised learning of visual representation has attracted great attention in tracking. Some works [35, 30] have demonstrated
that training the network in the real direction can also be
done even without ground truth. Some works [5, 6] directly
use ReID features to cluster objects with high similarity

16264

