This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffIR: Efficient Diffusion Model for Image Restoration
Bin Xia 1,3 , Yulun Zhang 2 , Shiyin Wang 3 , Yitong Wang 3 ,
Xinglong Wu 3 , Yapeng Tian 4 , Wenming Yang 1 *, and Luc Van Gool 2
1
Tsinghua University, 2 ETH Zürich, 3 ByteDance Inc, 4 University of Texas at Dallas

Abstract
Diffusion model (DM) has achieved SOTA performance
by modeling the image synthesis process into a sequential
application of a denoising network. However, different from
image synthesis, image restoration (IR) has a strong constraint to generate results in accordance with ground-truth.
Thus, for IR, traditional DMs running massive iterations on
a large model to estimate whole images or feature maps
is inefficient. To address this issue, we propose an efficient DM for IR (DiffIR), which consists of a compact IR
prior extraction network (CPEN), dynamic IR transformer
(DIRformer), and denoising network. Specifically, DiffIR
has two training stages: pretraining and training DM. In
pretraining, we input ground-truth images into CPENS1 to
capture a compact IR prior representation (IPR) to guide
DIRformer. In the second stage, we train the DM to directly
estimate the same IRP as pretrained CPENS1 only using LQ
images. We observe that since the IPR is only a compact
vector, DiffIR can use fewer iterations than traditional DM
to obtain accurate estimations and generate more stable
and realistic results. Since the iterations are few, our DiffIR can adopt a joint optimization of CPENS2 , DIRformer,
and denoising network, which can further reduce the estimation error influence. We conduct extensive experiments
on several IR tasks and achieve SOTA performance while
consuming less computational costs. Code is available at
https://github.com/Zj-BinXia/DiffIR.

1. Introduction
Image Restoration (IR) is a long-standing problem due to
its extensive application value and ill-posed nature. IR aims
to restore a high-quality (HQ) image from its low-quality
(LQ) counterpart corrupted by various degradation factors
(e.g., blur, mask, downsampling). Presently, deep-learning
based IR methods have achieved impressive success, as they
can learn strong priors from large-scale datasets.
Recently, Diffusion Models (DMs) [50], which is built

from a hierarchy of denoising autoencoders, have achieved
impressive results in image synthesis [21, 51, 11, 22] and IR
tasks (such as inpainting [37, 46] and super-resolution [48]).
Specifically, DMs are trained to iteratively denoise the image by reversing a diffusion process. DMs have shown
that the principled probabilistic diffusion modeling can realize high-quality mapping from randomly sampled Gaussian
noise to the complex target distribution, such as a realistic
image or latent [46] distribution, without suffering modecollapse and training instabilities as GANs.
As a class of likelihood-based models, DMs require a
large number of iteration steps (about 50 − 1000 steps) on
large denoising models to model precise details of the data,
which consumes massive computational resources. Unlike the image synthesis tasks generating each pixel from
scratch, IR tasks only require adding accurate details on the
given LQ images. Therefore, if DMs adopt the paradigm of
image synthesis for IR, it would not only waste a large number of computational resources but also be easy to generate
some details that do not match given LQ images.
In this paper, we aim to design a DM-based IR network
that can fully and efficiently use the powerful distribution
mapping abilities of DM to restore images. To this end,
we propose DiffIR. Since the transformer can model longrange pixel dependencies, we adopt the transformer blocks
as our basic unit of DiffIR. We stack transformer blocks in
Unet shape to form Dynamic IRformer (DIRformer) to extract and aggregate multi-level features. We train our DiffIR
in two stages: (1) In the first stage (Fig. 2 (a)), we develop
a compact IR prior extraction network (CPEN) to extract
a compact IR prior representation (IPR) from ground-truth
images to guide the DIRformer. Besides, we develop Dynamic Gated Feed-Forward Network (DGFN) and Dynamic
Multi-Head Transposed Attention (DMTA) for DIRformer
to fully use the IPR. It is notable that CPEN and DIRformer
are optimized together. (2) In the second stage (Fig. 2 (b)),
we train the DM to directly estimate the accurate IPR from
LQ images. Since the IPR is light and only adds details for
restoration, our DM can estimate quite an accurate IPR and
obtain stable visual results after several iterations.
Apart from the above scheme and architectural novel-

* Corresponding Author

13095

