This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Factorized Inverse Path Tracing
for Efficient and Accurate Material-Lighting Estimation
Liwen Wu1 * Rui Zhu1 * Mustafa B. Yaldiz1 Yinhao Zhu 2 Hong Cai 2 Janarbek Matai 2
Fatih Porikli 2 Tzu-Mao Li 1 Manmohan Chandraker 1 Ravi Ramamoorthi 1
1
UC San Diego 2 Qualcomm AI Research
{liw026,rzhu,myaldiz,tzli,mkchandraker,ravir}@ucsd.edu
{yinhaoz,hongcai,jmatai,fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Inverse path tracing has recently been applied to joint
material and lighting estimation, given geometry and multiview HDR observations of an indoor scene. However, it
has two major limitations: path tracing is expensive to compute, and ambiguities exist between reflection and emission.
Our Factorized Inverse Path Tracing (FIPT) addresses these
challenges by using a factored light transport formulation
and finds emitters driven by rendering errors. Our algorithm enables accurate material and lighting optimization
faster than previous work, and is more effective at resolving ambiguities. The exhaustive experiments on synthetic
scenes show that our method (1) outperforms state-of-theart indoor inverse rendering and relighting methods particularly in the presence of complex illumination effects; (2)
speeds up inverse path tracing optimization to less than an
hour. We further demonstrate robustness to noisy inputs
through material and lighting estimates that allow plausible
relighting in a real scene. The source code is available at:
https://github.com/lwwu2/fipt

Ours
view synthesis and relighting

IPT
IPT (≈3 hr)

MILO (≈10 hr)

Ground truth
Ours (44 min)

Ground truth
View synthesis and relighting

1. Introduction
We address the task of estimating the materials and lighting of an indoor scene based on image observations (Fig. 1).
Recent work has shown that optimizing per-scene material
and emission profiles through photometric loss and a differentiable renderer, with geometry reconstructed with the
existing 3D reconstruction algorithms [35, 26, 47], can lead
to promising results [1, 29, 45]. However, key challenges
remain unsolved in these methods: (1) they require expensive Monte Carlo estimation for both the loss and derivative
evaluations; (2) inherent ambiguity exists between material
and lighting, and this ill-posed inverse problem hinders the
optimization. We present an alternative inverse rendering
algorithm that outperforms the state-of-the-art in terms of
both efficiency and accuracy.
* Equal contribution

Material reflectance

Roughness

Emission (error)

Figure 1: Ours vs standard IPT. IPT [1] takes a piecewise
constant parameterization of material to reduce Monte Carlo
variance and ambiguity for inverse rendering, losing fine
spatial details as a result. Directly extending it to complex
material representation (e.g. MILO [45]) shows very slow
convergence. In contrast, we propose Factorized Inverse Path
Tracing (FIPT) to get rid of variance and reduce ambiguities,
yielding efficient and high quality BRDF and emission (4th
row), appealing relighting (1st row), and object insertion
(the bunny on the table). The presented scene is synthetic
with the inset showing the input (lower-left sub-figure). We
further showcase results on real scenes in Fig. 10 and 11.
Optimizing scene parameters with Monte Carlo differentiable rendering can suffer from high variance and lead to
slow convergence. Inspired by classical irradiance caching
literature [43], our key idea to address this challenge is to
factorize the material term out of the rendering integral and

3848

