This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prototypical Mixing and Retrieval-based Refinement for Label Noise-resistant
Image Retrieval
Xinlong Yang1 ,* Haixin Wang1∗ , Jinan Sun1 , Shikun Zhang1 , Chong Chen1 ,
Xian-Sheng Hua2 , Xiao Luo3†
1

Peking University 2 Terminus Group 3 University of California, Los Angeles
{xinlong.yang, wang.hx}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {sjn, zhangsk}@pku.edu.cn, cheung1990@126.com,
huaxiansheng@gmail.com, xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Label noise is pervasive in real-world applications,
which influences the optimization of neural network models. This paper investigates a realistic but understudied
problem of image retrieval under label noise, which could
lead to severe overfitting or memorization of noisy samples
during optimization. Moreover, identifying noisy samples
correctly is still a challenging problem for retrieval models. In this paper, we propose a novel approach called
Prototypical Mixing and Retrieval-based Refinement (TITAN) for label noise-resistant image retrieval, which corrects label noise and mitigates the effects of the memorization simultaneously. Specifically, we first characterize numerous prototypes with Gaussian distributions in the hidden
space, which would direct the Mixing procedure in providing synthesized samples. These samples are fed into a similarity learning framework with varying emphasis based on
the prototypical structure to learn semantics with reduced
overfitting. In addition, we retrieve comparable samples for
each prototype from simple to complex, which refine noisy
samples in an accurate and class-balanced manner. Comprehensive experiments on five benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our proposed TITAN compared with
various competing baselines.

1. Introduction
Content-based image retrieval has been an essential research area in computer vision [7], with various applications in search engineering [49, 13] and medical image analysis [19]. Content-based image retrieval can be divided
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

into instance-level retrieval [1, 62] and category-level retrieval [45, 43, 53]. The former focuses on capturing the
same instance in different environments. In recent years,
category-level retrieval has gained popularity by delivering
samples from a massive database with results grouped by
the same category as the query [36].
The core of successful category-level retrieval is to map
instances to data points in the feature space while preserving similarity connections. The majority of current approaches focus on similarity learning [46, 35], which use
pairwise [30] and triplet [16, 50] objectives to maintain semantics in the embedding space. These approaches promote the proximity of semantically similar samples in the
embedding space and the separation of semantically different samples. An alternative strategy is to utilize proxies [53, 36, 21, 14]. These methods map each class into the
deep feature space to guide semantics learning in a pointwise manner. A few of studies use binary descriptors to
improve efficiency [44, 56], which results in a candidate set
followed by further refinement for precise image retrieval.
Despite their considerable success, these retrieval systems often presume that the semantic labels in the training
set are accurate. In real-world applications, this assumption
could be invalidated by the possibility of annotation mistakes and inadequate automated collecting tactics [47, 54].
For instance, web-based sources often include tags and captions, which are usually utilized to provide label information for convenience. These approaches could generate extensive label noise to collected datasets. To address this
issue, this work studies a practical topic named image retrieval with label noise. Although there are extensive papers to study the problem of robust learning in classification
tasks [29, 12, 25], retrieval models under label noise are still
underexplored with unsatisfactory performance in practice.

11239

