This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transferable Adversarial Attack for Both Vision Transformers and
Convolutional Networks via Momentum Integrated Gradients

1

Wenshuo Ma1 , Yidong Li2 , Xiaofeng Jia3 , Wei Xu1
IIIS, Tsinghua University, 2 Beijing Jiaotong University, 3 Beijing Big Data Centre

mwenshuo@gmail.com, ydli@bjtu.edu.cn, jiaxf@jxj.beijing.gov.cn, weixu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual Transformers (ViTs) and Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) are the two primary backbone structures extensively used in various vision tasks. Generating transferable adversarial examples for ViTs is difficult
due to ViTs’ superior robustness, while transferring adversarial examples across ViTs and CNNs is even harder,
since their structures and mechanisms for processing images are fundamentally distinct. In this work, we propose
a novel attack method named Momentum Integrated Gradients (MIG), which not only attacks ViTs with high success
rate, but also exhibits impressive transferability across ViTs
and CNNs. Specifically, we use integrated gradients rather
than gradients to steer the generation of adversarial perturbations, inspired by the observation that integrated gradients of images demonstrate higher similarity across models in comparison to regular gradients. Then we acquire
the accumulated gradients by combining the integrated gradients from previous iterations with the current ones in a
momentum manner and use their sign to modify the perturbations iteratively. We conduct extensive experiments
to demonstrate that adversarial examples obtained using
MIG show stronger transferability, resulting in significant
improvements over state-of-the-art methods for both CNN
and ViT models.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have become increasingly
popular and are widely adopted [1, 4, 5, 11], following the
success of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [16, 25,
33, 34], due to their impressive performance. ViTs process
images as sequences of patches and use self-attention to
model global dependencies among them, while CNNs exploit spatial structures of images using convolutional filters
to capture local features like edges and textures. Regardless of these different image processing mechanisms used in
CNNs and ViTs, their widespread applications in visual do-

Original
image

Adversarial
image
via FGSM

Adversarial
image
via MIG
(our method)
Integrated gradients Integrated gradients
on source model
on target model

Figure 1. Integrated gradients of original image (top row), adversarial images generated with FGSM [14] (middle row) and
our Momentum Integrated Gradients (MIG) method (bottom row).
Adversarial examples are crafted on source model DeiT-S [43] and
used to attack target model ViT-B [11]. Compared to FGSM, adversarial image generated using MIG exhibits more consistent integrated gradients on both source and target models, indicating that
MIG effectively interferes with both models, leading them to focus
on unimportant background regions rather than the main objects.

mains emphasize the importance of developing adversarial
examples that can attack both types of models, which helps
identify models’ vulnerabilities before their deployment in
real-world scenarios.
In adversarial attacks, a malicious attacker perturbs an
input image by applying a small, human-imperceptible perturbation to break the prediction of a machine learning
model [6, 12, 14, 49]. Depending on whether the attacker
has full access to the target victim model, adversarial attack
methods can be classified into two types, white-box attacks
and black-box attacks. Considering that the target models
are usually not so readily accessible, generating a transferable adversarial example from a white-box surrogate model
and then transferring it to the target black-box model is a

4630

