This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TransIFF: An Instance-Level Feature Fusion Framework for
Vehicle-Infrastructure Cooperative 3D Detection with Transformers
Ziming Chen
Beihang University

Yifeng Shi*
Baidu Inc.

Jinrang Jia
Baidu Inc.

chenzm@buaa.edu.cn

shiyifeng@baidu.com

jjr5401@163.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Accurate environment perception [14, 15, 40] is an important topic in the field of autonomous driving. Cur* Corresponding author

Where2comm

TransIFF (Ours)
Performance AP@0.5

Cooperation between vehicles and infrastructure is vital to enhancing the safety of autonomous driving. Two
significant and contradictory challenges now stand in the
collaborative perception: fusion accuracy and communication bandwidth. Previous intermediate fusion methods that
transmit features balance the accuracy and bandwidth compared with early fusion and late fusion, but usually have
problems with feature alignment and domain gaps, and the
bandwidth usage still falls short of the industrial application standard to our best knowledge.
In this paper, we propose TransIFF, an instance-level
feature fusion framework with transformers that can effectively reduce bandwidth usage. Furthermore, it can align
the domain gaps between vehicle and infrastructure features, and improve the robustness of feature fusion, leading to a high cooperative perception accuracy. TransIFF is
composed of three components: a vehicle-side network, an
infrastructure-side network, and a vehicle-infrastructure fusion network. Initially, the vehicle-side and infrastructureside networks independently generate instance-level features. Subsequently, the infrastructure-side instance-level
features are transmitted to the vehicles, significantly reducing the communication bandwidth usage. Finally, in the
vehicle-infrastructure fusion network, Cross-Domain Adaptation (CDA) module is designed to align the feature domains, followed by Feature Magnet (FM) module which
can adaptively fuse the instance features and achieve a robust feature fusion. TransIFF yields state-of-the-art performance on the widely used real-world vehicle-infrastructure
cooperative benchmark DAIR-V2X, achieving 59.62% AP
with only 212 bytes bandwidth consumption.

65

60
V2VNet
55

Late Fusion

DiscoNet
V2X-ViT

50

Where2comm

When2com

No Collaboration
45
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Communication Volume (log2)

Figure 1. TransIFF achieves superior performance-bandwidth
trade-off on DAIR-V2X benchmark. Compared with other intermediate fusion methods, TransIFF can achieve over 212 times less
communication volume, and still have an AP of nearly 60%. The
curve of Where2comm means its performance at different bandwidth usage.

rently, autonomous vehicles mainly rely on the on-board
LiDAR sensors [15, 31, 32] to obtain dense point clouds
of the surrounding environment and perform target detection. However, limited by the height of the sensor installation, the vehicle perception system faces challenges such as
occlusion-induced blind spots and long-distance perception
instability, which hinder the development of autonomous
driving. In recent years, there has been an increasing
amount of research focused on utilizing both vehicle-side
and infrastructure-side information to achieve Vehicle-toEverything (V2X) cooperative perception [22, 36, 37, 8]
to address these issues. Thanks to the high installation
height of infrastructure-side sensors, autonomous vehicles
can achieve a global perspective and long-distance perception by receiving information from infrastructure-side sensors, significantly improving the perception ability.

18205

