This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VQA Therapy: Exploring Answer Differences by Visually Grounding Answers
Chongyan Chen1 , Samreen Anjum2 , Danna Gurari1,2
1

University of Texas at Austin 2 University of Colorado Boulder

Abstract
Visual question answering is a task of predicting the answer to a question about an image. Given that different
people can provide different answers to a visual question,
we aim to better understand why with answer groundings.
We introduce the first dataset that visually grounds each
unique answer to each visual question, which we call VQAAnswerTherapy. We then propose two novel problems of
predicting whether a visual question has a single answer
grounding and localizing all answer groundings. We benchmark modern algorithms for these novel problems to show
where they succeed and struggle. The dataset and evaluation server can be found publicly at https://vizwiz.org/tasksand-datasets/vqa-answer-therapy/.

1. Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) is the task of predicting the answer to a question about an image. A fundamental
challenge is how to account for when a visual question has
multiple natural language answers, a scenario shown to be
common [10]. Prior work [2] revealed reasons for these differences, including due to subjective or ambiguous visual
questions. However, it remains unclear to what extent answer differences arise because different visual content in an
image is described versus because the same visual content
is described differently (e.g., using different language).
Our work is designed to disentangle the vision problem
from other possible reasons that could lead to answer differences. To do so, we introduce the first dataset where all
valid answers to each visual question are grounded, meaning we segment for each answer the visual evidence in the
image needed to arrive at that answer. This new dataset,
which we call VQA-AnswerTherapy, consists of 5,825 visual questions from the popular VQAv2 [9] and VizWiz [11]
datasets. We find that 16% of the visual questions have multiple answer groundings, and provide fine-grained analysis
to better elucidate when and why this arises.
We also introduce two novel algorithmic challenges,
which are exemplified in Figure 1. First, we introduce the
Single Answer Grounding Challenge, which entails pre-

Figure 1: Examples from our VQA-AnswerTherapy dataset
showing that visual questions with different natural language answers can have multiple answer groundings (first
row) or all share the same answer grounding (second row).

dicting for a visual question whether all valid answers will
describe the same grounding or not. Next, the Grounding
Answer(s) Challenge entails localizing the answer groundings for all valid answers to a visual question. We benchmarked models for these novel tasks to demonstrate the
baseline performance for modern architectures and to highlight where they are succeeding and struggling.
We offer this work as a valuable foundation for improving our understanding and handling of annotator differences. Success on our Single Answer Grounding Chal-

15315

