This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D E D RIFT: Robust Similarity Search under Content Drift
Dmitry Baranchuk*
Yandex Research

Matthijs Douze
Meta AI

Yash Upadhyay
Meta AI

I. Zeki Yalniz
Meta AI

dbaranchuk@yandex-team.ru

matthijs@meta.com

yashup@meta.com

izy@meta.com

Abstract
The statistical distribution of content uploaded and
searched on media sharing sites changes over time due to
seasonal, sociological and technical factors. We investigate
the impact of this “content drift” for large-scale similarity
search tools, based on nearest neighbor search in embedding
space. Unless a costly index reconstruction is performed
frequently, content drift degrades the search accuracy and
efficiency. The degradation is especially severe since, in
general, both the query and database distributions change.
We introduce and analyze real-world image and video
datasets for which temporal information is available over
a long time period. Based on the learnings, we devise
D E D RIFT, a method that updates embedding quantizers to
continuously adapt large-scale indexing structures on-the-fly.
D E D RIFT almost eliminates the accuracy degradation due
to the query and database content drift while being up to
100× faster than a full index reconstruction.

1. Introduction
The amount of content available online is growing exponentially over the years. Various online content sharing sites
collect billions to trillions of images, videos and posts over
time. Efficient Nearest Neighbor Search (NNS) techniques
enable searching these vast unstructured databases based
on content similarity. NNS is at the core of a plethora of
practical machine learning applications including content
moderation [17], retrieval augmented modeling [10, 24],
keypoint matching for 3D reconstruction [1], image-based
geo-localisation [12], content de-duplication [44], k-NN classification [4, 11], defending against adversarial attacks [18],
active learning [15] and many others.
NNS techniques extract high dimensional feature vectors
(a.k.a. “embeddings”) from each item to be indexed. These
embeddings may be computed by hand-crafted techniques
[35, 28] or, more commonly nowadays, with pre-trained neural networks [7, 37, 36]. Given the database of embedding
* The work is partially done during the internship at Meta AI

vectors D={x1 , . . . , xN } ⊂ Rd and a query embedding
q ∈ Rd , NNS retrieves the closest database example to q
from D according to some similarity measure, typically the
L2 distance:
argminx∈D ∥q − x∥2
(1)
The exact nearest neighbor and its distance can be computed
by exhaustively comparing the query embeddings against
the entire database. On a single core of a typical server from
2023, this brute-force solution takes a few milliseconds for
databases smaller than few tens of thousand examples with
embeddings up to a few hundred dimensions.
However, practical use cases require real time search on
millions to trillion size databases, where brute-force NNS
is too slow [14]. Practitioners resort to approximate NNS
(ANNS), trading some accuracy of the results to speed up
the search. A common approach is to perform a statistical
analysis of D to build a specialized data structure (an “index”
in database terms) that performs the search efficiently. Like
any unsupervised machine learning task, the index is trained
on representative sample vectors from the data distribution
to the index.
A tool commonly used in indexes is vector quantization [22]. It consists in representing each vector by the nearest vector taken in a finite set of centroids {c1 , . . . , cK } ⊂
Rd . A basic use of quantization is compact storage: the vector can be reduced to the index of the centroid it is assigned
to, which occupies just ⌈log2 K⌉ bits of storage. The larger
K, the better the approximation. As typical for machine
learning, the training set T is distinct from D (usually T is a
small subset of D). The unsupervised training algorithm of
choice for quantization is k-means which guarantees Lloyd’s
optimality conditions [32].
In an online media sharing site, the index functions as a
database system. After the initial training, the index ingests new embeddings by batches as they are uploaded
by users and removes content that has been deleted (Figure 1). Depending on the particular indexing structure, addition/deletion may be easy [27], or more difficult [40]. However, a more pernicious problem that appears over the time
is content drift. In practice, over months and years, the statistical distribution of the content changes slowly, both for

11026

