This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Encyclopedic VQA:
Visual questions about detailed properties of fine-grained categories
Thomas Mensink†,∗

Jasper Uijlings†,∗

Lluis Castrejon∗

Arushi Goel‡

mensink@google.com

jrru@google.com

lluisc@google.com

goel.arushi@gmail.com

Felipe Cadar‡

Howard Zhou∗

Fei Sha∗

André Araujo∗

cadar@dcc.ufmg.br

howardzhou@google.com

fsha@google.com

andrearaujo@google.com

Vittorio Ferrari∗
vittoferrari@google.com

Abstract
We propose Encyclopedic-VQA, a large scale visual
question answering (VQA) dataset featuring visual questions about detailed properties of fine-grained categories
and instances. It contains 221k unique question+answer
pairs each matched with (up to) 5 images, resulting in a
total of 1M VQA samples. Moreover, our dataset comes
with a controlled knowledge base derived from Wikipedia,
marking the evidence to support each answer. Empirically,
we show that our dataset poses a hard challenge for large
vision+language models as they perform poorly on our
dataset: PaLI [12] is state-of-the-art on OK-VQA [35], yet
it only achieves 13.0% accuracy on our dataset. Moreover,
we experimentally show that progress on answering our encyclopedic questions can be achieved by augmenting large
models with a mechanism that retrieves relevant information from the knowledge base. An oracle experiment with
perfect retrieval achieves 87.0% accuracy on the singlehop portion of our dataset, and an automatic retrievalaugmented prototype yields 48.8%. We believe that our
dataset1 enables future research on retrieval-augmented vision+language models.

1. Introduction
Recently, large Vision+Language models (VLMs) have
demonstrated impressive performance on Visual Question
Answering (VQA) benchmarks [5, 12, 22, 53]. However,
Fig. 1 shows two typical examples where such models fail.
Answering these questions correctly requires knowledge of
† Equal contribution. ‡ Work done during internship at Google.
∗ Google Research
1 Available at:
https://github.com/google-research/
google-research/tree/master/encyclopedic_vqa.

Figure 1: One of the two answers above is wrong, do you know
which one? Encyclopedic questions about detailed properties of
fine-grained entities are difficult. Not only for humans, but also for
large VLMs. PaLI [12] fails to answer both questions correctly.

detailed properties (i.e. symbol of which city, year of automation) of fine-grained categories (‘Pinus Pinea’) or instances (‘Point Reyes Lighthouse’). We hypothesize that
this type of encyclopedic knowledge is hard for VLMs to
properly encode in its model parameters because such longtail information occurs rarely in its training data (i.e. the
web). Additionally, VLMs produce such incorrect answers
generally with high confidence, while these answers are
hard for users to verify since the model does not provide any
explanations. The answer to Fig. 1 (left) is correct; (right)
should be 1975. PaLI [12] predicts both incorrectly.
Both problems can be addressed by retrieval-augmented
models, which base their predictions on knowledge retrieved from a database. These models recently gained
popularity in NLP (e.g. [7, 21, 28, 31]), and some early
multi-modal models also exist [20, 24, 34, 49]. Retrievalaugmented models are well-suited for encyclopedic knowledge since retrieving the correct entry from a knowledge
base greatly facilitates constructing the right answer. Furthermore, the retrieved piece of knowledge provides attribution to the answer by design. This increases model in-

3113

