This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Most Important Person-guided Dual-branch Cross-Patch Attention for Group
Affect Recognition
Hongxia Xie1 , Ming-Xian Lee2 , Tzu-Jui Chen2 , Hung-Jen Chen1 , Hou-I Liu1 , Hong-Han Shuai1 and
Wen-Huang Cheng3
1

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, hongxiaxie.ee08@nycu.edu.tw
2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
3
National Taiwan University, wenhuang@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Group affect refers to the subjective emotion that is
evoked by an external stimulus in a group, which is an important factor that shapes group behavior and outcomes.
Recognizing group affect involves identifying important individuals and salient objects among a crowd that can evoke
emotions. However, most existing methods lack attention
to affective meaning in group dynamics and fail to account for the contextual relevance of faces and objects in
group-level images. In this work, we propose a solution
by incorporating the psychological concept of the Most Important Person (MIP), which represents the most noteworthy face in a crowd and has affective semantic meaning.
We present the Dual-branch Cross-Patch Attention Transformer (DCAT) which uses global image and MIP together
as inputs. Specifically, we first learn the informative facial regions produced by the MIP and the global context
separately. Then, the Cross-Patch Attention module is proposed to fuse the features of MIP and global context together to complement each other. Our proposed method
outperforms state-of-the-art methods on GAF 3.0, GroupEmoW, and HECO datasets. Moreover, we demonstrate the
potential for broader applications by showing that our proposed model can be transferred to another group affect task,
group cohesion, and achieve comparable results.

1. Introduction
Humans are active and social creatures, using multimodal interactions to convey their intentions, attitudes, and
feelings. Such physical and emotional interactions between
individuals within a group can generate group-level affect

Global +

All

3Random

3MIPs

1Random

MIP

Acc (%)

85.01

85.47

87.46

82.30

88.86

Table 1. Different face selection strategies. The “3Random” refers
to selecting 3 faces randomly from the detected faces in the image, while the “3MIPs” strategy selects the top three detected faces
based on their importance ranking. The dataset evaluated here is
the GroupEmoW [22].

or group-level emotion [2] 1 .

Figure 1. Feature map comparison between using MIP and all
faces. The yellow box in (a) represents the MIP region.

By providing the group-level information, group affect
prediction has various real-world applications, e.g., work
team outcome prediction [21], social relationship recognition [33], human-machine interaction systems [24]. As a
result, the research topics surrounding group affect are di1 In this work, groups range in size from two or three individuals up to
hundreds.

20598

