This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAL-ViT: Towards Latency Efficient Private Inference on ViT using Selective
Attention Search with a Learnable Softmax Approximation
Yuke Zhang* 1 , Dake Chen∗1 , Souvik Kundu∗2 , Chenghao Li1 , Peter A. Beerel1
1
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
2
Intel Labs, San Diego, USA
{yukezhan, dakechen}@usc.edu, souvikk.kundu@intel.com, {cli78217, pabeerel}@usc.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
The past few years have seen the tremendous success
of transformer-based models in natural language processing (NLP) [31], largely because of their self-attention (SA)
modules’ ability to effectively capture long-range depen* Authors contributed equally.
This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation (NSF)
under Grant No. CCF-1763747.

0.79%

1.14x

Better

Recently, private inference (PI) has addressed the rising
concern over data and model privacy in machine learning
inference as a service. However, existing PI frameworks
suffer from high computational and communication overheads due to the expensive multi-party computation (MPC)
protocols, particularly for large models such as vision
transformers (ViT). The majority of this overhead is due
to the encrypted softmax operation in each self-attention
layer. In this work, we present SAL-ViT with two novel techniques to boost PI efficiency on ViTs. Our first technique is a
learnable PI-efficient approximation to softmax, namely,
learnable 2Quad (L2Q), that introduces learnable scaling and shifting parameters to the prior 2Quad softmax
approximation, enabling improvement in accuracy. Then,
given our observation that external attention (EA) presents
lower PI latency than widely-adopted self-attention (SA)
at the cost of accuracy, we present a selective attention
search (SAS) method to integrate the strength of EA and
SA. Specifically, for a given lightweight EA ViT, we leverage
a constrained optimization procedure to selectively search
and replace EA modules with SA alternatives to maximize
the accuracy. Our extensive experiments show that our
SAL-ViT can averagely achieve 1.28×, 1.28×, 1.14× lower
PI latency with 1.79%, 1.41%, and 2.08% higher accuracy compared to the existing alternatives, on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and Tiny-ImageNet, respectively.

Better

Figure 1. Performance comparison between prior works (Baseline,
MPCFormer [21], EA ViT [9], MPCViT [35]) and ours on CIFAR10. Note that the MPCFormer [21] was proposed on BERT that we
have adapted to ViT.

dencies. Recently, vision transformers (ViTs) extended this
success to computer vision tasks, including image classification [6, 11], object detection [2, 22], and semantic segmentation [22, 37, 34], by outperforming convolutional network architectures due to their lower inductive bias.
The success of ViT and other deep neural network models have motivated emerging machine learning inference
as a service (MLaaS), where a service provider trains the
model and commercializes the inference service for various
tasks including performing online diagnoses and financial
product recommendations [18, 24]. However, growing privacy concerns have impeded such commercialization. In
particular, clients may not wish to reveal their personal
data to the service provider while the service providers
wish to protect the details of their proprietary trained models [18]. In general, neither party wants to send sensitive
unencrypted information to the other party. To mitigate
these rising concerns, various private inference (PI) methods [26, 13, 25, 30, 12, 29] have been proposed that leverage techniques such as Homomorphic encryption (HE) and
secure multi-party computation (MPC) protocols to preserve both the privacy of the client’s data and the inference
model’s intellectual property (IP).
While some existing works explored efficient PI on con-

5116

