This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeepChange:
A Long-Term Person Re-Identification Benchmark with Clothes Change
Peng Xu
Tsinghua University

Xiatian Zhu
University of Surrey

peng xu@tsinghua.edu.cn

xiatian.zhu@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract

ting as short-term re-id in the follows. Unfortunately, this
assumption would be easily broken once the search time
span is enlarged to long periods (such as days, weeks, or
even months) as an average person often changes the outfit during different day time and across different weathers,
daily activities and social events. As shown in Figure 1, a
specific person was dressed the same only in a short time
(e.g., minutes or hours) but with different clothes/hairs and
associations over a long time and across seasons and weathers. Relying heavily on the clothes appearance, the previous short-term re-id models are unsuitable and ineffective in
dealing with unconstrained clothes changes over space and
time.
Recently there have been a few studies for tackling
the long-term re-id situations focusing on clothes change
[54, 23, 39, 34, 48, 50, 51]. Since there are no appropriate
datasets publicly available, to enable research these works
introduced several small-scale long-term re-id datasets by
using web celebrity images [24], synthesizing pseudo person identities [48, 34], collecting person images under simulated surveillance settings [54, 39, 48, 50]. While these
dataset construction efforts are useful in initiating the research, it is obvious that a real, large-scale long-term re-id
benchmark is missing and highly demanded. The impact
and significance of such a benchmark in driving the research
progress has been repeatedly demonstrated in the short-term
re-id case [61, 32, 52, 51]. However, it is much more challenging to establish a large re-id dataset with clothes change
as compared to the short-term counterparts. This is due
to that: (1) More video data need to be collected and processed over long time periods; (2) Labeling person identity
becomes much more difficult when a person is dressed up
with different outfit from time to time. Regardless, we believe that it is worthwhile to overcome all these challenges.
To facilitate the research towards the applications of
long-term person search in reality, we contribute the first
large-scale person re-id dataset with native/natural appearance (mainly clothes) changes, termed as DeepChange.
Different from existing datasets, DeepChange has several
unique characteristics: (1) The raw videos are collected in

Long-term re-id with clothes change is a challenging
problem in surveillance AI. Currently, its major bottleneck
is that this field is still missing a large realistic benchmark.
In this work, we contribute a large, realistic long-term
person re-identification benchmark, termed DeepChange.
Its unique characteristics are: (1) Realistic and rich personal appearance (e.g., clothes and hair style) and variations: Highly diverse clothes change and styles, with varying reappearing gaps in time from minutes to seasons, different weather conditions (e.g., sunny, cloudy, windy, rainy,
snowy, extremely cold) and events (e.g., working, leisure,
daily activities). (2) Rich camera setups: Raw videos were
recorded by 17 outdoor varying-resolution cameras operating in a real-world surveillance system. (3) The currently largest number of (17) cameras, (1, 121) identities,
and (178, 407) bounding boxes, over the longest time span
(12 months). We benchmark the representative supervised
and unsupervised re-id methods on our dataset. In addition, we investigate multimodal fusion strategies for tackling the clothes change challenge. Extensive experiments
show that our fusion models outperform a wide variety of
state-of-the-art models on DeepChange. Our dataset and
documents are available at https://github.com/
PengBoXiangShang/deepchange.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id) aims to match the person identity classes of bounding box images extracted from
non-overlapping camera views [15, 62, 55]. Extensive re-id
models were developed in the past decade [16, 38, 63, 60,
59, 53, 64, 19, 57, 28, 3, 4, 33, 43, 29, 27, 2, 30, 58, 11, 65,
56, 6, 67, 66], thanks to the availability of reasonably sized
benchmarks [52, 61, 32, 49]. The majority of these methods consider the short-term search scenario with a strong
assumption that the appearance (e.g., clothes, hair style) of
each person is stationary. We name this conventional set-

11196

