This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cyclic-Bootstrap Labeling for Weakly Supervised Object Detection
Yufei Yin1
1

Jiajun Deng2

Wengang Zhou1,3, * Li Li1

Houqiang Li1,3, *

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
The University of Sydney
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
yinyufei@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiajun.deng@sydney.edu.au, {zhwg,lil1,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent progress in weakly supervised object detection
is featured by a combination of multiple instance detection
networks (MIDN) and ordinal online refinement. However,
with only image-level annotation, MIDN inevitably assigns
high scores to some unexpected region proposals when generating pseudo labels. These inaccurate high-scoring region proposals will mislead the training of subsequent refinement modules and thus hamper the detection performance. In this work, we explore how to ameliorate the quality of pseudo-labeling in MIDN. Formally, we devise CyclicBootstrap Labeling (CBL), a novel weakly supervised object detection pipeline, which optimizes MIDN with rank
information from a reliable teacher network. Specifically,
we obtain this teacher network by introducing a weighted
exponential moving average strategy to take advantage of
various refinement modules. A novel class-specific ranking distillation algorithm is proposed to leverage the output of weighted ensembled teacher network for distilling
MIDN with rank information. As a result, MIDN is guided
to assign higher scores to accurate proposals among their
neighboring ones, thus benefiting the subsequent pseudo labeling. Extensive experiments on the prevalent PASCAL
VOC 2007 & 2012 and COCO datasets demonstrate the
superior performance of our CBL framework. Code will
be available at https://github.com/Yinyf0804/
WSOD-CBL/.

1. Introduction
With the rapid advancements in deep neural networks,
object detection has experienced significant progress. Nevertheless, state-of-the-art object detection methods are contingent upon accurate instance-level annotations obtained
through fully-supervised learning settings. The process of
collecting such annotations is both arduous and costly. Such
* Corresponding authors: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li

Image-level labels

Image-level labels

MIDN

MIDN
Distill
(CRD)

Supervise
Supervise

Refinements

Cyclic-Bootstrap
Labeling
Refinements

WET
Supervise
(MSR)

OICs
R-CNN head
...

(a) Basic WSOD pipeline

OICs
R-CNN head
...

W-EMA

(b) Our CBL framework

Figure 1. Comparison between the basic WSOD pipeline and our
proposed CBL framework (feature extractor is omitted for simplicity). In the CBL framework, the subsequent refinement modules
of MIDN are finally utilized to distill MIDN in turn, forming a
cyclic-bootstrap procedure.

facts motivate the exploration of weakly supervised object
detection (WSOD) [2, 32, 44, 43, 48, 25], which achieves
the object detection task using only image-level labels.
Most existing WSOD approaches in the literature [32,
44] generally follow the training pipeline of Fig. 1(a). First,
a multiple instance detection network (MIDN) [2] is obtained by leveraging multiple instance learning scheme for
optimization, which converts WSOD into a multi-class classification problem over bottom-up generated region proposals [35]. The region proposals with high scores out of
MIDN are then exploited to generate pseudo ground-truth
boxes, which are used for the training of refinement modules, e.g., online instance classifiers (OICs), and regressors
(R-CNN head). By introducing MIL to the training process, MIDN obtains the capability of estimating whether an
object exists in the corresponding region. However, many
high-scoring region proposals from MIDN only cover the
discriminative part of an instance (e.g., the head of a bird),
or contain some background regions [32, 48]. The improper
scoring assignment of MIDN leads to the generation of inaccurate pseudo ground-truth boxes, which further hinder
the training of subsequent refinement modules.

7008

