This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interaction-aware Joint Attention Estimation Using People Attributes
Chihiro Nakatani1 Hiroaki Kawashima2 Norimichi Ukita1
1
Toyota Technological Institute, Japan 2 University of Hyogo, Japan

Abstract
Gaze
distribution

This paper proposes joint attention estimation in a single
image. Different from related work in which only the gazerelated attributes of people are independently employed, (i)
their locations and actions are also employed as contextual cues for weighting their attributes, and (ii) interactions among all of these attributes are explicitly modeled
in our method. For the interaction modeling, we propose a
novel Transformer-based attention network to encode joint
attention as low-dimensional features. We introduce a specialized MLP head with positional embedding to the Transformer so that it predicts pixelwise confidence of joint attention for generating the confidence heatmap. This pixelwise
prediction improves the heatmap accuracy by avoiding the
ill-posed problem in which the high-dimensional heatmap is
predicted from the low-dimensional features. The estimated
joint attention is further improved by being integrated with
general image-based attention estimation. Our method outperforms SOTA methods quantitatively in comparative experiments. Code: https://github.com/chihina/
PJAE.

1. Introduction
Attention analysis enables various applications, such as
customer’s interest estimation [51], analyzing atypical gaze
perception in autism spectrum disorder [21, 2], and humanrobot interaction [47]. While attention is represented as a
point, region, or object in the literature, we represent it as
an attention point, AP, because a point can be used in any
applications as an elemental representation. The confidence
distribution of APs can be expressed in a heatmap image [5,
60, 8, 52] where each pixel value represents the confidence.
Attention estimation has two categories: single attention
estimation [45, 46, 4, 3, 5, 9, 52, 18] and joint attention estimation [8, 60, 40, 41, 17]. While single attention estimation
targets the attention of a person, attention shared by multiple people is detected by joint attention estimation.
In single attention estimation, an AP is estimated based
on the gaze direction of a target person [42, 33, 10, 36,
26, 25, 14, 24] and the saliency map of a scene im-

(a) Previous methods [5, 60, 8, 52]
Share activity as members in a group
blocking

standing

waiting
waiting

digging
Highly weighted

Normally weighted

Lightly weighted

(b) Ours: gaze distributions are omitted for simple visualization
Figure 1. Difference between joint attention estimation methods.
(a) Aggregating the gaze-related features of equally-weighted people without considering their interaction. (b) Aggregating the attributes of people weighted by their contextual attributes (i.e., locations and actions) via the interaction among all the attributes.

age [27, 38, 23, 56, 59, 24] in general. By simply aggregating (e.g., averaging) multi-people APs that are independently estimated by single attention estimation, a joint AP
can be estimated [5, 52]. However, the APs of multiple people are not independent but jointly correlated in context.
For joint attention estimation with such contextual correlation, in [8, 60], only the gaze-related attributes of people
(e.g., “Gaze distribution” in Fig. 1 (a)) are employed. Such
a straightforward approach has the problems below:
• No contribution weights of people: Some people
share attention, but others do not. The latter people
should not affect joint attention estimation, while all
people are equally weighted in [8, 60].
• No explicit interaction among people attributes: As
contextual cues related to joint attention, not only
gazes [8, 60] but also other attributes of people, such
as their locations and actions, are useful. Their interactions are also informative. For example, nearby people
doing the same action may share the AP. Such interactions among people attributes are neglected in [8, 60].

10224

