This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rapid Adaptation in Online Continual Learning: Are We Evaluating It Right?
Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud1* Ameya Prabhu2 * Ser-Nam Lim3
Adel Bibi2† Bernard Ghanem1†
KAUST1 University of Oxford2 Meta AI3
Abstract

1. Introduction
The need for learning on continuously changing data
streams has led to a proliferation of research in Online Continual Learning (OCL) literature [21, 8]. The primary aim
of OCL algorithms is to enable deep models to continuously adapt to new data distributions without compromising the accumulated knowledge. However, we argue that
current metrics have deviated significantly from measuring
true adaptation capabilities. The majority of recent works
on OCL [7, 10] measure the adaptation of OCL algorithms
using the metric of online accuracy, defined as the accuracy of a model on the immediate incoming samples. This
evaluation practice resulted in the neglect in measuring the
capacity of models to retain previous knowledge. As a consequence, several OCL algorithms achieve high online ac* authors contributed equally; order decided by a coin flip.
† equal supervision

Online Accuracy

Backward Transfer @T

Information Retention

Time

Time

Backward Transfer @T

High Adaptation Low Retention
Near-Future Accuracy

Current Metric
(Data Correlations)

Rapid Adaptation

Our Metric
(No Correlations)

We revisit the common practice of evaluating adaptation
of Online Continual Learning (OCL) algorithms through
the metric of online accuracy, which measures the accuracy of the model on the immediate next few samples. However, we show that this metric is unreliable, as even vacuous blind classifiers, which do not use input images for
prediction, can achieve unrealistically high online accuracy by exploiting spurious label correlations in the data
stream. Our study reveals that existing OCL algorithms can
also achieve high online accuracy, but perform poorly in
retaining useful information, suggesting that they unintentionally learn spurious label correlations. To address this
issue, we propose a novel metric for measuring adaptation
based on the accuracy on the near-future samples, where
spurious correlations are removed. We benchmark existing OCL approaches using our proposed metric on largescale datasets under various computational budgets and
find that better generalization can be achieved by retaining
and reusing past seen information. We believe that our proposed metric can aid in the development of truly adaptive
OCL methods. We provide code to reproduce our results at
https://github.com/drimpossible/EvalOCL.

Philip H.S. Torr2

Time

Low Adaptation
Method 1 (Bad)

Time

Low Retention

Method 2 (Good)

Base

Figure 1. Effect of Spurious Correlations. Current methods in
OCL perform well on rapid adaptation but suffer from abysmal
information retention (top). We show that these trends are due to
idiosyncrasies in the data stream such as label correlations that favor methods that inadvertently overfit to the latest data. Using our
proposed metric that removes these correlations (bottom), different sets of methods achieve good performance, with high information retention being key for achieving high adaptability.

curacy [7] but poor performance on other important metrics
like information retention which measure catastrophic forgetting of past seen data. Poor information retention performance has been attributed to an inherent stability-plasticity
trade-off between learning new concepts and remembering
old concepts [6]. However, the ability to preserve information and representations of past data, such as images of
a class like the Eiffel Tower, should be crucial for accurately predicting future images of the same class, even if
they were taken under novel weather conditions or camera
poses. Hence, we find this justification to be unsatisfactory.
In this paper, we demonstrate that the conventional metric of measuring online accuracy may lead to misleading
conclusions about the adaptation capabilities of OCL algorithms due to the idiosyncrasies of the data stream. To
support our claim, we first demonstrate that a simple blind
classifier that relies solely on spurious label correlations in
the stream achieves unrealistically high online accuracy on
large-scale OCL datasets. Furthermore, we show that this
behaviour can be exhibited by deep OCL algorithms, where
we propose OverAdapt which achieves state-of-the-art performance in online accuracy despite the very poor perfor-

18852

