This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LeaF: Learning Frames for 4D Point Cloud Sequence Understanding

1

Yunze Liu 1,3 ,
Tsinghua University,

2

Junyu Chen 1 , Zekai Zhang1 , Jingwei Huang4 , Li Yi1,2,3 ,
Shanghai Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
4
Huawei

Abstract
We focus on learning descriptive geometry and motion
features from 4D point cloud sequences in this work. Existing works usually develop generic 4D learning tools without leveraging the prior that a 4D sequence comes from a
single 3D scene with local dynamics. Based on this observation, we propose to learn region-wise coordinate frames
that transform together with the underlying geometry. With
such frames, we can factorize geometry and motion to facilitate a feature-space geometric reconstruction for more
effective 4D learning. To learn such region frames, we develop a rotation equivariant network with a frame stabilization strategy. To leverage such frames for better spatialtemporal feature learning, we develop a frame-guided 4D
learning scheme. Experiments show that this approach signiﬁcantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods on
a wide range of 4D understanding benchmarks.

t-1

t

Frame-unaware
Spatial-temporal Conv

t+1

Frame-aware
Spatial-temporal Conv

Figure 1. Frame-aware spatial-temporal convolution. We propose
to learn frames for point cloud sequence. Upon obtaining the
frames, we could easily align the geometry regardless of the underlying motion toward a more canonical and complete geometry
understanding. The motion-agnostic geometric features also allow
easier temporal association toward a better motion understanding.

spatial-temporal feature barely outperforms the spatial feature alone. Another line of works [7] uses self-supervised
representation learning to encourage geometry and motion
learning in a loosely decoupled manner. However, the decoupling still happens on the whole-scene level with a special focus on camera ego-motion, restricting their efﬁcacy
in modeling local dynamics on the object-level. We envision that successful geometry and motion decoupling is the
key toward effective 4D representation learning. This essentially requires depicting the low-dimensional manifold
of the dynamic scenes from the redundant high-dimensional
4D data. This highly correlates to dynamic scene reconstruction which requires understanding both camera egomotion and object motion and is an ongoing research
topic itself. Instead of explicitly reconstructing the dynamic scene without a quality guarantee, we seek a more
lightweight and ﬂexible solution.

1. Introduction
We have recently witnessed a surge of interest in understanding point cloud sequences in 4D (3D space + 1D time).
As the direct sensory input in a large number of modern AI
applications including robotics and AR/VR, point cloud sequences can faithfully depict the geometry and motion of a
dynamic scene, and therefore become critical for an intelligent agent to perceive and interact with the physical world.
However, learning on such 4D data is very challenging
and is still in an immature stage. 4D point cloud sequences
usually couple 3D geometry and its dynamic motion together, resulting in quite redundant data in a very high dimensional space. This causes severe learning issues against
an effective and compact spatial-temporal representation.
Some existing efforts tackle the challenge through novel
4D backbone designs [8, 30, 7]. However, most of these
works treat the point cloud sequence as unstructured 4D
data and exploit generic 4D learning methods without leveraging the prior that the whole 4D sequence just depicts a
single 3D scene with dynamic objects. As a result, such
4D learning is usually not super effective and the learned

Our solution is based upon the following observation.
For a speciﬁc region in the scene, we can understand its
dynamic motion through establishing geometry-based and
temporally-consistent local coordinate frames. Speciﬁcally,
if we can establish a local coordinate frame based upon the
3D geometry in each timestamp and also make sure such
604

