This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompt-aligned Gradient for Prompt Tuning
Beier Zhu1
1

Yulei Niu2

Nanyang Technological University

Yucheng Han1
2

Yue Wu3

Columbia University

3

Hanwang Zhang1 *

Damo Academy, Alibaba Group

beier002@e.ntu.edu.sg, yn.yuleiniu@gmail.com yucheng002@e.ntu.edu.sg
matthew.wy@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Thanks to the large pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) like CLIP [37], we can craft a zero-shot classifier by discrete prompt design, e.g., the confidence score
of an image being “[CLASS]” can be obtained by using
the VLM provided similarity between the image and the
prompt sentence “a photo of a [CLASS]”. Furthermore, prompting shows great potential for fast adaptation of
VLMs to downstream tasks if we fine-tune the soft prompts
with few samples. However, we find a common failure that
improper fine-tuning or learning with extremely few-shot
samples may even under-perform the zero-shot prediction.
Existing methods still address this problem by using traditional anti-overfitting techniques such as early stopping and
data augmentation, which lack a principled solution specific to prompting. In this paper, we present Prompt-aligned
Gradient, dubbed ProGrad to prevent prompt tuning from
forgetting the general knowledge learned from VLMs. In
particular, ProGrad only updates the prompt whose gradient is aligned (or non-conflicting) to the general knowledge,
which is represented as the optimization direction offered by
the pre-defined prompt predictions. Extensive experiments
under the few-shot learning, domain generalization, baseto-new generalization and cross-dataset transfer settings
demonstrate the stronger few-shot generalization ability of
ProGrad over state-of-the-art prompt tuning methods.

1. Introduction
After seeing and reading countless image-text association
pairs, large and deep vision-language models (VLM) [37, 18]
can memorize the general knowledge (a.k.a. encyclopedic knowledge) about what visual patterns correspond to
what textual sequence and vice versa. Thanks to the powerful language modeling of VLMs, we can establish a communication channel in human-readable natural language,
i.e., prompt [25, 51, 19], to query the general knowledge.
* Corresponding author.

hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Prompting bridges the interface gap between the pre-trained
and downstream tasks (e.g., regression vs. classification)
without the need for additional fine-tuning adaptation. For
example, we can craft a concrete prompt—“a photo of
a [CLASS]”—for zero-shot image classification: by using
the popular vision-language model CLIP [37], we input the
image to the vision end and the prompt sentence to the language end, then obtain a vision-language similarity as the
confidence score of classifying the image as “[CLASS]”.
In practice, the prompt-based zero-shot image classification is not accurate because the hand-crafted prompt
may not be the most machine-favorable (e.g., “this is
a picture of” could be more grammatically prevailing
in VLM training), or not specific to the downstream domain (e.g., “a photo of a person doing” is better
in action recognition) [37]. Recently, prompt tuning or prefix
tuning [23, 26, 54, 55] has been proposed to replace the handcrafted prompt with a set of tunable word embedding vectors,
which do not have to be translatable back to human-readable
words. Yet, prompt tuning is still as tricky as conventional
fine-tuning: as the training continues, the generalization
ability may decrease and even under-perform the zero-shot
baseline. As shown in Figure 1(a&b), the prompt tuning
method CoOp [54] achieves the best results via early stopping, and its accuracies heavily drop by at most 4% when
the training continues. Besides, Figure 1(c&d) show that
CoOp underperforms zero-shot CLIP without augmentation
or enough samples from downstream tasks. To the best of
our knowledge, existing methods still rely on the conventional anti-overfitting techniques such as early stopping and
data augmentation [54, 55, 11, 36], which lacks a principled
solution to the nature of improper prompt tuning. Furthermore, the Grad-CAM visualization results indicate that the
fine-tuned prompt misleads the VLM to forget the general
knowledge that the classification should at least focus on the
foreground object but not the background. Comparing CoOp
(Figure 2(b)) with zero-shot CLIP (Figure 2(c)), we find that
the CoOp model distracts its attention to the background,
while CLIP mainly focuses on the foreground object. These
results demonstrate the over-fitting risk of existing prompt

15659

