This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gender Artifacts in Visual Datasets
Nicole Meister1†⇤ , Dora Zhao2†⇤ , Angelina Wang3 , Vikram V. Ramaswamy3 ,
Ruth Fong3 , Olga Russakovsky3
1

Stanford University
*Equal contribution

2

Sony AI

3

Princeton University

†Work done as a student at Princeton University

{nmeist, dorothyz}@stanford.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
It has been well established that machine learning systems contain gender biases [12, 15, 31, 76, 82, 83]. For
instance, image tagging systems have labelled similarly
posed female politicians differently than their male counterparts [64], and image search engines can return stereotypical results mirroring harmful gender roles [38, 48, 50].

Average color

F

M

0.4

0.2

2.0

0.2

0.1

1.0

0.0

F

M

Area

0.0

F

M

Distance

0.0

F

Color Channel Value

Gender biases are known to exist within large-scale visual datasets and can be reflected or even amplified in
downstream models. Many prior works have proposed
methods for mitigating gender biases, often by attempting to remove gender expression information from images.
To understand the feasibility and practicality of these approaches, we investigate what “gender artifacts” exist in
large-scale visual datasets. We define a “gender artifact”
as a visual cue correlated with gender, focusing specifically on cues that are learnable by a modern image classifier and have an interpretable human corollary. Through
our analyses, we find that gender artifacts are ubiquitous
in the COCO and OpenImages datasets, occurring everywhere from low-level information (e.g., the mean value of
the color channels) to higher-level image composition (e.g.,
pose and location of people). Further, bias mitigation methods that attempt to remove gender actually remove more information from the scene than the person. Given the prevalence of gender artifacts, we claim that attempts to remove
these artifacts from such datasets are largely infeasible as
certain removed artifacts may be necessary for the downstream task of object recognition. Instead, the responsibility lies with researchers and practitioners to be aware that
the distribution of images within datasets is highly gendered
and hence develop fairness-aware methods which are robust to these distributional shifts across groups.

Average pose

F

M

Aspect

M

100
50
0

F

M

Red

F

M

Green

F

M

Blue

Figure 1. We aim to understand gender artifacts in image datasets
by training a classifier to distinguish between images containing a
person labelled “female” vs. “male”. We find that such a classifier
frequently performs significantly above random chance even when
trained and evaluated on modified versions of images (e.g. where a
person’s appearance is obscured). On the left, we trained a CNN
on COCO [42] images with only the person segmentation mask
visible; on the right, we trained a logistic regression classifier using only 3 features (i.e. average color) per COCO image. Both
classifiers perform significantly above random chance, illustrating
how deeply gender artifacts are embedded within the dataset. We
visualize the classifiers’ top 20 (most “female”) and bottom 20
(most “male”) images (top), and further show the differences between their segmentation masks (left bottom) in normalized area,
distance from the center, and aspect ratio, and the differences between the R, G and B features (right bottom). These results suggest that gender artifacts are pervasive in computer vision datasets,
and current “fairness through blindness” methods that aim to “remove” gendered information may not be as effective as hoped.

A prevailing assumption in the fairness community is
that biases in models originate in biases in the input data.
Thus, there has been an effort to mitigate these dataset
biases (and thus also model biases). While many biases
stem from the lack of representation of certain demographic
groups, including women [13, 82, 83], naively balancing
gender distributions has been shown to be insufficient for
mitigating model biases [76]. As a result, a large vein
of work has attempted to pursue “fairness through blindness” [22] which operates under the assumption that remov-

4837

