This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ScatterNeRF:
Seeing Through Fog with Physically-Based Inverse Neural Rendering
Andrea Ramazzina1 Mario Bijelic2 Stefanie Walz1 Alessandro Sanvito1 Dominik Scheuble1 Felix Heide2
1
Mercedes-Benz 2 Princeton University

Abstract
Vision in adverse weather conditions, whether it be snow,
rain, or fog is challenging. In these scenarios, scattering and attenuation severly degrades image quality. Handling such inclement weather conditions, however, is essential to operate autonomous vehicles, drones and robotic applications where human performance is impeded the most.
A large body of work explores removing weather-induced
image degradations with dehazing methods. Most methods rely on single images as input and struggle to generalize from synthetic fully-supervised training approaches or
to generate high fidelity results from unpaired real-world
datasets. With data as bottleneck and most of today’s
training data relying on good weather conditions with inclement weather as outlier, we rely on an inverse rendering approach to reconstruct the scene content. We introduce ScatterNeRF, a neural rendering method which adequately renders foggy scenes and decomposes the fog-free
background from the participating media – exploiting the
multiple views from a short automotive sequence without
the need for a large training data corpus. Instead, the rendering approach is optimized on the multi-view scene itself,
which can be typically captured by an autonomous vehicle,
robot or drone during operation. Specifically, we propose
a disentangled representation for the scattering volume and
the scene objects, and learn the scene reconstruction with
physics-inspired losses. We validate our method by capturing multi-view In-the-Wild data and controlled captures in
a large-scale fog chamber. Our code and datasets are available at https://light.princeton.edu/scatternerf.

1. Introduction
Imaging and scene understanding in the presence of scattering media, such as fog, smog, light rain and snow, is an
open challenge for computer vision and photography. As
rare out-of-distribution events that occur based on geography and region [8], these weather phenomena can drastically reduce the image quality of the captured intensity images, reducing local contrast, color reproduction, and image
resolution [8]. A large body of existing work has investi-

Figure 1: ScatterNeRF produces accurate renderings for
scenes with volumetric scattering (b). By learning a disentangled representation of participating media and clear
scene, the proposed method is able to recover dehazed scene
content (c) with accurate depth (d).
gated methods for dehazing [57, 5, 49, 29, 73, 77] with the
most successful methods employing learned feed-forward
models [57, 5, 49, 29, 73]. Some methods [49, 5, 35] use
synthetic data and full supervision, but struggle to overcome the domain gap between simulation and real world.
Acquiring paired data in real world conditions is challenging and existing methods either learn natural image priors
from large unpaired datasets [74, 73], or they rely on crossmodal semi-supervision to learn to separate atmospheric effects from clear RGB intensity [57]. Unfortunately, as the
semi-supervised training cues are weak compared to paired
supervised data, these methods often fail to completely separate atmospheric scatter from clear image content, especially at long distances. The problem of predicting clear
images in the presence of haze is an open challenge, and
notably harsh weather also results in severely impaired human vision – a major driver behind fatal automotive accidents [4].
As the distribution of natural scenes with participating
media is long-tailed in typical training datasets [14, 60, 19,
18, 8], this also makes training and evaluation of computer
vision tasks that operate on RGB streams in bad weather
challenging. For supervised approaches to scene understanding tasks, these ”edge” scenarios often directly re17957

