This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Wasserstein Expansible Variational Autoencoder
for Discriminative and Generative Continual Learning
Fei Ye and Adrian G. Bors
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, UK
fy689@york.ac.uk, adrian.bors@york.ac.uk

Abstract
Task-Free Continual Learning (TFCL) represents a challenging learning paradigm where a model is trained on the
non-stationary data distributions without any knowledge of
the task information, thus representing a more practical
approach. Despite promising achievements by the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) mixtures in continual learning,
such methods ignore the redundancy among the probabilistic representations of their components when performing
model expansion, leading to mixture components learning
similar tasks. This paper proposes the Wasserstein Expansible Variational Autoencoder (WEVAE), which evaluates the statistical similarity between the probabilistic representation of new data and that represented by each mixture component and then uses it for deciding when to expand the model. Such a mechanism can avoid unnecessary model expansion while ensuring the knowledge diversity among the trained components. In addition, we propose an energy-based sample selection approach that assigns high energies to novel samples and low energies to
the samples which are similar to the model’s knowledge.
Extensive empirical studies on both supervised and unsupervised benchmark tasks demonstrate that our model outperforms all competing methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/dtuzi123/WEVAE/.

1. Introduction
The variational Autoencoder (VAE) [33] is one of the
most popular deep generative models, underlined by a symmetric network structure in which an input x is transferred
into a pseudo-similar data x′ through an encoding-decoding
process. Due to its powerful inference mechanisms, the
VAE has been successfully used in many applications, including few-shot learning [54], semi-supervised learning
[1], image synthesis [41], image-to-image translation [40],
and density estimation [59]. However, using the VAE model
in continual learning has not been sufficiently investigated
so far. Similar to other deep neural networks in contin-

ual learning, VAEs suffer from a significant performance
loss when continually learning new data domains, which is
known as catastrophic forgetting [45].
Constructing a fixed-length memory buffer that stores
some past samples and then replays them during the subsequent learning stages [14, 9] was shown to relieve catastrophic forgetting in continual learning. Meanwhile, other
approaches focus on regulating the optimization procedure
of the model by imposing a penalty term in the objective
function for freezing certain parameters, [34, 39]. These
approaches usually train a static model with a fixed capacity and cannot achieve good performance when learning
a growing number of tasks [71]. The dynamic expansion
model [52, 71] builds new hidden layers to handle incoming
tasks, showing promising results in continual learning due
to its scalability and generalization performance. However,
despite their impressive performance in continual learning,
most dynamic expansion methods still require the knowledge of the task boundaries, which limits their applicability
in a more realistic scenario such as the Task-Free Continual
Learning (TFCL) [6].
The dynamic expansible VAE framework was recently
shown to provide good performance in TFCL, [48, 73]. The
Continual Unsupervised Representation Learning (CURL)
[48] dynamically builds new VAE inference models to capture the distribution shift over time. CURL relieves forgetting by retraining a generator (decoder) to reproduce past
samples, inevitably leading to forgetting, [71]. A similar
idea was proposed in [38], which uses the Dirichlet process for the component expansion in a mixture of VAEs in a
method called the Continual Neural Dirichlet Process Mixture (CN-DPM). Unlike CURL, CN-DPM does not rely on
the generative replay mechanism (GRM) [84] and therefore
can preserve the best information for all previously learned
samples. More recently, the dynamic VAE mixture model
was upgraded by using the Online Cooperative Memorization (OCM) [73], which manages two cooperative memory
buffers to preserve both the short- and long-term information. However, none of these models have theoretical guarantees for their expansion mechanisms. Moreover, they do

18665

