This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Scale Bidirectional Recurrent Network with Hybrid Correlation for Point
Cloud Based Scene Flow Estimation
Wencan Cheng
Department of Artificial Intelligence
Sungkyunkwan University

Jong Hwan Ko
College of Information and Communication Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University

cwc1260@skku.edu

jhko@skku.edu

Abstract
Scene flow estimation provides the fundamental motion
perception of a dynamic scene, which is of practical importance in many computer vision applications. In this
paper, we propose a novel multi-scale bidirectional recurrent architecture that iteratively optimizes the coarse-tofine scene flow estimation. In each resolution scale of estimation, a novel bidirectional gated recurrent unit is proposed to bidirectionally and iteratively augment point features and produce progressively optimized scene flow. The
optimization of each iteration is integrated with the hybrid correlation that captures not only local correlation
but also semantic correlation for more accurate estimation. Experimental results indicate that our proposed architecture significantly outperforms the existing state-of-theart approaches on both FlyingThings3D and KITTI benchmarks while maintaining superior time efficiency. Codes
and pre-trained models are publicly available at https:
//github.com/cwc1260/MSBRN .

1. Introduction
Scene flow estimation is a fundamental task that estimates the dense 3D motion field of points from two consecutive frames [32, 19]. As it provides the basic motion
understanding of a dynamic environment, it is meaningful
in a variety of high-level applications such as autonomous
driving, augmented reality, and robotics [15].
Early scene flow estimation approaches rely on 2D representations such as RGB images [14, 11, 13, 28, 12]. They
basically estimate optical flow and disparity map separately
in the 2D space instead of directly estimating scene flow
vectors in the 3D space. Recently, with the advances in
LiDAR sensors and point cloud-based learning technologies, learning scene flow directly from point clouds has
been extensively studied. The pioneering work known as
FlowNet3D [19] is the first to introduce hierarchical Point-

Source frame

Multi-Scale Bidirectional
Recurrent Network
Multi-scale
Feature Extraction
BGRU
w/ HC
×𝐾

Target frame

BGRU
w/ HC
×𝐾

BGRU
w/ HC
×𝐾

Multi-scale
Feature Extraction

Scene flow
(+ source)

Figure 1. Illustration of the multi-scale bidirectional recurrent network for scene flow estimation. The multi-scale features extracted
from each input frame are fed into novel bidirectional gated recurrent units (BGRUs) that respectively iterates K times for optimizing scene flows on each scale. Introducing hybrid correlation (HC)
further improves the performance by searching correspondence in
both the Euclidean and latent feature space. The estimated scene
flows are warped with the source frame for a clear comparison
with the target frame.

Net++ [26] to directly predict the 3D scene flow based on
the point cloud. Following this work, a diverse variety of
architectures [33, 36, 9, 32, 15] have been proposed and
significantly enhanced performance.
Recently, there is a rising trend of iteratively optimizing estimated scene flow by utilizing the recurrent scheme
[15, 9, 31] to progressively improve the estimation accuracy. However, they only focus on optimizing single resolution scale which causes large computation latency. On the
other hand, another series of works [28, 4] presented their
superior efficiency by estimating multi-scale scene flow in
a coarse-to-fine manner. However, their single-shot estimation on each scale restricts their performance. To achieve
high estimation accuracy while holding high efficiency, we
propose an effective and efficient architecture, Multi-Scale
Bidirectional Recurrent Network (MSBRN), that iteratively
optimizes coarse-to-fine scene flow. Moreover, in our view,
the optimization phases of scene flow can be regarded as
temporal sequences, which can benefit from the bidirec-

10041

