This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamBooth3D: Subject-Driven Text-to-3D Generation
Amit Raj Srinivas Kaza Ben Poole Michael Niemeyer Nataniel Ruiz Ben Mildenhall
Shiran Zada Kﬁr Aberman Michael Rubinstein Jonathan Barron Yuanzhen Li Varun Jampani
Google

Figure 1: DreamBooth3D is a personalized text-to-3D generative model that creates plausible 3D assets of a speciﬁc subject
from just 3-6 images. Top: 3D output and geometry estimated for an owl object. Bottom: our approach can generate
variations of the 3D subject in different contexts (sleeping) or with different accessories (hat or tie) based on a text prompt.

Abstract
We present DreamBooth3D, an approach to personalize text-to-3D generative models from as few as 3-6 casually captured images of a subject. Our approach combines recent advances in personalizing text-to-image models (DreamBooth) with text-to-3D generation (DreamFusion). We ﬁnd that naı̈vely combining these methods fails
to yield satisfactory subject-speciﬁc 3D assets due to personalized text-to-image models overﬁtting to the input viewpoints of the subject. We overcome this through a 3-stage
optimization strategy where we jointly leverage the 3D consistency of neural radiance ﬁelds together with the personalization capability of text-to-image models. Our method

can produce high-quality, subject-speciﬁc 3D assets with
text-driven modiﬁcations such as novel poses, colors and
attributes that are not seen in any of the input images of
the subject. More results are available at our project page:
https://dreambooth3d.github.io

1. Introduction
Text-to-Image (T2I) generative models [6, 36, 37, 39]
have greatly expanded the ways we can create and edit visual content. Recent works [23, 27, 33, 43] have demonstrated high-quality Text-to-3D generation by optimizing
neural radiance ﬁelds (NeRFs) [28] using the T2I diffusion
models. Such automatic 3D asset creation with input text

2349

