This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring the Sim2Real Gap using Digital Twins
Sruthi Sudhakar1 * Jon Hanzelka2 Josh Bobillot2
Tanmay Randhavane2 Neel Joshi2 Vibhav Vineet2
1
Columbia University 2 Microsoft Research
Abstract

1. Introduction
A computer vision model must be trained on a large
dataset that samples across different environments and conditions so what is learned from it generalizes well. The traditional process is to train models on large real world image
datasets, which require a lot of time and cost to create [18].
Image collection alone is difﬁcult, time consuming, has low
scalability, and is sometimes impossible to do [2, 16, 26].
Furthermore, annotating the data is time-intensive.
An interesting alternative is to use computer graphics
methods to render large sets of synthetic images for training vision models. Synthetic data provides many beneﬁts
– it is easy to create a vast number of data variations with
* Correspondence to Sruthi Sudhakar at ss6638@columbia.edu.
1 Dataset: https://github.com/SruthiSudhakar/Exploring-the-Sim2Real-

Gap-using-Digital-Twins-Dataset.git

Figure 1: For each artifact that can arise in synthetic data
creation, we show how long it takes to ﬁx it vs. the drop
in mAP of the model trained with that data. This provides
actionable insights as to how to balance the time and cost
for synthetic data generation.
Artist Time vs mAP Difference for YCB-Real
2

texture level 1
ambient 2
ambient 1

clean

0
-2

Difference in mAP

It is very time consuming to create datasets for training computer vision models. An emerging alternative is to
use synthetic data, but if the synthetic data is not similar
enough to the real data, the performance is typically below
that of training with real data. Thus using synthetic data
still requires a large amount of time, money, and skill as
one needs to author the data carefully. In this paper, we
seek to understand which aspects of this authoring process
are most critical. We present an analysis of which factors
of variation between simulated and real data are most important. We capture images of YCB objects to create a novel
YCB-Real dataset. We then create a novel synthetic “digital
twin” dataset, YCB-Synthetic, which matches the YCB-Real
dataset and includes variety of artifacts added to the synthetic data. We study the affects of these artifacts on our
dataset and two existing published datasets on two different computer vision tasks: object detection and instance
segmentation. We provide an analysis of the cost-beneﬁt
trade-offs between artist time for ﬁxing artifacts and trained
model accuracy. We plan to release this dataset (images and
3D assets) so they can be further used by the community.
Link to dataset1

-4

noise level 1
holes level 2
holes level 3
holes level 1

-6
-8

baked light
texture level 3

-10
-12

texture level 2
noise level 2

-14
-16

noise level 3

-18
0

2

4

6

8

10

Hours of artist time

minimal human effort, and the annotation of the data is essentially free. These properties have lead an increased use
of synthetic data in academia [20, 25, 28, 2] and industry
(e.g. Microsoft AirSim, NVIDIA’s Carla and Omniverse
platforms, Unity’s Computer Vision API, Datagen, among
many others).
Despite these great beneﬁts, broad use is still limited,
as models trained on synthetic data often under-perform
on real world test data relative to models trained on real
world data [29]. Furthermore, many publicly available object models, such as ShapeNet [3], contain meshes which
render very poorly in 3D graphics software like Blender,
Arnold, etc., leading to difﬁculties in training for 3D vision
tasks. This performance gap, known as the “Sim2Real” gap,
is well known, and it is it caused by numerous factors that
make synthetic data a bad match for the data distribution
seen in the real world test data [29]. However, while the
problem is well known, there is actually quite little under-

20418

