This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Texture Generation on 3D Meshes with Point-UV Diffusion
Xin Yu1
1

Peng Dai1

Wenbo Li2

Lan Ma3

Zhengzhe Liu2†

Xiaojuan Qi1†

The University of Hong Kong, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 3 TCL Corporate Research
{yuxin,daipeng,xjqi}@eee.hku.hk

{wenboli,zzliu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

rubyma@tcl.com

Figure 1. A gallery of generated results by our Point-UV diffusion. Our method is capable of processing meshes of any genus, generating
diversiﬁed, geometry-compatible, and high-ﬁdelity textures.

Abstract
In this work, we focus on synthesizing high-quality textures on 3D meshes. We present Point-UV diffusion, a
coarse-to-ﬁne pipeline that marries the denoising diffusion model with UV mapping to generate 3D consistent
and high-quality texture images in UV space. We start
with introducing a point diffusion model to synthesize lowfrequency texture components with our tailored style guidance to tackle the biased color distribution. The derived
coarse texture offers global consistency and serves as a
condition for the subsequent UV diffusion stage, aiding in
regularizing the model to generate a 3D consistent UV texture image. Then, a UV diffusion model with hybrid conditions is developed to enhance the texture ﬁdelity in the
2D UV space. Our method can process meshes of any
genus, generating diversiﬁed, geometry-compatible, and
high-ﬁdelity textures. Code is available at https://cvmilab.github.io/Point-UV-Diffusion.

† : Corresponding authors

1. Introduction
Texturing 3D meshes is a fundamental task in computer
vision and graphics. It enhances the visual richness of
3D objects, thereby facilitating their application in various
ﬁelds such as video games, 3D movies, and AR/VR technologies. However, generating high-quality textures can
be daunting and time-consuming, often requiring specialized knowledge and resources. As such, there is a pressing
need for an efﬁcient approach to automatically create highquality textures on 3D meshes.
Despite the substantial progress the community has
made in 2D image synthesis and 3D shape generation using
GANs [13, 20, 44, 11] or diffusion models [34, 36, 35, 19],
crafting realistic textures on mesh surfaces remains challenging. One major difﬁculty stems from the need for suitable 3D representations for texture synthesis. Early approaches investigate the use of voxels [5, 45, 6] or point
clouds [10] and synthesize point/voxel colors. However,
they can only afford to synthesize low-resolution results
with low-ﬁdelity textures due to memory and model complexity constraints. In response, Texture Fields [29] adopts
an implicit representation with the potential to synthesize
14206

