This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EigenPlaces: Training Viewpoint Robust Models for Visual Place Recognition
Gabriele Berton*1

Gabriele Trivigno*1 Barbara Caputo1
1
Politecnico di Torino

Carlo Masone1

{gabriele.berton, gabriele.trivigno, barbara.caputo, carlo.masone}@polito.it

Abstract
Visual Place Recognition is a task that aims to predict
the place of an image (called query) based solely on its
visual features. This is typically done through image retrieval, where the query is matched to the most similar
images from a large database of geotagged photos, using learned global descriptors. A major challenge in this
task is recognizing places seen from different viewpoints.
To overcome this limitation, we propose a new method,
called EigenPlaces, to train our neural network on images from different point of views, which embeds viewpoint
robustness into the learned global descriptors. The underlying idea is to cluster the training data so as to explicitly present the model with different views of the same
points of interest. The selection of this points of interest is done without the need for extra supervision. We
then present experiments on the most comprehensive set
of datasets in literature, finding that EigenPlaces is able
to outperform previous state of the art on the majority of
datasets, while requiring 60% less GPU memory for training and using 50% smaller descriptors. The code and
trained models for EigenPlaces are available at https:
//github.com/gmberton/EigenPlaces, while results
with any other baseline can be computed with the codebase
at https://github.com/gmberton/auto_VPR.

1. Introduction
Visual Place Recognition (VPR) is a task that aims to
predict the place where a photo (i.e. query) was taken,
quickly and accurately, based solely on its visual features. This is typically done with an image retrieval approach [51, 14, 27, 16, 5, 15, 50, 23, 20, 31, 19, 21, 26,
57, 53, 22, 25, 60, 36, 1, 8, 10, 2, 29]: first, a deep
neural network is used to extract global descriptors from
the query and from a database of geo-referenced images;
then, a nearest neighbor search is performed in this features
space [5, 31, 27, 21, 8, 2, 1]. While such approaches have
shown great potential in partially solving known problems
such as scalability (by using ever more compact descriptors

Figure 1. Most previous works [5, 31, 27, 61] train their models
through metric learning, using as positive the most similar image
to the query, which naturally would have same or similar orientation to the query. Other works split the dataset in classes, with
images within a class having similar [1, 2] or exactly the same [8]
orientation. EigenPlaces goes against this trend, creating classes
in which all images are oriented towards the same point, leading
to viewpoint robust models able to correctly localize highly challenging queries, for example the ones collected from a sidewalk.

[62, 8, 2]) and illumination changes (through the synthetic
generation of night images [11, 41, 3] or strong data augmentation [21]), recognizing images under heavy viewpoint
shifts is still an open challenge. A popular strategy to handle
this problem is to follow up the similarity search performed
on global feature descriptors with a post-processing phase
that re-ranks the retrieved results using either spatial verification [12, 30, 22] or matching densely extracted local fea-

11080

