This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detecting Objects with Context-Likelihood Graphs and Graph Refinement
Aritra Bhowmik1 Yu Wang2 Nora Baka2 Martin R. Oswald1 Cees G. M. Snoek1
2
Atlas Lab - 1 University of Amsterdam
TomTom
{a.bhowmik, m.r.oswald, cgmsnoek}@uva.nl

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to detect objects by exploiting their interrelationships. Contrary to existing methods,
which learn objects and relations separately, our key idea
is to learn the object-relation distribution jointly. We first
propose a novel way of creating a graphical representation of an image from inter-object relation priors and initial class predictions, we call a context-likelihood graph.
We then learn the joint distribution with an energy-based
modeling technique which allows to sample and refine the
context-likelihood graph iteratively for a given image. Our
formulation of jointly learning the distribution enables us
to generate a more accurate graph representation of an image which leads to a better object detection performance.
We demonstrate the benefits of our context-likelihood graph
formulation and the energy-based graph refinement via experiments on the Visual Genome and MS-COCO datasets
where we achieve a consistent improvement over object detectors like DETR and Faster-RCNN, as well as alternative
methods modeling object interrelationships separately. Our
method is detector agnostic, end-to-end trainable, and especially beneficial for rare object classes.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a classical task in computer vision [2, 29], where methods in the last decade have evolved
from deep convolutional architectures [38, 37, 26, 4] to selfattention based transformer networks [5, 49, 35, 42]. Although these two approaches vary widely in architecture,
they both focus exclusively on the image space for feature
representation, rather than incorporating contextual semantics about object categories. Once fed with sufficient data,
these architectures might implicitly learn some object relations, but prior works [21, 45, 46, 44] have shown that explicitly modeling object relations enhances object detection
performance by a substantial margin.
Amongst existing work on modeling object relations,
Jiang et al. [21] hypothesize that in case a dataset has little information about certain classes, incorporating prior

{nora.baka, yu.wang}@tomtom.com

Faster-RCNN [27]

Ground truth detections

Initial context-likelihood graph

Results after energy-refinement

Figure 1. We generate a context-likelihood graph from the initial
predictions of a base detector, here Faster-RCNN, by incorporating
inter-object relation priors. Having learnt the joint object-relation
distribution, we iteratively sample a refined graph by energy optimization. This enables us to predict objects undetected by FasterRCNN, due to their relations or co-occurrence patterns with already detected objects. For instance, the detection of a face makes
the occurrence of eyes or a nose much more likely and vice versa.
Likewise for the trousers in the presence of a man, which are not
even present in the ground truth.

knowledge in the training of a detector should improve detection. This prior knowledge could be from another source,
or it could even be distilled from the original dataset. The
authors establish a novel way of explicitly incorporating semantic prior knowledge into a base object detection framework by predicting object-relations from features, creating
a graphical representation of the image. Xu et al. [45] propose to predict object relations solely from object features
and their spatial orientation, without any extra prior information, by creating a sparse graphical representation. Both
these methods are dependent on the correctness of the predicted relations since they refine the object features for classification. Instead of predicting an explicit graph representation, Xu et al. [46] enhance object detection by evolving high-level semantic representations globally, rather than
relying solely on visual features. This is accomplished
16524

