This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards High-Quality Specular Highlight Removal
by Leveraging Large-Scale Synthetic Data
Gang Fu1 , Qing Zhang2 , Lei Zhu3,4 , Chunxia Xiao5 , and Ping Li1, *
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
2
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
5
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China

Abstract
This paper aims to remove specular highlights from a
single object-level image. Although previous methods have
made some progresses, their performance remains somewhat limited, particularly for real images with complex
specular highlights. To this end, we propose a three-stage
network to address them. Specifically, given an input image,
we first decompose it into the albedo, shading, and specular
residue components to estimate a coarse specular-free image. Then, we further refine the coarse result to alleviate its
visual artifacts such as color distortion. Finally, we adjust
the tone of the refined result to match the tone of the input as
closely as possible. In addition, to facilitate network training and quantitative evaluation, we present a large-scale
synthetic dataset of object-level images, covering diverse
objects and illumination conditions. Extensive experiments
illustrate that our network is able to generalize well to unseen real object-level images, and even produce good results for scene-level images with multiple background objects and complex lighting.

1. Introduction
Specular highlights are very common in the real world,
but they are usually undesirable in photographs, since they
can degrade the image quality. In daily life, users often
want to achieve the specular-free image from an image.
For example, specular highlights in facial or document images sweep away skin details or meaningful texture patterns
which are very important to users. Removing specular highlights from a single image enables recovering visual content
with better perceptibility. Moreover, it has many related
applications such as recoloring [1], light source estimation
* Corresponding author.

[11], recognition of specular objects [18], and intrinsic image decomposition [31]. Thus, specular highlight removal
is a long-standing and challenging problem in computer vision and computer graphics.
To address this problem, researchers have proposed various specular highlight methods. They can be roughly divided into two categories: traditional methods [25, 29, 13,
24] based on intensity and chromaticity analysis as well as
optimization, and deep learning-based methods [30, 4, 28].
However, the traditional methods often produce unsatisfactory or even poor results with visual artifacts such as black
color block and detail missing; see Figure 1(b). The main
reason is that they fail to capture high-level semantic information to recover the missing colors and details underneath
specular highlights using those meaningful and reliable information from the non-highlight region. In addition, although the deep learning-based methods have achieved certain performance improvement, they may still produce unsatisfactory results with visual artifacts such as illumination
residue and color distortion; see Figure 1(c)(e). It is partly
attributed to the fact that they are trained on relatively simple images in which materials and illumination conditions
are not diverse enough, leading to their limited generalization to unseen images.
We in this paper propose a three-stage specular highlight removal network, consisting of (i) physics-based specular highlight removal, (ii) specular-free refinement, and
(iii) tone correction. In the first stage, based on a physicsbased formation model, we decompose an input image into
its albedo, shading, and specular residue components, and
then estimate a coarse specular-free image. In the second
stage, we further refine the coarse result to alleviate visual
artifacts for improving the quality. In the third stage, we
adjust the tone of the refined result to produce the final result with the similar tone of the input. In addition, to facilitate network training and quantitative evaluation, we build a

12857

