This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Prompt Model for Weakly Supervised Object Localization
Yuzhong Zhao1 ,
1

Qixiang Ye1 ,

Weijia Wu2 ,

Chunhua Shen2 ,

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract

2

Fang Wan1 *

Zhejiang University

Discriminatively trained activation model

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) is a challenging task when provided with image category supervision but required to learn object localization models.
As a pioneered WSOL method, Class Activation Map
(CAM) [67] defines global average pooling (GAP) to generate semantic-aware localization maps based on a discriminatively trained activation model. Such a fundamental method, however, suffers from partial object activation
while often missing full object extent, Fig. 1(upper). The
nature behind the phenomenon is that discriminative models are born to pursue compact yet discriminative features
while ignoring representative ones [3, 20].
* Corresponding author

…

Classification loss
Encoder

Discriminative
GAP
Embedding (!% )

0.1
0.8
0.1

dog
goldfish
shark

…

Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) remains
challenging when learning object localization models from
image category labels. Conventional methods that discriminatively train activation models ignore representative yet
less discriminative object parts. In this study, we propose
a generative prompt model (GenPromp), defining the first
generative pipeline to localize less discriminative object
parts by formulating WSOL as a conditional image denoising procedure. During training, GenPromp converts image
category labels to learnable prompt embeddings which are
fed to a generative model to conditionally recover the input image with noise and learn representative embeddings.
During inference, GenPromp combines the representative
embeddings with discriminative embeddings (queried from
an off-the-shelf vision-language model) for both representative and discriminative capacity. The combined embeddings are finally used to generate multi-scale high-quality
attention maps, which facilitate localizing full object extent.
Experiments on CUB-200-2011 and ILSVRC show that
GenPromp respectively outperforms the best discriminative
models by 5.2% and 5.6% (Top-1 Loc), setting a solid baseline for WSOL with the generative model. Code is available
at https://github.com/callsys/GenPromp.

Generative prompt model (Ours)
Prompt :
“a photo of a goldfish”
CLIP
Noisy image

Discriminative
Embedding (!% )
Representative
Embedding (!& )

Encoder

+

Combined Embedding (!' )

Decoder

Denoising

Denoising loss

Figure 1: Comparison of our generative prompt model
(GenPromp) with the discriminatively trained activation model. GenPromp aims to localize less discriminative
object parts by formulating WSOL as a conditional image
denoising procedure. Red, green, and black arrows respectively denote information propagation during training, inference, and training & inference. fd , fr , and fc denote the
discriminative, representative, and combined embeddings.

Many efforts have been proposed to alleviate the partial activation issue by introducing spatial regularization
terms [32, 33, 34, 52, 59, 60, 65, 66], auxiliary localization modules [33, 36, 54, 55], or adversarial erasing strategies [13, 14, 34, 65]. Nevertheless, the fundamental challenge about how to use a discriminatively trained classification model to generate precise object locations remains.
In this study, we propose a generative prompt model
(GenPromp), Fig. 1(lower), which formulates WSOL as
a conditional image denoising procedure, solving the
fundamental partial object activation problem in a new
and systematic way. During training, for each category
(e.g.goldfish in Fig. 1) in the predetermined category
set, GenPromp converts each category label to a learnable prompt embedding (fr ) through a pre-trained visionlanguage model (CLIP) [40]. The learnable prompt embedding is then fed to a transformer encoder-decoder to condi-

6351

