This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PC-Adapter: Topology-Aware Adapter for Efficient Domain Adaption
on Point Clouds with Rectified Pseudo-label
Joonhyung Park
KAIST

Hyunjin Seo
KAIST

Eunho Yang
KAIST, AITRICS

deepjoon@kaist.ac.kr

bella72@kaist.ac.kr

eunhoy@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Understanding point clouds captured from the realworld is challenging due to shifts in data distribution
caused by varying object scales, sensor angles, and selfocclusion. Prior works have addressed this issue by combining recent learning principles such as self-supervised
learning, self-training, and adversarial training, which
leads to significant computational overhead. Toward succinct yet powerful domain adaptation for point clouds, we
revisit the unique challenges of point cloud data under domain shift scenarios and discover the importance of the
global geometry of source data and trends of target pseudolabels biased to the source label distribution. Motivated
by our observations, we propose an adapter-guided domain adaptation method, PC-Adapter, that preserves the
global shape information of the source domain using an
attention-based adapter, while learning the local characteristics of the target domain via another adapter equipped
with graph convolution. Additionally, we propose a novel
pseudo-labeling strategy resilient to the classifier bias by
adjusting confidence scores using their class-wise confidence distributions to consider relative confidences. Our
method demonstrates superiority over baselines on various domain shift settings in benchmark datasets - PointDA,
GraspNetPC, and PointSegDA.

1. Introduction
3D vision has gained considerable attention as an immense amount of 3D data is collected by LiDAR sensors
or depth-sensing cameras in real-world applications such
as autonomous vehicles, surveillance systems, and drones.
In recent years, deep neural networks [15, 16, 22, 28, 17]
have become a de facto approach for understanding unordered 3D point sets (i.e. point cloud data). However, for
the case of point clouds in the wild, deep models inevitably
encounter distributional shift - also known as domain shift
- due to the different object scales, point density, angle of

sensor, object occlusion, etc. This problem makes the models perform poorly outside the laboratory.
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is a representative solution to tackle the domain shift problem, which
targets to transfer the knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain [24, 8, 10]. UDA methods generally endeavor to reduce the discrepancy of two domains in representation space, so that a classifier trained on
the label-rich source domain generalizes well on the target
domain. Such standard UDA strategies would be attractive
options even for point cloud data, since collecting synthetic
point clouds can be simply done by sampling points from
the 3D CAD models whereas annotating the enormous real
3D data is cumbersome and time-consuming. Hence, if a
UDA method can successfully transfer the knowledge from
synthetic point clouds (source domain) to real point clouds
(target domain), it will enable the models to significantly
boost performances over a broad range of 3D vision tasks.
Therefore, numerous studies considering the innate characteristic of point cloud data have recently been proposed
for domain adaptation [18, 1, 29, 5, 20, 12, 19]. Most
of them jointly exploit components such as self-supervised
learning, adversarial training, data augmentation, and selftraining to squeeze the best adaptation performances. Especially, recent works [29, 5, 12] focus on designing at
least two self-supervised learning tasks by deforming point
clouds; for example, reconstructing the deformed parts or
predicting the extent of specific distortion. Although these
methods have shown successful results, due to their excessive computations and memory access, these frameworks
are difficult to deploy in real-world systems where we do
not have sufficient computing resources. These situations
raise questions regarding the race of performance-oriented
design and call for a pivot towards a succinct yet effective
strategy toward a practical domain adaptation framework.
Toward this, we reconsider the individual efficacy of different types of knowledge for domain adaptation, especially
focusing on which knowledge of the source benefits to be
transferred, and suggest two design philosophies for a point
cloud-specific domain adaptation framework. We first com-

11530

