This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Collaborative Tracking Learning for Frame-Rate-Insensitive
Multi-Object Tracking
Yiheng Liu, Junta Wu*, Yi Fu
ByteDance Inc.
lyh156@mail.ustc.edu.cn, juntawu@163.com, emmafu1013@gmail.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
The goal of multi-object tracking (MOT) is to estimate bounding boxes and identities of objects of interest
in videos. In high-frame-rate videos, the velocities of objects are slow, which makes the difference between adjacent
frames small. State-of-the-art MOT methods [2, 28, 24, 34,
33, 37, 16, 30] achieve impressive results in the high-framerate situation. However, limited by storage, computing, and
network bandwidth, low-frame-rate videos are very com* First Author and Second Author contribute equally to this work.

65
60

HOTA (%)

Multi-object tracking (MOT) at low frame rates can reduce computational, storage and power overhead to better meet the constraints of edge devices. Many existing
MOT methods suffer from significant performance degradation in low-frame-rate videos due to significant location
and appearance changes between adjacent frames. To this
end, we propose to explore collaborative tracking learning (ColTrack) for frame-rate-insensitive MOT in a querybased end-to-end manner. Multiple historical queries of
the same target jointly track it with richer temporal descriptions. Meanwhile, we insert an information refinement module between every two temporal blocking decoders to better fuse temporal clues and refine features.
Moreover, a tracking object consistency loss is proposed to
guide the interaction between historical queries. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that in high-frame-rate
videos, ColTrack obtains higher performance than stateof-the-art methods on large-scale datasets Dancetrack and
BDD100K, and outperforms the existing end-to-end methods on MOT17. More importantly, ColTrack has a significant advantage over state-of-the-art methods in lowframe-rate videos, which allows it to obtain faster processing speeds by reducing frame-rate requirements while
maintaining higher performance. Code will be released at
https://github.com/yolomax/ColTrack

55

ColTrack (ours)
YOLOX+Bytetrack
MOTR
FairMOT

50
45

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Computing Time (s)

1.0

Figure 1. The comparison of the computing time for different
methods to achieve the required HOTA score when tracking in a
one-second video. These data are calculated based on the HOTA
score and FPS of different methods on the MOT17 validation set.
ColTrack still maintains high HOTA scores when tracking at low
frame rates, so it achieves faster tracking speed by reducing the
frame rate requirement while ensuring a high HOTA score.

mon. In low-frame-rate videos, the difference between adjacent frames is larger, which degrades the performance of
existing methods.
The challenges caused by low-frame-rate videos are
manifold. First, the displacements of objects between adjacent frames become larger, which even leads to no overlapping of the object boxes. This requires the model to
match targets over a larger range, which includes more
noisy objects. Furthermore, the position estimation error
of the motion model (e.g. the Kalman filter [14]) is amplified and leads to significant performance degradation of the
Kalman filter-based methods, e.g., Bytetrack [33] and FairMOT [34]. Second, objects have severe appearance changes
between adjacent frames. The viewpoints, visibilities, and
poses of the objects change greatly. In addition, the sudden
occlusion causes the objects to lose key appearance features
rapidly. This greatly challenges some methods [34, 24] that
rely on appearance features.
Some methods focusing on the detection of emerging objects [36] or the adjustment of training strategies [12] are
proposed to improve the MOT performance at low frame

9964

