This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatio-temporal Prompting Network for Robust Video Feature Extraction
Guanxiong Sun1, 2 , Chi Wang 1 , Zhaoyu Zhang 1 , Jiankang Deng 2, 3 , Stefanos Zafeiriou 3 , Yang Hua1
1

2
3
Queen’s University Belfast
Huawei UKRD
Imperial College London
{gsun02, cwang38, zzhang55,Y.Hua}@qub.ac.uk, {j.deng16,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Frame quality deterioration is one of the main challenges in the field of video understanding. To compensate for the information loss caused by deteriorated frames,
recent approaches exploit transformer-based integration
modules to obtain spatio-temporal information. However,
these integration modules are heavy and complex. Furthermore, each integration module is specifically tailored
for its target task, making it difficult to generalise to multiple tasks. In this paper, we present a neat and unified framework, called Spatio-Temporal Prompting Network (STPN). It can efficiently extract robust and accurate video features by dynamically adjusting the input features in the backbone network. Specifically, STPN predicts
several video prompts containing spatio-temporal information of neighbour frames. Then, these video prompts are
prepended to the patch embeddings of the current frame
as the updated input for video feature extraction. Moreover, STPN is easy to generalise to various video tasks because it does not contain task-specific modules. Without
bells and whistles, STPN achieves state-of-the-art performance on three widely-used datasets for different video understanding tasks, i.e., ImageNetVID for video object detection, YouTubeVIS for video instance segmentation, and
GOT-10k for visual object tracking. Codes are available at
https://github.com/guanxiongsun/STPN

1. Introduction
Video understanding is a fundamental research direction
in the field of computer vision. It plays an important role in
many real-world applications, such as autonomous driving
[64, 32], video surveillance [34, 5], and sports analysis [56,
25]. However, a significant challenge in this field is the
deterioration of video frames due to motion blur, occlusion,
and deformation, which makes it difficult to extract relevant
information.

VOD

VIS

VOT

VOD VIS

Integration Integration Integration
Module A Module B Module C
Backbone

Backbone
...

Support frames

DVP
Predictor

VOT

Backbone

...

Current frame

(a) Current pipeline

Support frames

Current frame

(b) STPN

Figure 1. Comparisons between pipelines of (a) existing methods
and (b) the proposed Spatio-temporal Prompting Network (STPN).
Existing methods introduce complex and task-specific integration
modules (
) after backbone networks ( ). In contrast,
STPN is a unified framework for multiple tasks. A lightweight dynamic video prompt (DVP) predictor ( ) generates a set of DVPs
to adjust input before backbone networks ( ). Best viewed in
colour.

To overcome this challenge, inspired by the great success of transformers in many computer vision tasks [49, 54,
27, 19, 4], researchers explore various transformer-based integration modules to alleviate the information loss on the
deteriorated video frames. For example, in video object
detection, transformer-based feature aggregation methods
[13, 7, 57, 43] are investigated to enhance the feature of proposals [40] in the detection head. In video instance segmentation, deteriorated frames usually cause wrong instance associations in a sequence, so 3D mask decoders [55, 22, 8]
are introduced to learn associations of instance masks in an
end-to-end manner. For visual object tracking, traditional
correlation filters [26, 47] meet their limitations in severely
degraded frames. Therefore, transformer-based integration
modules [11, 62, 6, 10] are proposed to better capture complicated correlations between the template region and the
search region. To conclude, the summarised pipeline of recent methods is shown in Figure 1 (a). A backbone network
extracts spatially-only features from the current frame and

13587

