This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gloss-free Sign Language Translation: Improving from Visual-Language
Pretraining
Benjia Zhou1 , Zhigang Chen2,3 ,* Albert Clapés4,5 , Jun Wan1,2,3†, Yanyan Liang1 ,
Sergio Escalera4,5,6 , Zhen Lei2,3,7 , Du Zhang1
1
2
MUST, Macau, China; UCAS, China; 3 MAIS, CASIA, China; 4 Universitat de Barcelona, Spain;
5
Computer Vision Center, Spain; 6 AAU, Aalborg, Denmark; 7 CAIR, HKISI, CAS, Hong Kong, China
Abstract
Sign Language Translation (SLT) is a challenging task
due to its cross-domain nature, involving the translation
of visual-gestural language to text. Many previous methods employ an intermediate representation, i.e., gloss sequences, to facilitate SLT, thus transforming it into a twostage task of sign language recognition (SLR) followed
by sign language translation (SLT). However, the scarcity
of gloss-annotated sign language data, combined with the
information bottleneck in the mid-level gloss representation, has hindered the further development of the SLT
task. To address this challenge, we propose a novel GlossFree SLT based on Visual-Language Pretraining (GFSLTVLP), which improves SLT by inheriting language-oriented
prior knowledge from pre-trained models, without any
gloss annotation assistance. Our approach involves two
stages: (i) integrating Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) with masked self-supervised learning to
create pre-tasks that bridge the semantic gap between visual and textual representations and restore masked sentences, and (ii) constructing an end-to-end architecture with
an encoder-decoder-like structure that inherits the parameters of the pre-trained Visual Encoder and Text Decoder
from the ﬁrst stage. The seamless combination of these
novel designs forms a robust sign language representation
and signiﬁcantly improves gloss-free sign language translation. In particular, we have achieved unprecedented improvements in terms of BLEU-4 score on the PHOENIX14T
dataset (≥+5) and the CSL-Daily dataset (≥+3) compared to state-of-the-art gloss-free SLT methods. Furthermore, our approach also achieves competitive results on
the PHOENIX14T dataset when compared with most of the
gloss-based methods1 .

* Benjia Zhou and Zhigang Chen contributed equally to this paper.
† Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/zhoubenjia/GFSLT-VLP

20871

Sign Language
Video
Mid-level
representation:
Gloss

NACH MITTAG
(after) (midday)

STARK WEHEN
(strong) (blow)

SLR

Sign Language und dazu kommt nachmittags dieser starke südwind . SLT
(and then there is this strong southerly wind in the
Sentence
afternoon.)

(a) Gloss-based approach.

Sign Language
Video
Language-oriented
visual representation
Sign Language
Sentence

und dazu kommt nachmittags dieser starke südwind .

SLT

(and then there is this strong southerly wind in the
afternoon.)

(b) Gloss-free approach (ours).

Figure 1: Comparison of Two SLT Approaches:
(a) incorporating gloss sequences as intermediates, e.g.,
Sign2Gloss2Text (directly) and Sign2Text (indirectly), and
(b) excluding gloss information throughout the training and
inference process.

1. Introduction
Sign language is the main medium of communication
among deaf people. To facilitate effective communication with hard-of-hearing people, developing Sign Language Translation (SLT) techniques is a promising direction. SLT refers to translating sign language into ﬂuent
spoken language sentences, which is more challenging than
traditional Natural Machine Translation (NMT) due to its

