This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Borrowing Knowledge From Pre-trained Language Model:
A New Data-efficient Visual Learning Paradigm
Wenxuan Ma1 Shuang Li1‡ JinMing Zhang1 Chi Harold Liu1 Jingxuan Kang2
Yulin Wang3 Gao Huang3
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 University of Liverpool 3 Tsinghua University
{wenxuan, shuangli, jm-zhang}@bit.edu.cn liuchi02@gmail.com sgjkang3@liverpool.ac.uk
wang-yl19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Offline knowledge extraction

Efficient vision model training

Embedding

The development of vision models for real-world applications is hindered by the challenge of annotated data
scarcity, which has necessitated the adoption of dataefficient visual learning techniques such as semi-supervised
learning. Unfortunately, the prevalent cross-entropy supervision is limited by its focus on category discrimination
while disregarding the semantic connection between concepts, which ultimately results in the suboptimal exploitation of scarce labeled data. To address this issue, this paper
presents a novel approach that seeks to leverage linguistic knowledge for data-efficient visual learning. The proposed approach, BorLan, Borrows knowledge from off-theshelf pretrained Language models that are already endowed
with rich semantics extracted from large corpora, to compensate the semantic deficiency due to limited annotation in
visual training. Specifically, we design a distribution alignment objective, which guides the vision model to learn both
semantic-aware and domain-agnostic representations for
the task through linguistic knowledge. One significant advantage of this paradigm is its flexibility in combining various visual and linguistic models. Extensive experiments on
semi-supervised learning, single domain generalization and
few-shot learning validate its effectiveness. Code is available at https://github.com/BIT-DA/BorLan.

1. Introduction
The tremendous accomplishment of deep learning in
computer vision is mostly supported by large-scale labeled
datasets [13, 46]. Nevertheless, in real-world scenarios, the
acquisition of extensive labeled data through manual annotation for each specific task is a time-consuming and laborexhaustive endeavor [11, 70]. As such, the development of
data-efficient learning methods has become an imperative
‡ Corresponding author.

Prediction
cat

rose
tiger

Concepts
language
model

Images
{tiger, cat, ..}

vision
model

Figure 1: Illustration of BorLan. In both domains of language and vision, we can easily have access to various offthe-shelf models that are pretrained on large datasets in their
respective modalities. This paper proposes a data-efficient
visual learning paradigm (black arrows), aiming to improve various vision models on challenging data-scarce vision tasks by borrowing linguistic knowledge from frozen
pretrained language models. In this way, we successfully
leverage the rich semantics embedded in language modality
to enhance data-efficiency in visual learning.
research direction aimed at enhancing the feasibility and
practicality of deep neural networks [53, 61].
To mitigate the requirement for labeled data, techniques
leveraging supplementary visual knowledge have been extensively investigated in vision community. For instance,
transfer learning [63, 60, 27, 64] employs models pretrained on a large image dataset as the initialization, semisupervised learning [26, 3, 44] exploits unlabeled data via
self-training, and out-of-domain generalization [68, 58, 55]
incorporates visual prior knowledge in the training using
methods such as data augmentation [12]. However, their
commonly adopted cross-entropy supervision mainly emphasizes category discrimination, while overlooking the semantic relevance between visual concepts. As a result, the
learned image feature space may become distorted [25], and
the inter-class relationships inferred by the model can become ambiguous, as shown in Fig 5. This observation motivates us to explore an additional form of supervision that
can capture semantic information from image annotations

18786

