This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Passive Ultra-Wideband Single-Photon Imaging
Mian Wei1*

Sotiris Nousias1*

Rahul Gulve2

David B. Lindell1

Kiriakos N. Kutulakos1

1 Dept. of Computer Science, University of Toronto

2 Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto

Abstract
We consider the problem of imaging a dynamic scene over
an extreme range of timescales simultaneously—seconds to
picoseconds—and doing so passively, without much light,
and without any timing signals from the light source(s)
emitting it. Because existing flux estimation techniques for
single-photon cameras break down in this regime, we develop a flux probing theory that draws insights from stochastic calculus to enable reconstruction of a pixel’s timevarying flux from a stream of monotonically-increasing
photon detection timestamps. We use this theory to (1)
show that passive free-running SPAD cameras have an attainable frequency bandwidth that spans the entire DC-to31 GHz range in low-flux conditions, (2) derive a novel
Fourier-domain flux reconstruction algorithm that scans this
range for frequencies with statistically-significant support
in the timestamp data, and (3) ensure the algorithm’s noise
model remains valid even for very low photon counts or
non-negligible dead times. We show the potential of this
asynchronous imaging regime by experimentally demonstrating several never-seen-before abilities: (1) imaging a
scene illuminated simultaneously by sources operating at
vastly different speeds without synchronization (bulbs, projectors, multiple pulsed lasers), (2) passive non-line-ofsight video acquisition, and (3) recording ultra-wideband
video, which can be played back later at 30 Hz to show
everyday motions—but can also be played a billion times
slower to show the propagation of light itself.

1. Introduction
A basic rule of thumb in high-speed imaging is that speed
needs light: the faster a scene changes, the more light we
need to image it accurately without excessive noise or motion blur. Over the decades, high-speed light sources [1],
fast cameras [2–4], and depth sensors [5, 6] have made it
possible to image dynamic phenomena occurring in eversmaller time intervals with the help of actively-controlled
light sources and synchronization: to collect enough light,
* Joint first authors: {mianwei,sotiris}@cs.toronto.edu
Project website: https://compimaging.dgp.toronto.edu/ultra-wideband

the same picosecond- or nanosecond-scale event may be imaged millions of times by operating a camera and a source
in lockstep, at MHz repetition rates or more.
Acquiring videos of ultrafast phenomena this way—from
imaging light in flight [7] to fast biological processes [8]—
is now quite common. Unfortunately, while these techniques do capture ultrafast events, they cannot simultaneously capture slower ones too: time wraps at the sync period, blurring out anything occurring over longer timespans.
But how do we image highly dynamic scenes—both slow
and ultrafast—passively, without any light sources under
our control, no synchronization, and not much light? Very
little is known about this problem because existing models for passive low-light imaging [9–13] break down at
timescales much shorter than the timespan between photon
arrivals. As a result, ultrafast imaging in low light has remained beyond the reach of passive methods.
In this work we seek to bridge these two regimes, active and
passive, by revisiting the need for synchronization when
imaging ultrafast scenes in low light. Working from first
principles, we develop a novel theory of passive singlephoton imaging that is specifically designed to eliminate
synchronization between a camera and the light sources in
a scene. The only requirements are that (1) the camera’s
pixels can detect and time-stamp individual photons and (2)
their dead-time period does not impair detection of photons
from one source significantly more than any other. In this
imaging regime, each camera pixel time-stamps the photons
it detects using an internal clock that follows the arrow of
time, obviating the need for any external timing signals.
Our work is based on the observation that passive (syncfree) imaging is fundamentally more powerful than active
imaging in such settings. Specifically, without the periodic timing signal from a light source, time never wraps
at a sync period; ultrafast scenes can be imaged for arbitrarily long timespans; and flux variations that occur concurrently across 12 orders of magnitude in time (picoseconds
to seconds)—and that involve many unknown sources—can
be recorded with just one camera.
Because photon timestamps due to all light sources and all

8135

