This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sketch and Text Guided Diffusion Model for Colored Point Cloud Generation
Zijie Wu1 * Yaonan Wang1
1

Hunan University

2

Mingtao Feng2† He Xie1

Xidian University

3

Ajmal Mian3

The University of Western Australia

Abstract
Diffusion probabilistic models have achieved remarkable success in text guided image generation. However,
generating 3D shapes is still challenging due to the lack
of sufficient data containing 3D models along with their descriptions. Moreover, text based descriptions of 3D shapes
are inherently ambiguous and lack details. In this paper,
we propose a sketch and text guided probabilistic diffusion
model for colored point cloud generation that conditions
the denoising process jointly with a hand drawn sketch of
the object and its textual description. We incrementally diffuse the point coordinates and color values in a joint diffusion process to reach a Gaussian distribution. Colored
point cloud generation thus amounts to learning the reverse
diffusion process, conditioned by the sketch and text, to iteratively recover the desired shape and color. Specifically,
to learn effective sketch-text embedding, our model adaptively aggregates the joint embedding of text prompt and the
sketch based on a capsule attention network. Our model
uses staged diffusion to generate the shape and then assign colors to different parts conditioned on the appearance prompt while preserving precise shapes from the first
stage. This gives our model the flexibility to extend to multiple tasks, such as appearance re-editing and part segmentation. Experimental results demonstrate that our model outperforms recent state-of-the-art in point cloud generation.

1. Introduction
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) [19,
45] can generate novel images and videos, from their text
descriptions. Recent diffusion models [38, 33, 39, 42] contain billions of parameters and are trained on millions of
text-image [13] pairs sourced from the Internet, including
existing datasets like MS-COCO [25]. The availability of
such large corpora of text-image pair datasets is, arguably,
the major driving force behind the success of research in image and video generation. However, such datasets of textshape pairs are almost nonexistent causing a major bottleneck for advancing research in this direction.
3D shape generation has a wide range of applications including data augmentation, virtual/augmented reality [12],
* Work performed during visit at the University of Western Australia
† Correponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of sketch and text guided 3D point cloud
generation. The text and sketch complement each other.

manufacturing, and reverse engineering. Pioneering works
in diffusion based 3D shape generation include Luo et
al. [26] and Point Voxel Diffusion (PVD) [66]. Luo et
al. [26] extend the DDPMs to 3D shape generation conditioned on shape latent that follows a prior distribution parameterized via normalized flows [9]. Their probabilistic
generative model treats points as particles that, under heat,
are diffused to a noise distribution. It then exploits the reverse diffusion process to learn the point distribution to be
able to generate plausible point clouds. PVD [66] combines the denoising diffusion model with the point-voxel
3D shape representation. It performs the denoising steps
by optimizing a variational lower bound to the conditional
likelihood function to produce 3D shapes or multiple 3D
completions [14] from a partial observation.
The problem of text guided 3D model or point cloud generation is slightly different from that of images in the sense
that there is a higher emphasis, at least implicitly, on geometry rather than appearance which puts yet another constraint
on the training datasets. Current methods [26, 66] have
mostly used the ShapeNet [3] dataset for text-shape learning
combined with the ModelNet [55] datasets for 3D representation learning and validation. However, these datasets are
relatively small and lack detailed textual descriptions. To
work around the data paucity, CLIP-forge [42] extends the
CLIP model [37] for 3D shape generation by aligning 3D
shapes with text in the latent space. Although these text
guided methods maintain diversity in the generated shapes,
their common limitation is that the generated shapes are often not the desired ones, which is understandable given the
shape ambiguity in the text.
In this paper, to reduce the shape ambiguity, we propose a sketch and text guided probabilistic diffusion (STPD)
model for colored point cloud generation that conditions the

8929

