This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PDiscoNet: Semantically consistent part discovery for fine-grained recognition
Robert van der Klis1 Stephan Alaniz2 Massimiliano Mancini3 Cassio F. Dantas4,6
Dino Ienco4,6 Zeynep Akata2 Diego Marcos5,6
1
WUR 2 University of Tübingen 3 University of Trento 4 INRAE/UMR TETIS 5 Inria 6 University
of Montpellier

Abstract

Head: species [C, F]
Neck: species [A, C]

Fine-grained classification often requires recognizing
specific object parts, such as beak shape and wing patterns for birds. Encouraging a fine-grained classification
model to first detect such parts and then using them to
infer the class could help us gauge whether the model is
indeed looking at the right details better than with interpretability methods that provide a single attribution map.
We propose PDiscoNet to discover object parts by using
only image-level class labels along with priors encouraging the parts to be: discriminative, compact, distinct
from each other, equivariant to rigid transforms, and active in at least some of the images. In addition to using the appropriate losses to encode these priors, we propose to use part-dropout, where full part feature vectors are
dropped at once to prevent a single part from dominating
in the classification, and part feature vector modulation,
which makes the information coming from each part distinct
from the perspective of the classifier. Our results on CUB,
CelebA, and PartImageNet show that the proposed method
provides substantially better part discovery performance
than previous methods while not requiring any additional
hyper-parameter tuning and without penalizing the classification performance. The code is available at https:
//github.com/robertdvdk/part_detection

1. Introduction
Commonly used approaches to inspect a deep learning
model’s inner workings yield a saliency map that indicates
which regions contributed the most to the output [5, 29]. If
the model seems to focus on image regions that are known
to be irrelevant, (e.g. the background or the wrong object),
it becomes clear that the model has picked up on spurious
correlations and cannot be trusted. This observation could

Wing: species [A, C, F]
Belly: species [B, C]

Final species: C

Figure 1. Our PDiscoNet extracts semantically consistent parts,
without any part annotations, and reasons on these parts before
combining the results into a final fine-grained classification output.

then be used to improve future iterations of the model, for
instance, by eliminating or compensating for the detected
spurious correlations. However, this type of approach offers little information when the model provides an incorrect
answer but the saliency map suggests that it is attending to
the correct image regions.
Other approaches aim at modifying the model architecture itself in order to ensure that the provided explanation
actually reflects the decision process of the model [10, 6].
In particular, the saliency map explanation can be enriched by dividing it in multiple semantically interpretable
parts, mimicking the traditional approaches of tackling finegrained visual categorization (FGVC), in which image-level
part annotations were leveraged [22] in order to help the
model differentiate between similar classes by helping it focus on the relevant parts. In this manner, we have more information to judge the adequacy of the model’s reasoning:
even if the correct object is highlighted, we will be suspicious of the result if the part map that the model generally
associated to the head of a bird seems to highlight the feet in
one particular image. We thus posit that a model that classifies images based on just a few discriminative regions that
are semantically consistent across images would be more
interpretable than one which highlights the whole object, as
one can immediately visualise the parts of the image that
have been attended to and interpret their semantics across

1866

