This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GACE: Geometry Aware Confidence Enhancement for
Black-box 3D Object Detectors on LiDAR-Data
David Schinagl1,2 Georg Krispel1 Christian Fruhwirth-Reisinger1,2 Horst Possegger1 Horst Bischof1,2
{david.schinagl,georg.krispel,reisinger,possegger,bischof}@icg.tugraz.at
1

Graz University of Technology 2 Christian Doppler Laboratory for Embedded Machine Learning

Abstract
Widely-used LiDAR-based 3D object detectors often neglect fundamental geometric information readily available
from the object proposals in their confidence estimation.
This is mostly due to architectural design choices, which
were often adopted from the 2D image domain, where geometric context is rarely available. In 3D, however, considering the object properties and its surroundings in a holistic
way is important to distinguish between true and false positive detections, e.g. occluded pedestrians in a group. To
address this, we present GACE, an intuitive and highly efficient method to improve the confidence estimation of a given
black-box 3D object detector. We aggregate geometric cues
of detections and their spatial relationships, which enables
us to properly assess their plausibility and consequently,
improve the confidence estimation. This leads to consistent
performance gains over a variety of state-of-the-art detectors. Across all evaluated detectors, GACE proves to be
especially beneficial for the vulnerable road user classes,
i.e. pedestrians and cyclists.

Figure 1. Context matters: a baseline detector struggles at detecting true positive objects confidently if the sampling pattern is
atypical, e.g. the occluded pedestrian in the orange bounding box
(close-up top-left). GACE exploits the geometric properties of the
detection and its surrounding objects to significantly increase the
score for this detection, which is intuitively correct for a human
observer considering this scene.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional perception of surrounding objects is
a critical component for autonomous vehicles and robots.
Many modern perception systems use point cloud data from
LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) sensors for this task,
since they can provide accurate 3D information even over
long distances. The popularity of these sensors can be seen
in the increased research interest in LiDAR-based 3D object
detection approaches, e.g. [10,29,38,40,45,47] and the large
number of recently published autonomous driving datasets
that include LiDAR data, e.g. [1, 6, 20, 33].
However, the characteristics of LiDAR data impose significant challenges for object detection. Unlike pixels in an
image, which are aligned in a regular grid, point clouds represent 3D data as a collection of individual points in space,
each with its own set of coordinates. In addition to the un-

structured nature of the data, the highly variable point density poses a major challenge. Due to the angular offset of
the LiDAR beams, the density is highly dependent on the
distance to the object and can be altered by occlusions in
the foreground. This often requires detecting objects based
on very few data points, which is especially true for classes
with smaller spatial dimensions, such as pedestrians and cyclists. For example, in the Waymo Open Dataset [33], one
of the most widely used and challenging datasets to date,
about 30 percent of all annotated pedestrians consist of less
than merely 20 points. Detecting these sparsely sensed objects naturally leads to a large number of false positive detections at test time. For this reason, determining a meaningful confidence value for the detections is critical to find
a trade-off between precision and recall that adequately dis-

6566

