This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decoupled DETR: Spatially Disentangling Localization and Classification for
Improved End-to-End Object Detection
Manyuan Zhang1,2
1

Guanglu Song2

Yu Liu2

Hongsheng Li1,3,4
2

Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of HongKong
3

SenseTime Research

Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence Limited
4

Shanghai AI Laboratory

zhangmanyuan@link.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
The introduction of DETR represents a new paradigm for
object detection. However, its decoder conducts classification and box localization using shared queries and crossattention layers, leading to suboptimal results. We observe
that different regions of interest in the visual feature map are
suitable for performing query classification and box localization tasks, even for the same object. Salient regions provide vital information for classification, while the boundaries around them are more favorable for box regression.
Unfortunately, such spatial misalignment between these two
tasks greatly hinders DETR’s training. Therefore, in this
work, we focus on decoupling localization and classification tasks in DETR. To achieve this, we introduce a new design scheme called spatially decoupled DETR (SD-DETR),
which includes a task-aware query generation module and
a disentangled feature learning process. We elaborately design the task-aware query initialization process and divide
the cross-attention block in the decoder to allow the taskaware queries to match different visual regions. Meanwhile,
we also observe that the prediction misalignment problem
for high classification confidence and precise localization
exists, so we propose an alignment loss to further guide
the spatially decoupled DETR training. Through extensive
experiments, we demonstrate that our approach achieves a
significant improvement in MSCOCO datasets compared to
previous work. For instance, we improve the performance of
Conditional DETR by 4.5 AP. By spatially disentangling the
two tasks, our method overcomes the misalignment problem
and greatly improves the performance of DETR for object
detection.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a critical problem in computer vision,
with traditional detectors relying on convolution to extract

Image

DETR

Localization

Classification

Figure 1. Visualization comparison of the cross-attention map for
the original DETR and split decoder DETR. To explore the preference of the classification and localization branches for different regions, we make a copy of the transformer decoder so that
the classification and localization branches can be decoupled entirely. There is a difference in the highlighted area between the
two branches, and the localization branch is more focused on the
object edges.

informative representations of the image, including singlestage and multi-stage detectors [29, 24, 28, 1, 18]. In contrast, recent work, such as DETR [3], breaks this paradigm.
DETR consists of an encoder and a decoder, with the encoder extracting image features using self-attention and the
decoder using these features to estimate object locations and
categories in interaction with the object query. It is an endto-end solution that does not require post-processing, such
as non-maximum suppression (NMS).
However, the lack of a good positional prior to matching the queries to the visual feature map has been observed to slow down DETR’s convergence. As a result,
subsequent work has focused on improving performance
by developing various techniques for initializing object
queries [23, 27, 7, 34, 37]. On the other hand, previous
RCNN-based object detection work [13, 35, 32] has shown

6601

