This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multimodal Distillation for Egocentric Action Recognition
Gorjan Radevski*
Dusan Grujicic*
Matthew Blaschko
Marie-Francine Moens
Tinne Tuytelaars
KU Leuven University, Belgium
{firstname}.{lastname}@kuleuven.be

Abstract
The focal point of egocentric video understanding is
modelling hand-object interactions. Standard models, e.g.
CNNs or Vision Transformers, which receive RGB frames
as input perform well, however, their performance improves
further by employing additional input modalities (e.g. object detections, optical flow, audio, etc.) which provide
cues complementary to the RGB modality. The added complexity of the modality-specific modules, on the other hand,
makes these models impractical for deployment. The goal
of this work is to retain the performance of such a multimodal approach, while using only the RGB frames as input
at inference time. We demonstrate that for egocentric action recognition on the Epic-Kitchens and the SomethingSomething datasets, students which are taught by multimodal teachers tend to be more accurate and better calibrated than architecturally equivalent models trained on
ground truth labels in a unimodal or multimodal fashion.
We further adopt a principled multimodal knowledge distillation framework, allowing us to deal with issues which
occur when applying multimodal knowledge distillation in
a naı̈ve manner. Lastly, we demonstrate the achieved reduction in computational complexity, and show that our approach maintains higher performance with the reduction
of the number of input views. We release our code at:
https://github.com/gorjanradevski/multimodal-distillation

1. Introduction
The purpose of egocentric vision is enabling machines
to interpret real-world data taken from a human’s perspective. Its applications are numerous, ranging from recognizing [63] or anticipating [15] actions, to more complex tasks
such as recognizing egocentric object-state changes, localizing action instances of a particular video moment [22],
etc. The focal point of egocentric vision is hand-object
interactions. Usually, these hand-object interactions take
*

Authors contributed equally.

Student Taught by a
Multimodal Teacher

Multimodal Action
Recognition Model

Multimodal Fusion
Module

Video Swin-Transformer

Optical Flow SwinTransformer

Audio SwinTransformer

...

Spatial-Temporal Layout
Transformer (STLT)

Video Swin-Transformer

...

Figure 1: Motivation: The multimodal action recognition model
is powerful, but too slow to be used in practice. The distilled student is significantly faster yet achieves competitive performance.

place in cluttered environments, where the object of interest
is often occluded, or occurs only during a short time period.
Furthermore, egocentric vision often suffers from motion
blur – due to the movement of the scene objects or the camera itself – and thus, understanding video content from RGB
frames alone may be challenging.
To cope with these challenges, various egocentric action
recognition methods [25, 29, 33, 43, 56, 59, 61] demonstrate
that explicitly modelling hand-object interactions (usually
represented via bounding boxes & object categories) significantly improves the action recognition performance, most
notably in a compositional generalization setup [43]. Similarly, other works show that leveraging multiple modalities
(optical flow, audio, etc.) at inference time yields improved
performance [16, 28, 36, 57]. The assumptions these methods make are (i) that all modalities used during training are
also available at inference time, and (ii) the compute budget
at inference time would be sufficient to obtain and process
the additional modalities. Such assumptions make these
methods cumbersome or even impossible to use in practice,
e.g. on a limited compute budget such as in the case of embedded devices. Namely, using dedicated models for each
additional modality (e.g. object detector, object tracker and
a transformer when using bounding boxes & object categories as input [43]), increases both the memory footprint
as well as the inference time. Ideally, video understanding

5213

