This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Single Image Super-Resolution via Partial Channel Shifting
Xiaoming Zhang, Tianrui Li, Xiaole Zhao*
Southwest Jiaotong University, China

Abstract
Although deep learning has significantly facilitated the
progress of single image super-resolution (SISR) in recent
years, it still hits bottlenecks to further improve SR performance with the continuous growth of model scale. Therefore, one of the hotspots in the field is to construct efficient
SISR models by elevating the effectiveness of feature representation. In this work, we present a straightforward and
generic approach for feature enhancement that can effectively promote the performance of SR models, dubbed partial channel shifting (PCS). Specifically, it is inspired by the
temporal shifting in video understanding and displaces part
of the channels along the spatial dimensions, thus allowing
the effective receptive field to be amplified and the feature
diversity to be augmented at almost zero cost. Also, it can
be assembled into off-the-shelf models as a plug-and-play
component for performance boosting without extra network
parameters and computational overhead. However, regulating the features with PCS encounters some issues, like
shifting directions and amplitudes, proportions, patterns of
shifted channels, etc. We impose some technical constraints
on the issues to simplify the general channel shifting. Extensive and throughout experiments illustrate that the PCS
indeed enlarges the effective receptive field, augments the
feature diversity for efficiently enhancing SR recovery, and
can endow obvious performance gains to existing models.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) is a long-standing
and challenging hotspot in the computer vision community,
to reconstruct a high-resolution (HR) image from one lowresolution (LR) image. Since an LR image can be degraded
from an infinite number of HR images, it is substantially
a mathematically ill-posed inverse problem. Convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [25, 24] have demonstrated significant breakthroughs in recent years, by leveraging largescale datasets, a highly nonlinear mapping from LR and HR
image pairs is learned. As a pioneering contribution, Dong
* Corresponding author, email: zxlation@foxmail.com

Truncating

𝐶

Padding

𝐻

𝑊

Original Feature

Uni-directional

Bi-directional

Cross-directional

Quad-directional

Figure 1: Representative shifting patterns of applying the PCS to
intermediate features, which show different spatial misalignments
that enhance the Effective Receptive Field (ERF) [34] and feature
diversity of the models. The pixels removed from the feature grids
are discarded outright, and the emptied grids are simply padded
with zeros to maintain the grid structure. These misalignments are
conducive to expanding the local association among intermediate
features while maintaining spatial integrity.

et al. [7] draw lessons from sparse representation [51, 52]
and propose a super-resolution convolutional neural network (SRCNN) to learn an end-to-end nonlinear mapping
from LR to HR images. This model is further extended from
the perspectives of sparse coding [48], increasing network
depth [20] and sharing parameters [21, 42], etc. Although
these models are capable of reconstructing high-fidelity SR
results, their achievements rely immensely on the upscaling
of the model scale, including network parameters, depth,
and subtle topologies. For instance, EDSR [30] maintains
more than 43M network parameters and about 70 layers of
network depth. While RCAN [58] facilitates the effectiveness of feature representation via attention mechanism [14]
and reduces the parameters to ∼16M, it reaches over 400
layers of depth and significantly lengthens the time of inference. However, simply increasing the model scale also
hits the bottleneck of performance improvement, and it is
difficult to elevate the utilization efficiency of network assets. Moreover, model training also suffers from the intractable holdback of information weakening as the model
scale continues to grow. Therefore, a promising compro-

Code is available at https://github.com/OwXiaoM/PCS

13223

