This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robo3D: Towards Robust and Reliable 3D Perception against Corruptions
Lingdong Kong1,2,3,∗ Youquan Liu1,4,∗ Xin Li1,5,∗ Runnan Chen1,6 Wenwei Zhang1,7
Jiawei Ren7 Liang Pan7 Kai Chen1 Ziwei Liu7,B
1

Shanghai AI Laboratory
5

2

National University of Singapore

East China Normal University

6

3

The University of Hong Kong

{konglingdong,liuyouquan,lixin,zhangwenwei,chenkai}@pjlab.org.cn

CNRS@CREATE
7

4

Hochschule Bremerhaven

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

{jiawei011,liang.pan,ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg

Clean

Fog

Wet Ground

Snow

Motion Blur

Beam Missing

Crosstalk

Incomplete Echo

Cross-Sensor

Figure 1: Taxonomy of the Robo3D benchmark. We simulate eight corruption types from three categories: 1) Severe
weather conditions, such as fog, rain, and snow; 2) External disturbances that are caused by motion blur or result in the
missing of LiDAR beams; and 3) Internal sensor failure, including LiDAR crosstalk, possible incomplete echo, and crosssensor scenarios. Each corruption is further split into three levels (light, moderate, and heavy) based on its severity.

Abstract
The robustness of 3D perception systems under natural corruptions from environments and sensors is pivotal
for safety-critical applications. Existing large-scale 3D
perception datasets often contain data that are meticulously cleaned. Such configurations, however, cannot reflect
the reliability of perception models during the deployment
stage. In this work, we present Robo3D, the first comprehensive benchmark heading toward probing the robustness
of 3D detectors and segmentors under out-of-distribution
scenarios against natural corruptions that occur in realworld environments. Specifically, we consider eight corruption types stemming from severe weather conditions, external disturbances, and internal sensor failure. We uncover
that, although promising results have been progressively

achieved on standard benchmarks, state-of-the-art 3D perception models are at risk of being vulnerable to corruptions. We draw key observations on the use of data representations, augmentation schemes, and training strategies, that
could severely affect the model’s performance. To pursue
better robustness, we propose a density-insensitive training
framework along with a simple flexible voxelization strategy to enhance the model resiliency. We hope our benchmark and approach could inspire future research in designing more robust and reliable 3D perception models. Our
robustness benchmark suite is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
3D perception aims to detect and segment accurate position, orientation, semantics, and temporary relation of
1 https://github.com/ldkong1205/Robo3D.

(∗) The first three authors contributed equally to this work.

19994

