This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shortcut-V2V: Compression Framework for Video-to-Video Translation
based on Temporal Redundancy Reduction
Chaeyeon Chung*1 , Yeojeong Park*1,2 , Seunghwan Choi1 , Munkhsoyol Ganbat1 , and Jaegul Choo1
1

2

KAIST AI
KT Research & Development Center, KT Corporation

{cy chung, indigopyj, shadow2496, soyol, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Video-to-video translation aims to generate video frames
of a target domain from an input video. Despite its usefulness, the existing networks require enormous computations, necessitating their model compression for wide use.
While there exist compression methods that improve computational efficiency in various image/video tasks, a generallyapplicable compression method for video-to-video translation has not been studied much. In response, we present
Shortcut-V2V, a general-purpose compression framework
for video-to-video translation. Shortcut-V2V avoids full
inference for every neighboring video frame by approximating the intermediate features of a current frame from
those of the previous frame. Moreover, in our framework,
a newly-proposed block called AdaBD adaptively blends
and deforms features of neighboring frames, which makes
more accurate predictions of the intermediate features possible. We conduct quantitative and qualitative evaluations
using well-known video-to-video translation models on various tasks to demonstrate the general applicability of our
framework. The results show that Shortcut-V2V achieves
comparable performance compared to the original videoto-video translation model while saving 3.2-5.7× computational cost and 7.8-44× memory at test time. Our code and
videos are available at https://shortcut-v2v.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Video-to-video translation is a task of generating temporally consistent and realistic video frames of a target domain from a given input video. Recent studies on video-tovideo translation present promising performance in various
domains such as inter-modality translation between labels
* indicates equal contributions.

and videos [34, 33, 18], and intra-modality translation between driving scene videos [32] or face videos [1].
Despite enhanced usefulness, video-to-video translation
networks usually require substantial computational cost and
memory usage, which limits their applicability. For instance, multiply–accumulates (MACs) of a widely-used
video translation model, vid2vid [34], is 2066.69G, while
the basic convolutional neural networks, ResNet v2 50 [10]
and Inception v3 [28], are 4.12G and 6G, respectively. Furthermore, temporally redundant computations for adjacent
video frames also harm the cost efficiency of a video-tovideo translation network. Performing full inference for every neighboring video frame that contains common visual
features inevitably entails redundant operations [20, 19].
In this regard, Fast-Vid2Vid [40] proposes a compression framework for vid2vid [34] based on spatial input compression and temporal redundancy reduction. However, it
cannot be applied to other video-to-video translation models since it is designed specifically for vid2vid. Moreover,
Fast-Vid2Vid does not support real-time inference since it
requires future frames to infer a current one. Alternatively,
one can apply model compression approaches for imageto-image translation [13, 22, 12] directly to video-to-video
translation, considering video frames as separate images.
However, these approaches are not designed to consider the
correlation among adjacent video frames during the compression. This may result in unrealistic output quality in
video-to-video translation, where the inherent temporal coherence of an input video needs to be preserved in the outputs. Also, frame-by-frame inference without temporal redundancy reduction involves unnecessary computations, resulting in computational inefficiency.
In this paper, we propose Shortcut-V2V, a generalpurpose framework for improving the computational efficiency of video-to-video translation based on temporal
redundancy reduction. Shortcut-V2V allows the original
video-to-video translation model to avoid temporally re-

7612

