This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Explaining Adversarial Robustness of Neural Networks
from Clustering Effect Perspective
Yulin Jin1 , Xiaoyu Zhang1 *, Jian Lou2 , Xu Ma3 , Zilong Wang1 Xiaofeng Chen1 ,
1
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Service Networks (ISN), Xidian University
2
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center, Zhejiang University
3
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Qufu Normal University
jyl990903@163.com xiaoyuzhang@xidian.edu.cn jian.lou@zju.edu.cn
xma@qfnu.edu.cn zlwang@xidian.edu.cn xfchen@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial training (AT) is the most commonly used
mechanism to improve the robustness of deep neural networks. Recently, a novel adversarial attack against intermediate layers exploits the extra fragility of adversarially
trained networks to output incorrect predictions. The result
implies the insufficiency in the searching space of the adversarial perturbation in adversarial training. To straighten
out the reason for the effectiveness of the intermediate-layer
attack, we interpret the forward propagation as the Clustering Effect, characterizing that the intermediate-layer representations of neural networks for samples i.i.d. to the
training set with the same label are similar, and we theoretically prove the existence of Clustering Effect by corresponding Information Bottleneck Theory. We afterward observe that the intermediate-layer attack disobeys the clustering effect of the AT-trained model. Inspired by these significant observations, we propose a regularization method
to extend the perturbation searching space during training, named sufficient adversarial training (SAT). We give a
proven robustness bound of neural networks through rigorous mathematical proof. The experimental evaluations
manifest the superiority of SAT over other state-of-the-art
AT mechanisms in defending against adversarial attacks
against both output and intermediate layers. Our code
and Appendix can be found at https://github.com/
clustering-effect/SAT.

1. Introduction
While the striking success of neural networks has been
deployed into diverse real-world application scenarios [9,
28, 7, 15, 31, 32], recent studies have demonstrated that
deep models are brittle to a series of crafted human* Corresponding Author

imperceptible perturbations which cause the target model to
produce an incorrect output [8, 13, 3, 17, 30, 21]. This phenomenon leads to a significant controversy in the application of neural networks in safety-critical scenarios, e.g., automatic driving systems [4], brain-computer interface systems, etc. Thus, resistance to adversarial perturbations on
the inputs [17], i.e., adversarial samples, is becoming a crucial design goal that pushes researchers to dive into proposing a sizable number of defense mechanisms for the adversarial robustness settings.
The most prosperous methodology among those defense
mechanisms, i.e., Adversarial Training (AT) [8, 17, 29, 22],
attempts to solve a min-max optimization problem of the
loss function. AT firstly searches the constraint perturbation
added to the sample as the maximum of the loss function in
the input space. Thereafter, AT updates the parameters of
the model utilizing the stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
algorithm to approach the minimum of loss function in the
parameter space. [8, 17] choose the ordinary Cross-Entropy
(CE) loss where the inner maximization is equivalent to an
adversarial attack to acquire incorrect outputs. [29, 22, 25]
defined rectified CE loss to characterize the distance from
the sample to the decision boundary. These mechanisms obtain pleasurable achievements against output-layer attacks
(OLA), i.e., FGSM [8], PGD [17], AutoAttack [5].
However, a recent research[27] manifests the extra vulnerability of the above defense methods to the intermediatelayer attack (ILA) [27] which disturbs features extracted
by intermediate layers. This novel fragility implies AT
[8, 17, 29, 22, 25] can merely regularize the model to defend against OLA [8, 17, 5] rather than ILA [27]. AT
merely adopts Cross-Entropy loss which entirely relies on
the output of the model, so perturbations involved in training are located in the maximum of Cross-Entropy loss in
input space. These perturbations are constrained in a narrow searching space during AT and can not represent the

4522

