This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SimNP: Learning Self-Similarity Priors Between Neural Points
Christopher Wewer1
1

Eddy Ilg2

Bernt Schiele1,2

Jan Eric Lenssen1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
2
Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
{cwewer, jlenssen}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

a·,·
a·,·
a·,·
a·,·

SRN

PixelNeRF

VisionNeRF

Ours

Target

Input

..
.
..
.

Embeddings

Attention Scores

a) Neural Point Representation

b) Single-view reconstruction comparison.

Figure 1: a) We present SimNP, a renderable neural point radiance field that learns category-level self-similarities from data
by connecting neural points to embeddings via optimized bipartite attention scores. b) The learned self-similarities can be
used to transfer details from single- or few-view observations to unobserved, similar and symmetric parts of objects.

Abstract
Existing neural field representations for 3D object reconstruction either (1) utilize object-level representations,
but suffer from low-quality details due to conditioning on a
global latent code, or (2) are able to perfectly reconstruct
the observations, but fail to utilize object-level prior knowledge to infer unobserved regions. We present SimNP, a
method to learn category-level self-similarities, which combines the advantages of both worlds by connecting neural
point radiance fields with a category-level self-similarity
representation. Our contribution is two-fold. (1) We design the first neural point representation on a category level
by utilizing the concept of coherent point clouds. The resulting neural point radiance fields store a high level of detail for locally supported object regions. (2) We learn how
information is shared between neural points in an unconstrained and unsupervised fashion, which allows to derive
unobserved regions of an object during the reconstruction
process from given observations. We show that SimNP is
able to outperform previous methods in reconstructing symmetric unseen object regions, surpassing methods that build
upon category-level or pixel-aligned radiance fields, while
providing semantic correspondences between instances.

1. Introduction
The human visual system succeeds in deriving 3D representations of objects just from incomplete 2D observations.
Key to this ability is that given observations are successfully
complemented by previously learned information about the
3D world. Replicating this ability has been a longstanding
goal in computer vision.
Since the task of reconstructing complete objects relies on generalization from a set of known examples, deep
learning is an intuitive solution. The common approach
is to use large amounts of data to train a category-level
model [35, 41, 54, 29, 13, 26, 25, 22, 31, 9, 44, 57] and let
the reconstruction process combine observations with the
prior knowledge learned from data, which we refer to as the
data prior. Notably, this introduces an inherent trade-off between contributions of the data prior and the observations.
On one extreme of the spectrum, NeRF-like methods [32, 55, 4] do not use a data prior at all. With a
high number of observations and an optimization process,
they are able to nearly perfectly reconstruct novel views of
scenes and objects. However, this renders them incapable of
deriving unseen regions. On the other extreme of the spectrum are methods that learn the full space of radiance or

8841

