This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Coarse-to-Fine Amodal Segmentation with Shape Prior
Jianxiong Gao1 , Xuelin Qian1,† , Yikai Wang1 , Tianjun Xiao2,† , Tong He2 , Zheng Zhang2 , Yanwei Fu1
1
Fudan University, 2 Amazon Web Service
jxgao22@m.fudan.edu.cn, {xlqian,yikaiwang19,yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn
{tianjux,htong,zhaz}@amazon.com

Abstract
Amodal object segmentation is a challenging task that
involves segmenting both visible and occluded parts of
an object. In this paper, we propose a novel approach,
called Coarse-to-Fine Segmentation (C2F-Seg), that addresses this problem by progressively modeling the amodal
segmentation. C2F-Seg initially reduces the learning space
from the pixel-level image space to the vector-quantized latent space. This enables us to better handle long-range
dependencies and learn a coarse-grained amodal segment
from visual features and visible segments. However, this
latent space lacks detailed information about the object,
which makes it difficult to provide a precise segmentation
directly. To address this issue, we propose a convolution refine module to inject fine-grained information and
provide a more precise amodal object segmentation based
on visual features and coarse-predicted segmentation. To
help the studies of amodal object segmentation, we create a synthetic amodal dataset, named as MOViD-Amodal
(MOViD-A), which can be used for both image and video
amodal object segmentation. We extensively evaluate our
model on two benchmark datasets: KINS and COCO-A.
Our empirical results demonstrate the superiority of C2FSeg. Moreover, we exhibit the potential of our approach
for video amodal object segmentation tasks on FISHBOWL
and our proposed MOViD-A. Project page at: https:
//jianxgao.github.io/C2F-Seg.

1. Introduction
Amodal instance segmentation [24] aims to extract complete shapes of objects in an image, including both visible
and occluded parts. This task plays a vital role in various real-world applications such as autonomous driving
[25, 10], robotics [4], and augmented reality [23, 20]. For
instance, in autonomous driving, partial understanding of
the scene may result in unsafe driving decisions.
†: Co-corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Visualization of predicted amodal masks in KINS and
COCOA by C2F-Seg. Images in the top row are from COCOA,
while the others are from KINS.

Typically, existing approaches [21, 29, 32, 13, 9] build
new modules on the detection framework, by additionally
introducing an amodal branch that predicts the complete
mask perception of the target object. The central idea lies
in imbibing a holistic understanding of shape (i.e., shape
prior) through multi-task learning by harnessing the supervised signals of the visible and full regions. While these approaches have yielded promising outcomes in recent years,
the task of amodal segmentation remains fraught with challenges. One of the main challenges of amodal segmentation is that it is an ill-posed problem, meaning that there
are many non-unique and reasonable possibilities for perceiving occluded areas, particularly for elastic bodies like
people and animals. On the other hand, there are intricate
categories and shapes of objects in real-world scenarios,
which would pose significant challenges to prior learning
of shapes.
In this paper, we advocate that shape priors are essen-

1262

