This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MixReorg: Cross-Modal Mixed Patch Reorganization is a Good Mask Learner
for Open-World Semantic Segmentation
Kaixin Cai1 * Pengzhen Ren1 * Yi Zhu2 Hang Xu2 Jianzhuang Liu2
Changlin Li3 Guangrun Wang4 Xiaodan Liang1,5,6 †
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
4
University of Oxford

2
5

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 University of Technology Sydney
MBZUAI 6 DarkMatter AI Research

caikx7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, pzhren@foxmail.com, {zhuyi36, xu.hang, liu.jianzhuang}@huawei.com,
{changlinli.ai, wanggrun, xdliang328}@gmail.com

Abstract
Recently, semantic segmentation models trained with
image-level text supervision have shown promising results
in challenging open-world scenarios. However, these models still face difficulties in learning fine-grained semantic
alignment at the pixel level and predicting accurate object masks. To address this issue, we propose MixReorg,
a novel and straightforward pre-training paradigm for semantic segmentation that enhances a model’s ability to reorganize patches mixed across images, exploring both local visual relevance and global semantic coherence. Our
approach involves generating fine-grained patch-text pairs
data by mixing image patches while preserving the correspondence between patches and text. The model is then
trained to minimize the segmentation loss of the mixed images and the two contrastive losses of the original and restored features. With MixReorg as a mask learner, conventional text-supervised semantic segmentation models can
achieve highly generalizable pixel-semantic alignment ability, which is crucial for open-world segmentation. After
training with large-scale image-text data, MixReorg models can be applied directly to segment visual objects of arbitrary categories, without the need for further fine-tuning.
Our proposed framework demonstrates strong performance
on popular zero-shot semantic segmentation benchmarks,
outperforming GroupViT by significant margins of 5.0%,
6.2%, 2.5%, and 3.4% mIoU on PASCAL VOC2012, PASCAL Context, MS COCO, and ADE20K, respectively.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation has important applications in scenarios such as virtual presence, virtual try-on, movie post* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Comparison between GroupViT [38] and MixReorg. (a)
GroupViT obtains image segmentation implicitly from image-text
pairs to achieve cross-modal semantic alignment. (b) MixReorg
explicitly constructs the fine-grained patch-text pairs data from the
image-text pairs for free by mixing the patches from different images and preserving the correspondence between patches and text.

production, and autonomous driving. Currently, state-ofthe-art semantic segmentation methods [35, 30, 6] benefit from a large number of densely annotated data. However, the assumption of this closed-world setting requires
that all categories of objects that appear in the test set are
included in the training set. This heavy dependence on annotations limits that they can only work well in closed-set
settings. However, considering ubiquitous new concepts in
real-world scenarios, learning an open-world segmentation
model is more practical, but it is also more challenging. The
open-world segmentation model is required to segment all
entities and objects class-agnostically and exhaustively during training and be highly generalizable for aligning pixels
with new semantics during testing.
Early methods achieve open-world semantic segmentation through few-shot learning [3] or unsupervised clustering [26]. The former actually still assumes that the training and testing classes are in the same latent feature space,

1196

