This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Isomer: Isomerous Transformer for Zero-shot Video Object Segmentation
Yichen Yuan1

Yifan Wang1∗ Lijun Wang1 Xiaoqi Zhao1 Huchuan Lu1
Yu Wang2 Weibo Su2 Lei Zhang2,3
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
OPPO Research Institute 3 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
MHSA

Appearance
Encoder

Norm

Fusion
Fusion

Decoder

Fusion

+
FFN

Fusion
Motion
Encoder

Norm

+
(a) Baseline pipeline

(b) Vanilla Transformer (c) Ground truth

(d) Stage 1 heatmaps

(e) Stage 2 heatmaps

(f) Stage 3 heatmaps

(g) Stage 4 heatmaps

Figure 1: Visualization of the learned attention dependencies of the baseline pipeline (a) using vanilla Transformer (b) as
fusion modules. (d)-(g) present the attention maps (heatmaps) of different queries (red points) computed by the vanilla
Transformer in different fusion stages: for the same input image, different queries have almost the same attention maps in
low-level stages (d) (e), while they only focus on image regions with the same semantics in high-level stages (f) (g).

Abstract
Recent leading zero-shot video object segmentation
(ZVOS) works devote to integrating appearance and motion information by elaborately designing feature fusion
modules and identically applying them in multiple feature stages. Our preliminary experiments show that with
the strong long-range dependency modeling capacity of
Transformer, simply concatenating the two modality features and feeding them to vanilla Transformers for feature fusion can distinctly benefit the performance but at
a cost of heavy computation. Through further empirical
analysis, we find that attention dependencies learned in
Transformer in different stages exhibit completely different properties: global query-independent dependency
in the low-level stages and semantic-specific dependency
in the high-level stages. Motivated by the observations,
we propose two Transformer variants: i) Context-Sharing
Transformer (CST) that learns the global-shared contextual
information within image frames with a lightweight computation. ii) Semantic Gathering-Scattering Transformer
(SGST) that models the semantic correlation separately for
the foreground and background and reduces the computation cost with a soft token merging mechanism. We apply CST and SGST for low-level and high-level feature fusions, respectively, formulating a level-isomerous Trans* Corresponding author: wyfan@dlut.edu.cn.

former framework for ZVOS task. Compared with the baseline that uses vanilla Transformers for multi-stage fusion,
ours significantly increase the speed by 13× and achieves
new state-of-the-art ZVOS performance. Code is available
at https://github.com/DLUT-yyc/Isomer.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot Video Object Segmentation (ZVOS) aims at
discovering the most visually attractive objects in a video
sequence and serves as a fundamental computer vision technique. Different from image segmentation that mainly relies
on static appearance features, ZVOS further explores temporal motion information to achieve reliable and temporally
consistent results. One popular pipeline [39, 17, 60, 43] is
integrating appearance and motion information by identically applying feature fusion modules in multiple stages as
shown in Fig. 1 (a). While great efforts have been made, designing effective multi-stage appearance-motion fusion approaches for ZVOS is still an open problem.
Transformers [49] have made remarkable breakthroughs
in many computer vision tasks [6, 3, 56, 28] due to its strong
capability in modeling long-range dependencies and unique
flexibility for cross-modal feature fusion. Nevertheless,
their merits have not been fully explored in the ZVOS field.
A straightforward way is adopting Transformer blocks as
the appearance-motion fusion modules. In our preliminary

966

