This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vanishing Point Estimation in Uncalibrated Images with Prior Gravity Direction
Rémi Pautrat1
1

Shaohui Liu1

Petr Hruby1
2

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich

(a) 4-line solver [43]
Num inliers: 390, Rotation error: 12.05◦

Marc Pollefeys1,2

Daniel Barath1

Microsoft Mixed Reality and AI Zurich lab

(b) Our 2-line solver with IMU gravity
Num inliers: 455, Rotation error: 2.54◦

(c) Our hybrid RANSAC
Num inliers: 482, Rotation error: 0.83◦

Figure 1: Vanishing point (VP) estimation with gravity prior. We propose two new 2-line solvers for VP estimation with
uncalibrated cameras leveraging a known direction. Inlier lines of RANSAC are depicted with one color per assigned VP.
Compared to previous work (a), our new solvers (b) and their combination in a hybrid RANSAC (c) are more accurate.

Abstract
We tackle the problem of estimating a Manhattan frame,
i.e. three orthogonal vanishing points, and the unknown focal length of the camera, leveraging a prior vertical direction. The direction can come from an Inertial Measurement
Unit that is a standard component of recent consumer devices, e.g., smartphones. We provide an exhaustive analysis
of minimal line configurations and derive two new 2-line
solvers, one of which does not suffer from singularities affecting existing solvers. Additionally, we design a new nonminimal method, running on an arbitrary number of lines,
to boost the performance in local optimization. Combining
all solvers in a hybrid robust estimator, our method achieves
increased accuracy even with a rough prior. Experiments on
synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the superior
accuracy of our method compared to the state of the art,
while having comparable runtimes. We further demonstrate
the applicability of our solvers for relative rotation estimation. The code is available at https://github.com/
cvg/VP-Estimation-with-Prior-Gravity.

1. Introduction
Projecting parallel lines of the world into a perspective
image reveals a common intersection point: their vanishing
point (VP). Estimating VPs from a single image is a long-

standing task in vision, as they provide critical information
about the 3D structure of the scene [39]. Vanishing points
are relevant in many vision applications, such as camera rotation estimation [11, 13, 18], calibration [10], single-view
reconstruction [22], wireframe parsing [35, 48].
Vanishing point estimation methods can be categorized
into two main paradigms: unconstrained VP detection discovering an undefined number of VPs [5, 34, 45, 24],
and approaches that make the Manhattan world assumption [11, 7, 46, 28], i.e., there are three dominant and orthogonal directions in the world. We opt in this paper for the
second option, assuming a Manhattan world. This scenario
is particularly relevant in human-made environments, where
most applications leveraging VPs take place. By making
this assumption, we can directly estimate the three orthogonal directions, significantly reducing the search space and
simplifying the robust estimation problem. Although it is
possible to detect an unconstrained number of VPs and later
orthogonalize them [13], directly looking for a set of 3 orthogonal VPs is more efficient and accurate in practice [7].
Vanishing point detection has been extensively studied
in the past. We distinguish five main directions of research:
exhaustive search methods [32, 36, 6, 31, 33], expectationmaximization-based [3, 13], optimization-based [8, 41],
deep learning-based [4, 47, 29, 40] and RANSAC-based
ones [2, 44, 43, 7, 46]. Due to their robustness to outliers,
we adopt the strand of research based on RANSAC in this

14118

