This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ObjectSDF++: Improved Object-Compositional Neural Implicit Surfaces
Qianyi Wu1
1

Monash University

2

Kaisiyuan Wang2

University of Sydney

Kejie Li3
3

Jianmin Zheng4

University of Oxford

4

Jianfei Cai1

Nanyang Technological University

{qianyi.wu, jianfei.cai}@monash.edu kaisiyuan.wang@sydney.edu.au
kejie.li@outlook.com asjmzheng@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
In recent years, neural implicit surface reconstruction
has emerged as a popular paradigm for multi-view 3D
reconstruction. Unlike traditional multi-view stereo approaches, the neural implicit surface-based methods leverage neural networks to represent 3D scenes as signed distance functions (SDFs). However, they tend to disregard
the reconstruction of individual objects within the scene,
which limits their performance and practical applications.
To address this issue, previous work ObjectSDF introduced
a nice framework of object-composition neural implicit surfaces, which utilizes 2D instance masks to supervise individual object SDFs. In this paper, we propose a new
framework called ObjectSDF++ to overcome the limitations of ObjectSDF. First, in contrast to ObjectSDF whose
performance is primarily restricted by its converted semantic field, the core component of our model is an occlusionaware object opacity rendering formulation that directly
volume-renders object opacity to be supervised with instance masks. Second, we design a novel regularization
term for object distinction, which can effectively mitigate
the issue that ObjectSDF may result in unexpected reconstruction in invisible regions due to the lack of constraint to
prevent collisions. Our extensive experiments demonstrate
that our novel framework not only produces superior object
reconstruction results but also significantly improves the
quality of scene reconstruction. Code and more resources
can be found in https://qianyiwu.github.io/
objectsdf++.

1. Introduction
Recently, the neural implicit surface representation [55,
54, 45] has revived the classical area of multi-view 3D
reconstruction that constructs a 3D scene from a set of
multi-view images. Unlike traditional multi-view stereo
approaches, neural implicit surface reconstruction leverages neural networks to implicitly represent 3D scenes as
signed distance functions (SDFs). Due to its large mod-

eling capability and resolution-free representation and also
the wide applications of 3D reconstruction (for instance, in
virtual and augmented reality and ditigal twins), this novel
paradigm has brought multi-view 3D reconstruction to a
new level and garnered the attention of the research community.
The success of the neural implicit surface representation
should be attributed to the seminal work of Neural Radiance
Field (NeRF) [23]. NeRF revolutionarily links the neural implicit 3D radiance field with 2D images via volume
rendering, which simulates how light rays travel from the
3D scene to the 2D image plane by sampling points along
each ray and accumulating their radiance. The neural implicit representation is designed as a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), which takes 3D coordinates of a point as input
and outputs RGB color and scene density. Since NeRF is
mainly designed for view synthesis, its performance on 3D
reconstruction is limited. This triggers the emergence of
the neural implicit surface representation and reconstruction, which predicts an SDF value instead of a radiance
field density and has proven its ability in 3D reconstruction
[55, 26, 54, 45, 58, 7, 27].
One major limitation of most existing neural implicit surface reconstruction methods is that they basically focus on
the representation of one entire scene or a single object,
without paying much attention to individual objects within
the scene. There have been a few attempts [53, 48, 17] that
address this issue by introducing the object-compositional
representation with additional guidance from 2D instance
masks. In particular, ObjectSDF [48] proposes a simple
and effective object-compositional neural implicit representation, where the MLP outputs individual object SDFs and
the scene SDF is simply the minimum over all object SDFs.
Moreover, ObjectSDF introduces a mapping function to
convert each object SDF to a 3D semantic logit, which is
volume-rendered to be compared with the given 2D semantic mask.
However, ObjectSDF also has a few limitations. First, it
requires the additional mapping function with a tuning parameter for constructing the vectorized semantic field from
1
21764

