This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Name Your Colour For the Task: Artificially Discover Colour Naming via Colour
Quantisation Transformer

1

Shenghan Su1 , Lin Gu3,2 *, Yue Yang1,4 , Zenghui Zhang1 , Tatsuya Harada2,3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 The University of Tokyo, 3 RIKEN AIP, 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{su2564468850, yang-yue, zenghui.zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn, lin.gu@riken.jp, harada@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Figure 1: (a) The theoretical limit of efficiency for colour naming (black curve) and cases of the WCS probability map of human
colour language copied from [49]. (b) The colour size (from 1-bit to 6-bit)-accuracy curve on the tiny-imagenet-200 [29]
dataset. The WCS probability maps generated by our CQFormer are also shown along the curve. (c) The colour naming
stimulus grid used in the WCS [26]. (d) The three-term WCS probability map of CQFormer after embedding 1978 Nafaanra
three-colour system ((light (‘fiNge’), dark (‘wOO’), and warm or red-like (‘nyiE’)) into the latent representation. (e) The
four-term WCS probability map of CQFormer evolved from (d). The evolved fourth colour, yellow-green, is consistent with
the prediction of basic colour term theory [2].

Abstract
The long-standing theory that a colour-naming system
evolves under dual pressure of efficient communication
and perceptual mechanism is supported by more and more
linguistic studies, including analysing four decades of diachronic data from the Nafaanra language. This inspires us
to explore whether machine learning could evolve and discover a similar colour-naming system via optimising the communication efficiency represented by high-level recognition
performance. Here, we propose a novel colour quantisation
transformer, CQFormer, that quantises colour space while
maintaining the accuracy of machine recognition on the
quantised images. Given an RGB image, Annotation Branch
maps it into an index map before generating the quantised
image with a colour palette; meanwhile the Palette Branch
utilises a key-point detection way to find proper colours in
the palette among the whole colour space. By interacting
with colour annotation, CQFormer is able to balance both
the machine vision accuracy and colour perceptual structure
* Corresponding author.

such as distinct and stable colour distribution for discovered
colour system. Very interestingly, we even observe the consistent evolution pattern between our artificial colour system
and basic colour terms across human languages. Besides,
our colour quantisation method also offers an efficient quantisation method that effectively compresses the image storage
while maintaining high performance in high-level recognition tasks such as classification and detection. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the superior performance of our
method with extremely low bit-rate colours, showing potential to integrate into quantisation network to quantities from
image to network activation. The source code is available at
https://github.com/ryeocthiv/CQFormer

1. Introduction
Hath not a Jew eyes? Hath not a Jew hands, organs,
dimensions, senses, affections, passions?
William Shakespeare “The Merchant of Venice”
Does artificial intelligence share the same perceptual
mechanism for colours as human beings? We aim to explore

12021

