This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-Oriented Multi-Modal Mutual Learning for Vision-Language Models
Sifan Long 1,2,3 †* Zhen Zhao3,4 †* Junkun Yuan3,5 †* Zichang Tan3 Jiangjiang Liu3
Luping Zhou4 Shengsheng Wang1,2 ‡ Jingdong Wang3 ‡
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Jilin, China
2
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education,
Jilin University, Jilin, China
3
4
5
Baidu VIS
University of Sydney
Zhejiang University
longsf22@mails.jlu.edu.cn

yuanjk@zju.edu.cn

{tanzichang, liujiangjiang, wangjingdong}@baidu.com

0.45

Abstract

Cosine distance

Ours (Acc.)

Ours (Cos.)

CoCoOp (Cos.)

2.56

100

90

6.00

7.05

1.88

8.22

80

8.65

UCF101

EuroSAT

DTD

60

SUN397

0.05

Food101

70

Flowers102

0.15

StanfordCars

* Equal contribution. † Interns at Baidu VIS. ‡ Corresponding authors.

CoCoOp (Acc.)

7.89

0.25

OxfordPets

Recently, large vision-language models (VLM), such as
CLIP [33] and ALIGN [15], which employ language as

9.39

Caltech101

1. Introduction

0.03

0.35

ImageNet

Prompt learning has become one of the most efficient
paradigms for adapting large pre-trained vision-language
models to downstream tasks. Current state-of-the-art methods, like CoOp and ProDA, tend to adopt soft prompts to
learn an appropriate prompt for each specific task. Recent CoCoOp further boosts the base-to-new generalization
performance via an image-conditional prompt. However, it
directly fuses identical image semantics to prompts of different labels and significantly weakens the discrimination
among different classes as shown in our experiments. Motivated by this observation, we first propose a class-aware
text prompt (CTP) to enrich generated prompts with labelrelated image information. Unlike CoCoOp, CTP can effectively involve image semantics and avoid introducing extra
ambiguities into different prompts. On the other hand, instead of reserving the complete image representations, we
propose text-guided feature tuning (TFT) to make the image branch attend to class-related representation. A contrastive loss is employed to align such augmented text and
image representations on downstream tasks. In this way,
the image-to-text CTP and text-to-image TFT can be mutually promoted to enhance the adaptation of VLMs for downstream tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method outperforms the existing methods by a significant
margin. Especially, compared to CoCoOp, we achieve an
average improvement of 4.03% on new classes and 3.19%
on harmonic-mean over eleven classification benchmarks.

2.47

Accuracy (%)

wss@jlu.edu.cn

{zhen.zhao, luping.zhou}@sydney.edu.au

Figure 1: Comparisons between CoCoOp [50] and our
method. The cosine distance between the positive and the
negative prompts, which quantifies the class discrimination,
and the average accuracy on benchmarks are reported.

supervision signal instead of discrete labels, have shown
impressive generalization performance in a wide range of
downstream vision tasks. Their multi-modal interaction nature delivers open-vocabulary support and achieves amazing zero-shot classification performance. Despite their impressive transferable abilities, as discussed in [25], it is essential to re-activate specific representation capabilities for
optimal performance in certain downstream tasks. Considering their hundreds of millions or billions of parameters,
attempting to fine-tune the entire model is impractical and
even jeopardizes the well-established representation space
[14]. To this end, many recent studies have centred on the
efficient and effective adaptation of pre-trained and frozen
large VLMs for the specific downstream tasks [28, 51, 50].

21959

