This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Universal Domain Adaptation via Compressive Attention Matching
Didi Zhu *1 , Yinchuan Li *2 , Junkun Yuan1 , Zexi Li1 , Kun Kuang †1 , and Chao Wu †1
1

2

{didi_zhu, yuanjk, zexi.li, kunkuang, chao.wu}@zju.edu.cn
2
{liyinchuan}@huawei.com

Source

Universal domain adaptation (UniDA) aims to transfer knowledge from the source domain to the target domain without any prior knowledge about the label set. The
challenge lies in how to determine whether the target samples belong to common categories. The mainstream methods make judgments based on the sample features, which
overemphasizes global information while ignoring the most
crucial local objects in the image, resulting in limited accuracy. To address this issue, we propose a Universal Attention Matching (UniAM) framework by exploiting the selfattention mechanism in vision transformer to capture the
crucial object information. The proposed framework introduces a novel Compressive Attention Matching (CAM)
approach to explore the core information by compressively
representing attentions. Furthermore, CAM incorporates a
residual-based measurement to determine the sample commonness. By utilizing the measurement, UniAM achieves
domain-wise and category-wise Common Feature Alignment (CFA) and Target Class Separation (TCS). Notably,
UniAM is the first method utilizing the attention in vision
transformer directly to perform classification tasks. Extensive experiments show that UniAM outperforms the current
state-of-the-art methods on various benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
While deep neural networks have achieved remarkable
success on visual tasks [12, 25, 19, 73, 51, 69, 70], their performance heavily relies on the assumption of independently
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) training and test data [57].
However, this assumption is frequently violated due to the
presence of domain shift in real-world scenarios [52, 33, 34,
68, 67, 74, 72]. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (DA) [1]
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding authors.

Fraction of object shape decesions

Universal Domain Adaptation

Abstract

Target

Classification

Shape categories

1

Zhejiang University
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

unknown
source labels

Fraction of global texture decesions

Figure 1: Left: Illustration of Universal Domain Adaptation. Right: Shape-bias Analysis. Plot shows shape-texture
trade off for attention and feature in ViT and humans.

has emerged as a promising solution to address this limitation by adapting models trained on a source domain to
perform well on an unlabeled target domain. Nevertheless,
most existing DA approaches [14, 56, 49, 40, 39, 38] assume that the label spaces in the source and target domains
are identical, which may not always hold in practical scenarios. Partial Domain Adaptation (PDA) [4] and Open Set
Domain Adaptation (OSDA) [43] have been proposed to
handle cases where the label spaces in one domain include
those in the other, but these still rely on prior knowledge
on label set, limiting knowledge generalizing from one scenario to others. Universal domain adaptation (UniDA) [66]
considers a more practical and challenging scenario where
the relationship of label space between source and target
domains is completely unknown i.e. with any number of
common, source-private and target-private classes.
In UniDA, the primary objective is to develop a model
capable of precisely categorizing target samples as one
of the common classes or an "unknown" class as shown
in Fig. 1 left. Existing UniDA methods aim to design
a transferability criteria to detect common and private
classes solely based on the discriminability of deep fea-

6974

