This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Iterative Prompt Learning for Unsupervised Backlit Image Enhancement
Zhexin Liang

Chongyi Li Shangchen Zhou Ruicheng Feng
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

Chen Change Loy

{zliang008, s200094, ruicheng002, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg, lichongyi25@gmail.com
https://zhexinliang.github.io/CLIP_LIT_page/

Figure 1: The proposed method trained using only hundreds of images yields favorable results on unseen backlit images
captured in various scenarios, including the human face, natural landscape, animal, architecture, and night scene.

Abstract
We propose a novel unsupervised backlit image enhancement method, abbreviated as CLIP-LIT, by exploring the potential of Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training (CLIP)
for pixel-level image enhancement. We show that the openworld CLIP prior not only aids in distinguishing between
backlit and well-lit images, but also in perceiving heterogeneous regions with different luminance, facilitating the
optimization of the enhancement network. Unlike high-level
and image manipulation tasks, directly applying CLIP to
enhancement tasks is non-trivial, owing to the difficulty in
finding accurate prompts. To solve this issue, we devise a
prompt learning framework that first learns an initial prompt
pair by constraining the text-image similarity between the
prompt (negative/positive sample) and the corresponding image (backlit image/well-lit image) in the CLIP latent space.
Then, we train the enhancement network based on the textimage similarity between the enhanced result and the ini-

tial prompt pair. To further improve the accuracy of the
initial prompt pair, we iteratively fine-tune the prompt learning framework to reduce the distribution gaps between the
backlit images, enhanced results, and well-lit images via
rank learning, boosting the enhancement performance. Our
method alternates between updating the prompt learning
framework and enhancement network until visually pleasing
results are achieved. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of
visual quality and generalization ability, without requiring
any paired data.

1. Introduction
Backlit images are captured when the primary light source
is behind some objects. The images often suffer from highly
imbalanced illuminance distribution, which affects the visual
quality or accuracy of subsequent perception algorithms.
Correcting backlit images manually is a laborious task

8094

