This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

No Fear of Classifier Biases: Neural Collapse Inspired Federated Learning with
Synthetic and Fixed Classifier
Zexi Li1
1

Xinyi Shang2†

Zhejiang University

2

{zexi.li,ruihe,chao.wu}@zju.edu.cn

Rui He1

Tao Lin3 *

Xiamen University

3

Westlake University

shangxinyi@stu.xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

Chao Wu1∗
lintao@westlake.edu.cn

Data heterogeneity is an inherent challenge that hinders
the performance of federated learning (FL). Recent studies have identified the biased classifiers of local models as
the key bottleneck. Previous attempts have used classifier
calibration after FL training, but this approach falls short
in improving the poor feature representations caused by
training-time classifier biases. Resolving the classifier bias
dilemma in FL requires a full understanding of the mechanisms behind the classifier. Recent advances in neural
collapse have shown that the classifiers and feature prototypes under perfect training scenarios collapse into an
optimal structure called simplex equiangular tight frame
(ETF). Building on this neural collapse insight, we propose a solution to the FL’s classifier bias problem by utilizing a synthetic and fixed ETF classifier during training.
The optimal classifier structure enables all clients to learn
unified and optimal feature representations even under extremely heterogeneous data. We devise several effective
modules to better adapt the ETF structure in FL, achieving both high generalization and personalization. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method achieves state-ofthe-art performances on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and TinyImageNet. The code is available at https://github.
com/ZexiLee/ICCV-2023-FedETF.

mobile services [8, 16], and so on; it shows promising
prospects in data collaboration. However, clients in FL
training may hold heterogeneous data, in other words,
clients’ datasets are in Non-IID distributions1 , which causes
a huge degradation to the global model’s generalization
[5, 31, 3, 27, 13, 14].
Numerous recent studies have shown that classifier biases in clients’ local models caused by Non-IID data are
the primary cause of degradation in FL [31, 52, 21]. It
has been discovered that the classifier layer is more biased
than other layers [31], and classifier biases will create a vicious cycle between biased classifiers and misaligned features across clients [52]. Figure 1 illustrates the issue of
classifier bias in FL, where Non-IID data leads to poor pairwise cosine similarities among clients’ classifiers and feature prototypes. Furthermore, class-wise classifier vectors
of clients are scattered in the embedding space, leading to
significant generalization declines.
Previous research has attempted to mitigate classifier biases through classifier retraining via generated virtual features at the end of FL training [31, 37]. However, these
methods fail to address classifier biases during training. Biased classifiers during the training phase lead to inadequate
feature extractors and poor representations of generated features, negatively affecting the retrained classifiers. Our experiments have also shown the limitations of classifier retraining methods (Table 1). Therefore, we wonder:

1. Introduction

Can we break the classifier bias dilemma during training,
improving both the classifiers and feature representations?

Federated learning (FL) [32, 28, 48, 26] is a distributed
training paradigm that enables collaborative training from
massive multi-source datasets without transferring the raw
data, reserving data ownership [29] while relieving communication burdens [32]. FL facilitates broad applications
in medical images [2, 7], the internet of things [17, 33],

To resolve the classifier bias dilemma, it is essential to
fully understand the mechanisms behind the classifier. We
further wonder: what are the properties of a well-trained
(i.e. good) classifier? An emerging discovery called neural
collapse [34, 43, 25, 44] has shed light on this matter. It
describes the phenomenon that, in the perfect training sce-

* Corresponding authors. † Work was done during Xinyi’s visit to Westlake University.

1 We use “data heterogeneity” and “Non-IID data” interchangeably.

5319

