This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MPCViT: Searching for Accurate and Efficient MPC-Friendly
Vision Transformer with Heterogeneous Attention
Meng Li1* Wenjie Xiong2 Tong Tong1 Wen-jie Lu3
Jin Tan3 Runsheng Wang1 Ru Huang1
1
Peking University 2 Virginia Tech 3 Ant Group

Wenxuan Zeng1

{zwx.andy,tongtong}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {meng.li,wrs,ruhuang}@pku.edu.cn,
wenjiex@vt.edu, {juhou.lwj,tanjin.tj}@antgroup.com

(a) Influence of the Number of Heads

Abstract

1. Introduction
As machine learning models are handling increasingly
sensitive data and tasks, privacy has become one of the major concerns during the model deployment. Secure multiparty computation (MPC) [14] can protect the privacy of
* Corresponding author.

(c) Relative Error in MPC

LogScale Error (%)

70
60

20

Latency (s)

Latency (s)

Secure multi-party computation (MPC) enables computation directly on encrypted data and protects both data and
model privacy in deep learning inference. However, existing
neural network architectures, including Vision Transformers (ViTs), are not designed or optimized for MPC and incur
significant latency overhead. We observe Softmax accounts
for the major latency bottleneck due to a high communication complexity, but can be selectively replaced or linearized without compromising the model accuracy. Hence,
in this paper, we propose an MPC-friendly ViT, dubbed
MPCViT, to enable accurate yet efficient ViT inference in
MPC. Based on a systematic latency and accuracy evaluation of the Softmax attention and other attention variants,
we propose a heterogeneous attention optimization space.
We also develop a simple yet effective MPC-aware neural architecture search algorithm for fast Pareto optimization. To further boost the inference efficiency, we propose
MPCViT+ , to jointly optimize the Softmax attention and
other network components, including GeLU, matrix multiplication, etc. With extensive experiments, we demonstrate
that MPCViT achieves 1.9%, 1.3% and 3.6% higher accuracy with 6.2×, 2.9× and 1.9× latency reduction compared with baseline ViT, MPCFormer and THE-X on the
Tiny-ImageNet dataset, respectively. MPCViT+ further
achieves a better Pareto front compared with MPCViT. The
code and models for evaluation are available at https:
//github.com/PKU-SEC-Lab/mpcvit.

(b) Influence of the Number of Tokens
80

25

15
10

50

10

40
30
20

5
0

10
1

2

4

8

Number of Attention Heads

0

1
64

128

Number of Tokens

256

0.25 0.50 1.00 2.00 4.00 8.00

Input Variance

Figure 1. The latency breakdown of a Transformer block w.r.t (a)
# heads and (b) # tokens; and (c) the relative error of Softmax and
ReLU Softmax with different input variances.

both data and deep neural network (DNN) models and has
gained a lot of attention in recent years [42, 51, 60].
However, existing DNN architectures, especially the recently proposed Vision Transformers (ViTs) [2, 11, 64], are
not designed or optimized for MPC (the high-level private
ViT inference framework in MPC is shown in Figure 2 and
Appendix A.1). Although ViTs have achieved superior performance for various vision tasks [2, 15, 16, 64], they face
several realistic limitations when directly deployed in MPC:
1) communication overhead: in contrast to regular inference on plaintext, operations like Softmax, GeLU, max, etc,
require intensive communication in MPC, which usually
dominates the total inference latency [42, 60]. For example, Softmax is usually very lightweight in plaintext inference. However, as shown in Figure 1(a) and Figure 1(b),
it accounts for the majority of the Transformer inference
latency due to the high communication complexity; 2) approximation error: operations like exponential, tanh, reciprocal, etc, cannot be computed directly and require iterative approximation, limiting the computation accuracy. For
instance, as shown in Figure 1(c), the relative error of Softmax significantly increases when the input variance is large
due to its narrow dynamic range [60]. In contrast, replacing exponential in Softmax with ReLU reduces the relative
error drastically (denoted as ReLU Softmax in §2.2).
Numerous efficient Transformer variants have been pro-

5052

