This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MiniROAD: Minimal RNN Framework for Online Action Detection
Joungbin An1

Hyolim Kang1 Su Ho Han1 Ming-Hsuan Yang1,2,3 Seon Joo Kim1
1
Yonsei University 2 UC Merced 3 Google Research

Abstract

1. Introduction
Online Action Detection (OAD) is a challenging task
that involves identifying actions taking place in a streaming video without access to future frames. Since its introduction [7], OAD has gained great attention in research circles, as it has numerous real-world applications, such as autonomous driving [20], smart surveillance systems [26, 27],
and anomaly detection [31]. These applications require the
ability to process streaming videos in real-time, making
OAD an essential component of many advanced systems.
As a result, there has been a growing interest in developing
more accurate and efficient methods for performing OAD.
To address the challenges of OAD, recent efforts have
focused on developing novel models for analyzing streaming videos in real-time. The conventional process of OAD
consists of two stages. In the first stage, frames are con-

Ours

TesSTra

GateHUB

70

LSTR

68
mAP

Online Action Detection (OAD) is the task of identifying
actions in streaming videos without access to future frames.
Much effort has been devoted to effectively capturing longrange dependencies, with transformers receiving the spotlight for their ability to capture long-range temporal structures. In contrast, RNNs have received less attention lately,
due to their lower performance compared to recent methods
that utilize transformers. In this paper, we investigate the
underlying reasons for the inferior performance of RNNs
compared to transformer-based algorithms. Our findings
indicate that the discrepancy between training and inference is the primary hindrance to the effective training of
RNNs. To address this, we propose applying non-uniform
weights to the loss computed at each time step, which allows the RNN model to learn from the predictions made in
an environment that better resembles the inference stage.
Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets, THUMOS, TVSeries, and FineAction demonstrate that a minimal
RNN-based model trained with the proposed methodology
performs equally or better than the existing best methods
with a significant increase in efficiency. The code is available at https://github.com/jbistanbul/MiniROAD.

72

66

OadTR

64

Model Parameter Count
20M
40M
60M
80M

TRN

62

300M

60
0

1

2

3
4
GFLOPs

5

6

7

Figure 1: Performance of recent OAD methods with respect
to GFLOPs and the model’s size.
verted into a sequence of features by a feature extractor.
In the second stage, the extracted features are processed
to capture the temporal information required for performing OAD. Much attention on OAD research has been paid
to this second stage where the two mainstream models are
RNNs [11, 30, 18, 5] and Transformers [9, 10, 33].
Each model has its strengths and weaknesses. RNNs
can capture temporal transitions effectively by modeling sequences recurrently but are known for their training difficulties [23, 30]. Transformers can capture long-term dependencies through self-attention, however, attention computation is computationally expensive. Although recent research has shifted towards using Transformer models, our
paper revisits RNN, which has been overlooked in recent
studies.
In this work, we show that RNN’s intrinsic inductive
bias—prioritizing the current input while preserving meaningful temporal information from the histories—makes
them well-suited for OAD. Unlike in natural language processing, where a distant word can significantly affect the
next sequence prediction, we observe that in OAD, the current and its neighboring frames have a dominant influence
on the current prediction. In addition, RNN is efficient,
as it requires a small computational overhead compared to

10341

