This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Open-Set Test-Time Adaptation
Utilizing the Wisdom of Crowds in Entropy Minimization
Jungsoo Lee1,2* Debasmit Das1 Jaegul Choo2 Sungha Choi1†
1
1 {jungsool,

Qualcomm AI Research‡

debadas, sunghac}@qti.qualcomm.com

Ground Truth

KAIST

2 {bebeto,

jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

: Closed-set noisy losses
: Open-set noisy losses

: Open-set classes

Input Images

2

Predictions

(a) Entropy Minimization

: Correct losses
: Discarded losses

(b) Ours

Figure 1: Discarding noisy losses in test-time adaptation (TTA). Black pixels in the ground truth indicate the open-set classes
in the test set (i.e., BDD-100K [60]), which were not included in the train set (i.e., Cityscapes [10]), such as the guardrails
in the first row or the garbage truck in the second row. (a) Since TTA models generally use their predictions for the target
outputs, they are prone to utilizing noisy losses from 1) wrong predictions (pink pixels ■) and 2) open-set classes (red pixels
■). Performing TTA for a long term in such an environment degrades the performance of TTA models significantly. (b)
Our method effectively filters out such noisy losses, preventing performance degradation and alarming unexpected obstacles,
which is crucial for safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving (see Supplementary).

Abstract
Test-time adaptation (TTA) methods, which generally
rely on the model’s predictions (e.g., entropy minimization)
to adapt the source pretrained model to the unlabeled target
domain, suffer from noisy signals originating from 1) incorrect or 2) open-set predictions. Long-term stable adaptation is hampered by such noisy signals, so training models without such error accumulation is crucial for practical
TTA. To address these issues, including open-set TTA, we
propose a simple yet effective sample selection method inspired by the following crucial empirical finding. While entropy minimization compels the model to increase the probability of its predicted label (i.e., confidence values), we
found that noisy samples rather show decreased confidence
values. To be more specific, entropy minimization attempts
to raise the confidence values of an individual sample’s prediction, but individual confidence values may rise or fall
due to the influence of signals from numerous other pre∗ Work done during an internship at Qualcomm AI Research.
† Corresponding author. ‡ Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of
Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

dictions (i.e., wisdom of crowds). Due to this fact, noisy
signals misaligned with such ‘wisdom of crowds’, generally found in the correct signals, fail to raise the individual confidence values of wrong samples, despite attempts
to increase them. Based on such findings, we filter out the
samples whose confidence values are lower in the adapted
model than in the original model, as they are likely to be
noisy. Our method is widely applicable to existing TTA
methods and improves their long-term adaptation performance in both image classification (e.g., 49.4% reduced
error rates with TENT) and semantic segmentation (e.g.,
11.7% gain in mIoU with TENT).

1. Introduction
Despite the recent advancements of deep learning, models still show a significant performance degradation when
confronted with large domain shifts (e.g., changes of cities
with different landscapes during autonomous driving) [8,
33, 39, 27, 11]. Among various studies, test-time adaptation
(TTA) is at the center of attention due to its practicality in
not requiring 1) the source data during the adaptation stage
and 2) ground truth labels of the target domain [57].

16380

