This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deformer: Dynamic Fusion Transformer for Robust Hand Pose Estimation
Qichen Fu1

Xingyu Liu1
Ran Xu2
1
Carnegie Mellon University

Juan Carlos Niebles2
Kris M. Kitani1
2
Salesforce Research

Abstract
Accurately estimating 3D hand pose is crucial for understanding how humans interact with the world. Despite remarkable progress, existing methods often struggle to generate plausible hand poses when the hand is heavily occluded or blurred. In videos, the movements of the hand allow us to observe various parts of the hand that may be occluded or blurred in a single frame. To adaptively leverage
the visual clue before and after the occlusion or blurring for
robust hand pose estimation, we propose the Deformer: a
framework that implicitly reasons about the relationship between hand parts within the same image (spatial dimension)
and different timesteps (temporal dimension). We show that
a naive application of the transformer self-attention mechanism is not sufficient because motion blur or occlusions
in certain frames can lead to heavily distorted hand features and generate imprecise keys and queries. To address
this challenge, we incorporate a Dynamic Fusion Module
into Deformer, which predicts the deformation of the hand
and warps the hand mesh predictions from nearby frames
to explicitly support the current frame estimation. Furthermore, we have observed that errors are unevenly distributed
across different hand parts, with vertices around fingertips
having disproportionately higher errors than those around
the palm. We mitigate this issue by introducing a new
loss function called maxMSE that automatically adjusts the
weight of every vertex to focus the model on critical hand
parts. Extensive experiments show that our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods by 10%, and is
more robust to occlusions (over 14%).

1. Introduction
Accurately estimating hand poses in the wild is a challenging task that is affected by various factors, including object occlusion, self-occlusion, motion blur, and low camera
exposure. To address these challenges, temporal information can be leveraged using a self-attention mechanism [52]
that reasons the feature correlation between adjacent frames
to generate better hand pose estimations. However, as the
generation of key and query vectors depends on per-frame

Input Frames

TCMR

Ours

Time

Vertex Error

Figure 1: Given a video where in some frames (left) the
hand is heavily occluded or blurred, the existing state-ofthe-art video-based method TCMR [10] (middle) fails to
predict accurate hand poses. Our method (right) is able
to capture the hand dynamics and leverage neighborhood
frames to robustly produce plausible hand pose estimations.

features, heavy occlusion or blurring can significantly contaminate them, resulting in inaccurate output. Another challenge of hand pose estimation is that the fingertips, located
at the periphery of the hand, are more prone to occlusion
and have more complex motion patterns, making them particularly challenging for the model to estimate accurately.
To tackle the aforementioned challenges, we propose
Deformer: a dynamic fusion transformer that leverages
nearby frames to learn hand deformations and assemble
multiple wrapped hand poses from nearby frames for a robust hand pose estimation in the current frame. Deformer
implicitly models the temporal correlations between adjacent frames and automatically selects frames to focus on.

23600

