This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Foresightful Dense Visual Affordance
for Deformable Object Manipulation
Ruihai Wu1,3,4 * Chuanruo Ning2,1 * Hao Dong1,3,4†
CFCS, School of CS, PKU 2 School of EECS, PKU 3 BAAI
4
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of CS, PKU
1

Abstract
Understanding and manipulating deformable objects
(e.g., ropes and fabrics) is an essential yet challenging
task with broad applications. Difficulties come from complex states and dynamics, diverse configurations and highdimensional action space of deformable objects. Besides,
the manipulation tasks usually require multiple steps to accomplish, and greedy policies may easily lead to local optimal states. Existing studies usually tackle this problem using reinforcement learning or imitating expert demonstrations, with limitations in modeling complex states or requiring hand-crafted expert policies. In this paper, we study
deformable object manipulation using dense visual affordance, with generalization towards diverse states, and propose a novel kind of foresightful dense affordance, which
avoids local optima by estimating states’ values for longterm manipulation. We propose a framework for learning
this representation, with novel designs such as multi-stage
stable learning and efficient self-supervised data collection
without experts. Experiments demonstrate the superiority of
our proposed foresightful dense affordance. Project page:
https://hyperplane-lab.github.io/DeformableAffordance

1. Introduction
Many kinds of deformable objects, such as ropes and
fabrics, exist everywhere in our daily life. Perceiving and
manipulating deformable objects plays a significant role
and paves the way for future home-assistant robots.
Unlike rigid or articulated objects, due to the complex
dynamics, high-dimensional and nearly infinite degrees of
freedom, large action space, and severe self-occlusion, deformable objects pose much more challenges to manipulate.
Moreover, unlike tasks for rigid objects (like grasping) or
articulated objects (like pushing a door) that require one
or only a few steps to accomplish, deformable object manipulation tasks usually require many steps to accomplish,
* Equal contribution, order determined by coin flip.
† Corresponding author

Pick
Point
Place
Point
0.382 0.320

0.557 0.613

Complex
States and
Dynamic

Coverage

Local
Optimal
State

Affordance
Prediction

Pick Place
Low

Pick

Place

Pick

Place
High

Figure 1. Deformable Object Manipulation has many difficulties. 1) It requires multiple steps to complete. 2) Most actions can
hardly facilitate tasks, for the exceptionally complex states and
dynamics. 3) Many local optimal states are temporarily closer to
the target, but making following actions harder to coordinate for
the whole task. We propose to learn Foresightful Dense Visual
Affordance aware of future actions to avoid local optima for deformable object manipulation, with real-world implementations.

laying much focus on relationships and influences between
actions in a sequence, as an action leading to local optimal
states may not eventually complete the task.
Specifically, as shown in Figure 1, unfolding crumpled
cloth requires a sequence of actions (pick-and-place). Because of the exceptionally complex states and dynamics,
and large action space, most actions fail to facilitate the task.
Moreover, although some cloth in local optimal states temporarily have larger coverage areas than others, following
actions face difficulties in smoothly completing the task.
Proposed by Gibson [8] and aimed at providing indicative information for agents to execute actions (e.g., el-

10947

