This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Viewset Diffusion: (0-)Image-Conditioned 3D Generative Models from 2D Data
Stanislaw Szymanowicz Christian Rupprecht Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group — University of Oxford
{stan,chrisr,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Generative Single-view 3D Reconstruction
Input

3D Generation

Reconstructions

Volumes

Volumes

Samples

Reconstructions

Samples

Input

Figure 1: Viewset Diffusion. Our category-specific models perform both ‘generative’ 3D reconstruction and unconditional 3D generation.
In single-view 3D reconstruction (left) our models generate plausible explanations of occluded regions (car’s back, hydrant’s occluded side).
The same models are able to generate varied 3D objects (right) in a feed-forward manner while being trained only on 2D data.

Abstract
We present Viewset Diffusion, a diffusion-based generator that outputs 3D objects while only using multi-view 2D
data for supervision. We note that there exists a one-toone mapping between viewsets, i.e., collections of several
2D views of an object, and 3D models. Hence, we train a
diffusion model to generate viewsets, but design the neural
network generator to reconstruct internally corresponding
3D models, thus generating those too. We fit a diffusion
model to a large number of viewsets for a given category
of objects. The resulting generator can be conditioned on
zero, one or more input views. Conditioned on a single view,
it performs 3D reconstruction accounting for the ambiguity of the task and allowing to sample multiple solutions
compatible with the input. The model performs reconstruction efficiently, in a feed-forward manner, and is trained using only rendering losses using as few as three views per
viewset. Project page: szymanowiczs.github.io/
viewset-diffusion.

1. Introduction
Image-based 3D reconstruction, i.e., recovering the 3D
shape of the world from 2D observations, is a fundamental

problem in computer vision. In this work, we study the
problem of reconstructing the 3D shape and appearance of
individual objects from as few as one image. In fact, we cast
this as image-conditioned 3D generation, and also consider
the case of unconditional generation (fig. 1).
Single-view 3D reconstruction is inherently ambiguous
because projecting a 3D scene to an image loses the depth
dimension. The goal is thus not to recover the exact 3D
shape and appearance of the object, particularly of its occluded parts, but to generate plausible reconstructions. This
can only be achieved by learning a prior over the likely 3D
shapes and appearances of the objects. Here, we do so for
one category of objects at a time.
Leveraging 3D object priors for reconstruction has been
explored by several works [11, 48]. Most of these tackle
3D reconstruction in a deterministic manner, outputting one
reconstruction per object. This is limiting in the presence of
ambiguity, as a deterministic reconstructor can only predict
either (1) a single most likely solution, which is plausible
but usually incorrect, or (2) an average of all possible reconstructions, which is implausible (fig. 2).
Thus, in this work, we tackle the problem of modelling
ambiguity in few-view 3D reconstruction. Our goal is to
learn a conditional generator that can sample all plausible
3D reconstructions consistent with a given image of an ob-

8863

