This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Human-Human Interactions in Images from Weak Textual Supervision
Morris Alper and Hadar Averbuch-Elor
Tel Aviv University

Abstract
Interactions between humans are diverse and contextdependent, but previous works have treated them as categorical, disregarding the heavy tail of possible interactions.
We propose a new paradigm of learning human-human interactions as free text from a single still image, allowing for
flexibility in modeling the unlimited space of situations and
relationships between people. To overcome the absence of
data labelled specifically for this task, we use knowledge
distillation applied to synthetic caption data produced by a
large language model without explicit supervision. We show
that the pseudo-labels produced by this procedure can be
used to train a captioning model to effectively understand
human-human interactions in images, as measured by a variety of metrics that measure textual and semantic faithfulness and factual groundedness of our predictions. We
further show that our approach outperforms SOTA image
captioning and situation recognition models on this task.
We will release1 our code and pseudo-labels along with
Waldo and Wenda, a manually-curated test set for still image human-human interaction understanding.

Figure 1. How would you describe the interactions depicted in
these images? There are unlimited possible interactions between
people which cannot be easily described by a fixed set of categories or actions. Context plays a crucial role, as in the left image
where the clothing and cake in the background help to interpret
the depicted interaction. Moreover, interactions may be involve
participants at a physical distance as in the image on the right. To
model the heavy tail of possible interactions, we propose to learn
HHI as free text (see below2 for predictions using our method).

Humans are social beings. As such, interactions among
people are ubiquitous and diverse, affected by various factors including social context and cultural norms. Reasoning about these interactions is crucial for gaining a holistic
understanding of visual scenes depicting people. However,
in spite of significant progress in analyzing isolated human
actions [29, 73, 79] and relationships between entities and
objects [27, 83], far less attention has been devoted towards
an automatic understanding of human-human interactions
(HHI). This is despite the importance of this task for applications such as interactive robotics, social behaviour understanding, and captioning systems for the visually impaired.
There are a number of factors that make the analysis of

HHI difficult. The space of possible interactions between
people is vast and requires understanding social context and
physically non-local relationships, as illustrated in Figure 1.
In addition, images depicting HHI may have multiple interpretations, some of which may be simultaneously correct.
For example, the image on the left might depict “celebrating a wedding” as well as “dancing”. Contextual cues such
as the cake in the background of the image provide additional information that hints at the depicted HHI.
Prior works targeting HHI understanding focus on a
small fixed number of interactions; representative works include [63, 65, 43, 30], all of whose models are trained to
recognize no more than ten interaction classes. In this work,
we are interested in modeling the heavy tail of possible HHI
to better understand the rich variety of ways in which people
interact. To this aim, we propose to model HHI understanding as free text generation; since HHI are not confined to a
fixed set of categories or even to a syntactic class such as
verbs, HHI as free text enables the expression of an infinite
variety of possible interactions. Furthermore, in contrast to
previous works that frequently rely on extra context such
as video data [60], we use a single image with no additional information (during inference), making our method
more widely applicable. We focus on what Stergiou and

1 via our project page https://learning-interactions.
github.io

2 A model fine-tuned on our pseudo-labels yields “dancing” and “having a picnic”.

1. Introduction
“No man is an island entire of itself.”

-John Donne

2887

