This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Point Cloud Registration as Masking and Reconstruction
Guangyan Chen1
1

Meiling Wang1

Li Yuan2

Beijing Institute of Technology

Yi Yang1
2

Yufeng Yue1 *

Peking University

Abstract
Point cloud registration is essential in computer vision
and robotics. In this paper, a critical observation is made
that the invisible parts of each point cloud can be directly
utilized as inherent masks, and the aligned point cloud pair
can be regarded as the reconstruction target. Motivated
by this observation, we rethink the point cloud registration problem as a masking and reconstruction task. To this
end, a generic and concise auxiliary training network, the
Masked Reconstruction Auxiliary Network (MRA), is proposed. The MRA reconstructs the complete point cloud by
separately using the encoded features of each point cloud
obtained from the backbone, guiding the contextual features
in the backbone to capture fine-grained geometric details
and the overall structures of point cloud pairs. Unlike recently developed high-performing methods that incorporate
specific encoding methods into transformer models, which
sacrifice versatility and introduce significant computational
complexity during the inference process, our MRA can be
easily inserted into other methods to further improve registration accuracy. Additionally, the MRA is detached after
training, thereby avoiding extra computational complexity
during the inference process. Building upon the MRA, we
present a novel transformer-based method, the Masked Reconstruction Transformer (MRT), which achieves both precise and efficient alignment using standard transformers.
Extensive experiments conducted on the 3DMatch, ModelNet40, and KITTI datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our MRT over state-of-the-art methods. Codes are
available at https://github.com/CGuangyan-BIT/MRA.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration is a fundamental problem in
computer vision and robotics that aims to recover an op* Corresponding author: Yufeng Yue (yueyufeng@bit.edu.cn). This
work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant No. NSFC 62233002, 62003039, 61973034, U1913203, the
National Key RD Program of China (2022ZD0118), the CAST program
under Grant No. YESS20200126.

Figure 1. Our MRA considers the invisible parts of each point
cloud as inherent masks. During training, the encoded features obtained from the backbone, along with mask tokens, are processed
by a decoder that separately constructs the complete point cloud.
In this manner, the MRA guides the backbone to capture the geometric details and overall structures. After training, the decoder is
detached, thereby avoiding extra inference time.

timal transformation for point cloud pair alignment. Recent
advances in 3D point representation have led to significant
attention on learning-based methods [2, 9, 28, 45], such as
PointNetLK [2], which utilize neural networks to separately
extract point-wise features and establish point-to-point correspondences. Nonetheless, the lack of interaction between
point clouds hinders the ability to accurately register partially visible point clouds. Inspired by the recent advances
in transformers, transformer-based methods [15, 40, 45, 46]
incorporate transformers to exchange information and encode contextual information, exhibiting significant registration accuracy and robustness improvements. However, the
limited shared characteristics of low-overlap point cloud
pairs produce ambiguity when identifying common structures, thus degrading the performance of such methods.
Recently proposed methods [8,29,35,38] have attempted
to address this limitation by introducing dedicated designed
encoding methods for measuring pairwise consistency, facilitating the common structure identification and reliable
correspondence generation. These methods have been
17717

