This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WaterMask: Instance Segmentation for Underwater Imagery
Shijie Lian1 , Hua Li1* , Runmin Cong2,3* , Suqi Li1 , Wei Zhang2,3 , Sam Kwong4,5
1
Hainan University 2 Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and System Control, Ministry of Education
3
Shandong University 4 City University of Hong Kong 5 Lingnan University, Hong Kong
1

{lianshijie, lihua, lisuqi}@hainanu.edu.cn 2 {rmcong, davidzhang}@sdu.edu.cn 3 cssamk@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Underwater image instance segmentation is a fundamental and critical step in underwater image analysis and understanding. However, the paucity of general multiclass
instance segmentation datasets has impeded the development of instance segmentation studies for underwater images. In this paper, we propose the first underwater image instance segmentation dataset (UIIS), which provides
4628 images for 7 categories with pixel-level annotations.
Meanwhile, we also design WaterMask for underwater image instance segmentation for the first time. In WaterMask, we first devise Difference Similarity Graph Attention Module (DSGAT) to recover lost detailed information
due to image quality degradation and downsampling to
help the network prediction. Then, we propose Multi-level
Feature Refinement Module (MFRM) to predict foreground
masks and boundary masks separately by features at different scales, and guide the network through Boundary Mask
Strategy (BMS) with boundary learning loss to provide finer
prediction results. Extensive experimental results demonstrates that WaterMask can achieve significant gains of 2.9,
3.8 mAP over Mask R-CNN when using ResNet-50 and
ResNet-101. Code and Dataset are available at https:
//github.com/LiamLian0727/WaterMask.

1. Introduction
The field of underwater image vision is dedicated to the
analysis and understanding of underwater images, and thus
to the exploration, exploitation and protection of marine
resources [17]. And instance segmentation assigns each
pixel in the image to a specific semantic category and distinguishes different individual objects in the same category
[11, 12, 33]. Since it is valuable in estimating object interactions and inferring scene geometry, instance segmentation
is of great use in many underwater vision scenarios, such
as underwater robot vision, autonomous underwater vehicle
* Corresponding Author

(a) Original

(b) Mask RCNN

(c) Ours

Figure 1: A simple comparison of Mask R-CNN and WaterMask R-CNN on UIIS dataset. The first, second and
third columns indicate the original image, results of Mask
R-CNN and our WaterMask R-CNN, respectively.
autopilot and underwater target recognition detection.
However, image instance segmentation for general underwater scenes has not been explored thoroughly. On the
one hand, there is no general underwater image instance
segmentation dataset to promote training and evaluation of
instance segmentation models. The existing annotated data
is either related to the application of instance segmentation
for a specific object, like fish [10] and buildings [34], or
only applicable for certain tasks such as object detection
[27], semantic segmentation [14]. These datasets are not
general for the task of multi-class instance segmentation of
underwater images. On the other hand, quality degradation of underwater images is inevitable due to wavelength
and distance-related attenuation and scattering [1]. Moreover, sea snow formed by plankton and other organisms in
the ocean may also cause varying degrees of noise, which
is harmful for imaging quality. This leads to the fact that
directly transferring the existing instance segmentation algorithms for natural images to underwater images, it will
have a certain degradation on the segmentation results. We
illustrate a simple case of utilizing Mask RCNN [12] for underwater scenes in Figure 1. We can see that Mask R-CNN

1305

