This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation by
Direction-aware Cumulative Convolution Network

1

Wencheng Han1 , Junbo Yin2 , Jianbing Shen1†
SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau, 2 Beijing Institute of Technology
{wencheng256, yinjunbocn, shenjiangbingcg}@gmail.com

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation is known as an ill-posed
task in which objects in a 2D image usually do not contain sufficient information to predict their depth. Thus,
it acts differently from other tasks (e.g., classification and
segmentation) in many ways. In this paper, we find that
self-supervised monocular depth estimation shows a direction sensitivity and environmental dependency in the
feature representation. But the current backbones borrowed from other tasks pay less attention to handling
different types of environmental information, limiting the
overall depth accuracy. To bridge this gap, we propose
a new Direction-aware Cumulative Convolution Network
(DaCCN), which improves the depth feature representation in two aspects. First, we propose a direction-aware
module, which can learn to adjust the feature extraction in each direction, facilitating the encoding of different types of information. Secondly, we design a new cumulative convolution to improve the efficiency for aggregating important environmental information. Experiments
show that our method achieves significant improvements
on three widely used benchmarks, KITTI, Cityscapes, and
Make3D, setting a new state-of-the-art performance on the
popular benchmarks with all three types of self-supervision.
https://github.com/wencheng256/DaCCN.

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation is an important vision task
for autonomous driving, which can generate a depth map for
the image from a single camera. Unlike stereo-matching
methods [38, 9, 25, 19], monocular depth estimation does
not require rectified images, making it easier to be applied
for self-driving cars. Because of this, monocular depth estimation methods attract much more attention from both the
Corresponding author† : Jianbing Shen. This work was supported in
part by the FDCT grants 0154/2022/A3 and SKL-IOTSC(UM)-2021-2023,
the MYRG-CRG2022-00013-IOTSC-ICI grant and the SRG2022-00023IOTSC grant.

(a)

(b)
Figure 1. Illustration of the direction sensitivity of selfsupervised monocular depth estimation. In (a), we translate the
same car into different positions, and their depth values are shown
in the right figure. In (b), we illustrate the connection region of the
car and analyze the importance of this region.

academic and the industrial societies, and many representative monocular depth estimation methods [23, 24, 3, 10]
have been proposed during the last decade.
The pioneering work of Eigen et al. [6] first developed
a CNN-based network and trained the model in a fully supervised manner. To alleviate the need for the ground truth,
Grag et al. [10] proposed a self-supervised method based on
the stereo images. Zhou et al. [53] proposed a pose network
to predict the relative position between two consecutive
frames and only employ the sequence captured by a single
camera in the training phase. Based on these works, a series of monocular depth estimation methods based on selfsupervised learning have been proposed [33, 45, 18, 33]. In
this paper, we mainly focus on the self-supervised monocular depth estimation task by fully exploring the direction
sensitivity and environmental dependency information of
this task.
Monocular depth estimation is an ill-posed task since the
pixels of one object do not contain enough information to
predict its depth. Therefore, the models highly rely on the

8613

