This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text2Video-Zero:
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models are Zero-Shot Video Generators
Levon Khachatryan1∗ Andranik Movsisyan1∗ Vahram Tadevosyan1∗ Roberto Henschel1∗
Zhangyang Wang1,2 Shant Navasardyan1 Humphrey Shi1,3
1

Picsart AI Resarch (PAIR)

2

UT Austin

3

SHI Labs @ Georgia Tech, Oregon & UIUC

https://github.com/Picsart-AI-Research/Text2Video-Zero

Text-to-Video generation: "a horse galloping on a street"

Text-to-Video generation: "a panda is playing guitar on times square"

Text-to-Video generation + pose control: "a bear
dancing on the concrete"

Text-to-Video generation + edge control: "white butterfly"

Video Instruct-Pix2Pix: "make it Van Gogh Starry Night style"

Figure 1: Our method Text2Video-Zero enables zero-shot video generation using (i) a textual prompt (see rows 1, 2), (ii)
a prompt combined with guidance from poses or edges (see lower right), and (iii) Video Instruct-Pix2Pix, i.e., instructionguided video editing (see lower left). Results are temporally consistent and follow closely the guidance and textual prompts.

Abstract
Recent text-to-video generation approaches rely on computationally heavy training and require large-scale video
datasets. In this paper, we introduce a new task, zeroshot text-to-video generation, and propose a low-cost approach (without any training or optimization) by leveraging
the power of existing text-to-image synthesis methods (e.g.
Stable Diffusion), making them suitable for the video domain. Our key modifications include (i) enriching the la* Equal contribution.

tent codes of the generated frames with motion dynamics
to keep the global scene and the background time consistent; and (ii) reprogramming frame-level self-attention using a new cross-frame attention of each frame on the first
frame, to preserve the context, appearance, and identity of
the foreground object. Experiments show that this leads to
low overhead, yet high-quality and remarkably consistent
video generation. Moreover, our approach is not limited to
text-to-video synthesis but is also applicable to other tasks
such as conditional and content-specialized video generation, and Video Instruct-Pix2Pix, i.e., instruction-guided

15954

