This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Characteristic Function Learning for Conditional Image Generation
Shengxi Li1 , Jialu Zhang1 , Yifei Li1 , Mai Xu* 1 , Xin Deng2 , Li Li1
1

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{LiShengxi, JialuZhang, leafy, MaiXu, cindydeng, lili2005}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
The emergence of conditional generative adversarial networks (cGANs) has revolutionised the way we approach and
control the generation, by means of adversarially learning
joint distributions of data and auxiliary information. Despite the success, cGANs have been consistently put under
scrutiny due to their ill-posed discrepancy measure between
distributions, leading to mode collapse and instability problems in training. To address this issue, we propose a novel
conditional characteristic function generative adversarial
network (CCF-GAN) to reduce the discrepancy by the characteristic functions (CFs), which is able to learn accurate
distance measure of joint distributions under theoretical
soundness. More specifically, the difference between CFs
is first proved to be complete and optimisation-friendly, for
measuring the discrepancy of two joint distributions. To
relieve the problem of curse of dimensionality in calculating
CF difference, we propose to employ the neural network,
namely neural CF (NCF), to efficiently minimise an upper
bound of the difference. Based on the NCF, we establish the
CCF-GAN framework to explicitly decompose CFs of joint
distributions, which allows for learning the data distribution
and auxiliary information with classified importance. The
experimental results on synthetic and real-world datasets
verify the superior performances of our CCF-GAN, on both
the generation quality and stability.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial network (GAN) has been the
workhorse in deep generative models since its birth for image
generation [16], and its popularity arises from the capability
of generating clear and realistic images from merely small dimensions. Despite success, the original architecture of GAN
only allows for randomly generating images from Gaussian
* The corresponding author of this paper is Mai Xu, with email:
MaiXu@buaa.edu.cn.

noise, and an important variant of GANs aims to control
the generation by pre-defined auxiliary information (e.g.,
the class labels or texts), constituting the conditional GAN
(cGAN). Taking advantages of the auxiliary information,
cGANs have been proved to be capable of enhancing the
realistic image generation that is conditioned on extra semantic cues [42, 32, 33]. Therefore, the past few years have
witnessed the extensive applications of cGANs, including
class-conditioned generation [31, 37], style transfer [55],
text-to-image translation [42, 51], to name but a few.
Generally speaking, cGANs establish a joint distribution between data X and auxiliary information Y, i.e.,
{X , Y} ∼ p(x, y). Most cGANs agreed on the design
of the generator network, in which the auxiliary information
is embedded to the input noise [31] or the inter-mediate layers of the generator [11, 37, 9, 50, 40, 4, 33]. As such, the
generator aims to sample from the joint distribution p(x, y).
On the other hand, for designing the discriminator, the way
we formulate the conditional distribution tells the existing
cGANs apart, because p(x, y) can be formulated by either
p(x|y)p(y) or p(y|x)p(x). The former calls for transforming the auxiliary information Y into the discriminator so as
to predict p(x|y), and this can be achieved by concatenating
with X as input [31, 10, 44], or embedding Y to hidden
layers of the discriminator [42, 51]. The latter, however,
requires the discriminator to predict the auxiliary information p(y|x), by for example, additional explicit classifiers
[37, 15, 21] or implicit projections [33, 50, 32, 4]. Despite
being able to control the generation by pre-defined auxiliary cues, applying cGANs in practice has been significantly
restricted owing to their mode collapse [48, 52, 23] and instability [37, 33] problems in training, thus impeding the
consistent improvement in the realistic image generation.
Indeed, most discriminators of cGANs build upon the
cross-entropy adversarial loss, with an equivalence to the
Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence between generated and real
data distributions [2]. Unfortunately, it has been verified
both theoretically and empirically that the JS divergence,

7204

