This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SatlasPretrain: A Large-Scale Dataset for Remote Sensing Image Understanding
Favyen Bastani

Piper Wolters

Ritwik Gupta Joe Ferdinando
Allen Institute for AI

Aniruddha Kembhavi

Wind Turbines

Water Resources

2020

2021

2012

2018

{favyenb,piperw,ritwikg,joef,anik}@allenai.org

2018

Urban Expansion
Ice Extent

2021

Image

Key Statistics
●
●
●
●

Deforestation

Image

Flood Map

Vessels

●

137 categories
302 million labels
7 label types
17 million image megapixels
21 million sq km covered

Figure 1: S ATLAS P RETRAIN is a large-scale remote sensing dataset. Its labels are relevant to many important planet monitoring applications, including water resource monitoring, tracking deforestation, detecting wind turbines for infrastructure
mapping, tracking glacier loss, detecting floods, tracking urban expansion, and detecting vessels for tackling illegal fishing.

Abstract
Remote sensing images are useful for a wide variety of
planet monitoring applications, from tracking deforestation
to tackling illegal fishing. The Earth is extremely diverse—
the amount of potential tasks in remote sensing images
is massive, and the sizes of features range from several
kilometers to just tens of centimeters. However, creating
generalizable computer vision methods is a challenge in
part due to the lack of a large-scale dataset that captures
these diverse features for many tasks. In this paper, we
present S ATLAS P RETRAIN, a remote sensing dataset that
is large in both breadth and scale, combining Sentinel-2
and NAIP images with 302M labels under 137 categories
and seven label types. We evaluate eight baselines and
a proposed method on S ATLAS P RETRAIN, and find that
there is substantial room for improvement in addressing research challenges specific to remote sensing, including processing image time series that consist of images from very
different types of sensors, and taking advantage of longrange spatial context. Moreover, we find that pre-training
on S ATLAS P RETRAIN substantially improves performance
on downstream tasks, increasing average accuracy by 18%
over ImageNet and 6% over the next best baseline. The

dataset, pre-trained model weights, and code are available
at https://satlas-pretrain.allen.ai/.

1. Introduction
Satellite and aerial images provide a diverse range of information about the physical world. In images of urban areas, we can identify unmapped roads and buildings and incorporate them into digital map datasets, as well as monitor
urban expansion. In images of industrial areas, we can catalogue solar farms and wind turbines to track the progress
of renewable energy deployment. In images of glaciers and
forests, we can monitor slow natural changes like glacier
loss and deforestation. With the availability of global, regularly updated, and public domain sources of remote sensing
images like the EU’s Sentinel missions [4], we can monitor
the Earth for all of these applications and more at a globalscale, on a monthly or even weekly basis.
Because the immense scale of the Earth makes global
manual analysis of remote sensing images cost-prohibitive,
automatic computer vision methods are crucial for unlocking their full potential. Previous work has proposed applying computer vision for automatically inferring the posi-

16772

