This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Devil is in the Crack Orientation: A New Perspective for Crack Detection
Zhuangzhuang Chen, Jin Zhang, Zhuonan Lai, Guanming Zhu, Zun Liu, Jie Chen ∗, Jianqiang Li
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
{chenzhuangzhuang2016, 2018101068, zhuguanming2022}@email.szu.edu.cn
{jin.zhang, chenjie, zunliu, lijq}@szu.edu.cn

Images

Abstract
Cracks are usually curve-like structures that are the focus of many computer-vision applications (e.g., road safety
inspection and surface inspection of the industrial facilities). The existing pixel-based crack segmentation methods rely on time-consuming and costly pixel-level annotations. And the object-based crack detection methods exploit
the horizontal box to detect the crack without considering
crack orientation, resulting in scale variation and intraclass variation. Considering this, we provide a new perspective for crack detection that models the cracks as a series of sub-cracks with the corresponding orientation. However, the vanilla adaptation of the existing oriented object
detection methods to the crack detection tasks will result in
limited performance, due to the boundary discontinuity issue and the ambiguities in sub-crack orientation. In this
paper, we propose a first-of-its-kind oriented sub-crack detector, dubbed as CrackDet, which is derived from a novel
piecewise angle definition, to ease the boundary discontinuity problem. And then, we propose a multi-branch angle regression loss for learning sub-crack orientation and
variance together. Since there are no related benchmarks,
we construct three fully annotated datasets, namely, ORC,
ONPP, and OCCSD, which involve various cracks in road
pavement and industrial facilities. Experiments show that
our approach outperforms state-of-the-art crack detectors.

1. Introduction
Crack is a type of defect that appears on the surfaces
of many physical structures, e.g., the road pavement [41],
the industrial facilities [8]. Inspecting and repairing cracks
are crucial tasks for avoiding expansion of the harm to
these structures [77]. Besides, a recent study reveals that
recognizing the surface cracks caused by earthquakes in
time can avoid secondary damage to people’s properties
∗ Corresponding Author Email: chenjie@szu.edu.cn

Segmentation

Detection

Ours

(a) Visualization of different perspectives for crack detection

(b) Boundary discontinuity
(c) Ambiguities in orientation
Figure 1. Cracks tend to be curve-like structures [77] in real-world
applications. (a) We compare our orientation-based perspective
with others for crack detection. (b) Boundary discontinuity issue
in the existing 180-degree definition. (c) The sub-crack orientation
is ambiguous in some cases due to the irregular sub-crack shape.

and lives [67]. However, manual inspection is costly, timeconsuming, and prone to human error [34]. Hence, automatic image-based crack detection plays an essential role in
a real-world application of crack identification [22, 67].
Currently, image-based crack detection methods can be
roughly divided into three categories [36]: patch-level classification [4, 8], object-level detection [54, 31], and pixellevel crack segmentation [76, 49]. Although the first two
methods take less labeling cost than the last one, they can
only provide a coarse crack localization. Moreover, we are

6653

