This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Person Re-Identification without Identification via Event Anonymization
Shafiq Ahmad1,2
1

Pietro Morerio1

Alessio Del Bue1

Pattern Analysis & Computer Vision (PAVIS) - Istituto Italino di Tecnologia, Italy 2 Universita degli Studi di Genova, Italy
{shafiq.ahmad, pietro.morerio, alessio.delbue}@iit.it

Abstract
Wide-scale use of visual surveillance in public spaces
puts individual privacy at stake while increasing resource
consumption (energy, bandwidth, and computation). Neuromorphic vision sensors (event-cameras) have been recently considered a valid solution to the privacy issue because they do not capture detailed RGB visual information
of the subjects in the scene. However, recent deep learning architectures have been able to reconstruct images from
event cameras with high fidelity, reintroducing a potential
threat to privacy for event-based vision applications. In
this paper, we aim to anonymize event-streams to protect
the identity of human subjects against such image reconstruction attacks. To achieve this, we propose an end-to-end
network architecture jointly optimized for the twofold objective of preserving privacy and performing a downstream
task such as person ReId. Our network learns to scramble
events, enforcing the degradation of images recovered from
the privacy attacker. In this work, we also bring to the community the first ever event-based person ReId dataset gathered to evaluate the performance of our approach. We validate our approach with extensive experiments and report
results on the synthetic event data simulated from the publicly available SoftBio dataset and our proposed Event-ReId
dataset. The code is available at https://github.
com/IIT-PAVIS/ReId_without_Id

1. Introduction
For security and monitoring purposes, intelligent surveillance systems are installed in our personal spaces (e.g.,
home surveillance) and all over urban areas (hospitals,
banks, shopping malls, airports and streets, etc.). However,
collecting images and videos with always-connected vision
sensors raises new issues: i) ethical discussions over the balance between safety/security needs and individual privacy;
ii) unauthorized access to sensory data that may threaten
users’ privacy; iii) extensive resource consumption of largescale sensor networks, e.g., energy, bandwidth, and computing power. Neuromorphic vision sensors (event cameras)

Figure 1. Event-to-image [32] can be regarded as a privacy attack, which reconstructs the appearance of a person from an event
stream (a). We propose a learnable Event Anonymization network
architecture (b), which deals with such attack by scrambling the
event stream so that reconstruction deteriorates while preserving
the performance of an event-based downstream task (e.g., person
ReId (c)). We also consider a possible Inversion Attack (d), where
the attacker tries to reverse the effect of the proposed anonymization in order to attain image reconstruction (e).

are a disruptive technology as they only capture scene dynamics and do not record visual detail of humans, which
enforces privacy-by-design (to some extent); their ultra-low
resource consumption makes them ideal for always-on visual sensors. Besides, their high dynamic range enables
them to work under challenging illumination conditions
while, alike RGB cameras, event-cameras are able to solve
various vision tasks, such as object recognition [26], human
pose estimation [33], detection and tracking [27, 15, 21],
and person re-identification (ReId) [1].
Event cameras output asynchronous events that are triggered with extremely low latency when an intensity change
at pixel level is over a given threshold. Due to their asynchronous nature, event streams do not form images but
rather a data-stream containing pixel position activation

11132

