This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning from Noisy Pseudo Labels for Semi-Supervised
Temporal Action Localization
Kun Xia1,3† Le Wang1 * Sanping Zhou1 Gang Hua2 Wei Tang3
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Wormpex AI Research 3 University of Illinois Chicago
1

Abstract
Semi-Supervised Temporal Action Localization (SS-TAL)
aims to improve the generalization ability of action detectors with large-scale unlabeled videos. Albeit the recent
advancement, one of the major challenges still remains:
noisy pseudo labels hinder efficient learning on abundant
unlabeled videos, embodied as location biases and category
errors. In this paper, we dive deep into such an important
but understudied dilemma. To this end, we propose a unified framework, termed Noisy Pseudo-Label Learning, to
handle both location biases and category errors. Specifically, our method is featured with (1) Noisy Label Ranking
to rank pseudo labels based on the semantic confidence and
boundary reliability, (2) Noisy Label Filtering to address
the class-imbalance problem of pseudo labels caused by
category errors, (3) Noisy Label Learning to penalize inconsistent boundary predictions to achieve noise-tolerant
learning for heavy location biases. As a result, our method
could effectively handle the label noise problem and improve
the utilization of a large amount of unlabeled videos. Extensive experiments on THUMOS14 and ActivityNet v1.3
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. The code is
available at github.com/kunnxia/NPL.

1. Introduction
Temporal Action Localization (TAL) aims at detecting
action instances of interest in an untrimmed video by locating their temporal boundaries and recognizing their action
categories. Most existing TAL methods rely on dense temporal annotations for the training videos. However, labeling
human actions is very tedious and time-consuming. As a
remedy, Semi-Supervised TAL (SS-TAL) requires only a few
∗ Corresponding author
† Part of this work was done while Kun Xia was a visiting scholar at
University of Illinois Chicago.

Labeled Action

Pseudo-Label@10%
Pseudo-Label@40%

67.4

Cricket Bowling
71.2

63.1

62.0

74.8

Frisbee Catch

Cricket Bowling

63.0
60.2

Time(sec)

Golf Swing

77.0
75.5

65.6

Golf Swing

65.9

Golf Swing

66.0

Figure 1. Illustration of label noise. Two examples demonstrate
that pseudo labels may contain location biases and category errors.
The fewer labeled videos are available, the heavier the noise of the
pseudo labels will be.

labeled videos in conjunction with a large amount of unlabeled videos. It has attracted growing attention in academia
and industry.
Existing SS-TAL methods [12, 37, 28] are based on consistency regularization or self-training. Consistency-based
methods [12, 37] aim to generate consistent action proposals for the same video subject to different augmentations, e.g., time warping [12] and temporal feature shift [37].
In contrast, the self-training-based method [28] achieves
new state-of-the-art performance by alternating between
pseudo-labeling and re-training. It focuses on designing a
proposal-free framework to address proposal error propagation from [12, 37] but neglects the important role of pseudo
labels. Albeit its advancement, label noise still remains a
core challenge, hindering efficient learning on abundant un-

10160

