This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Unsupervised Domain Generalization for Face Anti-Spoofing
Yuchen Liu1† , Yabo Chen2† , Mengran Gou3 , Chun-Ting Huang3 , Yaoming Wang1 ,
Wenrui Dai2 *, and Hongkai Xiong1
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{liuyuchen6666, chenyabo, wang yaoming, daiwenrui, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn
3

Qualcomm AI Research {mgou, chunting}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Generalizable face anti-spoofing (FAS) based on domain
generalization (DG) has gained growing attention due to its
robustness in real-world applications. However, these DG
methods rely heavily on labeled source data, which are usually costly and hard to access. Comparably, unlabeled face
data are far more accessible in various scenarios. In this
paper, we propose the first Unsupervised Domain Generalization framework for Face Anti-Spoofing, namely UDGFAS, which could exploit large amounts of easily accessible
unlabeled data to learn generalizable features for enhancing the low-data regime of FAS. Yet without supervision signals, learning intrinsic live/spoof features from complicated
facial information is challenging, which is even tougher in
cross-domain scenarios due to domain shift. Existing unsupervised learning methods tend to learn identity-biased
and domain-biased features as shortcuts, and fail to specify
spoof cues. To this end, we propose a novel Split-RotationMerge module to build identity-agnostic local representations for mining intrinsic spoof cues and search the nearest
neighbors in the same domain as positives for mitigating the
identity bias. Moreover, we propose to search cross-domain
neighbors with domain-specific normalization and merged
local features to learn a domain-invariant feature space. To
our best knowledge, this is the first attempt to learn generalized FAS features in a fully unsupervised way. Extensive
experiments show that UDG-FAS significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on six diverse practical protocols.

1. Introduction
Face recognition (FR) systems [13, 39] have been widely
deployed in real-world applications for person authentication, such as access control and electronic payments. However, FR systems are vulnerable to presentation attacks, e.g.,
* Corresponding author: Wenrui Dai. † Equal contribution. Qualcomm
AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

Figure 1. Different from traditional DG methods that rely on labeled data for supervised training, our unsupervised domain generalization can learn live/spoof features with more accessible unlabeled data in various environments. Then, we can directly deploy
the unsupervised model via kNN or further finetune it with few labeled data. Our method significantly improves performance with
various few labeled live (L) and spoof (S) data for I&C&M to O.

print attack, video replay and 3D mask. To address this issue, face anti-spoofing (FAS) methods have been proposed,
including hand-crafted descriptors [12, 22, 33] and deep
learning based methods [3, 25, 28, 49]. Despite promising
results in intra-dataset scenarios, these methods are dramatically degraded in cross-dataset tests due to the domain gap
across datasets. To facilitate generalization on unseen target
domains, domain generalization methods [9, 26, 37, 43, 55]
have been introduced in FAS to alleviate domain shifts.
Despite the improved generalizability, existing DG
methods rely heavily on supervised training using labeled
source data. However, labeled data are laborious and costly
to obtain, leading to the notorious problem of limited data in
FAS. On the contrary, large amounts of unlabeled face data
can be easily collected in various environments (e.g., from

20654

