This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AlignDet: Aligning Pre-training and Fine-tuning in Object Detection
Ming Li1⋆ Jie Wu1⋆† Xionghui Wang1 Chen Chen2†
Jie Qin1 Xuefeng Xiao1 Rui Wang1 Min Zheng1 Xin Pan1
1
ByteDance Inc 2 Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida

Figure 1. Illustration of the data, model, and task discrepancies between the pre-training and fine-tuning stages in object detection. In
mostly pre-training phase, only the backbone is updated via classification task supervision on object-centric datasets such as ImageNet.
However, the whole detector is fine-tuned in the multi-objects-based datasets, supervising via classification and regression tasks. By bridging these discrepancies with self-supervised pre-training, AlignDet achieves significant improvements across various detection algorithms,
model backbones, data settings, and training schedules on COCO. Project Page: https://liming-ai.github.io/AlignDet.

Abstract
The paradigm of large-scale pre-training followed by
downstream fine-tuning has been widely employed in various object detection algorithms. In this paper, we reveal discrepancies in data, model, and task between the
pre-training and fine-tuning procedure in existing practices,
which implicitly limit the detector’s performance, generalization ability, and convergence speed. To this end, we propose AlignDet, a unified pre-training framework that can
be adapted to various existing detectors to alleviate the
discrepancies. AlignDet decouples the pre-training process into two stages, i.e., image-domain and box-domain
pre-training. The image-domain pre-training optimizes the
detection backbone to capture holistic visual abstraction,
and box-domain pre-training learns instance-level semantics and task-aware concepts to initialize the parts out of
the backbone. By incorporating the self-supervised pretrained backbones, we can pre-train all modules for various
detectors in an unsupervised paradigm. As depicted in Figure 1, extensive experiments demonstrate that AlignDet can
achieve significant improvements across diverse protocols,
⋆ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

such as detection algorithm, model backbone, data setting,
and training schedule. For example, AlignDet improves
FCOS by 5.3 mAP, RetinaNet by 2.1 mAP, Faster R-CNN
by 3.3 mAP, and DETR by 2.3 mAP under fewer epochs.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been significant progress
in large-scale pre-training and fine-tuning optimization
paradigms in computer vision. A series of pre-training algorithms have been designed to learn domain-sensitive or
task-aware concepts to boost downstream performance [17,
22, 1]. As for object detection, current approaches generally leverage ImageNet [14] to pre-train the backbone with
classification-oriented supervision. However, compared to
the detection-oriented fine-tuning process, this pre-training
paradigm exhibits three discrepancies, as shown in Figure 1:
• Data: most pre-training methods are conducted on single
object-centric datasets, like ImageNet. However, the detection datasets, e.g., COCO [34], usually consist of multiple objects with different scales and locations. The differences in data characteristics and domain can cause the
pre-training to deviate from the downstream task.

6866

