This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Viewpoint-Invariant Visual Recognition via Adversarial Training
Shouwei Ruan1 , Yinpeng Dong2,3 , Hang Su2,4,5∗ , Jianteng Peng6 , Ning Chen2 , Xingxing Wei1 *
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
2
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center,
THBI Lab, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3
RealAI 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory 5 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China 6 OPPO
{shouweiruan,xxwei}@buaa.edu.cn, {dongyinpeng,suhangss,ningchen}@tsinghua.edu.cn,

Natural Viewpoint

Abstract

1. Introduction
The ability of learning invariant representations is highly
desirable in numerous computer vision tasks [6, 17] and is
conducive to model robustness under semantic-preserving
image transformations. Previous works [15, 60, 9, 45] have
striven to make visual recognition models invariant to image translation, rotation, reflection, and scaling. However,
they mainly consider invariances to 2D image transformations, leaving the viewpoint transformation [58] in the 3D
world less explored. It has been shown that visual recognition models are susceptible to viewpoint changes [2, 5, 13],
* Corresponding author.

Forklift:0.99

Adversarial Viewpoint
Spotlight:0.24

Stopwatch:0.08

Binoculars:0.16

!

#$%%

Visual recognition models are not invariant to viewpoint
changes in the 3D world, as different viewing directions can
dramatically affect the predictions given the same object.
Compared to 2D transformations, the exploration of 3D
viewpoint invariance deserves more attention for its greater
practical significance. Motivated by the success of adversarial training in promoting model robustness, we propose Viewpoint-Invariant Adversarial Training (VIAT) to
improve viewpoint robustness of common image classifiers.
By regarding viewpoint transformation as an attack, VIAT
is formulated as a minimax optimization problem, where the
inner maximization characterizes diverse adversarial viewpoints by learning a Gaussian mixture distribution based
on a new attack GMVFool, while the outer minimization
trains a viewpoint-invariant classifier by minimizing the expected loss over the worst-case adversarial viewpoint distributions. To further improve the generalization performance, a distribution sharing strategy is introduced leveraging the transferability of adversarial viewpoints across
objects. Experiments validate the effectiveness of VIAT in
improving the viewpoint robustness of various image classifiers based on the diversity of adversarial viewpoints generated by GMVFool.

pengjianteng@oppo.com

"

!

"

Figure 1. An illustration of viewpoint changes on model performance. We show the loss landscape w.r.t. yaw and pitch of the
camera, which demonstrates multiple regions of adversarial viewpoints (We use ResNet-50 as the target model [21]).

exhibiting a significant gap from the human vision that can
robustly recognize objects under different viewpoints [7].
Due to the naturalness and prevalence of viewpoint variations in safety-critical applications (e.g., autonomous driving, robotics, surveillance, etc.), it is thus imperative to endow visual recognition models with viewpoint invariance.
Despite the importance, it is extremely challenging to
build viewpoint-invariant visual recognition models since
typical networks take 2D images as inputs without inferring
the structure of 3D objects. As an effective data-driven approach, adversarial training augments training data with adversarially generated samples under a specific threat model
and shows promise to improve model invariance/robustness
to additive adversarial perturbations [63, 59, 54, 57], image translation and rotation [15], geometric transformations
[28], etc. However, it is non-trivial to directly apply adversarial training to improving viewpoint robustness due to
the difficulty of generating the worst-case adversarial viewpoints. A pioneering work [13] proposes ViewFool, which
encodes real-world 3D objects as Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [36] given multi-view images and performs black-

4709

