This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ScanNet++: A High-Fidelity Dataset of 3D Indoor Scenes
Chandan Yeshwanth∗

Yueh-Cheng Liu∗

Matthias Nießner

Angela Dai

Technical University of Munich
DSLR Image

iPhone RGB

Figure 1: ScanNet++ contains 460 high-resolution 3D reconstructions of indoor scenes with dense semantic and instance
annotations, along with corresponding high-quality DSLR images and iPhone RGB-D sequences. The long-tail and multilabeled annotations enable fine-grained semantic understanding, while the high-quality and commodity RGB images enable
benchmarking of novel view synthesis methods at scale.

Abstract
We present ScanNet++, a large-scale dataset that couples together capture of high-quality and commodity-level
geometry and color of indoor scenes. Each scene is captured with a high-end laser scanner at sub-millimeter resolution, along with registered 33-megapixel images from a
DSLR camera, and RGB-D streams from an iPhone. Scene
reconstructions are further annotated with an open vocabulary of semantics, with label-ambiguous scenarios explicitly annotated for comprehensive semantic understanding.
ScanNet++ enables a new real-world benchmark for novel
view synthesis, both from high-quality RGB capture, and
importantly also from commodity-level images, in addition
to a new benchmark for 3D semantic scene understanding
that comprehensively encapsulates diverse and ambiguous
semantic labeling scenarios. Currently, ScanNet++ contains 460 scenes, 280,000 captured DSLR images, and over
3.7M iPhone RGBD frames.
* Equal contribution.
† Project page: https://cy94.github.io/scannetpp/

1. Introduction
Reconstruction and understanding of 3D scenes is fundamental to many applications in computer vision, including robotics, autonomous driving, mixed reality and content creation, among others. The last several years have
seen a revolution in representing and reconstructing 3D
scenes with groundbreaking networks such as neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [27]. NeRFs optimize complex scene
representations from an input set of posed RGB images
with a continuous volumetric scene function to enable synthesis of novel image views, with recent works achieving improved efficiency, speed, and scene regularization
[40, 11, 48, 25, 23, 1, 2, 5, 29]. Recent works have even
extended the photometric-based formulation to further optimize scene semantics based on 2D semantic signal from the
input RGB images [52, 43, 12, 21, 36].
Notably, such radiance field scene representations focus
on individual per-scene optimization, without learning generalized priors for view synthesis. This is due to the lack
of large-scale datasets which would support learning such
general priors. As shown in Table 1, existing datasets ei1 12

