This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fully Attentional Networks with Self-emerging Token Labeling
Bingyin Zhao1,2 * Zhiding Yu1† Shiyi Lan1 Yutao Cheng3 Anima Anandkumar1,4
Yingjie Lao2 Jose M. Alvarez1
1
2
NVIDIA
Clemson University 3 Fudan University 4 Caltech

Abstract
Recent studies indicate that Vision Transformers (ViTs)
are robust against out-of-distribution scenarios. In particular, the Fully Attentional Network (FAN) - a family of ViT
backbones, has achieved state-of-the-art robustness. In this
paper, we revisit the FAN models and improve their pretraining with a self-emerging token labeling (STL) framework. Our method contains a two-stage training framework. Specifically, we first train a FAN token labeler (FANTL) to generate semantically meaningful patch token labels,
followed by a FAN student model training stage that uses
both the token labels and the original class label. With the
proposed STL framework, our best model based on FANL-Hybrid (77.3M parameters) achieves 84.8% Top-1 accuracy and 42.1% mCE on ImageNet-1K and ImageNetC, and sets a new state-of-the-art for ImageNet-A (46.1%)
and ImageNet-R (56.6%) without using extra data, outperforming the original FAN counterpart by significant margins. The proposed framework also demonstrates significantly enhanced performance on downstream tasks such as
semantic segmentation, with up to 1.7% improvement in robustness over the counterpart model.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) [1] have recently achieved
remarkable success in visual recognition tasks. Such success is not only attributed to their self-attention representation but also to the newly developed training recipes. For
instance, refinements in training techniques such as strong
data augmentation and knowledge distillation [2] greatly
alleviate ViT’s issue of being data-hungry and make them
more accessible for training on ImageNet-1K.
Another important development in the training recipe is
token labeling [3], where patch tokens are assigned with
labels to ViTs in a dense manner. In some sense, token labeling can also be considered as an alternative form of hard
knowledge distillation. However, the dense nature of token

Robust Acc.
50

Robust Acc.
60
Ours

Ours

48
46

FAN

44

FAN

ConvNeXt

56
54
52

42
40
38

58

ConvNeXt

50
LV-ViT

LV-ViT

48

36

46

34

44

32

42

30

Robustness on ImageNet-A

Robustness on ImageNet-R

40

Figure 1. Results of zero-shot robustness against ImageNetA and ImageNet-R. Models trained on ImageNet-1K with selfemerging token labels from FAN show superior robustness to the
out-of-distribution data. Our best model (with only 77.3M parameters) achieves robust accuracy of 46.1% and 56.6% and sets a new
record on ImageNet-A and ImageNet-R.

labeling allows ViTs to leverage more fine-grained information in an image and take different categories and object
localization into account. Compared to traditional knowledge distillation methods, token labeling enables ViTs to
exploit a wider range of information in the image, leading to more accurate results. The success of token labeling depends on carefully-designed token-level annotators (i.e., token-labelers) that can provide accurate locationspecific information (i.e., token labels) to patch tokens.
In [3], this is done by a special re-labeling process [4] using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [5] pre-trained
on ImageNet-1K. While Vision Transformers have shown
great promise in representation learning, less exploration
has been conducted on modeling them as token-labelers.
This raises two interesting questions:
1. Can Transformer-based models self-produce meaningful token labels?
2. Can one improve the pre-training of ViTs with selfproduced knowledge instead of external teachers?

* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
† Corresponding author.

5585

