This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Label Knowledge Distillation
Penghui Yang1,2 ,* Ming-Kun Xie1,2 ,* Chen-Chen Zong1,2 , Lei Feng3 ,
Gang Niu4 , Masashi Sugiyama4,5 , Sheng-Jun Huang1,2†
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Nanjing, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, 5 The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
phyang.cs@gmail.com, mkxie@nuaa.edu.cn, chencz@nuaa.edu.cn, lfengqaq@gmail.com,
gang.niu.ml@gmail.com, sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp, huangsj@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing knowledge distillation methods typically work
by imparting the knowledge of output logits or intermediate
feature maps from the teacher network to the student network, which is very successful in multi-class single-label
learning. However, these methods can hardly be extended
to the multi-label learning scenario, where each instance is
associated with multiple semantic labels, because the prediction probabilities do not sum to one and feature maps of
the whole example may ignore minor classes in such a scenario. In this paper, we propose a novel multi-label knowledge distillation method. On one hand, it exploits the informative semantic knowledge from the logits by dividing the
multi-label learning problem into a set of binary classification problems; on the other hand, it enhances the distinctiveness of the learned feature representations by leveraging
the structural information of label-wise embeddings. Experimental results on multiple benchmark datasets validate
that the proposed method can avoid knowledge counteraction among labels, thus achieving superior performance
against diverse comparing methods. Our code is available
at: https://github.com/penghui-yang/L2D.

1. Introduction
Multi-label learning (MLL) addresses problems where
each instance is assigned with multiple class labels simultaneously [32]. For example, as shown in Figure 1, an image
of a street scene may be annotated with labels bus, car and
person. To learn the complex object-label mapping, there
is always necessity of training large models to obtain desirable performance in MLL. While the remarkable successes
* Both authors contributed equally to this research.
† Correspondence to: Sheng-Jun Huang (huangsj@nuaa.edu.cn).

Vanilla

ReviewKD

L2D

Teacher

Bus

Vanilla

ReviewKD

Vanilla

ReviewKD

L2D

Teacher

L2D

Teacher

Car

Person

Figure 1. Visualization of attention maps on different classes.
We compare our method with the following three baselines: 1)
Vanilla: the student trained without distillation; 2) ReviewKD [1]:
a feature-based method that achieves the state-of-the-art performance; 3) Teacher: the pretrained model used in distillation. It
can be observed that: on the classes bus and car, L2D captures semantic objects more precisely than the conventional KD method;
on the class person, although all of the methods focus on people,
only our method focuses on the same person as the teacher, which
validates that L2D can distill the “dark” knowledge [27] from the
teacher more effectively. The backbones of the teacher and student models are respectively ResNet-101 and ResNet-34. More
visualization of attention maps can be found in Appendix.

have been made in MLL through the training of deep neural
networks (DNNs) [14, 23], it is hard to deploy these large

17271

