This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Single-Stage Diffusion NeRF: A Unified Approach to
3D Generation and Reconstruction
Hansheng Chen,1,* Jiatao Gu,2 Anpei Chen,3 Wei Tian,1 Zhuowen Tu,4 Lingjie Liu,5 Hao Su4
1

2
3
Tongji University
Apple
ETH Zürich
4
5
University of California, San Diego
University of Pennsylvania
Training

Diffusion 𝑝𝑝 𝑥𝑥
Prior

Testing

Extracted mesh

0 view

Multi-view training images
(3 views or more)

Trained on
SRN Cars

⋯
NeRF
Decoder

Trained on
ABO Tables

⋯

⋯

⋯

⋯

⋯

1 view

Input

Predicted novel views

∞ views

Extracted mesh

Trained on
SRN Chairs

⋯

⋯

(a) Unconditional 3D Generation

(b) Single-View Reconstruction

Figure 1. During training, SSDNeRF jointly learns triplane features of individual scenes, a shared NeRF decoder, and a triplane diffusion
prior. During testing, it can perform (a) unconditional generation, (b) single-view reconstruction, as well as multi-view reconstruction.

Abstract
3D-aware image synthesis encompasses a variety of
tasks, such as scene generation and novel view synthesis
from images. Despite numerous task-specific methods, developing a comprehensive model remains challenging. In
this paper, we present SSDNeRF, a unified approach that
employs an expressive diffusion model to learn a generalizable prior of neural radiance fields (NeRF) from multi-view
images of diverse objects. Previous studies have used twostage approaches that rely on pretrained NeRFs as real data
to train diffusion models. In contrast, we propose a new
single-stage training paradigm with an end-to-end objective
that jointly optimizes a NeRF auto-decoder and a latent diffusion model, enabling simultaneous 3D reconstruction and
prior learning, even from sparsely available views. At test
time, we can directly sample the diffusion prior for unconditional generation, or combine it with arbitrary observations of unseen objects for NeRF reconstruction. SSDNeRF
demonstrates robust results comparable to or better than
leading task-specific methods in unconditional generation
and single/sparse-view 3D reconstruction.6
* Work done during a remote internship with UCSD.
6 Project page: https://lakonik.github.io/ssdnerf

1. Introduction
Synthesizing 3D visual contents has gained significant
attention in computer vision and graphics, thanks to advances in neural rendering and generative models. Although numerous methods have emerged to handle individual tasks, such as single-/multi-view 3D reconstruction and
3D content generation, it remains a major challenge to develop a comprehensive framework that bridges the state of
the art of multiple tasks. For instance, neural radiance fields
(NeRF) [28] have shown impressive results in novel view
synthesis by solving the inverse rendering problem via perscene fitting, which is suitable for dense-view inputs but difficult to generalize to sparse observations. In contrast, many
sparse-view 3D reconstruction methods [55, 8, 25] rely on
feed-forward image-to-3D encoders, but they are unable to
handle ambiguity in the occluded region and generate crisp
images. Regarding unconditional generation, 3D-aware
generative adversarial networks (GAN) [31, 5, 16, 13] are
partially limited in their usage of single-image discriminators, which cannot reason cross-view relationships to effectively learn from multi-view data.
In this paper, we propose a unified approach to various
3D tasks (Fig. 1) by developing a holistic model that learns
generalizable 3D priors from multi-view images. Inspired

2416

