This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Residual Pattern Learning for Pixel-wise Out-of-Distribution Detection in
Semantic Segmentation
Yuyuan Liu1 †

3

Choubo Ding1 †
Yu Tian2
Guansong Pang3
1
Ian Reid
Gustavo Carneiro5, 1

Vasileios Belagiannis4

1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide 2 Harvard University
5
Singapore Management University 4 Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg
University of Surrey

Ours

PEBAL

Softmax

Input

https://github.com/yyliu01/RPL

Figure 1: Visualisations for pixel-wise anomaly scores. The top row shows real-world images along with bounding boxes
around anomalous objects with respect to the training categories. Subsequent rows show the anomaly score map for different
methods, namely SoftMax [14], PEBAL [35], and our approach. Note that our method successfully detect all anomalous
objects without incorrectly deeming in-distribution pixels to be anomalous, while the previous SOTA PEBAL [35] either
fails to detect the anomaly (column 2) or mis-detects inliers as anomalies (columns 3-5).

Abstract
Semantic segmentation models classify pixels into a set
of known (“in-distribution”) visual classes. When deployed
in an open world, the reliability of these models depends
on their ability to not only classify in-distribution pixels but
also to detect out-of-distribution (OoD) pixels. Historically,
the poor OoD detection performance of these models has
motivated the design of methods based on model re-training
using synthetic training images that include OoD visual objects. Although successful, these re-trained methods have
two issues: 1) their in-distribution segmentation accuracy
may drop during re-training, and 2) their OoD detection

accuracy does not generalise well to new contexts outside
the training set (e.g., from city to country context). In this
paper, we mitigate these issues with: (i) a new residual
pattern learning (RPL) module that assists the segmentation model to detect OoD pixels with minimal deterioration
to inlier segmentation accuracy; and (ii) a novel contextrobust contrastive learning (CoroCL) that enforces RPL to
robustly detect OoD pixels in various contexts. Our approach improves by around 10% FPR and 7% AuPRC previous state-of-the-art in Fishyscapes, Segment-Me-If-YouCan, and RoadAnomaly datasets.

1151

