This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Make Encoder Great Again in 3D GAN Inversion through Geometry and
Occlusion-Aware Encoding

1

Ziyang Yuan1∗ Yiming Zhu1,2∗ Yu Li2† Hongyu Liu3 Chun Yuan1†
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School 2 International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
https://eg3d-goae.github.io
Inversion

Geometry

Age

Glasses

Input

Inversion

Geometry Small Eyes

Black

Novel View

Novel View

Input View

Input View

Novel View

Novel View

Input View

Input View

Input

Figure 1: The inversion and editing results of our method on human portraits and cat images. The novel view synthesized images demonstrate that our method can achieve high-quality inversion and editing given a single image input.

Abstract

1. Introduction

3D GAN inversion aims to achieve high reconstruction
ﬁdelity and reasonable 3D geometry simultaneously from a
single image input. However, existing 3D GAN inversion
methods rely on time-consuming optimization for each individual case. In this work, we introduce a novel encoderbased inversion framework based on EG3D, one of the most
widely-used 3D GAN models. We leverage the inherent
properties of EG3D’s latent space to design a discriminator and a background depth regularization. This enables us
to train a geometry-aware encoder capable of converting
the input image into corresponding latent code. Additionally, we explore the feature space of EG3D and develop an
adaptive reﬁnement stage that improves the representation
ability of features in EG3D to enhance the recovery of ﬁnegrained textural details. Finally, we propose an occlusionaware fusion operation to prevent distortion in unobserved
regions. Our method achieves impressive results comparable to optimization-based methods while operating up to
500 times faster. Our framework is well-suited for applications such as semantic editing.

Recent advances in 3D-aware generative adversarial networks (GAN) (e.g. [5, 6, 14, 32]) have integrated neural radiance ﬁelds (NeRF) [27] into style-based generation, resulting in remarkable success in generating highly realistic
3D portraits. Similar to 2D GAN inversion techniques, 3D
GAN inversion also projects images into the latent space
of pre-trained 3D GAN models. However, in addition to
pursuing faithful image reconstruction and preserving ﬁned
details, 3D GAN inversion also aims for accurate 3D geometry, which is critical for generating realistic and consistent
multi-view images. This ability to ensure the correctness of
3D geometry is a crucial advantage of 3D GAN inversion
over its 2D counterpart.
Some optimization-based methods, such as [21, 47, 49],
ﬁrst invert the image to a latent code to obtain a coarse
3D shape. They then synthesize pseudo-multi-view images
with this shape using a warping process. These pseudo images are used as supervision to optimize the parameters of
the 3D GAN for more precise 3D geometry and better detail preservation. While these iterative optimization-based
pipelines can prevent shape collapse and produce accurate

∗ Equal contributions; † Corresponding author.

2437

