This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PointOdyssey: A Large-Scale Synthetic Dataset for Long-Term Point Tracking
Yang Zheng

Adam W. Harley†

Bokui Shen Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University

Leonidas J. Guibas

{yzheng18,harleya,willshen,gordonwz,guibas}@stanford.edu

Figure 1: PointOdyssey dataset. We provide point correspondence annotations across long continuous videos. Here we
visualize pixel-coordinate trajectories from frame 0 to frame 1600 in a sample video from our dataset.

Abstract
We introduce PointOdyssey, a large-scale synthetic
dataset, and data generation framework, for the training and evaluation of long-term fine-grained tracking algorithms. Our goal is to advance the state-of-the-art by
placing emphasis on long videos with naturalistic motion.
Toward the goal of naturalism, we animate deformable
characters using real-world motion capture data, we build
3D scenes to match the motion capture environments, and
we render camera viewpoints using trajectories mined via
structure-from-motion on real videos. We create combinatorial diversity by randomizing character appearance, motion
profiles, materials, lighting, 3D assets, and atmospheric effects. Our dataset currently includes 104 videos, averaging
2,000 frames long, with orders of magnitude more correspondence annotations than prior work. We show that existing methods can be trained from scratch in our dataset and
outperform the published variants. Finally, we introduce
modifications to the PIPs point tracking method, greatly
widening its temporal receptive field, which improves its
performance on PointOdyssey as well as on two real-world
benchmarks. Our data and code are publicly available at:
https://pointodyssey.com

1. Introduction
In a variety of computer vision tasks, large-scale annotated datasets have provided a highway for the development
† Corresponding author

of accurate models. In this paper, we aim to provide such
a highway for the task of fine-grained long-range tracking.
The goal of fine-grained long-range tracking is: given any
pixel coordinate in any frame of a video, track the corresponding world surface point for as long as possible.
While there exist multiple generations of datasets targeting fine-grained short-range tracking (i.e., optical flow)
[6, 13, 40], and annually updated datasets targeting several
forms of coarse-grained long-range tracking (i.e., singleobject tracking [20], multi-object tracking [32], video object segmentation [45]), there are only a handful of works at
the intersection of fine-grained and long-range tracking.
Harley et al. [25] and Doersch et al. [16], train finegrained trackers on unrealistic synthetic data (FlyingThings++ [40, 25] and Kubric-MOVi-E [24]), consisting
of random objects moving in random directions on random backgrounds, and test on real-world videos with
sparse human-provided annotations (BADJA [8] and TAPVid [16]). While it is interesting that generalization to real
video emerges from these models, the use of such simplistic
training data precludes the learning of long-range temporal context, and scene-level semantic awareness. We argue
that long-range point tracking should not be treated as an
extension of optical flow, where naturalism might indeed
be discarded without ill effect [50]. Pixels in real video
may move somewhat unpredictably, but they take a journey which reflects a variety of modellable factors, including
camera shake, object-level motions and deformations, and
multi-object relationships such as physical and social interactions. Realizing the grand scope of this problem, both in
our data and in our methods, is critical for progress.

19855

