This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VL-PET: Vision-and-Language Parameter-Efficient Tuning
via Granularity Control

1

Zi-Yuan Hu1,3
Yanyang Li1
Michael R. Lyu1
Liwei Wang1,2 *
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{zyhu22,yyli21,lyu,lwwang}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

3

Abstract

* Corresponding author.

2
Relative Performance (%)

As the model size of pre-trained language models
(PLMs) grows rapidly, full fine-tuning becomes prohibitively expensive for model training and storage. In
vision-and-language (VL), parameter-efficient tuning (PET)
techniques are proposed to integrate modular modifications (e.g., Adapter and LoRA) into encoder-decoder PLMs.
By tuning a small set of trainable parameters, these techniques perform on par with full fine-tuning. However, excessive modular modifications and neglecting the functionality gap between the encoders and decoders can lead to
performance degradation, while existing PET techniques
(e.g., VL-Adapter) overlook these critical issues. In this
paper, we propose a Vision-and-Language ParameterEfficient Tuning (VL-PET) framework to impose effective
control over modular modifications via a novel granularitycontrolled mechanism. Considering different granularitycontrolled matrices generated by this mechanism, a variety of model-agnostic VL-PET modules can be instantiated from our framework for better efficiency and effectiveness trade-offs. We further propose lightweight PET module designs to enhance VL alignment and modeling for the
encoders and maintain text generation for the decoders.
Extensive experiments conducted on four image-text tasks
and four video-text tasks demonstrate the efficiency, effectiveness and transferability of our VL-PET framework.
In particular, our VL-PETlarge with lightweight PET module designs significantly outperforms VL-Adapter by 2.92%
(3.41%) and LoRA by 3.37% (7.03%) with BART-base (T5base) on image-text tasks. Furthermore, we validate the
enhanced effect of employing our VL-PET designs on existing PET techniques, enabling them to achieve significant performance improvements. Our code is available at
https://github.com/HenryHZY/VL-PET.

VL-PETlarge 2.39%

1

Full Fine-tuning

0
-1

VL-PETmiddleX 1.34%
VL-PETmiddleY 1.16%
VL-PETsmall 1.05%

VL-Adapter -0.52%
LoRA -0.94%

-2

Compacter -2.00% HyperFormer -2.12%

-3

-16.00%
-15 BitFit
Prompt Tuning -23.43%
-25

1

2

3
4
5
6
Trainable Parameters (%)

7

Figure 1. Relative average performance gain of difference PET
techniques w.r.t to full fine-tuning. Experiments are conducted
with three seeds on four image-text tasks based on BART-base.

1. Introduction
Recently, the paradigm of pre-training transformer-based
models on large-scale corpus and then fine-tuning them for
downstream tasks has achieved great success in various domains, such as natural language processing (NLP) [50, 9,
33, 27, 45, 2], computer vision (CV) [10, 35, 36, 34, 13, 1],
and vision-and-language (VL) [6, 28, 23, 29, 8, 42, 51].
However, as the model size of pre-trained language models
(PLMs) and the number of tasks grow rapidly, fine-tuning
the entire parameter set of PLMs (i.e., full fine-tuning)
and preserving a task-specific copy of PLMs becomes prohibitively expensive for model training and storage.
To mitigate these problems, parameter-efficient tuning
(PET) techniques are proposed to save model storage space.
As stated in [12], most PET techniques freeze the whole
PLM backbone and integrate trainable modular modifications (i.e., additional small trainable PET modules, such as

3010

