This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffuse3D: Wide-Angle 3D Photography via Bilateral Diffusion
Yutao Jiang1,4 *, Yang Zhou1,4∗ , Yuan Liang1,4 , Wenxi Liu2 , Jianbo Jiao3 , Yuhui Quan1 , and Shengfeng He4†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University
3
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
4
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University

(a) Input

(b) AdaMPI [6]

(c) 3D Photo [26]

(d) Ours

Figure 1: We propose a new novel 3D photography approach that generates 3D viewing experience from a single image
using bilateral diffusion. It allows injecting depth information into the denoising diffusion probabilistic inference, and leads
to superior performances in wide-angle synthesis compared with state-of-the-arts.

Abstract
This paper aims to resolve the challenging problem of
wide- angle novel view synthesis from a single image, a.k.a.
wide- angle 3D photography. Existing approaches rely on
local context and treat them equally to inpaint occluded
RGB and depth regions, which fail to deal with large- region
occlusion (i.e., observing from an extreme angle) and foreground layers might blend into background inpainting. To
address the above issues, we propose Diffuse3D which employs a pre- trained diffusion model for global synthesis,
while amending the model to activate depth- aware inference. Our key insight is to alter the convolution mechanism
* Both authors contributed equally to this research.
† Corresponding author: shengfenghe@smu.edu.sg.

in the denoising process. We inject depth information into
the denoising convolution operation with bilateral kernels,
i.e., a depth kernel and a spatial kernel, to consider layered
correlations among pixels. In this way, foreground regions
are overlooked in background inpainting and only pixels
close in depth are leveraged. On the other hand, we propose
a global- local balancing approach to maximize both contextual understandings. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our approach outperforms state- of- the- art methods in
novel view synthesis, especially in wide- angle scenarios.
More importantly, our method does not require any training
and is a plug- and- play module that can be integrated with
any diffusion model. Our code can be found at https:
//github.com/yutaojiang1/Diffuse3D.

8998

