This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ASIC: Aligning Sparse in-the-wild Image Collections
Kamal Gupta1,2 , Varun Jampani1 , Carlos Esteves1 ,
Abhinav Shrivastava2 , Ameesh Makadia1 , Noah Snavely1 , Abhishek Kar1
1

Google

2

University of Maryland, College Park

Input
Images

Canonical
Space
Alignment

Dense
Warp
Source

Source

Firetruck

Cow

Figure 1: Globally consistent and dense aligments with ASIC. Given a small set (∼10-30) of images of an object or object category
captured in-the-wild, our framework computes a dense and consistent mapping between all the images in a self-supervised manner. First
row: Unaligned sets of images from the SAMURAI (Keywest) and SPair-71k (Cow) datasets. Second row: Dense correspondence maps
produced by our method. Third row: Image in the first column warped to the images in columns 2-5.

Abstract
We present a method for joint alignment of sparse in-thewild image collections of an object category. Most prior
works assume either ground-truth keypoint annotations or
a large dataset of images of a single object category. However, neither of the above assumptions hold true for the longtail of the objects present in the world. We present a selfsupervised technique that directly optimizes on a sparse collection of images of a particular object/object category to
obtain consistent dense correspondences across the collection. We use pairwise nearest neighbors obtained from deep
features of a pre-trained vision transformer (ViT) model as
noisy and sparse keypoint matches and make them dense
and accurate matches by optimizing a neural network that
jointly maps the image collection into a learned canonical
grid. Experiments on CUB, SPair-71k and PF-Willow benchmarks demonstrate that our method can produce globally
consistent and higher quality correspondences across the
image collection when compared to existing self-supervised
methods. Code and other material will be made available at
https://kampta.github.io/asic.

1. Introduction
Given an image of a car, we as humans, can easily map
corresponding pixels between this car and an arbitrary collection of car images. Our visual system is able to achieve this
(rather impressive) feat using a multitude of cues - low level
photometric consistency, high level visual grouping and our
priors on cars as an object category (shape, pose, materials,
illumination etc.). The above is also true for an image of a
“never-before-seen” object (as opposed to a common object
category such as cars) where humans demonstrate surprisingly robust generalization despite lacking an object or category specific priors [7]. These correspondences in turn inform downstream inferences about the object such as shape,
affordances, and more. In this work, we tackle this problem
of “low-shot dense correspondence” – i.e. given only a small
in-the-wild image collection (∼10–30 images) of an object
or object category, we recover dense and consistent correspondences across the entire collection.
Prior works addressing this problem of dense alignment
in “in-the-wild” image collections assume availability of annotated keypoint matches and image pairs [13, 55], a mesh
of the object [42, 86], or a very large collection of images

4134

