This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probabilistic Modeling of Inter- and Intra-observer Variability in Medical Image
Segmentation
Arne Schmidt, Pablo Morales-Álvarez, and Rafael Molina
Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain
{arne, pablomorales, rms}@decsai.ugr.es

Abstract
Medical image segmentation is a challenging task, particularly due to inter- and intra-observer variability, even
between medical experts. In this paper, we propose a
novel model, called Probabilistic Inter-Observer and iNtraObserver variation NetwOrk (Pionono). It captures the labeling behavior of each rater with a multidimensional probability distribution and integrates this information with the
feature maps of the image to produce probabilistic segmentation predictions. The model is optimized by variational
inference and can be trained end-to-end. It outperforms
state-of-the-art models such as STAPLE, Probabilistic UNet, and models based on confusion matrices. Additionally,
Pionono predicts multiple coherent segmentation maps that
mimic the rater’s expert opinion, which provides additional
valuable information for the diagnostic process. Experiments on real-world cancer segmentation datasets demonstrate the high accuracy and efficiency of Pionono, making
it a powerful tool for medical image analysis.

1. Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) algorithms have shown remarkable progress in image analysis, holding great promise
for faster and more accurate diagnostic procedures [13, 27,
26, 3]. Nevertheless, in medical practice, there exists a
high degree of variability among the opinions of different
medical experts, even when the same expert assesses the
same data at different times. This inter- and intra-observer
variability has been reported across various tasks, including MRI-based segmentation of HCC lesions [7], lung cancer segmentation in CT scans [14], and multiple fields in
pathology [21, 2, 5, 22]. It leads to uncertainties when applying AI models because in contrast to other classification
tasks, there is not a single ground truth.
Especially in the medical domain, the careful modeling of uncertainties in its different forms has a high priority to minimize the risk of relying on incorrect predictions

Prediction

Annotation

||

||

||

concatenate

KL

LL

Figure 1. The proposed Pionono model. The labeling behavior
of each rater r is represented by a multivariate Gaussian distribution q(z|r). The drawn samples z̃j are concatenated with the
extracted features v of fω and then fed into the segmentation head
fθ . The output simulates the inter- and intra-observer variability
of annotations and is optimized using the real annotations sr of
each rater. The model is trained end-to-end with a combination
of log-likelihood loss (LL) and Kulback Leibler (KL) divergence
between posterior and prior, combined in the overall loss LELBO .

[17, 26, 15, 13, 10]. In recent years, probabilistic methods,
such as Bayesian Neural Networks [8] and sparse Gaussian
processes [10, 33] have gained more and more attention, because they are able to account for uncertainties in a sound
manner. They showed promising results when modeling uncertainty in the network weights [8], data ambiguities[15] or
attention weights [26]. Although inter- and intra-observer
variability is often mentioned as a key challenge when applying AI to medical data [21, 16, 28, 18], to the best of our
knowledge there is no method that explicitly models these
two types of uncertainty for medical image segmentation.
To address this gap, we propose a novel approach called
the Probabilistic Inter-Observer and iNtra-Observer varia-

21097

