This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Generation of Human-Object Interactions
with Diffusion Probabilistic Models
Huaijin Pi1 , Sida Peng1 , Minghui Yang2 , Xiaowei Zhou1 , Hujun Bao1 *
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

2

Ant Group

Abstract
This paper presents a novel approach to generating the
3D motion of a human interacting with a target object, with
a focus on solving the challenge of synthesizing long-range
and diverse motions, which could not be fulfilled by existing auto-regressive models or path planning-based methods. We propose a hierarchical generation framework to
solve this challenge. Specifically, our framework first generates a set of milestones and then synthesizes the motion
along them. Therefore, the long-range motion generation
could be reduced to synthesizing several short motion sequences guided by milestones. The experiments on the
NSM, COUCH, and SAMP datasets show that our approach
outperforms previous methods by a large margin in both
quality and diversity. The source code is available on our
project page https://zju3dv.github.io/hghoi.

1. Introduction
Scene-aware motion generation [19] aims to synthesize
3D human motion given a 3D scene model to enable virtual humans to naturally wander around scenes and interact
with objects, which has a variety of applications in AR/VR,
filmmaking, and video games.
Unlike traditional motion generation methods for character control which aim to generate short or repeated motion
on the fly guided by a user’s control signals [56], we focus
on the setting of generating long-term human-object interactions [56, 19, 76] given a starting position of the human
and a target object model. This setting brings in new challenges. First, the entire approaching process and the humanobject interaction should be coherent, which requires the
capability of modeling long-range interaction between the
human and the object. Second, in the context of content
generation, the generative model should be able to synthesize diverse motions as there are many plausible ways for a
real human to approach and interact with the target object.
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Genreation of human-object interactions. Given an
object, our method first predicts a set of milestones, where the
rings indicate the positions and the humans with pink clothes represent the local poses. Then the motions are infilled between milestones. This figure shows that our method can generate diverse
milestones and motions with the same object. The flow of time is
shown with a color code where darker blue denotes the later frame.

Existing methods for motion synthesis can be roughly
characterized into online generation and offline generation.
Most online methods [56, 19, 76] focus on real-time control of characters. Given a target object, they generally use
auto-regressive models to recurrently generate future motions by feeding their predictions. Although they have been
widely used for interactive scenarios like video games, their
motion quality is not satisfactory enough for long-term generation [63]. A plausible cause is the error accumulation
in the auto-regressive process, where the errors in previous
predictions are fed back as the model input, as discussed
in [40, 26, 45, 46, 22]. To improve the motion quality,

15061

