This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Panoramas from Photons
Sacha Jungerman†

Atul Ingle§

Mohit Gupta†

sjungerman@wisc.edu

ingle2@pdx.edu

mohitg@cs.wisc.edu

†

University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Scene reconstruction in the presence of high-speed motion and low illumination is important in many applications such as augmented and virtual reality, drone navigation, and autonomous robotics. Traditional motion estimation techniques fail in such conditions, suffering from too
much blur in the presence of high-speed motion and strong
noise in low-light conditions. Single-photon cameras have
recently emerged as a promising technology capable of capturing hundreds of thousands of photon frames per second
thanks to their high speed and extreme sensitivity. Unfortunately, traditional computer vision techniques are not well
suited for dealing with the binary-valued photon data captured by these cameras because these are corrupted by extreme Poisson noise. Here we present a method capable
of estimating extreme scene motion under challenging conditions, such as low light or high dynamic range, from a
sequence of high-speed image frames such as those captured by a single-photon camera. Our method relies on iteratively improving a motion estimate by grouping and aggregating frames after-the-fact, in a stratified manner. We
demonstrate the creation of high-quality panoramas under
fast motion and extremely low light, and super-resolution
results using a custom single-photon camera prototype. For
code and supplemental material see our project webpage.

1. Introduction
Accurate recovery of motion from a sequence of images
is one of the most fundamental tasks in computer vision,
with numerous applications in robotics, augmented reality,
user interfaces, and autonomous navigation. When successfully estimated, motion information can be used to locate
and track the camera or different objects in the scene [7],
perform motion-aware video compression [19] or stabilization [22], relate multiple sensors, merge information across
different viewpoints, and even reconstruct city-scale 3D
models using only images from the web [1, 34, 28].
Image sequences can be used to estimate different kinds
‡ This research was supported in part by an NSF CAREER award
1943149, NSF award CNS-2107060 and NSF ECCS-2138471.

§

Portland State University

of motion ranging in complexity and degrees of freedom,
from global motion models, such as simple translations,
projective warps, or 3D (6-DoF) camera pose, to non-rigid,
local motion models such as optical flow. However, regardless of the motion model, traditional methods cannot
recover motion that is simply too fast for the camera to capture. This is especially challenging when capturing scenes
in low-light conditions—the camera will compensate by increasing the exposure, thereby introducing motion blur, as
seen in Fig. 1(a), or increasing the gain (ISO), thereby introducing noise [14]. Fundamentally, the image degradation
associated with faster motion or a darker scene causes traditional motion estimation methods to fail.
One way to handle fast motion is by using specialized
high-speed cameras. However, such cameras are not only
bulky and costly but also suffer from extremely low signalto-noise ratio due to both low signal values and high readout
noise, at least an order of magnitude higher than conventional CMOS cameras1 . This requires the scenes to be well
illuminated, often in a controlled setting, further limiting
their scope and widespread adoption.
Fortunately, there is an emerging class of sensors called
single-photon cameras, which are capable of high-speed
imaging in low-light conditions. Single-photon cameras
based on single-photon avalanche diode (SPAD) technology [6] provide extreme sensitivity, are cheap to manufacture, and are increasingly becoming commonplace, recently
getting deployed in consumer devices such as iPhones. The
key benefit of SPADs is that they do not suffer from readnoise, enabling captures at hundreds of thousands of frames
per second even in extremely low flux, while being limited
only by the fundamental photon noise.
Although single-photon cameras can capture scene information at unprecedented sensitivity and speed, each individual captured frame is binary valued: a pixel is “on” if
at least one photon is detected during the exposure time and
“off” otherwise. This binary imaging model presents unique
challenges. Traditional image registration techniques rely
on feature-based matching, or direct optimization using differences between pixel intensities, both of which rely on
image gradients to converge to a solution. Individual binary
1 For example, the Phantom v2640 has read noise up to 58e− .

10626

