This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Sky to the Ground: A Large-scale Benchmark and Simple Baseline
Towards Real Rain Removal
Yun Guo1,†, Xueyao Xiao1,†, Yi Chang1,∗, Shumin Deng1 , Luxin Yan1
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
1

{guoyun, xiaoxueyao, yichang, shumindeng, yanluxin}@hust.edu.cn

Clean Image

Rainy Image

https://github.com/yunguo224/LHP-Rain

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed paired rainy/clean images dataset. The proposed real rain dataset is to cope with various
rain categories, such as rain streaks, veiling effect, occlusion, and ground splashing. We recommend zooming in the figure
on PC for better visualization.

Abstract
Learning-based image deraining methods have made
great progress. However, the lack of large-scale high-quality
paired training samples is the main bottleneck to hamper
the real image deraining (RID). To address this dilemma
and advance RID, we construct a Large-scale High-quality
Paired real rain benchmark (LHP-Rain), including 3000
video sequences with 1 million high-resolution (1920*1080)
frame pairs. The advantages of the proposed dataset over
the existing ones are three-fold: rain with higher-diversity
and larger-scale, image with higher-resolution and higherquality ground-truth. Specifically, the real rains in LHP-Rain
not only contain the classical rain streak/veiling/occlusion
in the sky, but also the splashing on the ground overlooked
by deraining community. Moreover, we propose a novel robust low-rank tensor recovery model to generate the GT with
better separating the static background from the dynamic
rain. In addition, we design a simple transformer-based single image deraining baseline, which simultaneously utilize
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
∗ Corresponding author.

the self-attention and cross-layer attention within the image
and rain layer with discriminative feature representation.
Extensive experiments verify the superiority of the proposed
dataset and deraining method over state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Single image deraining is to improve the imaging quality by separating rain from image background. In recent
years, significant progress has been made in learning-based
single image deraining by various sophisticated CNN architectures [14, 36, 53, 10] and powerful Transformer models
[35, 44]. Although these state-of-the-art supervised methods
have achieved impressive results on simulated datasets, a fact
cannot be ignored that those competitive methods perform
unsatisfactory on diverse real rainy scenes. The core reason
is the domain shift issue between the simplified synthetic
rain and complex real rain [50, 32, 41, 51].
To solve this problem, an intuitive idea is to try the best
to make rain degradation model as real as possible [11].
The researchers formulate the rain imaging procedure into
a comprehensive rain simulation model [9, 48, 12, 24, 18],
12097

