This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decoupled Iterative Refinement Framework for Interacting Hands
Reconstruction from a Single RGB Image
Pengfei Ren1,2 Chao Wen2 Xiaozheng Zheng1,2 Zhou Xue2
Haifeng Sun1 Qi Qi1 Jingyu Wang1 * Jianxin Liao1 *
1
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
PICO IDL, ByteDance, Beijing
rpf@bupt.edu.cn; {wenchao.w, zhengxiaozheng}@bytedance.com; xuezhou08@gmail.com;
{hfsun, qiqi8266, wangjingyu, liaojx}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Reconstructing interacting hands from a single RGB image is a very challenging task. On the one hand, severe mutual occlusion and similar local appearance between two
hands confuse the extraction of visual features, resulting in
the misalignment of estimated hand meshes and the image.
On the other hand, there are complex spatial relationship
between interacting hands, which significantly increases the
solution space of hand poses and increases the difficulty of
network learning. In this paper, we propose a decoupled
iterative refinement framework to achieve pixel-alignment
hand reconstruction while efficiently modeling the spatial
relationship between hands. Specifically, we define two feature spaces with different characteristics, namely 2D visual
feature space and 3D joint feature space. First, we obtain
joint-wise features from the visual feature map and utilize
a graph convolution network and a transformer to perform
intra- and inter-hand information interaction in the 3D joint
feature space, respectively. Then, we project the joint features with global information back into the 2D visual feature space in an obfuscation-free manner and utilize the
2D convolution for pixel-wise enhancement. By performing
multiple alternate enhancements in the two feature spaces,
our method can achieve an accurate and robust reconstruction of interacting hands. Our method outperforms all existing two-hand reconstruction methods by a large margin
on the InterHand2.6M dataset.

1. Introduction
3D hand reconstruction plays an important role in many
applications, such as virtual reality (VR), augmented re* Corresponding authors

Joint Feature

3D Joint Feature Space

Enhanced Joint Feature

Global Joint Feature
Interaction
Pixel-Aligned
Visual Feature Sampling

Obfuscation-Free
Joint Feature Projection

Local Visual Feature
Refinement
Visual Feature Map

2D Visual Feature Space

Projected Feature Map

Figure 1. Decoupled Iterative Refinement. Our method extracts
the visual feature map from the input RGB image, then iteratively
performs visual feature refinement and joint feature interaction in
a decoupled manner, and finally uses the enhanced joint feature for
interacting hands reconstruction.

ality (AR), robotics, etc. With the emergence of largescale datasets and deep learning, single-hand pose estimation and reconstruction [50, 18, 53, 34, 52, 40, 63, 6, 36,
19, 5, 59, 64, 1, 22, 46, 2, 33, 32, 9, 7, 8] have made
significant progress in the past few years. Furthermore,
since two hands can express richer semantics and implement more complex operations, interacting two-hand reconstruction has received a lot of attention recently. Previous
work usually relies on depth cameras [3, 38, 23, 49, 37] or
multi-camera systems [45], which greatly limits the application scenarios of these methods. In this paper, we focus
on reconstructing interacting hands from the widely available RGB image.
Compared to the single-hand reconstruction task, reconstructing the interacting hands from a single RGB image
is more challenging and far from being solved. On the one
hand, severe mutual occlusion between interacting hands results in a large amount of hand area being unobservable. At
the same time, the self-similar appearance brings severe am-

8014

