This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Random Sub-Samples Generation for Self-Supervised Real Image Denoising
Yizhong Pan1 , Xiao Liu1 , Xiangyu Liao1 , Yuanzhouhan Cao2 , Chao Ren1(B)
1
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Sichuan University, China
2
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
{panyizhong, liux, liaoxiangyu1}@stu.scu.edu.cn, yzhcao@bjtu.edu.cn, chaoren@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
With sufficient paired training samples, the supervised
deep learning methods have attracted much attention in image denoising because of their superior performance. However, it is still very challenging to widely utilize the supervised methods in real cases due to the lack of paired noisyclean images. Meanwhile, most self-supervised denoising
methods are ineffective as well when applied to the realworld denoising tasks because of their strict assumptions
in applications. For example, as a typical method for selfsupervised denoising, the original blind spot network (BSN)
assumes that the noise is pixel-wise independent, which is
much different from the real cases. To solve this problem, we
propose a novel self-supervised real image denoising framework named Sampling Difference As Perturbation (SDAP)
based on Random Sub-samples Generation (RSG) with a
cyclic sample difference loss. Specifically, we dig deeper
into the properties of BSN to make it more suitable for real
noise. Surprisingly, we find that adding an appropriate perturbation to the training images can effectively improve the
performance of BSN. Further, we propose that the sampling
difference can be considered as perturbation to achieve
better results. Finally we propose a new BSN framework
in combination with our RSG strategy. The results show
that it significantly outperforms other state-of-the-art selfsupervised denoising methods on real-world datasets. The
code is available at https://github.com/p1y2z3/SDAP.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is a hot topic in low-level vision tasks,
aiming to obtain high-quality images from noisy versions.
In recent years, learning-based methods have been widely
used in image denoising with their superior performance.
Thanks to the construction of paired image datasets, the supervised approaches [44, 2, 28, 11, 33, 34] can be efficiently
implemented. In these approaches, it is a common practice
B Corresponding Author

Noisy

CBDNet [14]

C2N [18]

CVF-SID [25]

AP-BSN [22]

SDAP (S)(E) (Ours)

Figure 1: Real-world image denoising results on DND [27].
to synthesize paired datasets directly using a specific noise
model, such as the signal-independent additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) model.
However, the real images are captured by cameras with
image signal processing (ISP) pipelines [4]. The noise is
usually signal-dependent and spatially correlated in the real
world. Moreover, ISP includes many non-linear operations
that can complicate the noise distribution. Due to the influence of ISP pipelines within the camera, the noise distribution of real images is difficult to predict. Therefore, it is
difficult and challenging for us to model the noise for real
images. To overcome the problem of directly and explicitly modelling noise distribution, paired real-world datasets
have been constructed by researchers. However, collecting
paired noisy-clean images is difficult and time-expensive.
Recently, a series of unsupervised and self-supervised
methods have been introduced. These methods do not require paired datasets for training, and thus further avoiding the difficulty of collecting real-world paired datasets
for denoising. Among them, Noise2Void [20] proposes
Blind-Spot Network (BSN) that can be trained with only
single noisy images. Unfortunately, BSN has strict assumptions, which can only be applied to pixel-wise independent
noise. AP-BSN [22] applies pixel-shuffle downsampling

12150

