This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MRN: Multiplexed Routing Network
for Incremental Multilingual Text Recognition
Tianlun Zheng1,2 , Zhineng Chen1,2 *, Bingchen Huang1,2 , Wei Zhang3 and Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing, China
3
Gaoding AI, China
{tlzheng21, bchuang21}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zhinchen, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn, wzhang.cu@gmail.com

: Incremental
Multilingual Text Recognition

Abstract
Multilingual text recognition (MLTR) systems typically
focus on a fixed set of languages, which makes it difficult to handle newly added languages or adapt to everchanging data distribution. In this paper, we propose the
Incremental MLTR (IMLTR) task in the context of incremental learning (IL), where different languages are introduced in batches. IMLTR is particularly challenging due
to rehearsal-imbalance, which refers to the uneven distribution of sample characters in the rehearsal set, used to
retain a small amount of old data as past memories. To address this issue, we propose a Multiplexed Routing Network
(MRN). MRN trains a recognizer for each language that is
currently seen. Subsequently, a language domain predictor
is learned based on the rehearsal set to weigh the recognizers. Since the recognizers are derived from the original
data, MRN effectively reduces the reliance on older data
and better fights against catastrophic forgetting, the core
issue in IL. We extensively evaluate MRN on MLT17 and
MLT19 datasets. It outperforms existing general-purpose
IL methods by large margins, with average accuracy improvements ranging from 10.3% to 35.8% under different
settings. Code is available at https://github.com/
simplify23/MRN .

1. Introduction
Scene text recognition (STR) is a task aiming to read text
in natural scenes. Recent advances in deep learning have
significantly improved the accuracy of STR, allowing it to
recognize text in the presence of font variations, distortions,
and noise interference [39, 40, 43, 38, 19, 53]. As countries
and cultures are more interconnected, the task of simultaneously recognizing multiple languages, i.e., multilingual
text recognition (MLTR), has also become more important.
* Corresponding Author.

Multilingual

Rehearsalimbalance

Problem Difficulty

Chinese

Rehearsal-imbalance
•
Data-imbalance
•
Class-imbalance
•
Variable-length
Classification
Object Detection
Semantic Segmentation
Text Recogntion

Arabic

Incremental Learning

Latin
...

Scene Text Recogntion

Figure 1. Incremental multilingual text recognition (IMLTR) focuses on the practical scenario where different languages are introduced sequentially. The goal is to accurately recognize the newly
introduced language while maintaining high recognition accuracy
for previously seen languages. IMLTR introduces a task focusing
on text recognition that faces rehearsal-imbalance challenges.

Existing methods typically address this challenge by training on mixed multilingual data [8, 4, 34] or designing independent language blocks [29, 22, 24]. However, when
each time a new language is added, the above methods need
retraining on a dataset mixing the old and new languages.
This increases the training cost [37, 46] and also may lead
to an imbalance [7, 14] between old and new data.
Incremental learning (IL) is designed for scenarios
where new data is continuously learned and typically, the
old samples are maintained by a small ratio. The collection
of old samples is referred to as the rehearsal set [51, 27],
which serves as limited past memories. IL aims to learn the
new data well while minimizing forgetting the past learned
knowledge. Most existing studies [37, 7, 52, 28] conduct
experiments on balanced datasets and maintain a constant
number of classes at each learning step. However, in realworld scenarios, the number of classes and samples may
differ across steps, leading to imbalanced datasets. To ad-

18644

