This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Active Self-Supervised Learning:
A Few Low-Cost Relationships Are All You Need
Vivien Cabannes*
Meta AI

Leon Bottou
Meta AI

Abstract
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has emerged as the solution of choice to learn transferable representations from
unlabeled data. However, SSL requires to build samples that are known to be semantically akin, i.e. positive views. Requiring such knowledge is the main limitation of SSL and is often tackled by ad-hoc strategies
e.g. applying known data-augmentations to the same input. In this work, we formalize and generalize this principle through Positive Active Learning (PAL) where an oracle queries semantic relationships between samples. PAL
achieves three main objectives. First, it unveils a theoretically grounded learning framework beyond SSL, based on
similarity graphs, that can be extended to tackle supervised
and semi-supervised learning depending on the employed
oracle. Second, it provides a consistent algorithm to embed a priori knowledge, e.g. some observed labels, into
any SSL losses without any change in the training pipeline.
Third, it provides a proper active learning framework yielding low-cost solutions to annotate datasets, arguably bringing the gap between theory and practice of active learning
that is based on simple-to-answer-by-non-experts queries of
semantic relationships between inputs.

1. Introduction
Learning representations of data that can be used to
solve multiple tasks, out-of-the-box, and with minimal postprocessing is one of the main goals of current AI research
[39, 35, 24]. Such representations are generally found
by processing given inputs through Deep neural Networks
(DNs). The main question of interest around which contemporary research focuses on deals with the choice of the
training setting that is employed to tune the DN’s parameters. A few different strategies have emerged such as layerwise [6], reconstruction based [48], and more recently,
based on Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) [14, 37]. In fact,
*Equal contribution.

Yann Lecun
Meta AI

Randall Balestriero*
Meta AI

due to the cost of labeling and the size of datasets constantly
growing, recent methods have tried to drift away from traditional supervised learning [42]. From existing training
solutions, joint-embedding SSL has emerged as one of the
most promising ones [34]. It consists in learning representations that are invariant along some known transformations
while preventing dimensional collapse of the representation. Such invariance is enforced by applying some known
Data-Augmentation (DA), e.g. translations for images, to
the same input and making sure that their corresponding
representations are the same.
Despite tremendous progress, several limitations remain
in the way of a widespread deployment of SSL. In particular, it is not clear how to incorporate a priori knowledge into
SSL frameworks beyond the usual tweaking of the loss and
DAs being employed, although some efforts are being made
[16, 53, 52]. Indeed, it is not surprising that vision-language
pre-training has replaced SSL as the state-of-the-art to learn
image representation [26], as those models are better suited
to incorporate information stemming from captions that often come alongside images collected on the Internet.
In this study, we propose to redefine existing SSL losses
in terms of a similarity graph –where nodes represent data
samples and edges reflect known inter-sample relationships.
Our first contribution stemming from this formulation provides a generic framework to think about learning in terms
of similarity graph: it yields a spectrum on which SSL and
supervised learning can be seen as two extremes. Within
this realm, those two extremes are connected through the
similarity matrix, and in fact can be made equivalent by
varying the similarity graph. Our second contribution naturally emerges from using such a similarity graph, unveiling
an elegant framework to reduce the cost and expert requirement of active learning summarized by:
Tell me who your friends are,
and I will tell you who you are.
Active learning, which aims to reduce supervised learning
cost by only asking an oracle for sample labels when needed
[41, 20, 27, 31], can now be formulated in term of relative
sample comparison, rather than absolute sample labeling.

16274

