This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain generalization of 3D semantic segmentation in autonomous driving
Jules Sanchez1
Jean-Emmanuel Deschaud1
François Goulette1,2
2
1
Centre for Robotics, Mines Paris - PSL,
U2IS, ENSTA Paris,
PSL University,
Institut Polytechnique de Paris,
75006 Paris, France
91120 Palaiseau, France
firstname.surname@minesparis.psl.eu

firstname.surname@ensta-paris.fr

Abstract
Using deep learning, 3D autonomous driving semantic
segmentation has become a well-studied subject, with methods that can reach very high performance. Nonetheless,
because of the limited size of the training datasets, these
models cannot see every type of object and scene found in
real-world applications. The ability to be reliable in these
various unknown environments is called domain generalization.
Despite its importance, domain generalization is relatively unexplored in the case of 3D autonomous driving semantic segmentation. To fill this gap, this paper presents the
first benchmark for this application by testing state-of-theart methods and discussing the difficulty of tackling Laser
Imaging Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) domain shifts.
We also propose the first method designed to address this
domain generalization, which we call 3DLabelProp. This
method relies on leveraging the geometry and sequentiality of the LiDAR data to enhance its generalization performances by working on partially accumulated point clouds.
It reaches a mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) of 50.4%
on SemanticPOSS and of 55.2% on PandaSet solid-state LiDAR while being trained only on SemanticKITTI, making
it the state-of-the-art method for generalization (+5% and
+33% better, respectively, than the second best method).
The code for this method is available on GitHub:
https://github.com/JulesSanchez/3DLabelProp.

1. Introduction
Since the release of SemanticKITTI [2], 3D semantic
segmentation for autonomous driving has been a field of
growing interest, resulting in the emergence of a large variety of open-source datasets [3, 27, 21] and high-performing
methods [47, 29].
Using LiDAR data instead of the typical 2D images obtained from cameras has several advantages. First, LiDAR
data are resilient to some sources of 2D domain shifts, such

Figure 1: Illustration of the 3DLabelProp algorithm. With
the past inferred sequence and the current registered LiDAR
frame given as inputs, 3DLabelProp geometrically propagates the static object labels. Then, it clusterizes the current
scan and populates it with points from the past sequence
to feed small but dense point clouds to the KPConv module. Finally, predictions from the geometric propagation
and deep learning module are combined to obtain the inferred LiDAR frame.

as the change in illumination. Furthermore, these data yield
precise geometric information and reliable distance information relative to the objects in scenes (down to a few
centimeters in error). Nevertheless, deep learning methods dealing with LiDAR data are still sensitive to domain
shifts such as scene-type change (urban vs. suburban) or
sensor change [17]. This observation is especially relevant
for autonomous driving semantic segmentation because the
source of the domain shift varies and originates from hardware, such as the number of fibers in the LiDAR and its
positioning on the vehicles; from firmware such as reflectivity calculations; and from the scene itself. LiDAR data
are also costly to acquire and label (1,700 hours of labelization for SemanticKITTI [2]). The accumulation of these
issues has clarified the need for domain adaptation and domain generalization methods to, on the one hand leverage
18077

