This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UnitedHuman: Harnessing Multi-Source Data for
High-Resolution Human Generation
Jianglin Fu1* , Shikai Li1* , Yuming Jiang2 , Kwan-Yee Lin1,3 , Wayne Wu1† , Ziwei Liu2†
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 3 CUHK
{fujianglin, lishikai}@pjlab.org.cn
{yumingj80, wuwenyan0503}@gmail.com
Face Dataset

ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

junyilin@cuhk.edu.hk

Full-Body Dataset

256px (1.0x)
Hand Dataset

Partial-Body Dataset

Multi-Source Dataset

512px (2.0x)

2048px (8.0x)

1024px (4.0x)

2048px (8.0x)

Figure 1: UnitedHuman. We present our method UnitedHuman that left) integrates multi-source datasets related to human into the fullbody image space and right) generates full-body human images at multiple resolutions, and captures high-quality details of the body-parts
across different resolutions.

Abstract
Human generation has achieved significant progress.
Nonetheless, existing methods still struggle to synthesize
specific regions such as faces and hands. We argue that the
main reason is rooted in the training data. A holistic human
dataset inevitably has insufficient and low-resolution information on local parts. Therefore, we propose to use multisource datasets with various resolution images to jointly
learn a high-resolution human generative model. However, multi-source data inherently a) contains different parts
that do not spatially align into a coherent human, and b)
comes with different scales. To tackle these challenges,
we propose an end-to-end framework, UnitedHuman, that

empowers continuous GAN with the ability to effectively
utilize multi-source data for high-resolution human generation. Specifically, 1) we design a Multi-Source Spatial Transformer that spatially aligns multi-source images
to full-body space with a human parametric model. 2)
Next, a continuous GAN is proposed with global-structural
guidance and CutMix consistency. Patches from different datasets are then sampled and transformed to supervise the training of this scale-invariant generative model.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our model jointly
learned from multi-source data achieves superior quality
than those learned from a holistic dataset. Project page:
https://unitedhuman.github.io/.

* Equal contribution.
† Equal advising.

7301

