This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PRANC: Pseudo RAndom Networks for Compacting deep models
Parsa Nooralinejad

Ali Abbasi

Soroush Abbasi Koohpayegani*

University of California, Davis

Vanderbilt University

University of California, Davis

Kossar Pourahmadi Meibodi *

Rana Muhammad Shahroz Khan*

University of California, Davis

Vanderbilt University

Soheil Kolouri

Hamed Pirsiavash

Vanderbilt University

University of California, Davis

Abstract
We demonstrate that a deep model can be
reparametrized as a linear combination of several
randomly initialized and frozen deep models in the weight
space. During training, we seek local minima that reside
within the subspace spanned by these random models
(i.e., ‘basis’ networks). Our framework, PRANC, enables
significant compaction of a deep model. The model can
be reconstructed using a single scalar ‘seed,’ employed
to generate the pseudo-random ‘basis’ networks, together
with the learned linear mixture coefficients. In practical
applications, PRANC addresses the challenge of efficiently
storing and communicating deep models, a common
bottleneck in several scenarios, including multi-agent
learning, continual learners, federated systems, and edge
devices, among others. In this study, we employ PRANC
to condense image classification models and compress
images by compacting their associated implicit neural
networks. PRANC outperforms baselines with a large
margin on image classification when compressing a deep
model almost 100 times. Moreover, we show that PRANC
enables memory-efficient inference by generating layerwise weights on the fly. The source code of PRANC is here:
https://github.com/UCDvision/PRANC

1. Introduction
The prevailing notion is that larger deep models yield
improved accuracy. Yet, it remains unclear if the better
generalization of larger models stems from the increased
complexity of the architecture or more parameters. Moreover, among numerous good local minima in the loss function, training finds one. In this paper, we introduce a fresh
* Equal contribution

approach: viewing a deep model as a linear combination
within the weight space of several randomly initialized and
frozen models. During learning, our goal shifts to finding
a minimum that exists within the subspace defined by these
initial models. Our findings highlight the potential to significantly compact deep models by retaining only the seed
value of the pseudo-random generator and the coefficients
for weight combination.
This efficient reparameterization benefits AI and ML applications by reducing deep model size for easier storage
or communication. In modern neural networks with millions to billions of parameters, storage, and communication become costly. This issue worsens in low-bitrate environments due to physical constraints or adversarial disruption. For instance, underwater applications might have
as low as 100 bits per second bandwidth, then, transferring
ResNet18’s 11M parameter model takes more than 40 days
in such conditions. Moreover, in distributed learning with
many agents, high-bandwidth WiFi networks still face congestion issues.
Going beyond communications, loading or storing these
large models on edge devices poses another significant challenge. Edge devices often come with small memories unsuitable for storing large neural networks and may want to
run the model less frequently (on-demand). Hence, they
may benefit from compacting a deep model to fewer parameters to construct the model layer-by-layer or even kernelby-kernel on-demand to run each inference. This will result
in significantly less I/O cost.
One may compact the model by distilling it into a smaller
model [18], pruning the model parameters [29], quantizing
the parameters [26], or sharing the weights as much as possible [40, 6]. More recently, dataset distillation [48] is proposed. It can be seen as an alternative to model compression
since one can store or communicate the distilled dataset and
then train the model again when needed. However, most of

17021

