This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Building Bridge Across the Time:
Disruption and Restoration of Murals In the Wild
Huiyang Shao1,2
Qianqian Xu1 *
Peisong Wen1
2
3,4
Peifeng Gao
Zhiyong Yang
Qingming Huang1,2,5,6∗
1

2

Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
State Key Lab of Info. Security, Inst. of Info. Engineering, CAS
4
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory
shaohuiyang21@mails.ucas.ac.cn xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn
wenpeisong20z@ict.ac.cn gaopeifeng21@mails.ucas.ac.cn
yangzhiyong21@ucas.ac.cn qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on the mural-restoration task,
which aims to detect damaged regions in the mural and repaint them automatically. Different from traditional image
restoration tasks like in/out/blind-painting and image renovation, the corrupted mural suffers from more complicated
degradation. However, existing mural-restoration methods
and datasets still focus on simple degradation like masking.
Such a significant gap prevents mural-restoration from being applied to real scenarios. To fill this gap, in this work,
we propose a systematic framework to simulate the physical process for damaged murals and provide a new benchmark dataset for mural-restoration. Limited by the simplification of the data synthesis process, the previous muralrestoration methods suffer from poor performance in our
proposed dataset. To handle this problem, we propose the
Attention Diffusion Framework (ADF) for this challenging task. Within the framework, a damage attention map
module is proposed to estimate the damage extent. Facing
the diversity of defects, we propose a series of loss functions
to choose repair strategies adaptively. Finally, experimental
results support the effectiveness of the proposed framework
in terms of both mural synthesis and restoration.

1. Introduction
As an art form of recording ancient civilization’s culture, murals describe people’s life scenes and society’s landscape, which have great scientific, historical, and artistic
* Corresponding authors.

Figure 1: The disruption and restoration of murals. We
propose an simulation framework to generate a damaged
mural image (top) and a restoration method to restore the
corrupted image (bottom).
significance [54, 49]. However, with constant exposure
to the terrible environment, ancient murals are inevitably
destroyed by light, winds, bacteria, and human activities
[30, 45]. According to the digital report of [30], manually restoring murals is still the primary restoration mode.
This method is time-consuming due to large areas of missing content caused by wall peeling and color decay. Hence,
it is necessary to design a mural restoration algorithm to accurately repair the structured and unstructured defects [45].
Prior to the deep learning era, researchers attempted to
design geometry-based or patch-based methods to detect

20259

