This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sparse Sampling Transformer with Uncertainty-Driven Ranking for Unified
Removal of Raindrops and Rain Streaks
Tian Ye1,3 * Jinbin Bai2
Jun Shi4 Lei Zhu1,5†

Sixiang Chen1,3∗
1

Erkang Chen3

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 2 National University of Singapore
3
School of Ocean Information Engineering, Jimei University
4

Xinjiang University

5

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

{sixiangchen, owentianye} @hkust-gz.edu.cn
jinbin.bai@u.nus.edu, ekchen@jmu.edu.cn, junshi2022@gmail.com, leizhu@ust.hk
Project page: https://ephemeral182.github.io/UDR_S2Former_deraining

Abstract
In the real world, image degradations caused by rain
often exhibit a combination of rain streaks and raindrops,
thereby increasing the challenges of recovering the underlying clean image. Note that the rain streaks and raindrops
have diverse shapes, sizes, and locations in the captured image, and thus modeling the correlation relationship between
irregular degradations caused by rain artifacts is a necessary prerequisite for image deraining. This paper aims
to present an efficient and flexible mechanism to learn and
model degradation relationships in a global view, thereby
achieving a unified removal of intricate rain scenes. To
do so, we propose a Sparse Sampling Transformer based
on Uncertainty-Driven Ranking, dubbed UDR-S2 Former.
Compared to previous methods, our UDR-S2 Former has
three merits. First, it can adaptively sample relevant image degradation information to model underlying degradation relationships. Second, explicit application of the
uncertainty-driven ranking strategy can facilitate the network to attend to degradation features and understand the
reconstruction process. Finally, experimental results show
that our UDR-S2 Former clearly outperforms state-of-theart methods for all benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Rain is a ubiquitous condition that negatively impacts
various computer vision tasks [2, 70]. In real-world rain
scenes, raindrops and rain streaks are irregularly superimposed on clean images. Image deraining is employed to
restore the clean images from the complex rain degradations. According to previous work [48], the imaging model
* Equal contributions.
† Lei Zhu (leizhu@ust.hk) is the corresponding author.

Drive

(a) Fixed patch partition breaks the
relationship modeling within diverse
rain degradations

(b) We utilize the uncertainty-driven sparse
sampling transformer to thoroughly explore
arbitrary position degradation relationships.

(c) Uncertainty Map

Figure 1: Illustration of the breakdown of complex rain degradation relationships and the thumbnails of our main ideas. Colored
places indicate degradations. Two-way arrows represents modeling between degradations.

of precipitation, inclusive of rain streaks and raindrops, can
be expressed as:
Rds = (1 − Mr ) ⊙ (B + S) + ηD,

(1)

where B and S denote the clean background and rain streak
map. Mr is a binary mask used to judge whether the pixel
belongs to the raindrops or the background. D is the raindrops and η means global atmospheric lighting coefficient.
As noted by CCN [48], removing rain streaks and raindrops in a unified manner cannot be achieved by simply
combining separate methods for removing either. This is
due to the complex nature of the physical models involved
and the wide array of possible degradation combinations.
Previous models developed to address singular forms of
degradations [11, 12, 36, 49, 50, 55, 62] face notable obstacles when dealing with irregularly dispersed and diverse
rain degradation types.
Specifically, current SOTA methods for image deraining
primarily concentrate on using ViTs due to their abilities
to model long-range dependencies [27, 40, 57, 58]. Among
these methods, window-based self-attention [40, 57, 58] has
gained popularity due to its computational efficiency. However, as shown in Fig.1, we argue that utilizing window-

13106

