This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SuS-X: Training-Free Name-Only Transfer of Vision-Language Models
Vishaal Udandarao
University of Cambridge

Ankush Gupta
DeepMind, London

Samuel Albanie
University of Cambridge

vu214@cam.ac.uk

ankushgupta@google.com

sma71@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) has
emerged as a simple yet effective way to train large-scale
vision-language models. CLIP demonstrates impressive
zero-shot classification and retrieval performance on diverse downstream tasks. However, to leverage its full potential, fine-tuning still appears to be necessary. Finetuning the entire CLIP model can be resource-intensive
and unstable. Moreover, recent methods that aim to circumvent this need for fine-tuning still require access to
images from the target task distribution. In this paper,
we pursue a different approach and explore the regime of
training-free “name-only transfer” in which the only knowledge we possess about the downstream task comprises the
names of downstream target categories. We propose a novel
method, SuS-X, consisting of two key building blocks—
“SuS” and “TIP-X”, that requires neither intensive finetuning nor costly labelled data. SuS-X achieves state-ofthe-art (SoTA) zero-shot classification results on 19 benchmark datasets. We further show the utility of TIP-X in the
training-free few-shot setting, where we again achieve SoTA
results over strong training-free baselines. Code is available at https://github.com/vishaal27/SuS-X.

1. Introduction
Vision-language pre-training has taken the machine
learning community by storm. A broad range of visionlanguage models (VLMs) [57, 42, 73, 1, 37] exhibiting
exceptional transfer on tasks like classification [80, 84],
cross-modal retrieval [67, 2] and segmentation [63, 27] have
emerged. These models are now the de facto standard for
downstream task transfer in the field of computer vision.
One such prominent model, CLIP [57], is trained on
400M image-text pairs using a contrastive loss that maximises the similarities of paired image-text samples. CLIP
pioneered the notion of zero-shot transfer in the visionlanguage setting1 : classification on unseen datasets. For
a given classification task, CLIP converts the class labels
1 This idea of zero-shot transfer is distinct from the traditional zero-shot

Prediction
Image

Pre-trained
VLM
Text

Support Set
constructed only from
target category names
(SuS)

Training-Free Adapter
(TIP-X)

Figure 1: Training-free name-only transfer. We propose
SuS-X, a framework for enhancing the zero-shot transfer
abilities of VLMs like CLIP [57], BLIP [42] and TCL [72],
without training. To achieve this, we propose a novel
method TIP-X, which adapts these VLMs using a curated
support set (SuS) that is not drawn from the target distribution. Our SuS leverages one key piece of information about
the task at hand: the names of the target categories.
into textual prompts (e.g. “A photo of a <CLASS>.”, where
<CLASS> represents the ground-truth text label for each
class). It then computes similarities between all the class
prompts and the query image, selecting the class with the
highest image similarity as the predicted label (see Eq. (2)).
CLIP’s zero-shot performance is however limited by its
pre-training distribution [24, 60, 21, 51]. If the downstream dataset diverges significantly from the pretraining
image distribution, CLIP’s zero-shot performance drastically drops [21]. To mitigate this, several lines of work propose to adapt CLIP on diverse downstream tasks—Tab. 1
briefly summarises these methods. Most of them employ
fine-tuning on either labelled or unlabelled subsets of data
from the target task. However, fine-tuning such an overparameterised model can be unstable and lead to overfitting [15, 25]. Furthermore, having access to the true distribution of the target task can be prohibitive in data-scarce environments [12, 4, 38] and online learning settings [14, 65].
To alleviate these issues, in this paper, we aim to adapt
CLIP and other VLMs for downstream classification in a
name-only (requires only category names2 , but no samples
classification setup introduced by Lampert et al. [41] in which the task is
to generalise to classes not seen during training.
2 We use category and class interchangeably in this paper.

2725

