This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ResQ: Residual Quantization for Video Perception
Davide Abati

Haitam Ben Yahia

Markus Nagel

Amirhossein Habibian

Qualcomm AI Research*
{dabati,hyahia,markusn,ahabibia}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
This paper accelerates video perception, such as segmentation and human pose estimation, by levering crossframe redundancies. Unlike the existing approaches, which
avoid redundant computations by warping the past features
using optical-flow or by performing sparse convolutions on
frame differences, we approach the problem from a different perspective: low-bit quantization. We observe that
residuals, as the difference in network activations between
two neighboring frames, exhibit properties that make them
highly quantizable. Based on this observation, we propose
a novel quantization scheme for video networks coined as
Residual Quantization. ResQ extends the standard, frameby-frame, quantization scheme by incorporating temporal
dependencies that lead to better performance in terms of
accuracy vs. bit-width. Furthermore, we extend our model
to dynamically adjust the bit-width proportionally to the
amount of changes in the video. We showcase the superiority of our model, against the standard quantization and
existing efficient video perception models, using various architectures on semantic segmentation, video object segmentation and human pose estimation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Despite the great progress made in optimizing the computational efficiency of deep neural networks, real-time
video inference is still an open challenge in many cases,
especially when deploying on resource-constrained devices [46, 15, 68, 14, 9, 21, 25]. The most effective strategy to accelerate video inference is to exploit the temporal
redundancy, i.e. by leveraging what has been processed already in the past. Early works relied on feature warping and
adaptation using optical flow [68, 25] or self-attention [21].
More recently, some encouraging results have been obtained by decomposing video snippets into a keyframe followed by residuals, that can be more efficiently processed
* Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,

Inc.

Frame quantization. err.
Residual quantization. err.
Figure 1: Visualization of the quantization error (bottom) when
using frame representations (left) and residual representations
(right). The residual quantization. error is typically lower (blue)
than the one on individual frames (red).

with distilled networks [15] or sparse operators [14, 46, 9].
For many applications, neural network quantization has
emerged over the years as one of the key techniques for accelerating floating point models [10, 42, 30, 39, 2, 23], and
for their deployment in integer precision. However, when
dealing with video inputs, quantized models still operate by
processing every frame independently, neglecting the opportunity to exploit redundancy among frames.
In this paper, we observe that residuals, as the difference in network activations between adjacent frames, exhibit properties that make them highly quantizable. Specifically, we illustrate that residuals typically exhibit a smaller
variance w.r.t. the frame activations, which results in a reduction in quantization error as illustrated in Fig. 1. Following this observation, we propose Residual Quantization,
coined as ResQ, a novel quantization scheme tailored for
video perception. ResQ employs two sets of quantizers: one
at a higher precision to quantize keyframes, one at a lower
precision to quantize the residuals for subsequent frames.
Both quantizers interact during the inference to combine the

17119

