This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DVIS: Decoupled Video Instance Segmentation Framework
Tao Zhang1
Xingye Tian2
Yu Wu1
Shunping Ji1 *
Xuebo Wang2
Yuan Zhang2
Pengfei Wan2
1

Wuhan University

2

Y-tech, Kuaishou Technology

Abstract
Video instance segmentation (VIS) is a critical task with
diverse applications, including autonomous driving and
video editing. Existing methods often underperform on
complex and long videos in real world, primarily due to
two factors. Firstly, ofﬂine methods are limited by the
tightly-coupled modeling paradigm, which treats all frames
equally and disregards the interdependencies between adjacent frames. Consequently, this leads to the introduction of excessive noise during long-term temporal alignment. Secondly, online methods suffer from inadequate
utilization of temporal information. To tackle these challenges, we propose a decoupling strategy for VIS by dividing it into three independent sub-tasks: segmentation,
tracking, and reﬁnement. The efﬁcacy of the decoupling
strategy relies on two crucial elements: 1) attaining precise long-term alignment outcomes via frame-by-frame association during tracking, and 2) the effective utilization of
temporal information predicated on the aforementioned accurate alignment outcomes during reﬁnement. We introduce
a novel referring tracker and temporal reﬁner to construct
the Decoupled VIS framework (DVIS). DVIS achieves new
SOTA performance in both VIS and VPS, surpassing the
current SOTA methods by 7.3 AP and 9.6 VPQ on the
OVIS and VIPSeg datasets, which are the most challenging and realistic benchmarks. Moreover, thanks to the decoupling strategy, the referring tracker and temporal reﬁner are super light-weight (only 1.69% of the segmenter
FLOPs), allowing for efﬁcient training and inference on a
single GPU with 11G memory. The code is available at
https://github.com/zhang-tao-whu/DVIS.

1. Introduction
Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) is a critical computer
vision task that involves identifying, segmenting, and tracking all interested instances in a video simultaneously. This
task was ﬁrst introduced in [31]. The importance of VIS lies
* Corresponding author.

online video
segmentation results

offline video
segmentation results

frame-by-frame matching

coupled offline VIS model

coupled online VIS model

video

video frames
(b) previous online method

(a) previous offline method
instance representations

referring
tracker

online video
segmentation
results

temporal
refiner

offline video
segmentation
results

segmenter

video frames

(c) DVIS

Figure 1. Pipelines of previous ofﬂine (a), online (b), and proposed DVIS (c) frameworks. Unlike previous methods that rely
on tightly coupled networks, DVIS consists of independent components, including a segmenter, a referring tracker, and a temporal
reﬁner.

in its ability to facilitate many downstream computer vision
applications, such as online autonomous driving and ofﬂine
video editing.
Previous studies [12, 6, 28, 10] have demonstrated successful performance validation on videos with short durations and simple scenes [31]. However, in real-world scenarios, videos often present highly complex scenes, severe
instance occlusions, and prolonged durations [21]. As a result, these approaches [12, 6, 28, 10] have exhibited poor
performance on videos [21] that are more representative of
real-world scenarios.
We believe that the fundamental reason for the failure
of the aforementioned methods [12, 6, 28, 10] lies in the
assumption that a coupled network can effectively predict
the video segmentation results for any video, irrespective
of its length, scene complexity, or instance occlusion lev-

1282

