This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unleashing Vanilla Vision Transformer with Masked Image Modeling
for Object Detection
Yuxin Fang1 * Shusheng Yang1∗ Shijie Wang1∗ Yixiao Ge2,3 Ying Shan2,3 Xinggang Wang1†
1

School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
2
Tencent AI Lab 3 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG

Abstract
We present an approach to efficiently and effectively adapt
a masked image modeling (MIM) pre-trained vanilla Vision
Transformer (ViT) for object detection, which is based on
our two novel observations: (i) A MIM pre-trained vanilla
ViT encoder can work surprisingly well in the challenging
object-level recognition scenario even with randomly sampled partial observations, e.g., only 25% ∼ 50% of the
input embeddings. (ii) In order to construct multi-scale representations for object detection from single-scale ViT, a
randomly initialized compact convolutional stem supplants
the pre-trained patchify stem, and its intermediate features
can naturally serve as the higher resolution inputs of a feature pyramid network without further upsampling or other
manipulations. While the pre-trained ViT is only regarded
as the 3rd -stage of our detector’s backbone instead of the
whole feature extractor. This naturally results in a ConvNetViT hybrid architecture. The proposed detector, named
M IM D ET, enables a MIM pre-trained vanilla ViT to outperform leading hierarchical architectures such as Swin
Transformer, MViTv2 and ConvNeXt on COCO object detection & instance segmentation, and achieves better results
compared with the previous best adapted vanilla ViT detector using a more modest fine-tuning recipe while converging
2.8× faster. Code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/hustvl/MIMDet.

1. Introduction
Transformer [53] is born to transfer. Entering the 2020s,
Vision Transformer (ViT) [16] is rapidly transferring the
landscape of computer vision in both architectural design [35, 54, 17, 62, 25] as well as representation learning [5, 21, 61, 64, 18]. From the perspective of architectural
design, Swin Transformer [35], as a representative, seam* Equal contribution. † Xinggang Wang (xgwang@hust.edu.cn) is
the corresponding author. This work was done when Shusheng Yang was
interning at ARC Lab, Tencent PCG.

lessly incorporates the local window attention into a hierarchical macro architecture. The window attention enables
Swin Transformer to efficiently process high-resolution inputs with feasible costs, and the inherent pyramidal feature
hierarchy can better handle the large variations of visual
entities’ scales and sizes, which is crucial for object-level
understanding. Meanwhile, from the perspective of general visual representation learning, masked image modeling
(MIM) [5, 21] pre-trained vanilla ViT1 demonstrates promising scalability and is superior to the supervised isotropic or
hierarchical ViT counterparts when transferred to image as
well as video classification tasks [64, 15, 55, 4] with lowresolution inputs.
The compelling transfer learning performance of MIM
pre-trained ViTs in image- and video-level recognition tasks
motivate us to ponder: Is it possible for the more challenging object- or instance-level recognition tasks, e.g., object
detection and instance segmentation, to also benefit from
the powerful MIM pre-trained representations? Unfortunately, it is quite slow for vanilla ViT to directly process
high-resolution images required by object-level recognition,
for the complexity of global attention scales quadratically
with the spatial dimension. One way is to re-introduce window attention or its variants during the fine-tuning stage,
which can help reduce the attention’s costs [31]. However,
using window attention causes a discrepancy between MIM
pre-training and fine-tuning, as the window partition implicitly treats inputs as 2D continuous regular grids, while the
vanilla ViT is pre-trained to process 1D partial sequences.
Inspired by the MIM pre-training [5, 21], this work pursues a radical solution to transfer a vanilla ViT for objectlevel recognition (Figure 1b): We feed the MIM pre-trained
ViT encoder with only a partial input, e.g., only 25% ∼ 50%
of the input sequence of embeddings with random sampling,
during the object detection fine-tuning stage. The output
sequence fragments are then complemented with learnable
1 For disambiguation, in this paper, “vanilla ViT” refers to the Vision
Transformer proposed by [16] with the isotropic, single-scale architecture
unless specified.

6244

