This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GrowCLIP: Data-aware Automatic Model Growing for
Large-scale Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training
Xinchi Deng1 Han Shi2 Runhui Huang1 Changlin Li3 Hang Xu2
Jianhua Han2 James Kwok4 Shen Zhao1 * Wei Zhang2 Xiaodan Liang1
1

3

Sun Yat-sen University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
University of Technology Sydney 4 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
dengxch5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-modal pre-training has shown impressive performance on a wide range of downstream tasks, benefiting from
massive image-text pairs collected from the Internet. In
practice, online data are growing constantly, highlighting
the importance of the ability of pre-trained model to learn
from data that is continuously growing. Existing works on
cross-modal pre-training mainly focus on training a network with fixed architecture. However, it is impractical
to limit the model capacity when considering the continuously growing nature of pre-training data in real-world applications. On the other hand, it is important to utilize the
knowledge in the current model to obtain efficient training
and better performance. To address the above issues, in
this paper, we propose GrowCLIP, a data-driven automatic
model growing algorithm for contrastive language-image
pre-training with continuous image-text pairs as input. Specially, we adopt a dynamic growth space and seek out the
optimal architecture at each growth step to adapt to online
learning scenarios. And the shared encoder is proposed in
our growth space to enhance the degree of cross-modal fusion. Besides, we explore the effect of growth in different
dimensions, which could provide future references for the
design of cross-modal model architecture. Finally, we employ parameter inheriting with momentum (PIM) to maintain the previous knowledge and address the issue of the
local minimum dilemma. Compared with the existing methods, GrowCLIP improves 2.3% average top-1 accuracy on
zero-shot image classification of 9 downstream tasks. As for
zero-shot image retrieval, GrowCLIP can improve 1.2% for
top-1 image-to-text recall on Flickr30K dataset.

* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Top-1 accuracy (%) of zero-shot image classification on
ImageNet of GrowCLIP and baselines during training at step 4,
where the horizontal dotted lines mean the process of supernet
training. Our GrowCLIP has the best performance and is more
efficient compared with other baselines.

1. Introduction
Recently, large-scale pre-trained models illustrate the
potential performance among different fields including
computer vision (CV) [24, 25, 11] and natural language processing (NLP) [15, 44, 33]. Cross-modal models like CLIP
[52], ALIGN [28], FILIP [65], BLIP [36] also demonstrate
remarkable success across various vision-language downstream tasks. Note that these models are usually built in
dual-stream architectures, which consist of the image and
text encoders to extract the feature of image and text inputs,
respectively. The alignment between these two features is
then performed under the contrastive objective to learn the
alignment between different modals.
However, training these cross-modal models requires a
large amount of image-text pairs collected from the Internet, e.g., 400M image-text pairs for CLIP [52] and
300M for FILIP [65]. Most existing cross-modal methods
[52, 28, 65, 39, 36, 68, 63, 1] directly train the final large-

22178

