This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Meta OOD Learning For Continuously Adaptive OOD Detection
Xinheng Wu† Jie Lu† Zhen Fang† Guangquan Zhang†
†
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney
Xinheng.Wu@student.uts.edu.au

{Jie.Lu, Zhen.Fang, Guangquan.Zhang}@uts.edu.au *

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is crucial to modern deep learning applications by identifying and alerting
about the OOD samples that should not be tested or used for
making predictions. Current OOD detection methods have
made significant progress when in-distribution (ID) and
OOD samples are drawn from static distributions. However, this can be unrealistic when applied to real-world systems which often undergo continuous variations and shifts
in ID and OOD distributions over time. Therefore, for an effective application in real-world systems, the development
of OOD detection methods that can adapt to these dynamic
and evolving distributions is essential. In this paper, we propose a novel and more realistic setting called continuously
adaptive out-of-distribution (CAOOD) detection which targets on developing an OOD detection model that enables
dynamic and quick adaptation to a new arriving distribution, with insufficient ID samples during deployment time.
To address CAOOD, we develop meta OOD learning (MOL)
by designing a learning-to-adapt diagram such that a good
initialized OOD detection model is learned during the training process. In the testing process, MOL ensures OOD detection performance over shifting distributions by quickly
adapting to new distributions with a few adaptations. Extensive experiments on several OOD benchmarks endorse
the effectiveness of our method in preserving both ID classification accuracy and OOD detection performance on continuously shifting distributions.

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is vital to modern
deep learning (DL) applications in the real world, especially
in safety-critical applications such as autonomous vehicle
control [21], and medical areas [64]. This is because DL
systems may make over-confident and incorrect predictions
when encountering the out-of-distribution (OOD) samples,
which possess semantic labels that are distinct from those
* Corresponding to Jie Lu and Zhen Fang. The work is supported by the
Australian Research Council under Discovery Grant DP200100700.

Figure 1: Difference between existing static OOD detection and a more realistic scenario of Continuously Adaptive
OOD Detection (Problem 1) when test samples come from
continuously shifting distribution, i.e., Definition 1.
of in-distribution (ID) samples [63]. To mitigate this issue,
an important problem out-of-distribution detection has been
proposed and studied extensively [10, 17]. In OOD detection, the classifier is required to perform accurate predictions on ID samples while simultaneously identifying OOD
samples. Many representative methods either utilize outputs [17, 34], feature representations [29, 45], or gradients
[19, 32] to enlarge the separations between ID and OOD
samples, while others [18, 39] incorporate auxiliary OOD
samples to regularize the deep models during training.
Although OOD detection has achieved great progress,
existing methods only focus on a simple scenario where
ID and OOD samples are assumed to be drawn from static
ID and OOD distributions. However, many real-world systems are changing dynamically and thus inherently exhibit
continuous distribution shifts over time. Take a self-driving
agent equipped with a scene recognition system as an example: in the real world, the surrounding environment (e.g.,
illumination, weather) may shift continuously on the road,
such as from day to night, and from clean to foggy. Treating
the arriving training and test samples as from static distributions may potentially harm the effectiveness of OOD detection, leading to the misclassification of distribution-shifted

19353

