This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TransHuman: A Transformer-based Human Representation for
Generalizable Neural Human Rendering

1

Xiao Pan1,2⇤ , Zongxin Yang1 , Jianxin Ma2 , Chang Zhou2 , Yi Yang1†
ReLER Lab, CCAI, Zhejiang University, China 2 Alibaba DAMO Academy, China

{xiaopan, yangzongxin, yangyics}@zju.edu.cn {majx13fromthu, ericzhou.zc}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

SPC-based

Visible

Obs. Space Learning

Rendering high-fidelity free-viewpoint videos of dynamic human performers is vital for many applications such
as mixed reality, gaming, and telepresence. Compared to
general 2D-to-3D estimation/reconstruction [29, 32, 50],
* Work done during an internship with Alibaba DAMO Academy.
† Corresponding author.

Partial Coordinate System

Visibl
Proje
c

Occlu
t

Trilinear
Sampling
Painted SMPL
(Incomplete)

SparseConvNet

Human
Representation

Discrete 3D Volume

Transformer-based (Ours)
Can. Space
Global
Initialized
Learning Relationships

…

…

1. Introduction

Query Point

Proje
c

Deformed

…

Deform
t

Canonical
Body
Grouping
Painted SMPL
(Incomplete)

……

In this paper, we focus on the task of generalizable neural human rendering which trains conditional Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) from multi-view videos of different
characters. To handle the dynamic human motion, previous methods have primarily used a SparseConvNet (SPC)based human representation to process the painted SMPL.
However, such SPC-based representation i) optimizes under the volatile observation space which leads to the posemisalignment between training and inference stages, and
ii) lacks the global relationships among human parts that
is critical for handling the incomplete painted SMPL. Tackling these issues, we present a brand-new framework named
TransHuman, which learns the painted SMPL under the
canonical space and captures the global relationships between human parts with transformers. Specifically, TransHuman is mainly composed of Transformer-based Human
Encoding (TransHE), Deformable Partial Radiance Fields
(DPaRF), and Fine-grained Detail Integration (FDI). TransHE first processes the painted SMPL under the canonical space via transformers for capturing the global relationships between human parts. Then, DPaRF binds each
output token with a deformable radiance field for encoding
the query point under the observation space. Finally, the
FDI is employed to further integrate fine-grained information from reference images. Extensive experiments on ZJUMoCap and H36M show that our TransHuman achieves
a significantly new state-of-the-art performance with high
efficiency. Project page: https://pansanity666.
github.io/TransHuman/

Occluded

Local Receptive Fields

Human
Representation
Grouped SMPL Transformers Can. Space Obs. Space
+ Canonical PE
DPaRF
TransHE

Figure 1. Comparisons between existing SPC-based and our
transformer-based human representations. Given the incomplete painted SMPL, the SPC-based one optimizes under the varying observation space with limited receptive fields from 3D convolution. Instead, our transformer-based one optimizes under the
canonical space with global relationships between human parts.

human-centric reconstruction [33] is a more difficult task
considering the dynamic and deformable nature of the human body, yet can be improved by incorporating prior
knowledge about human body through the construction of
multi-knowledge representations [47].
Recent works [33, 31, 44, 38] integrate the Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [29] technology with parametric human
prior models (e.g., SMPL [26]) for handling the dynamic
human body and achieve fair novel view synthesis results.
However, the tedious per-subject optimization and the requirement of dense training views largely hinder the application of such methods. Targeting these issues and inspired
by the recent success of generalizable NeRF [51, 5, 42] on
static scenes, the task of generalizable neural human rendering is proposed [19], which trains conditional NeRF across
multi-view human videos, and can generalize to a new subject in a single feed-forward manner given sparse reference
views as input.

3544

