This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Expressive Text-to-Image Generation with Rich Text
1

Songwei Ge1
Taesung Park2
Jun-Yan Zhu3
Jia-Bin Huang1
2
3
University of Maryland, College Park
Adobe Research
Carnegie Mellon University
https://rich-text-to-image.github.io/

A pizza with pineapples, pepperonis, and
mushrooms on the top, 4k, photorealism.

A night sky filled with stars above a turbulent
sea with giant waves.

A close-up of a cat1 riding a scooter. Tropical
trees in the background.

A young woman1 sits at a table in a beautiful, lush A nightstand1 next to a bed with pillows on it. Gray
garden, reading a book on the table.
wall2 bedroom.

1A cat wearing sunglasses and has a bandana around its neck.

A marble statue of a wolf's head and shoulder,
surrounded by colorful flowers

Styles: Van Gogh, Hokusai.

Style: Claude Monet 1Girl with a pearl earring by Johannes Vermeer.

1A nightstand with some books. 2Accent shelf with plants on the gray wall.

Figure 1. Plain text (left image) vs. Rich text (right image). Our method allows a user to describe an image using a rich text editor that
supports various text attributes such as font family, size, color, and footnote. Given these text attributes extracted from rich text prompts,
our method enables precise control of text-to-image synthesis regarding colors, styles, and object details compared to plain text.

Abstract
Plain text has become a prevalent interface for text-toimage synthesis. However, its limited customization options
hinder users from accurately describing desired outputs.
For example, plain text makes it hard to specify continuous quantities, such as the precise RGB color value or importance of each word. Furthermore, creating detailed text
prompts for complex scenes is tedious for humans to write
and challenging for text encoders to interpret. To address
these challenges, we propose using a rich-text editor supporting formats such as font style, size, color, and footnote.
We extract each word’s attributes from rich text to enable
local style control, explicit token reweighting, precise color
rendering, and detailed region synthesis. We achieve these
capabilities through a region-based diffusion process. We
first obtain each word’s region based on attention maps of
a diffusion process using plain text. For each region, we enforce its text attributes by creating region-specific detailed
prompts and applying region-specific guidance, and maintain its fidelity against plain-text generation through regionbased injections. We present various examples of image
generation from rich text and demonstrate that our method

outperforms strong baselines with quantitative evaluations.

1. Introduction
The development of large-scale text-to-image generative
models [52, 56, 54, 28] has propelled image generation to
an unprecedented era. The great flexibility of these largescale models further offers users powerful control of the
generation through visual cues [4, 17, 77] and textual inputs [7, 19]. Without exception, existing studies use plain
text encoded by a pretrained language model to guide the
generation. However, in our daily life, it is rare to use only
plain text when working on text-based tasks such as writing
blogs or editing essays. Instead, a rich text editor [68, 71]
is the more popular choice providing versatile formatting
options for writing and editing text. In this paper, we seek
to introduce accessible and precise textual control from rich
text editors to text-to-image synthesis.
Rich text editors offer unique solutions for incorporating conditional information separate from the text. For example, using the font color, one can indicate an arbitrary
color. In contrast, describing the precise color with plain
text proves more challenging as general text encoders do

7545

