This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GlowGAN: Unsupervised Learning of HDR Images from
LDR Images in the Wild
Chao Wang1
Ana Serrano2
Xingang Pan1,3
Bin Chen1
Karol Myszkowski1
1
1
Hans-Peter Seidel
Christian Theobalt
Thomas Leimkühler1
1
2
3
MPI Informatik
Universidad de Zaragoza
Nanyang Technological University
{chaowang, binchen, karol, theobalt, thomas.leimkuehler}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
anase@unizar.es

(a) LDR Dataset

xingang.pan@ntu.edu.sg

(b) Generated HDR Images

hpseidel@mpi-sb.mpg.de

LDR

HDR

LDR

HDR

(c) Inverse Tone Mapping

Figure 1: Typical image datasets have a low dynamic range (LDR), resulting in over- and underexposed pixels (a). We devise
a high-dynamic-range (HDR) generator trained only on in-the-wild LDR data. Our samples (b, tonemapped) exhibit details at
all brightness levels. Our model can be used for inverse tone mapping to recover details in large-scale saturated regions (c).

Abstract
Most in-the-wild images are stored in Low Dynamic
Range (LDR) form, serving as a partial observation of the
High Dynamic Range (HDR) visual world. Despite limited
dynamic range, these LDR images are often captured with
different exposures, implicitly containing information about
the underlying HDR image distribution. Inspired by this intuition, in this work we present, to the best of our knowledge,
the first method for learning a generative model of HDR
images from in-the-wild LDR image collections in a fully
unsupervised manner. The key idea is to train a generative
adversarial network (GAN) to generate HDR images which,
when projected to LDR under various exposures, are indistinguishable from real LDR images. The projection from
HDR to LDR is achieved via a camera model that captures
the stochasticity in exposure and camera response function.

Experiments show that our method GlowGAN can synthesize
photorealistic HDR images in many challenging cases such
as landscapes, lightning, or windows, where previous supervised generative models produce overexposed images. With
the assistance of GlowGAN, we showcase the novel application of unsupervised inverse tone mapping (GlowGAN-ITM)
that sets a new paradigm in this field. Unlike previous methods that gradually complete information from LDR input,
GlowGAN-ITM searches the entire HDR image manifold
modeled by GlowGAN for the HDR images which can be
mapped back to the LDR input. GlowGAN-ITM achieves
more realistic reconstruction of overexposed regions compared to state-of-the-art supervised learning models, despite
not requiring HDR images or paired multi-exposure images
for training.

10509

