This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GETAvatar: Generative Textured Meshes for Animatable Human Avatars
Xuanmeng Zhang1,2∗ Jianfeng Zhang2,3∗ Rohan Chacko2
Hongyi Xu2 Guoxian Song2 Yi Yang4 Jiashi Feng2
1
ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney 2 ByteDance
3
National University of Singapore 4 ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University

(a) Varying camera parameters

(b) Varying body poses

Figure 1: GETAvatar generates controllable human avatars with diverse textures and detailed geometries under full control
over camera poses and body poses. Please refer to the Appendix for more multi-view and animation results.

Abstract
We study the problem of 3D-aware full-body human generation, aiming at creating animatable human avatars with
high-quality textures and geometries. Generally, two challenges remain in this field: i) existing methods struggle
to generate geometries with rich realistic details such as
the wrinkles of garments; ii) they typically utilize volumetric radiance fields and neural renderers in the synthesis process, making high-resolution rendering non-trivial.
To overcome these problems, we propose GETAvatar, a
Generative model that directly generates Explicit Textured
3D meshes for animatable human Avatar, with photorealistic appearance and fine geometric details. Specifically, we first design an articulated 3D human representation with explicit surface modeling, and enrich the generated humans with realistic surface details by learning from
the 2D normal maps of 3D scan data. Second, with the
explicit mesh representation, we can use a rasterizationbased renderer to perform surface rendering, allowing us
to achieve high-resolution image generation efficiently. Extensive experiments demonstrate that GETAvatar achieves
state-of-the-art performance on 3D-aware human genera*Equal contribution.

tion both in appearance and geometry quality. Notably,
GETAvatar can generate images at 5122 resolution with
17FPS and 10242 resolution with 14FPS, improving upon
previous methods by 2×. Our code and models will be at
https://getavatar.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Generating high-quality 3D human avatars with explicit
control over camera poses, body poses and shapes has been
a long-standing challenge in computer vision and graphics. It has wide applications in video games, AR/VR, and
movie production. Recently, 3D-aware generative models
have demonstrated impressive results in producing multiview-consistent images of 3D shapes [29, 4, 22, 3, 24, 6].
However, despite their success in modeling relatively simple and rigid objects, it remains challenging for modeling
dynamic human bodies with large articulated motions. The
main reason is that these 3D GANs are not designed to handle body deformations, such as variations in human shapes
and poses. Thus, they struggle to manipulate or animate the
generated avatars given the control signals.
Some recent works [23, 2, 9, 35] have incorporated human priors [17] into 3D-aware generative models [4, 3] to

2273

