This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MixBag: Bag-Level Data Augmentation for Learning from Label Proportions
Takanori Asanomi1 , Shinnosuke Matsuo1 , Daiki Suehiro1,2 , Ryoma Bise1
1
2
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
RIKEN AIP, Japan
{takanori.asanomi@human., shinnosuke.matsuo@human., suehiro@, bise@}ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Abstract

Training Data (𝐵, 𝐩)

𝐵

Learning from label proportions (LLP) is a promising
weakly supervised learning problem. In LLP, a set of instances (bag) has label proportions, but no instance-level
labels are given. LLP aims to train an instance-level classifier by using the label proportions of the bag. In this paper,
we propose a bag-level data augmentation method for LLP
called MixBag, based on the key observation from our preliminary experiments; that the instance-level classification
accuracy improves as the number of labeled bags increases
even though the total number of instances is fixed. We also
propose a confidence interval loss designed based on statistical theory to use the augmented bags effectively. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to propose bag-level data augmentation for LLP. The advantage
of MixBag is that it can be applied to instance-level data
augmentation techniques and any LLP method that uses the
proportion loss. Experimental results demonstrate this advantage and the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
In general classification tasks, a model is trained on
datasets where each piece of data (instance) has class labels.
However, instance-level annotations cost a lot, and there are
many cases in which instance-level annotation cannot be
disclosed to the public for privacy reasons [23]. In such a
situation, we only know the label proportions given to a set
of instances (bag) and must train a model from these label
proportions to classify each instance. This problem setting
is known as learning from label proportions (LLP) [1].
Figure 1 illustrates the problem setup of LLP. A bag B
consists of instances (e.g., images). Bag-level labels are
given as training data instead of instance-level labels (class
labels of each instance x are unknown). The label proportion pi of bag B i is given as a bag-level label. For example,
if a bag B 0 contains 60, 100, and 40 instances of class 1, 2,
and 3, respectively, pi = (0.3, 0.5, 0.2)T . LLP aims to train
an instance-level classifier by using the label proportions of
a bag. It is a weakly supervised learning task.

"

𝐵!

!
instance 𝑥#

…
30%

ı

50%
20%

class1 class2 class3

𝐩𝟎

10%

30%

60%

class1 class2 class3

𝐩𝐧

Test Data
Input

Classification

Trained CNN

Figure 1. Illustration of learning from label proportions. LLP aims
to train an instance-level classifier by using label proportions of a
bag as training data instead of instance-level labels.

Many LLP methods have been proposed to address this
challenging task [1, 24, 28, 27, 18, 19]. Most of them are
based on the proportion loss, which evaluates the difference
between the given proportion pi and the estimated proportion p̂i , and can be calculated by taking the average of the
class probabilities of the instances in a bag. The methods
based on the proportion loss work well when bag-level labels (label proportions) are sufficient. However, the accuracy decreases as the number of labeled bags decreases, i.e.,
insufficient labeled data causes difficulty in training a network, which is known in machine learning tasks.
In such cases, instance-level data augmentation is often an effective way to improve accuracy. Many instancelevel data augmentation techniques, such as perturbation,
for general classification tasks have been proposed, and
their effectiveness has been demonstrated [25]. Instancelevel data augmentation may improve the accuracy in LLP.
However, it does not increase the number of labeled bags
from the original one, and it is difficult to generate various
bags with different proportions without using instance-level
labels (these are unknown in LLP).
This paper proposes a bag-level data augmentation for
16570

