This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video State-Changing Object Segmentation
∗

Xiang Li1

Jiangwei Yu1

∗

Xinran Zhao2

Hongming Zhang3

Yu-Xiong Wang1

1

2

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Carnegie Mellon University 3 Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue

{jy79, xiangl12}@illinois.edu

xinranz3@andrew.cmu.edu

hongmingzhang@global.tencent.com

yxw@illinois.edu

Abstract
Video Object Segmentation: 89.5

Daily objects commonly experience state changes. For
example, slicing a cucumber changes its state from whole
to sliced. Learning about object state changes in Video
Object Segmentation (VOS) is crucial for understanding
and interacting with the visual world. Conventional VOS
benchmarks do not consider this challenging yet crucial
problem. This paper makes a pioneering effort to introduce
a weakly-supervised benchmark on Video State-Changing
Object Segmentation (VSCOS). We construct our VSCOS
benchmark by selecting state-changing videos from existing
datasets. In advocate of an annotation-efficient approach towards state-changing object segmentation, we only annotate
the first and last frames of training videos, which is different
from conventional VOS. Notably, an open-vocabulary setting is included to evaluate the generalization to novel types
of objects or state changes. We empirically illustrate that
state-of-the-art VOS models struggle with state-changing
objects and lose track after the state changes. We analyze
the main difficulties of our VSCOS task and identify three
technical improvements, namely, fine-tuning strategies, representation learning, and integrating motion information.
Applying these improvements results in a strong baseline
for segmenting state-changing objects consistently. Our
benchmark and baseline methods are publicly available at
https://github.com/venom12138/VSCOS.

1. Introduction
Object state changes are common in the real world. For
example, when slicing a cucumber, the cucumber’s state
changes from whole to sliced. Humans learn commonsense
knowledge about actions and associated objects by memorizing the state change in a certain time period [12]. Understanding state changes in visual perception tasks, for
* Equal contribution.

Video State-Changing Object Segmentation: 66.7

Figure 1. We propose Video State-Changing Object Segmentation
(VSCOS), which is significantly more challenging than conventional VOS. State-of-the-art VOS model XMem [2] performance
drops from 89.5 J &F (Jaccard & F-Score) to 66.7 J &F on our
benchmark, because it fails to associate drastically changing object
appearance. Best viewed in color with zoom.

example, video object segmentation (VOS), is also crucial
for autonomous agents to interact safely and efficiently with
objects. In the example of slicing a cucumber, without state
change knowledge, an autonomous agent might not know
how to pick up and cut the cucumber such that it becomes
slices. However, objects under state changes are largely ignored in previous VOS research. Existing VOS benchmarks
tend to focus on normal objects, while overseeing the significantly more difficult state-changing ones with shifting
appearances.
This work investigates this under-explored problem of
object state change in VOS. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to formally define the task of Video StateChanging Object Segmentation (VSCOS). VSCOS aims to
predict pixel-wise masks of state-changing objects in each
frame of the video, given the first frame mask as reference.
In an effort to facilitate research on the VSCOS task, our
first contribution is to construct a dedicated benchmark that
reveals the failure of existing VOC methods and identifies

20439

