This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

E2 NeRF: Event Enhanced Neural Radiance Fields from Blurry Images
Yunshan Qi1
1

Yu Zhang3

Lin Zhu2 *

Jia Li1,4 *

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
2
Beijing Institute of Technology 3 SenseTime and Tetras.AI 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory

Real Data

Synthetic Data

{qi yunshan, jiali}@buaa.edu.cn, linzhu@bit.edu.cn, zhangyulb@gmail.com

Blurry Input

Novel Views from NeRF

Novel Views from Deblur-NeRF

Novel Views from Event Enhanced NeRF

Figure 1: Given a set of blurry images from multiple views of an object or a scene, the novel view rendering results of original
NeRF [27] is severely blurred and the performance of Deblur-NeRF [24] is also limited. In contrast, our approach leverages
event data to significantly enhance the learning of neural 3D representation even when the input images are highly blurred.
Consequently, the rendered views of the object or scene are much sharper.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) achieves impressive rendering performance by learning volumetric 3D representation from several images of different views. However, it
is difficult to reconstruct a sharp NeRF from blurry input
as often occurred in the wild. To solve this problem, we
propose a novel Event-Enhanced NeRF (E2 NeRF) by utilizing the combination data of a bio-inspired event camera and a standard RGB camera. To effectively introduce
event stream into the learning process of neural volumetric representation, we propose a blur rendering loss and an
event rendering loss, which guide the network via modelling
real blur process and event generation process, respectively.
Moreover, a camera pose estimation framework for realworld data is built with the guidance of event stream to
generalize the method to practical applications. In con* Correspondence should be addressed to Lin Zhu and Jia Li. Website:
https://cvteam.buaa.edu.cn

trast to previous image-based or event-based NeRF, our
framework effectively utilizes the internal relationship between events and images. As a result, E2 NeRF not only
achieves image deblurring but also achieves high-quality
novel view image generation. Extensive experiments on
both synthetic data and real-world data demonstrate that
E2 NeRF can effectively learn a sharp NeRF from blurry
images, especially in complex and low-light scenes. Our
code and datasets are publicly available at https://
github.com/iCVTEAM/E2NeRF.

1. Introduction
With the proposal of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF)
[27], significant progress has been made in neural 3D representation and novel view synthesis tasks in the past few
years. NeRF takes 3D location and 2D view direction as
input and uses multi-view images of objects or scenes as
supervision to learn the neural volumetric representation,

13254

