This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Regularized Primitive Graph Learning for Unified Vector Mapping
Lei Wang1 , Min Dai1 , Jianan He1 , Jingwei Huang1
1
Riemann Lab, Huawei Technologies.
{leiwang4, daimin11, hejianan2, huangjingwei6}@huawei.com

Abstract
Large-scale vector mapping is the foundation for transportation and urban planning. Most existing mapping methods are tailored to one specific mapping task, due to taskspecific requirements on shape regularization and topology reconstruction. We propose GraphMapper, a unified
framework for end-to-end vector map extraction from satellite images. Our key idea is using primitive graph as
a unified representation of vector maps and formulating
shape regularization and topology reconstruction as primitive graph reconstruction problems that can be solved in
the same framework. Specifically, shape regularization is
modeled as the consistency between primitive directions
and their pairwise relationship. Based on the primitive
graph, we design a learning approach to reconstruct primitive graphs in multiple stages. GraphMapper can fully
explore primitive-wise and pairwise information for shape
regularization and topology reconstruction, resulting improved primitive graph learning capabilities. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of GraphMapper on two
challenging mapping tasks for building footprints and road
networks. With the premise of sharing the majority design of
the architecture and a few task-specific designs, our model
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both tasks on public
benchmarks. Our code will be publicly available.

1. Introduction
Up-to-date vector maps are essential for navigation and
urban planning. Methods to automatically extract vector maps from aerial or satellite images have greatly advanced in recent years. However, state-of-the-art vector
mapping methods are tailored for one specific type of target [39, 18, 30, 16]. Consequently, multiple models must
be maintained for comprehensive mapping systems, which
increases the burden of model development and limits the
system extensibility.
Designing a unified method for multiple vector mapping
tasks is challenging due to the difficulties in processing multiple types of geometric primitives. The method must gen-

erate shapes with precise location, well-regularized geometry, and correct topology, which are the three fundamental
requirements for vector mapping. However, existing endto-end methods either only focus on refining location accuracy [23], or learnable topology reconstruction [39, 34];
end-to-end shape regularization is still under explored.
Shape regularization in vector mapping is essentially reducing the variation of relative relationship between primitives; for example, the angles between line segments of
a building polygon usually share a few distinctive values
(i.e, 0°, 90°, etc.). Conventional methods rely on heuristicsbased rules [10, 1, 31] to generate regularized shapes, which
are not flexible and requires extensive tuning. Recent methods regularize shapes through contour optimization or deformation [16, 25, 12, 10, 39]. However, these methods are
not utilizing global shape structure, which we think is essential for accurate and flexible shape regularization. None of
these methods are explicitly enforce low variation of primitive relationships.
In this paper, we use primitive graph as a generic representation to build a unified framework, GraphMapper, for
multi-type vector mapping. GraphMapper incrementally
learns to refine primitives’ locations and reconstruct their
pairwise relationships. Effective shape regularization and
topology reconstruction are achieved through the relationship classification of pairwise primitives. With our design,
most existing mapping tasks can be converted to imagebased primitive graph reconstruction tasks. As shown in
Fig. 1, GraphMapper is mainly composed of a convolutional visual feature encoder and two primitive learning
structures (PLS) using multi-head attention (MHA) network. We first extract visual features of input image using
a convolutional encoder and sample primitives (i.e., points,
line segments) from the segmentation maps and key points.
Then, we refine the primitives’ coordinates and predict their
geometric directions, which uses a PLS for local and global
shape context modeling. Finally, we use another PLS to
classify the relationships of primitive pairs.
We apply GraphMapper to two typical mapping tasks:
building and road mapping. For building, we find line segment primitives and their topology from segmentation re-

16817

