This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMVP: Motion-Matrix-based Video Prediction
Yiqi Zhong1 *† Luming Liang2 *‡ Ilya Zharkov2 Ulrich Neumann1‡
1
University of Southern California 2 Microsoft
1

{yiqizhon, uneumann}@usc.edu

Abstract
A central challenge of video prediction lies where the
system has to reason the objects’ future motions from image
frames while simultaneously maintaining the consistency
of their appearances across frames. This work introduces
an end-to-end trainable two-stream video prediction framework, Motion-Matrix-based Video Prediction (MMVP), to
tackle this challenge. Unlike previous methods that usually handle motion prediction and appearance maintenance
within the same set of modules, MMVP decouples motion
and appearance information by constructing appearanceagnostic motion matrices. The motion matrices represent
the temporal similarity of each and every pair of feature
patches in the input frames, and are the sole input of the
motion prediction module in MMVP. This design improves
video prediction in both accuracy and efficiency, and reduces the model size. Results of extensive experiments
demonstrate that MMVP outperforms state-of-the-art systems on public data sets by non-negligible large margins (≈
1 db in PSNR, UCF Sports) in significantly smaller model
sizes (84% the size or smaller). Please refer to this link for
the official code and the datasets used in this paper.

1. Introduction
Video prediction aims at predicting future frames from
limited past frames. It is a longstanding yet unsolved problem studied for decades [13, 3]. Advancing research in
this area benefits various applications such as video compression [29, 53, 28], surveillance systems [57, 59, 7], and
robotics [9, 16, 8]. The task can be essentially broken down
into two sub-tasks: i) motion prediction and ii) frame synthesis. Each sub-task has its unique goal that cannot be
simply accomplished by achieving the other one. For the
sub-task of motion prediction, systems need to reason the
future movements of objects/backgrounds by discovering
the motion cues hidden in the past frames. Whereas for
* Equal contributions.
† The work is done during Yiqi Zhong’s internship at Microsoft.
‡ Corresponding authors.

2

{lulian,zharkov}@microsoft.com

the sub-task of frame synthesis, systems need to maintain
appearance features and generate future frames that keep
appearance consistency. These separated goals make video
prediction inherently much more difficult than the individual task of normal motion prediction or content synthesis.

Figure 1: Performance comparison on UCF Sports with
STIP [4] and SimVP [12]. The hard subset contains samples where SSIM between the last observed frame and the
first future frame is smaller than 0.6, which indicates drastic
motion patterns (data is from Tables 2 and 6).
Most existing works in video prediction are based on a
single-stream pipeline that conducts motion prediction and
appearance feature extraction for frame synthesis within the
same set of modules. Their systems [47, 45, 46, 55, 5, 4]
usually grow out of advanced network structures for sequential data analysis, such as recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) [31] and transformers [42]. One shared characteristic of those methods is that they show excellent capabilities
in capturing complex motion patterns but lower capabilities in appearance maintenance, yielding “correct” but not
“good” synthesized frames. The reason behind this is that
those methods usually contain complicated spatial-temporal
feature extraction and state transition operations, which can
cause unavoidable appearance information loss.

4273

