This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PreSTU: Pre-Training for Scene-Text Understanding

Xi Chen2

Jihyung Kil1 * Soravit Changpinyo2
Hexiang Hu2 Sebastian Goodman2 Wei-Lun Chao1
1
The Ohio State University 2 Google Research

Radu Soricut2

{kil.5,chao.209}@osu.edu
{schangpi,chillxichen,hexiang,seabass,rsoricut}@google.com

Abstract

TextVQA
what is the title of this book?

The ability to recognize and reason about text embedded in visual inputs is often lacking in vision-and-language
(V&L) models, perhaps because V&L pre-training methods
have often failed to include such an ability in their training objective. In this paper, we propose P RE STU, a novel
pre-training recipe dedicated to scene-text understanding
(STU). P RE STU introduces OCR-aware pre-training objectives that encourage the model to recognize text from
an image and connect it to the rest of the image content.
We implement P RE STU using a simple transformer-based
encoder-decoder architecture, combined with large-scale
image-text datasets with scene text obtained from an off-theshelf OCR system. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of this pre-training approach on eight visual question answering and four image captioning benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Understanding the role of text as it appears in the context
of a visual scene is important in various real-world applications, e.g., from automatically organizing images of receipts, to assisting visually-impaired users in overcoming
challenges related to comprehension of non-Braille writing in their surroundings, to enabling autonomous robots to
make safe decisions in environments designed for humans.
As a result, scene-text understanding (STU) has received
increased attention in vision-and-language (V&L) understanding tasks, such as visual question answering (VQA)
[46, 5, 40, 55, 38, 37, 36] or image captioning [45, 16, 30].
Please see Figure 1 for an illustration.
We identify two distinct capabilities that models targeting STU must address: (i) recognizing text in a visual scene
and (ii) connecting the text to its context in the scene. Previous solutions that target STU tasks [46, 45, 19, 59] often delegate scene-text recognition to off-the-shelf OCR
*

Work done at Google Research.

Groundtruth:

the dancers of arun

NoPreSTU
the berkley fantasy
(Baseline):
PreSTU:

the dancers of arun
TextCaps

Groundtruth:

the name nasa is on the back
of the plane

NoPreSTU a nasa 905 airplane is sitting
(Baseline):
on a runway
PreSTU:

a nasa jet is flying next to a
united states space shuttle

Figure 1: Example of scene-text understanding (STU)
tasks. N O P RE STU (baseline) and P RE STU share the
same V&L model, but P RE STU is pre-trained on our proposed pre-training objectives. Scene texts are highlighted
by bounding boxes. Unlike the baseline, P RE STU correctly predicts the title of the book on scene-text VQA
(TextVQA [46]) and even generates a more detailed scenetext caption (e.g., “united states space shuttle”) than the
ground-truth annotated by humans (TextCaps [45]).
(Optical Character Recognition) systems [45, 7] and model
the visual context using pre-computed object-detection features. These two streams of information (noisy OCR strings
and visual features on detected objects) are used as input
into a V&L model. While achieving decent results, these
methods heavily rely on the quality of the upstream OCR
system and lack a direct connection between the text being
recognized and a high-fidelity representation of its context.
More concretely, previous methods have not fully explored pre-training objectives that specifically target STU.
In general, V&L pre-training objectives (e.g., masked language modeling, image-text matching [33], etc.) have been
proven effective for learning and became the go-to approach
in V&L research. However, these objectives typically do

15270

