This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D-IF: Uncertainty-aware Human Digitization via Implicit Distribution Field
Xueting Yang1†
1

Yihao Luo1,2†

Psyche AI Inc.

2

Yuliang Xiu3

Wei Wang1

Hao Xu1,4

Zhaoxin Fan1,4∗

Imperial College London 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

yangxueting@psyai.net

y.luo23@imperial.ac.uk

faithwwei@bupt.edu.cn

yuliang.xiu@tue.mpg.de

{hxubl,zfanaq}@connect.ust.hk

Abstract
Realistic virtual humans play a crucial role in numerous
industries, such as metaverse, intelligent healthcare, and
self-driving simulation. But creating them on a large scale
with high levels of realism remains a challenge. The utilization of deep implicit function sparks a new era of imagebased 3D clothed human reconstruction, enabling pixelaligned shape recovery with fine details. Subsequently, the
vast majority of works locate the surface by regressing the
deterministic implicit value for each point. However, should
all points be treated equally regardless of their proximity
to the surface? In this paper, we propose replacing the
implicit value with an adaptive uncertainty distribution,
to differentiate between points based on their distance to
the surface. This simple “value ⇒ distribution” transition yields significant improvements on nearly all the baselines. Furthermore, qualitative results demonstrate that
the models trained using our uncertainty distribution loss,
can capture more intricate wrinkles, and realistic limbs.
Code and models are available for research purposes at
github.com/psyai-net/D-IF release.

Ours
vs
PIFu

Ours
vs
PaMIR

Ours
vs
ICON

1. Introduction
The creation of realistic digital avatars with intricate
clothing details holds significant importance in various
applications, such as metaverse [40], intelligent healthcare [45], teleportation [19], and self-driving simulation [44]. However, conventional methods require substantial human resources and considerable costs for designing
or capturing high-fidelity 3D digital avatars. To simplify
this process while maintaining quality, both the academic
community and industry have shifted their focus and efforts
toward data-driven approaches [20, 37, 43], to accurately
reconstruct 3D humans from images or monocular videos.
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
* represents the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison with mainstream SOTAs.
Unlike
PaMIR [47], PIFu [37], and ICON [43], which frequently produce 3D humans with distorted or non-human shape limbs, missing details, and high-frequency noise, our method overcomes these
issues and achieves superior geometric details in reconstruction.

Explicit-shape-based approaches [1–3, 18, 41, 48] typically fit and deform the parametric body model, like SMPL(X) [23, 33], to align with the visual observations. While
these approaches could recover 3D humans wearing tight
clothing, they face limitations when it comes to reconstructing loose-fitting garments that largely deviate from the
body. Alternatively, implicit-function-based approaches [4,
13–15, 21, 38, 42, 43, 47] utilize implicit function parame-

9122

