This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Fine-Tuning based Backdoor Defense with Sharpness-Aware
Minimization
Mingli Zhu1 Shaokui Wei1 Li Shen2 Yanbo Fan3 Baoyuan Wu1 *
1
School of Data Science, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China
2
JD Explore Academy
3
Tencent AI Lab

Abstract
Backdoor defense, which aims to detect or mitigate the
effect of malicious triggers introduced by attackers, is becoming increasingly critical for machine learning security
and integrity. Fine-tuning based on benign data is a natural defense to erase the backdoor effect in a backdoored
model. However, recent studies show that, given limited benign data, vanilla fine-tuning has poor defense performance.
In this work, we firstly investigate the vanilla fine-tuning
process for backdoor mitigation from the neuron weight perspective, and find that backdoor-related neurons are only
slightly perturbed in the vanilla fine-tuning process, which
explains its poor backdoor defense performance. To enhance the fine-tuning based defense, inspired by the observation that the backdoor-related neurons often have larger
weight norms, we propose FT-SAM, a novel backdoor defense paradigm that aims to shrink the norms of backdoorrelated neurons by incorporating sharpness-aware minimization with fine-tuning. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method on several benchmark datasets and network
architectures, where it achieves state-of-the-art defense performance, and provide extensive analysis to reveal the FTSAM’s mechanism. Overall, our work provides a promising
avenue for improving the robustness of machine learning
models against backdoor attacks. Codes are available at
https://github.com/SCLBD/BackdoorBench.

1. Introduction
As deep neural networks (DNNs) have been increasingly applied to safety-critical tasks such as face recognition, autonomous driving, and medical image processing [16, 1, 28, 29, 33, 31, 44, 52, 30], the threat exhibited by DNNs has drawn attention from both the industrial and academic community. Recently, backdoor attacks
wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn).

* Corresponds to Baoyuan Wu (

T-SNE

Backdoored Model

After FT

Neuron Weight Norm

Figure 1: Left: T-SNE [45] visualization on the backdoored
model and the model after fine-tuning. FT fails to remove
backdoor effect. Right: the neuron weight norm distribution
between the two models. The weight seems to have remained
mostly unchanged after the fine-tuning process.
[50, 15, 34, 14, 2] have emerged as a new practical and
stealthy threat to DNNs, for which the attacker plant predefined triggers to a small portion of the dataset and misleads
the DNNs trained on such dataset to behave normally with
benign inputs while classifying input with trigger into the
target class. To detect or mitigate the effect of backdoor, substantial efforts have been done in inversing triggers, splitting
dataset, or pruning the DNNs, while fine-tuning, a natural
choice for backdoor defense has received much less attention. Although complex techniques such as unlearning and
pruning have achieved remarkable performance, they usually
come at the cost of accuracy on the original tasks. Additionally, the effectiveness of pruning is contingent upon the
network structure, as highlighted by Wu et al. [51, 49], underscoring the necessity for meticulous pruning strategies.
In contrast, fine-tuning, a more general approach, can moderately restore the model’s utility.
Although vanilla fine-tuning has been adopted as a component of some backdoor defense methods [32, 27], fine-tuning
a backdoored model to remove the backdoor is still challenging when only limited benign data is given[49]. Previous
work [49] has found that fine-tuning is a powerful technique
in some situations. However, it cannot resist strong backdoor
attacks such as Blended [7] and LF [55]. One of the possible

4466

