This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ActFormer: A GAN-based Transformer towards General Action-Conditioned
3D Human Motion Generation
Liang Xu2,3 * Ziyang Song5 * Dongliang Wang1,6 Jing Su1 Zhicheng Fang1 Chenjing Ding1
Weihao Gan7 Yichao Yan2 Xin Jin3,4 Xiaokang Yang2 Wenjun Zeng3,4 Wei Wu1,6
1
SenseTime Research 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo
4
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin 5 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 6 Shanghai AI Laboratory
7
Mashang Consumer Finance Co., Ltd.
...

Abstract

1. Introduction
This work aims to tackle the action-conditioned motion
generation task. Specifically, given a semantic action label
as input and generate corresponding 3D human motions.
The technique is key to applications like character anima* Denotes equal contribution. Work done when Liang and Ziyang
were at SenseTime. Corresponding authors: Dongliang Wang (wangdongliang@senseauto.com), Yichao Yan (yanyichao@sjtu.edu.cn) and
Xin Jin (jinxin@eias.ac.cn).

Jog
Crouch
Side kick

...

Take off shoe
Salute

Shake hands
Exchange sth.
Pat on back

...

ActFormer

We present a GAN-based Transformer for general
action-conditioned 3D human motion generation, including not only single-person actions but also multi-person
interactive actions. Our approach consists of a powerful
Action-conditioned motion TransFormer (ActFormer) under
a GAN training scheme, equipped with a Gaussian Process latent prior. Such a design combines the strong spatiotemporal representation capacity of Transformer, superiority in generative modeling of GAN, and inherent temporal
correlations from the latent prior. Furthermore, ActFormer
can be naturally extended to multi-person motions by alternately modeling temporal correlations and human interactions with Transformer encoders. To further facilitate research on multi-person motion generation, we introduce a
new synthetic dataset of complex multi-person combat behaviors. Extensive experiments on NTU-13, NTU RGB+D
120, BABEL and the proposed combat dataset show that
our method can adapt to various human motion representations and achieve superior performance over the stateof-the-art methods on both single-person and multi-person
motion generation tasks, demonstrating a promising step towards a general human motion generator. The project website can be found at https://liangxuy.github.io/actformer/.

Squat down

High-five
Touch pocket

Combat
Hug

...

Figure 1. Towards general action-conditioned 3D human motion generation. Our framework adapts to more action categories,
various human motion representations (e.g., SMPL body models,
skeleton joint coordinates), and multi-person interactive actions.

tion creation, humanoid robots interaction and data synthesis for computer vision tasks related to human actions.
Human motion synthesis has been a long-standing research topic. However, most of the prior works are closer
to a prediction task, in which future motions are generated
from previous motions [16, 26, 41, 8, 22, 11, 55, 34]. In
recent years, some works started to focus on motion generation from action labels [20, 45, 49]. Despite some impressive generation results, these works are still limited in
the following two aspects. Firstly, most of these works bias
towards motion data of SMPL pose parameters while performing poorly on data of skeleton joint coordinates, which
limits the generalization. A solution adaptable to various
human motion representations is thus expected. Secondly,
prior works only focus on single-person motion generation
while neglecting multi-person interactive actions, which are
integral parts of daily human motions. In general, prior
works fail to cover a complete domain of human motions
and stand far from a general human motion generator.

2228

