This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sentence Attention Blocks for Answer Grounding
Seyedalireza Khoshsirat
Chandra Kambhamettu
Video/Image Modeling and Synthesis (VIMS) Lab, University of Delaware
{alireza, chandrak}@udel.edu

Abstract
Answer grounding is the task of locating relevant visual
evidence for the Visual Question Answering task. While
a wide variety of attention methods have been introduced
for this task, they suffer from the following three problems: designs that do not allow the usage of pre-trained
networks and do not benefit from large data pre-training,
custom designs that are not based on well-grounded previous designs, therefore limiting the learning power of the
network, or complicated designs that make it challenging to re-implement or improve them. In this paper, we
propose a novel architectural block, which we term Sentence Attention Block, to solve these problems. The proposed block re-calibrates channel-wise image feature-maps
by explicitly modeling inter-dependencies between the image feature-maps and sentence embedding. We visually
demonstrate how this block filters out irrelevant featuremaps channels based on sentence embedding. We start our
design with a well-known attention method, and by making minor modifications, we improve the results to achieve
state-of-the-art accuracy. The flexibility of our method
makes it easy to use different pre-trained backbone networks, and its simplicity makes it easy to understand and
be re-implemented. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method on the TextVQA-X, VQS, VQA-X, and VizWiz-VQAGrounding datasets. We perform multiple ablation studies
to show the effectiveness of our design choices.

1. Introduction
1.1. Visual Question Answering
Visual Question Answering (VQA) systems try to accurately answer natural language questions regarding an input
image [1]. This topic aims at developing systems that can
communicate effectively about an image in natural language
and comprehend the contents of images similar to humans.

1.2. Answer Grounding
The answer grounding task is defined as detecting the
pixels that can provide evidence for the answer to a given
question regarding an image [3]. In other words, the task
is to return the image regions used to arrive at the answer
for a given visual question (question-image pair) with an
answer. Although the VQA community has made significant progress, the best-performing systems are complicated
black-box models, raising concerns about whether their answer reasoning is based on correct visual evidence. By
understanding the reasoning mechanism of the model, we
can evaluate the quality of answers, improve model performance, and provide explanations for end-users. To address
this problem, answer grounding has been introduced into
VQA systems, which requires the model to locate relevant
image regions as well as answer visual questions.
By providing answer groundings in response to visual
questions, numerous applications become possible. First,
they allow for evaluating whether a VQA model is reasoning correctly based on visual evidence. This is useful as an
explanation as well as for assisting developers with model
debugging. Second, answer grounding makes it possible
to separate important regions from irrelevant background
regions. Given that non-professional users can mistakenly
have private information in the background of their pictures,
answer grounding is a useful tool to obfuscate the background for privacy preserving. Third, suppose a service can
magnify the relevant visual evidence. In that case, users will
be able to discover the needed information in less time. This
is useful in part because VQA answers can be insufficient
sometimes.

1.3. Multimodal Deep Learning
By definition, the VQA and answer grounding tasks are
multimodal tasks since a method for these tasks should be
able to process and correlate two different modalities.
Multimodal Joint-Embedding Models: These models
merge and learn representations of multiple modalities in a
joint feature space. Joint-embeddings underpin the building
of a lot of cross-modal methods as they can bridge the gap
between different modalities. In this joint space, the dis-

6080

