This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Strata-NeRF : Neural Radiance Fields for Stratified Scenes
Ankit Dhiman1,2 R Srinath1 Harsh Rangwani1 Rishubh Parihar1
Lokesh R Boregowda2 Srinath Sridhar3 R Venkatesh Babu1
1
Vision and AI Lab, IISc Bangalore 2 Samsung R & D Institute India - Bangalore 3 Brown University

Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) approaches learn the underlying 3D representation of a scene and generate photorealistic novel views with high fidelity. However, most proposed settings concentrate on modelling a single object or
a single level of a scene. However, in the real world, we
may capture a scene at multiple levels, resulting in a layered capture. For example, tourists usually capture a monument’s exterior structure before capturing the inner structure. Modelling such scenes in 3D with seamless switching between levels can drastically improve immersive experiences. However, most existing techniques struggle in
modelling such scenes. We propose Strata-NeRF, a single
neural radiance field that implicitly captures a scene with
multiple levels. Strata-NeRF achieves this by conditioning
the NeRFs on Vector Quantized (VQ) latent representations
which allow sudden changes in scene structure. We evaluate the effectiveness of our approach in multi-layered synthetic dataset comprising diverse scenes and then further
validate its generalization on the real-world RealEstate10K
dataset. We find that Strata-NeRF effectively captures
stratified scenes, minimizes artifacts, and synthesizes highfidelity views compared to existing approaches. https:
//ankitatiisc.github.io/Strata-NeRF/

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis is an ill-posed problem widely encountered in various areas such as augmented reality [24,
28], virtual reality [11], etc. A paradigm change for solving
these kinds of problems was brought by the introduction
of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [34]. NeRFs are neural networks that take in the spatial coordinates and camera
parameters as input and output the corresponding radiance
field. Earlier version of NeRFs enable the generation of
high-fidelity novel views for bounded scenes, significantly
improving over existing techniques like Structure From Motion [47]. Further, the capability of NeRFs have been recently extended to model unbounded scenes by Mip-NeRF
360 [2]. This enabled NeRFs to model complex real-world

Level 0

Abstract

Level 0

Level 1

Level 2

Figure 1. Top, wireframe view of a multi-layered stratified scene
with three levels (monkey head inside sphere inside a cube). The
camera colors indicate views of a specific level. Strata-NeRF enables high-quality reconstruction of such stratified scenes using a
single neural network.

scenes, where the scene content can exist at any distance
from the camera.
However, similar to unboundedness in scenes, hierarchies in scenes are also natural. For example, images captured in a house can be categorized into images captured
outside and inside across various rooms. Modelling such hierarchical scenes jointly for all levels through a NeRF could
be particularly useful in cases of Virtual Reality applications. As it would not require switching to a different NeRF
for each level, reducing memory requirement and latency in
switching. Further, as the different hierarchies of a scene
usually share texture and architectural commonalities, it
could lead to effective knowledge sharing and reduce the requirement of training independent models. For tackling the
above novel objective, we introduce a paradigm of scenes
that can be deconstructed into several tiers, termed “Stratified Scenes”. A “stratified” scene has several levels or

17603

