This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contactless Pulse Estimation Leveraging Pseudo Labels and Self-Supervision
Zhihua Li, Lijun Yin
Department of Computer Science, Binghamton University
zli191@binghamton.edu, lijun@cs.binghamton.edu

Abstract
Remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) is a promising
research area involving non-invasive monitoring of vital
signs using cameras. While several supervised methods have been proposed, recent research has focused on
contrastive-based self-supervised methods. However, these
methods often collapse to learning irrelevant periodicities
when dealing with interferences such as head motions, facial dynamics, and video compression. To address this limitation, firstly, we enhance the current self-supervised learning by introducing more reliable and explicit contrastive
constraints. Secondly, we propose an innovative learning strategy that seamlessly integrates self-supervised constraints with pseudo-supervisory signals derived from traditional unsupervised methods. This is followed by a corectification technique designed to mitigate the adverse effects of noisy pseudo-labels. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our methodology over representative models when applied to small, high-quality datasets
such as PURE and UBFC-rPPG. Importantly, on largescale challenging datasets such as VIPL-HR and V4V, our
method, with zero annotation cost, not only significantly
surpasses prevailing self-supervised techniques but also
showcases remarkable alignment with state-of-the-art supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) is a non-contact
method for monitoring human cardiac activity by detecting subtle facial color variations induced by changes in
blood volume in skin tissue [16, 26]. Although these cyclic
changes are not perceptible to the human eye, they can
be captured by video cameras and extracted using computational algorithms [18, 45]. The deployment of rPPG
technology has led to various applications, including home
health monitoring, fitness training, and face anti-spoofing.
Remarkably, consumer cameras that are integrated into
smartphones can be used for these applications, making
rPPG technology widely accessible [11, 36].

The development of rPPG methods has evolved from
hand-crafted features [9, 35, 51] to deep learning methods
[22, 32, 56], resulting in significantly improved accuracy
due to the powerful feature extraction and representation capabilities of the latter. However, this transition has also led
to an increase in the cost of data collection and annotation.
Collecting sufficient data for rPPG can be a challenging task [8], prompting researchers to develop fully selfsupervised learning-based methods that can predict pulse
signals without annotations. For example, Gideon et al.
[13] derived multiple-views contrastive learning utilizing
the resampled and recovered videos. Similarly, ContrastPhys [44] enforced the power spectral density (PSD) of the
estimated pulse signal to be as similar as possible for temporally nearby segments and enlarged the distances of PSDs
of different videos. Although they opened the door to training with unlabeled data, there exist limitations.
The temporal stability assumption used to acquire positive pairs does not hold if the pulse rate changes instantaneously due to physical or mental activities. Besides, the
current contrastive learning [13, 44] enforced the distance
between the anchor and the negatives to be further than the
positives, which are coarse-grained and unable to provide
explicit regularization to the distances. This allows for any
videos that are distant from the anchor but not necessarily identical to the corresponding negative samples to satisfy the constraints. The easily breakable assumption of
temporal stability and the quite open-ended negative constraints can render the network collapse to learning pulseirrelevant features, particularly in the absence of supervised
constraints.
While some of these methods [13, 44] have shown
promising results on small datasets with high-quality and
high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) videos (e.g., videos in
PURE [43] and UBFC-rPPG [3]), where the pulse signal
is clear enough to be detected using contrastive periodical
constraints, their performance can be compromised when
dealing with more challenging videos (e.g., VIPL-HR [32]
and V4V [39]). In particular, when head motion, varying lighting, and video compression are present, the subtle
periodical facial chrominance changes that are crucial for

20588

