This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIRE for Diffusion-Generated Image Detection
Zhendong Wang1, ∗ Jianmin Bao2, * Wengang Zhou1,3, †
Weilun Wang1 Hezhen Hu1 Hong Chen4 Houqiang Li1,3, †
1

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
3

Microsoft Research Asia

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
4

Merchants Union Consumer Finance Company

{zhendongwang,wwlustc,alexhu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
jianbao@microsoft.com, {zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn, chenhong@mucfc.com

Real

Abstract
Diffusion models have shown remarkable success in visual synthesis, but have also raised concerns about potential
abuse for malicious purposes. In this paper, we seek to
build a detector for telling apart real images from diffusiongenerated images. We find that existing detectors struggle
to detect images generated by diffusion models, even if we
include generated images from a specific diffusion model
in their training data. To address this issue, we propose a
novel image representation called DIffusion Reconstruction
Error (DIRE), which measures the error between an input
image and its reconstruction counterpart by a pre-trained
diffusion model. We observe that diffusion-generated images
can be approximately reconstructed by a diffusion model
while real images cannot. It provides a hint that DIRE can
serve as a bridge to distinguish generated and real images.
DIRE provides an effective way to detect images generated
by most diffusion models, and it is general for detecting
generated images from unseen diffusion models and robust
to various perturbations. Furthermore, we establish a comprehensive diffusion-generated benchmark including images
generated by various diffusion models to evaluate the performance of diffusion-generated image detectors. Extensive
experiments on our collected benchmark demonstrate that
DIRE exhibits superiority over previous generated-image
detectors. The code, models, and dataset are available at
https://github.com/ZhendongWang6/DIRE.

1. Introduction
Recently, Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) [17, 41] have set up a new paradigm in image
generation due to their strong ability to generate high-quality
images. There arises plenty of studies [32, 10, 42, 23, 37]
exploring the improvement of the network architecture, ac* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li.

DDPM

iDDPM

ADM

PNDM

Source

Recon.

DIRE

Figure 1: The DIRE representation of a real image and
four generated images from diffusion models: DDPM [17],
iDDPM [32], ADM [10], and PNDM [23], respectively. The
DIREs of real images tend to have larger values compared
to diffusion-generated images.
celeration of sampling, and so on. As users enjoy the strong
generation capability of diffusion models, there are concerns
about potential privacy problems. For example, diffusion
models may memorize individual images from their training
data and emit them at the generation stage [3, 52]. Moreover,
some attackers may develop new deepfake techniques based
on diffusion models. Therefore, it is an urgent demand for a
diffusion-generated image detector.
Our focus in this work is to develop a general diffusiongenerated image detector. We notice that there are various
detectors for detecting generated images available. Despite
the fact that most diffusion models employ CNNs as the
network, the generation processes between diffusion models and previous generators (e.g., GAN, VAE) are entirely
different, rendering previously generated image detectors ineffective. A naïve thought is to train a CNN binary classifier
on diffusion-generated and real images. However, we find
that such a naïve scheme suffers limited generalization to
unseen diffusion-generated images.

22445

