This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

REAP: A Large-Scale Realistic Adversarial Patch Benchmark
Nabeel Hingun*
UC Berkeley

Chawin Sitawarin*
UC Berkeley

Jerry Li
Microsoft

nabeel126@berkeley.edu

chawins@berkeley.edu

jerrl@microsoft.com

David Wagner
UC Berkeley
daw@cs.berkeley.edu
Adversarial Patch Evaluation in Previous Work

Our REAP Benchmark

Figure 1: When digitally evaluating patch attacks, past work (top row) ignores many real-world factors and thus may yield
a misleading evaluation. We develop the REAP benchmark (bottom row) that more realistically simulates the effect of a
real-world patch attack on road signs, accounting for the pose, the location, and the lighting condition.

Abstract
Machine learning models are known to be susceptible to
adversarial perturbation. One famous attack is the adversarial patch, a particularly crafted sticker that makes the model
mispredict the object it is placed on. This attack presents
a critical threat to cyber-physical systems that rely on cameras such as autonomous cars. Despite the significance of
the problem, conducting research in this setting has been
difficult; evaluating attacks and defenses in the real world
is exceptionally costly while synthetic data are unrealistic.
In this work, we propose the REAP (REalistic Adversarial
Patch) benchmark, a digital benchmark that enables the evaluations on real images under real-world conditions. Built
on top of the Mapillary Vistas dataset, our benchmark contains over 14,000 traffic signs. Each sign is augmented with
geometric and lighting transformations for applying a digi-

tally generated patch realistically onto the sign. Using our
benchmark, we perform the first large-scale assessments of
adversarial patch attacks under realistic conditions. Our
experiments suggest that patch attacks may present a smaller
threat than previously believed and that the success rate of an
attack on simpler digital simulations is not predictive of its
actual effectiveness in practice. Our benchmark is released
publicly at https://github.com/wagner-group/
reap-benchmark.

1. Introduction
Research has shown that machine learning models lack robustness against adversarially chosen perturbations. Szegedy
et al. [54] first demonstrated that one can engineer perturbations that are indiscernible to the human eye yet that cause
neural networks to misclassify images with high confidence.
* Equal contribution.

14640

