This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UATVR: Uncertainty-Adaptive Text-Video Retrieval
Bo Fang1∗
Wenhao Wu2,3∗
Chang Liu4∗
Yu Zhou1†
Yuxin Song3
Weiping Wang1
Xiangbo Shu5
Xiangyang Ji4
Jingdong Wang3
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 The University of Sydney
3
Baidu Inc. 4 Tsinghua University 5 Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{fangbo,zhouyu,wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn, {songyuxin02,wangjingdong}@baidu.com,
{liuchang2022,xyji}@tsinghua.edu.cn, wenhao.wu@sydney.edu.au, shuxb@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
With the explosive growth of web videos and emerging large-scale vision-language pre-training models, e.g.,
CLIP, retrieving videos of interest with text instructions has
attracted increasing attention. A common practice is to
transfer text-video pairs to the same embedding space and
craft cross-modal interactions with certain entities in specific granularities for semantic correspondence. Unfortunately, the intrinsic uncertainties of optimal entity combinations in appropriate granularities for cross-modal queries
are understudied, which is especially critical for modalities
with hierarchical semantics, e.g., video, text, etc. In this
paper, we propose an Uncertainty-Adaptive Text-Video Retrieval approach, termed UATVR, which models each lookup as a distribution matching procedure. Concretely, we
add additional learnable tokens in the encoders to adaptively aggregate multi-grained semantics for flexible highlevel reasoning. In the refined embedding space, we represent text-video pairs as probabilistic distributions where
prototypes are sampled for matching evaluation. Comprehensive experiments on four benchmarks justify the superiority of our UATVR, which achieves new state-of-theart results on MSR-VTT (50.8%), VATEX (64.5%), MSVD
(49.7%), and DiDeMo (45.8%). The code is available at
https://github.com/bofang98/UATVR.

1. Introduction
With surging portable filming devices and emerging
video media platforms, searching videos of interest with
human instructions, typically as texts, has been a part of
daily lives, which urgently requires effective and robust
∗ Co-first authorship. This work was done when Bo Fang was a research intern at Baidu Inc.
† Corresponding author.

Textual Queries:

1
2
1 3

2

3

4

5

4 5
6

(a) Uncertain problem

𝒩"
𝒩!

(Video-Sentence Matching:)
various scenes from
different football games
(Frame-Sentence Matching:)
football player scores a
touchdown
(Frame-Word Matching:)
football players celebrate
and another player makes an
amazing touchdown
frame embedding
word embedding

6
(b) Ours

Representation
distribution

Figure 1. Motivation. A video has numerous descriptions containing different level information, (a) which shows inconsistent
text-video correspondences in the common embedding space. The
former three frames depict a ‘celebrate’ action, while the last three
frames are about a ‘touchdown’. This video diversity thus makes
the optimal text-video matching in uncertain granularities, which
we call an uncertain matching problem. Moreover, previous deterministic works can only handle one-to-one text-video mappings,
yet a realistic relationship between two modalities is one-to-many.
(b) The above problems motivate our uncertainty-adaptive model
through distribution matching procedures.

text-video retrieval (TVR) techniques. Given a query text
(video), TVR aims to find the most relevant video (text) in
the database, which is typically overwhelmed with sophisticated vague semantic combinations varying with hierarchical text structures or spatiotemporal video spans.
Recent breakthroughs in the large-scale image and/or
text pre-training [48, 22, 61] benefit TVR significantly. A
serial of seminal works employ a separated encoder architecture to respectively project texts and videos into a pretrained joint embedding space for compact cross-modal in-

13723

