This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ORC: Network Group-based Knowledge Distillation using Online Role Change
Junyong Choi1,2 , Hyeon Cho1 , Seokhwa Cheung1 , and Wonjun Hwang1,3
1
Ajou University, Korea, 2 Hyundai Motor Company, 3 Naver AI Lab
chldusxkr@hyundai.com, {ch0104, shjeong008, wjhwang}@ajou.ac.kr

Abstract
In knowledge distillation, since a single, omnipotent teacher network cannot solve all problems, multiple
teacher-based knowledge distillations have been studied recently. However, sometimes their improvements are not
as good as expected because some immature teachers may
transfer the false knowledge to the student. In this paper, to
overcome this limitation and take the efficacy of the multiple
networks, we divide the multiple networks into teacher and
student groups, respectively. That is, the student group is a
set of immature networks that require learning the teacher’s
knowledge, while the teacher group consists of the selected
networks that are capable of teaching successfully. We propose our online role change strategy where the top-ranked
networks in the student group are able to promote to the
teacher group at every iteration. After training the teacher
group using the error samples of the student group to refine the teacher group’s knowledge, we transfer the collaborative knowledge from the teacher group to the student group successfully. We verify the superiority of the
proposed method on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet
which achieves high performance. We further show the generality of our method with various backbone architectures
such as ResNet, WRN, VGG, Mobilenet, and Shufflenet.1

1. Introduction
Deep learning using convolutional neural networks
(CNN) is making significant progress in computer vision
tasks (e.g., object detection, classification, segmentation).
For making the efficient network, many trials have been
studied from quantization [36, 3, 30, 19] to pruning [13, 23,
9, 10]. After Hinton’s proposal [16] on Knowledge Distillation (KD), KD methods have been proposed in various
forms [31, 39, 34, 35, 38, 4, 6] but most of them leverage a pair of a single large teacher and a small student for
knowledge transfer. However, there is a clear limitation to
improving the performance of the student successfully be1 Our code is available at https://github.com/choijunyong/ORCKD

cause the teacher network is egocentric and complacent in
spite of its good performance and note that the teacher is independently trained in advance without the consideration
of the student’s characteristics. Eventually, the teacher’s
knowledge is transferred from the viewpoint the teacher has
learned in advance, not the direction in which the student
can learn successfully, and the student network easily overfits in an undesired direction. Another limitation of KD
is that when the difference of network sizes between the
teacher and student networks is large, a single teacher-based
KD does not properly transfer the teacher’s knowledge to
the student as described in [25, 33].
Recently, the multiple teacher-based KD methods [25,
33, 43, 8] have been proposed to solve the issues mentioned above. Specifically, Teacher Assistant-based KD
(TAKD) [25, 33] was proposed as a method of teaching students using multiple networks with different network sizes
and online distillation methods [43, 22, 8] simultaneously
learned the knowledge from the multiple networks of the
similar capacity from the beginning. Most of all, the fundamental problem of the multiple network-based KD is that,
as shown in Fig. 1 (a), the networks are trained by using
even knowledge from immature networks. As a result, the
collaborative knowledge that should be used for learning
can be contaminated by the false knowledge. On the other
hand, we use multiple networks of different sizes to overcome the teacher-student large gap in online KD and divide
the networks into a teacher group and a student group to prevent false knowledge from being used for learning as shown
in Fig. 1 (b).
In this paper, we propose a method to prevent the transfer of false knowledge. False knowledge refers to flawed
information present in teacher networks, and our objective
is to prevent the student networks from learning in the
wrong direction by avoiding the assimilation of this false
knowledge. We first deploy the multiple networks into the
teacher group and the student group according to their roles.
The main role of the teacher group is to educate the student
network using collaborative knowledge, and the main role
of the student group is to receive useful information from
the teacher group and train optimally. What we need to

17381

