This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Large-scale Study of Spatiotemporal Representation Learning with a New
Benchmark on Action Recognition
Andong Deng∗
Taojiannan Yang*
Chen Chen
Center for Research in Computer Vision
University of Central Florida, USA
andong.deng@ucf.edu, taoyang1122@knights.ucf.edu, chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract

Domain Diversity
Anomaly

The goal of building a benchmark (suite of datasets)
is to provide a unified protocol for fair evaluation and
thus facilitate the evolution of a specific area. Nonetheless, we point out that existing protocols of action recognition could yield partial evaluations due to several limitations. To comprehensively probe the effectiveness of spatiotemporal representation learning, we introduce BEAR,
a new BEnchmark on video Action Recognition. BEAR
is a collection of 18 video datasets grouped into 5 categories (anomaly, gesture, daily, sports, and instructional),
which covers a diverse set of real-world applications. With
BEAR, we thoroughly evaluate 6 common spatiotemporal
models pre-trained by both supervised and self-supervised
learning. We also report transfer performance via standard finetuning, few-shot finetuning, and unsupervised domain adaptation. Our observation suggests that the current state-of-the-art cannot solidly guarantee high performance on datasets close to real-world applications, and we
hope BEAR can serve as a fair and challenging evaluation benchmark to gain insights on building next-generation
spatiotemporal learners. Our dataset, code, and models are
released at: https://github.com/AndongDeng/BEAR

1. Introduction
Learning good spatiotemporal representations [45, 70,
24, 60, 16, 76] is fundamental for video understanding
tasks. In action recognition, a common evaluation protocol is to first evaluate the model performance on largescale video datasets such as Kinetics-400 [30], then show
its effectiveness of transfer learning to different downstream
tasks [5, 17, 38, 2, 41, 72]. Many video datasets [56, 32,
30, 20, 9] have been introduced over the past few years to
advance the field. However, there are several major limitations: (1) These datasets are similar in terms of domains
* Equal Contribution.

Gesture

Daily

Sports

Instructional

BEAR
Task Diversity
2-shot

Few-shot

4-shot

Domain
Adaptation

viewpoint adaptation

Zero-shot
prompt A
prompt B
prompt C

synthetic to real

Figure 1: BEAR is a collection of 18 video action recognition datasets grouped into 5 categories (Anomaly, Gesture,
Daily, Sports, and Instructional). It enables various evaluation settings, e.g., standard finetuning, few-shot finetuning,
unsupervised domain adaptation, and zero-shot learning.
and actions. Most of them only contain daily or sports actions because these categories are easy to collect from the
web. Yet many important real-world applications, such as
anomaly detection and industrial inspection, are rarely included. (2) Each of these datasets has its own characteristics (e.g. appearance-focused [30], motion-focused [20],
fine-grained [52], egocentric [9]). Previous works usually
conduct evaluations on a few datasets. However, without
evaluating a suite of datasets, we cannot fully diagnose a
model and make further improvements. (3) The held-out
test set for these datasets either does not exist or is not commonly adopted. This will affect the transfer performance
because models tuned on a test set using hyperparameter optimization or neural architecture search might achieve good
performance but cannot transfer well due to overfitting.
In light of this, we propose a unified and challenging
BEnchmark on video Action Recognition, named BEAR, to
better evaluate spatiotemporal representation learning. We
define good representations as those that can achieve strong

20519

