This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SeeABLE: Soft Discrepancies and Bounded Contrastive Learning
for Exposing Deepfakes
Nicolas Larue1,2 , Ngoc-Son Vu1 , Vitomir Struc2 , Peter Peer2 , Vassilis Christophides1
1
ETIS - CY Cergy Paris University, ENSEA, CNRS, France
2
University of Ljubljana, Slovenia
Abstract
Modern deepfake detectors have achieved encouraging
results, when training and test images are drawn from
the same data collection. However, when these detectors
are applied to images produced with unknown deepfakegeneration techniques, considerable performance degradations are commonly observed. In this paper, we propose
a novel deepfake detector, called SeeABLE, that formalizes
the detection problem as a (one-class) out-of-distribution
detection task and generalizes better to unseen deepfakes.
Specifically, SeeABLE first generates local image perturbations (referred to as soft-discrepancies) and then pushes the
perturbed faces towards predefined prototypes using a novel
regression-based bounded contrastive loss. To strengthen
the generalization performance of SeeABLE to unknown
deepfake types, we generate a rich set of soft discrepancies and train the detector: (i) to localize, which part of
the face was modified, and (ii) to identify the alteration
type. To demonstrate the capabilities of SeeABLE, we perform rigorous experiments on several widely-used deepfake datasets and show that our model convincingly outperforms competing state-of-the-art detectors, while exhibiting
highly encouraging generalization capabilities. The source
code for SeeABLE is available from: https://github.
com/anonymous-author-sub/seeable.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in (deep) generative models, such
as generative adversarial networks (GAN) [23], diffusion
models [32] and generative normalizing flows [14], have
made it possible to generate fake images and videos with
unprecedented levels of realism. Human faces have been
a particularly popular target for such models, enabling the
creation of so-called deepfakes [12,19,65,66], i.e., manipulated facial images commonly used for malicious purposes.
These deepfakes have been shown to constitute a serious
psychological and financial treat to individuals, but also society as a whole [8, 52]. As a result, the deep learning community is actively working on countermeasures and detection techniques that can help to mitigate this threat.
By having access to datasets with both, real and forged
(manipulated) faces [15,16,36,41,47,57,70], existing deep-

Figure 1: Examples of faces with soft-discrepancies. Can
you identify the discrepancy in each image? SeeABLE can.
SeeABLE’s answer: the perturbed area of the four facial
images is within the circle shown on the right. Note that a
different soft discrepancy is used in each image.
fake detectors [1,7,9,10,33,50,57] essentially learn a binary
decision boundary that leads to reasonable detection performance with deepfake-generation techniques seen during
training. However, as recent empirical studies [18, 39, 67]
report, the performance of such (discriminatively-trained)
detectors degrades significantly when used with unseen
face-manipulation methods, which severely limits their use
in real-life deployment scenarios [75].
A powerful solution to improve the generalization capabilities of deepfake detectors is to use synthetic data (i.e.,
pseudo deepfakes) during training and encourage the models to learn generalizable decision boundaries. Such strategies are at the core of many of the state-of-the-art (SoTA)
detection models [5, 45, 48, 60, 71] that either enrich the diversity of available deepfakes by synthesizing novel fake
images for training, or rely completely on synthetic deepfakes when learning the detection models. These methods
differ in the type of augmentations considered: blendingor adversarial-based techniques, adoption of global or local
transformations, and use of single or multiple source/target
images, as summarized in Table 1. Once the pseudo-fakes
are generated, a classifier is learned to distinguish between
real and fake faces. While these methods were observed
to lead to highly competitive detection performance, especially in cross-dataset settings, they are still limited by the
discriminative nature of the training procedure that tries to
differentiate between real faces and the specific artifacts induced by the pseudo-deepfake generation procedure.
In this paper, we propose a novel deepfake detector,
called SeeABLE (Soft discrepancies and bounded contrastive larning for exposing deepfakes), that formulates the
detection problem as a (one-class) out-of-distribution detec-

21011

