This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data-free Knowledge Distillation for Fine-grained Visual Categorization

1

Renrong Shao1 , Wei Zhang1 ,* Jianhua Yin2 , Jun Wang1 *
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University
{roryshaw6613,zhangwei.thu,jhyinmail, wongjun}@gmail.com

Abstract

long been considered a more challenging issue than traditional image classiﬁcation due to the subtle inter-class and
large intra-class variations [42]. To distinguish subtle diversities, the current approaches commonly exploit deeper neural networks with elaborate designs [50, 26, 53] to excavate
the discriminative features effectively. Inevitably, the network becomes more and more complex, which leads to another problem, i.e., complicated networks are not easily deployed on embedded or mobile devices. Besides, the training data of released pre-trained models are often unavailable
due to transmission, privacy, or legal issues. For example,
pre-trained models commonly need a large amount of data
such as ImageNet [24]. If the data is transmitted directly, a
large amount of bandwidth is consumed. Moreover, some
sensitive data such as e-commerce items or medical data
are usually not directly accessible to the public due to intellectual property rights or privacy protection considerations. To obtain a lightweight model, recent research has
made signiﬁcant progress, including pruning [25], quantization [49, 27], and knowledge distillation [16]. Among
them, knowledge distillation (KD) is a popular and effective paradigm for model compression and knowledge transfer [16]. It works by transferring knowledge from a cumbersome teacher network to a lightweight student network.
Thanks to this separable architecture, it can also be used
to solve privacy protection in data-free scenarios, which is
called data-free knowledge distillation (DFKD) [5] or zeroshot knowledge distillation (ZSKD) [33].

Data-free knowledge distillation (DFKD) is a promising approach for addressing issues related to model compression, security privacy, and transmission restrictions.
Although the existing methods exploiting DFKD have
achieved inspiring achievements in coarse-grained classiﬁcation, in practical applications involving ﬁne-grained
classiﬁcation tasks that require more detailed distinctions
between similar categories, sub-optimal results are obtained. To address this issue, we propose an approach
called DFKD-FGVC that extends DFKD to ﬁne-grained visual categorization (FGVC) tasks. Our approach utilizes
an adversarial distillation framework with attention generator, mixed high-order attention distillation, and semantic feature contrast learning. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a
spatial-wise attention mechanism to the generator to synthesize ﬁne-grained images with more details of discriminative parts. We also utilize the mixed high-order attention
mechanism to capture complex interactions among parts
and the subtle differences among discriminative features
of the ﬁne-grained categories, paying attention to both local features and semantic context relationships. Moreover,
we leverage the teacher and student models of the distillation framework to contrast high-level semantic feature maps
in the hyperspace, comparing variances of different categories. We evaluate our approach on three widely-used
FGVC benchmarks (Aircraft, Cars196, and CUB200) and
demonstrate its superior performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/RoryShao/DFKD-FGVC.git

Fortunately, a series of DFKD methods have been proposed [5, 33, 30, 11, 47, 12]. The existing approaches can
be divided into two paradigms. The ﬁrst paradigm is based
on the category distribution, which exploits the out distribution of teacher and student to optimize the student and generator, e.g., DFAL [5], ZSKT [30], DFAD [11], ZSKD [33].
Such a paradigm commonly fails to generate realistic samples due to the lack of semantic-related information, especially when it comes to complex samples. The second
paradigm is based on prior distribution, which exploits the
prior information (i.e., BatchNorm) to optimize synthetic
images for distillation, e.g., MAD [10], CMI [12], DFQ [8],

1. Introduction
Fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) aims at distinguishing subcategories from father categories, e.g., subcategories of birds [43], aircraft [29], and cars [23]. It has
* Corresponding authors. This work was supported in part by National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant (No. 62072182, No.
92270119, and No. 62172261) and Key Laboratory of Advanced Theory
and Application in Statistics and Data Science, Ministry of Education.

1515

