This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learn TAROT with MENTOR: A Meta-Learned Self-supervised Approach for
Trajectory Prediction
Mozhgan Pourkeshavarz, Changhe Chen, Amir Rasouli
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
Toronto, Canada
firstname.lastname@huawei.com

Abstract
Predicting diverse yet admissible trajectories that adhere to the map constraints is challenging. Graph-based
scene encoders have been proven effective for preserving
local structures of maps by deﬁning lane-level connections.
However, such encoders do not capture more complex patterns emerging from long-range heterogeneous connections
between nonadjacent interacting lanes. To this end, we
shed new light on learning common driving patterns by introducing meTA ROad paTh (TAROT) to formulate combinations of various relations between lanes on the road
topology. Intuitively, this can be viewed as ﬁnding feasible routes. Furthermore, we propose MEta-road NeTwORk
(MENTOR) that helps trajectory prediction by providing it
with TAROT as navigation tips. More speciﬁcally, 1) we deﬁne TAROT prediction as a novel self-supervised proxy task
to identify the complex heterogeneous structure of the map.
2) For typical driving actions, we establish several TAROTs
that result in multiple Heterogeneous Structure Learning
(HSL) tasks. These tasks are used in MENTOR, which performs meta-learning by simultaneously predicting trajectories along with proxy tasks, identifying an optimal combination of them, and automatically balancing them to improve
the primary task. We show that our model achieves state-ofthe-art performance on the Argoverse dataset, especially on
diversity and admissibility metrics, achieving up to 20% improvements in challenging scenarios. We further investigate
the contribution of proposed modules in ablation studies.

1. Introduction
Vehicle trajectory prediction is one of the main building blocks of autonomous driving. Prediction demonstrates
how the future might unfold based on the road structure and
the behavior of road users. To operate safely, self-driving
cars must accurately perceive the geometric and semantic information in the driving scene and predict diverse yet
scene-compliant trajectories. High-deﬁnition maps provide
useful cues since the behaviors of agents and the interac-

tions among them are largely inﬂuenced by the road topology and governed by the map constraints. For example, a
vehicle is unlikely to change to a lane that runs in the opposite direction. In this light, learning the structure of the
map efﬁciently is essential to predict a variety of feasible
trajectories.
Inspired by the structural nature of the road, map vectorization has become prevalent in recent works, in which
lanes are converted into vectors [15, 56, 18]. Consequently,
graph structures can be leveraged to learn the relationships
between vectorized entities [28, 54, 11, 16]. In this way,
connected lanes in various formations, e.g. successor, predecessor, right, and left, represent admissible ways to traverse the terrain. For example, two lanes positioned consecutively in space and connected by a sequential link can
be driven successively, whereas two lanes connected by a
lateral link enable a lane change maneuver. Hence, the HD
map lane graph has edges with different semantic meanings,
indicating its heterogeneous nature.
Although existing lane graphs are shown to be effective
in learning local structures through the adjacent lanes, they
lack the ability to model more complex patterns imposed
by long-range heterogeneous connections between nonadjacent yet interacting lanes. These connections are important
to capture high-level intentions, such as overtaking, merging, and double turns, and can potentially represent the constraints and rules of the road. To model such connections,
some methods propose adopting self-supervised tasks on
top of the lane graph [15, 4] to encourage the model to learn
the semantics associated with lane connectivities. Since
scene structure contains various semantics, having only one
proxy task at a time is insufﬁcient to provide diverse trafﬁc patterns. Alternatively, anchor-based models incorporate
prior knowledge by identifying candidate trajectories based
on sampling or clustering of training data [6, 43]. However,
these methods are less robust and generalizable due to their
dependency on the distribution of data.
Motivated by this insight, we introduce a novel selfsupervised task for trajectory prediction, termed Heteroge-

8384

