This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Fair and Comprehensive Comparisons for Image-Based
3D Object Detection
Xinzhu Ma1,2

Yongtao Wang3 Yinmin Zhang1,2 Zhiyi Xia4 Yuan Meng4,⇤
Zhihui Wang3,⇤
Haojie Li3
Wanli Ouyang1
1
Shanghai AI Lab 2 University of Sydney 3 Dalian University of Technology 4 Tsinghua University
{maxinzhu, zhangyinmin, ouyangwanli}@pjlab.org.cn

{yongtaowang@mail., zhwang@, hjli@}dlut.edu.cn

{yuanmeng, xiazy21}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

proposed, which significantly promotes the development of
this research field.

In this work, we build a modular-designed codebase, formulate strong training recipes, design an error diagnosis
toolbox, and discuss current methods for image-based 3D
object detection. In particular, different from other highly
mature tasks, e.g., 2D object detection, the community of
image-based 3D object detection is still evolving, where
methods often adopt different training recipes and tricks
resulting in unfair evaluations and comparisons. What
is worse, these tricks may overwhelm their proposed designs in performance, even leading to wrong conclusions.
To address this issue, we build a module-designed codebase and formulate unified training standards for the community. Furthermore, we also design an error diagnosis
toolbox to measure the detailed characterization of detection models. Using these tools, we analyze current methods in-depth under varying settings and provide discussions for some open questions, e.g., discrepancies in conclusions on KITTI-3D and nuScenes datasets, which have
led to different dominant methods for these datasets. We
hope that this work will facilitate future research in imagebased 3D object detection. Our codes will be released at
https://github.com/OpenGVLab/3dodi.

However, although lots of breakthroughs in detection accuracy and inference speed have been achieved, there are
still some critical problems to be solved, especially the standardization of evaluation protocols. Specifically, compared
with the encouraging developments at the technique level,
the conventional rules in model building, training recipes,
and evaluation are not well-defined. As shown in Table
1, existing methods generally adopt different settings, e.g.
backbones, training strategies, augmentations, etc., to build
and evaluate their models, and the commonly used benchmarks (and most of the papers) only record the final accuracy. This makes the comparison of the detectors unfair and
may lead to misleading conclusions.

1. Introduction
As a new and rapidly developing research field, visionbased 3D object detection [49] shows promising potential in
autonomous driving and attracts lots of attention from both
academia and industry. Thanks to the unremitting efforts of
numerous researchers, lots of advanced technologies, such
as model designs [3, 46, 29], detection pipelines [95, 83,
27], and challenging datasets [21, 6, 75], are continuously
Corresponding author

In this paper, we aim to provide a unified platform for
image-based 3D object detectors and standardize the protocols in model building and evaluation. Specifically, similar to the advanced codebases in 2D detection [9, 86], we
decompose the image-based 3D detection frameworks into
several separate components, e.g. backbones, necks, etc.,
and provide a unified implementation for current methods.
Furthermore, we fully investigate existing algorithms and
formulate several efficient training protocols, e.g. training
schedules, data augmentation, etc. Our summarized training recipes not only provide a fair environment for evaluation but also significantly improve the performance of current methods, particularly in the KITTI-3D dataset. For example, the methods [51, 46] published two years ago trained
with our recipes can achieve better (or similar) performance
than the recent works [29, 55], emphasizing the importance
of establishing a standard training recipe.
Furthermore, to systematically analyze the bottlenecks
and issues in image-based 3D object detection, we urgently
require a tool to thoroughly examine detection results. Inspired by TIDE [2], we propose an error diagnosis toolbox,
named TIDE3D, to measure the detailed characterization of

6425

