This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreeCOS: Self-Supervised Learning from Fractals and Unlabeled Images for
Curvilinear Object Segmentation
Tianyi Shi, Xiaohuan Ding, Liang Zhang, Xin Yang†
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
{shitianyihust, dingxiaohuan, liangz, xinyang2014}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Curvilinear object segmentation is critical for many applications. However, manually annotating curvilinear objects is very time-consuming and error-prone, yielding insufficiently available annotated datasets for existing supervised methods and domain adaptation methods. This paper proposes a self-supervised curvilinear object segmentation method (FreeCOS) that learns robust and distinctive features from fractals and unlabeled images. The key
contributions include a novel Fractal-FDA synthesis (FFS)
module and a geometric information alignment (GIA) approach. FFS generates curvilinear structures based on the
parametric Fractal L-system and integrates the generated
structures into unlabeled images to obtain synthetic training images via Fourier Domain Adaptation. GIA reduces
the intensity differences between the synthetic and unlabeled images by comparing the intensity order of a given
pixel to the values of its nearby neighbors. Such image
alignment can explicitly remove the dependency on absolute intensity values and enhance the inherent geometric
characteristics which are common in both synthetic and
real images. In addition, GIA aligns features of synthetic
and real images via the prediction space adaptation loss
(PSAL) and the curvilinear mask contrastive loss (CMCL).
Extensive experimental results on four public datasets, i.e.,
XCAD, DRIVE, STARE and CrackTree demonstrate that our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art unsupervised methods, self-supervised methods and traditional methods by a
large margin. The source code of this work is available at
https://github.com/TY-Shi/FreeCOS.

1. Introduction
Automatically segmenting curvilinear structures (such
as vascular trees in medical images and road systems in
aerial photography) is critical for many applications, including retinal fundus disease screening [2, 14], diagnosing
† Corresponding author.

coronary artery disease [38], road condition evaluation and
maintenance [51]. Despite a plethora of research works in
the literature, accurately segmenting curvilinear objects remains challenging due to their complex structures with numerous tiny branches, tortuosity shapes, ambiguous boundaries due to imaging issues and noisy backgrounds.
Most recent methods [39, 10, 36, 42, 18, 29, 7, 28, 6, 35]
leverage supervised deep learning for curvilinear object segmentation and have achieved encouraging results. However,
those methods require a large number of pixel-wise manual
annotations for training which are very expensive to obtain
and error-prone due to poor image quality, annotator’s fatigue and lack of experience. Although, there are several
publically available annotated datasets for curvilinear object
segmentation [37, 17, 51, 25], the large appearance variations between different curvilinear object images, e.g., Xray coronary angiography images vs. retinal fundus images,
yields significant performance degradation for supervised
models across different types of images (even across the
same type of images acquired using different equipments).
As a result, expensive manual annotations are inevitably demanded to tune the segmentation model for a particular application. Potential solutions to alleviate the annotation burden include domain adaption [8, 32] and unsupervised segmentation [9, 19, 24, 11, 9, 1]. However, the effectiveness
of domain adaptation is largely dependent on the quality of
annotated data in the source domain and constrained by the
gap between the source and target domain. Existing unsupervised segmentation methods [9, 19] can hardly achieve
satisfactory performance for curvilinear objects due to their
thin, long, and tortuosity shapes, complex branching structures, and confusing background artifacts.
Despite the high complexity and great variety of curvilinear structures in different applications, they share some
common characteristics (i.e., the tube-like shape and the
branching structure). Thus, existing studies [47, 46, 48]
have demonstrated that several curvilinear structures (e.g.,
arterial trees of the circulation system) can be generated
via the fractal systems with proper branching parameters
to mimic the fractal and physiological characteristics, and

876

