This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReST: A Reconfigurable Spatial-Temporal Graph Model for Multi-Camera
Multi-Object Tracking

1

Cheng-Che Cheng1 Min-Xuan Qiu1
National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan

{chengche6230, maisiechiu}@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

2

Chen-Kuo Chiang2 Shang-Hong Lai1
National Chung Cheng University, Taiwan
ckchiang@cs.ccu.edu.tw

lai@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
Multi-Camera Multi-Object Tracking (MC-MOT) utilizes information from multiple views to better handle problems with occlusion and crowded scenes. Recently, the
use of graph-based approaches to solve tracking problems
has become very popular. However, many current graphbased methods do not effectively utilize information regarding spatial and temporal consistency. Instead, they rely on
single-camera trackers as input, which are prone to fragmentation and ID switch errors. In this paper, we propose a novel reconfigurable graph model that first associates all detected objects across cameras spatially before
reconfiguring it into a temporal graph for Temporal Association. This two-stage association approach enables us
to extract robust spatial and temporal-aware features and
address the problem with fragmented tracklets. Furthermore, our model is designed for online tracking, making
it suitable for real-world applications. Experimental results show that the proposed graph model is able to extract more discriminating features for object tracking, and
our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on several
public datasets. Code is available at https://github.
com/chengche6230/ReST.

(a) Single-camera tracker

(b) Our ReST tracker

1. Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is an important task in
computer vision, which involves object detection and tracking multiple objects over time in an image sequence. It can
be applied to several real-world scenarios, such as video
surveillance, autonomous vehicles, and sports analysis. Despite numerous research methods proposed for MOT, the
problem of fragmented tracklets or ID switching caused
by frequent occlusion in crowded scenes remains a major
challenge. One potential solution is to track objects under a multi-camera setting, which is called a Multi-Camera
Multi-Object Tracking (MC-MOT) task. By leveraging information from multiple cameras, occluded objects in one
view may become clearly visible in another view, allowing

Figure 1: Example of handling object occlusion for MCMOT. (a) When occlusion occurs at time t (red dotted box),
the single-camera tracker generates fragmented tracklets
and causes ID switch errors. (b) Our ReST tracker corrects
object ID in c1 via Spatial and Temporal Association, by
leveraging spatial and temporal consistency.
for more accurate object tracking results.
Most of tracking-by-detection paradigms [1] adopt
Kalman filter [17] in the data association stage. It serves
as a motion model, predicting the next possible position and
matching with previous detection. However, such method is
usually deterministic and cannot adapt to the dynamically
changing environment. In addition, the tracking results
are difficult to achieve globally optimal, since the illumi-

10051

