This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CopyRNeRF: Protecting the CopyRight of Neural Radiance Fields
Ziyuan Luo1,2

Qing Guo3
1

Simon See2

Renjie Wan1 *

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
2

3

Ka Chun Cheung2,4

NVIDIA AI Technology Center, NVIDIA

IHPC and CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
4

Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong Baptist University

ziyuanluo@life.hkbu.edu.hk, guo_qing@cfar.a-star.edu.sg, {chcheung, ssee}@nvidia.com,
renjiewan@hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract

Secret message

Novel
views

00100110…

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have the potential to be
a major representation of media. Since training a NeRF
has never been an easy task, the protection of its model
copyright should be a priority. In this paper, by analyzing the pros and cons of possible copyright protection solutions, we propose to protect the copyright of NeRF models
by replacing the original color representation in NeRF with
a watermarked color representation. Then, a distortionresistant rendering scheme is designed to guarantee robust
message extraction in 2D renderings of NeRF. Our proposed method can directly protect the copyright of NeRF
models while maintaining high rendering quality and bit accuracy when compared among optional solutions. Project
page: https://luo-ziyuan.github.io/copyrnerf.

1. Introduction
Though Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [23] have the
potential to be the mainstream for the representation of digital media, training a NeRF model has never been an easy
task. If a NeRF model is stolen by malicious users, how can
we identify its intellectual property?
As with any digital asset (e.g., 3D model, video, or image), copyright can be secured by embedding copyright
messages into asset, aka digital watermarking, and NeRF
models are no exception. An intuitive solution is to directly
watermark rendered samples using an off-the-shelf watermarking approach (e.g., HiDDeN [50] and MBRS [14]).
However, this only protects the copyright of rendered samples, leaving the core model unprotected. If the core model
has been stolen, malicious users may render new samples
* Corresponding author. This work was carried out at Renjie’s Research
Group at the Department of Computer Science of Hong Kong Baptist University.

Extracted
message
00100110…

j

k

00100110…
00100110…

Reconstruction quality under different settings

Ground truth
PSNR/Bit Acc.

Our CopyRNeRF
32.69/100%

HiDDeN + NeRF NeRF with message
22.83/69%
27.71/51%

Figure 1: When NeRF models are stolen ( 1 ) by maclicious users, CopyRNeRF can help to claim model ownership by transmitting copyright messages embedded in models to rendering samples ( 2 ). We show some comparisons
with HiDDeN [50] + NeRF [23], and NeRF [23] with messages. PSNR/Bit Accuracy is shown below each example.
using different rendering strategies, leaving no room for
external watermarking expected by model creators. Besides, without considering factors necessary for rendering
during watermarking, directly watermarking rendered samples may leave easily detectable trace on areas with low geometry values.
The copyright messages are usually embedded into 3D
structure (e.g., meshes) for explicit 3D models [43]. Since
such structures are all implicitly encoded into the weights
of multilayer perceptron (MLP) for NeRF, its copyright
protection should be conducted by watermarking model
weights. As the information encoded by NeRF can only be
accessed via 2D renderings of protected models, two common standards should be considered during the watermark
extraction on rendered samples [1, 15, 41, 45]: 1) invisibility, which requires that no serious visual distortion are

22401

