This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MV-Map: Offboard HD Map Generation with Multi-view Consistency
Ziyang Xie∗1,2
Ziqi Pang∗1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Yu-Xiong Wang1
2
Fudan University

{ziyang8, ziqip2, yxw}@illinois.edu

Abstract
While bird’s-eye-view (BEV) perception models can be
helpful in building high-definition maps (HD maps) with
less human labor, their results are often unreliable and
demonstrate noticeable inconsistencies in the predicted HD
maps from different viewpoints. This is because BEV perception is typically set up in an “onboard” manner, which
restricts the computation and prevents algorithms from simultaneously reasoning multiple views. This paper overcomes these limitations and advocates a more practical
“offboard” HD map generation setup that removes the computation constraints, based on the fact that HD maps are
commonly reusable infrastructures built offline in data centers. To this end, we propose a novel offboard pipeline
called MV-Map that capitalizes multi-view consistency and
can handle an arbitrary number of frames with the key design of a “region-centric” framework. In MV-Map, the target HD maps are created by aggregating all the frames of
onboard predictions, weighted by the confidence scores assigned by an “uncertainty network.” To further enhance
multi-view consistency, we augment the uncertainty network with the global 3D structure optimized by a voxelized
neural radiance field (Voxel-NeRF). Extensive experiments
on nuScenes show that our MV-Map significantly improves
the quality of HD maps, further highlighting the importance
of offboard methods for HD map generation. Our code
and model are available at https : //github.com/
ZiYang-xie/MV-Map.

1. Introduction
High-definition maps (HD maps) play a crucial role
in ensuring the safe navigation of autonomous vehicles,
by providing essential positional and semantic information
about road elements. Ideally, one would expect the process of constructing HD maps to be as simple as collecting numerous sensory data while driving and then utilizing an automatic algorithm to extract the road elements,
* Equal contribution.

Collected
Frames

1

…

i

…

…

N

BEV Perception

On-vehicle
Computation
(Onboard)
Data Center
Computation
(Offboard)

…

Region-centric Fusion (Ours)

Road Boundary

Human Labeling (Ground Truth)

Pedestrian Crossing

Road Divider

Figure 1: Current onboard methods generate unreliable HD
map predictions that are inconsistent across multiple views,
due to occlusions or viewpoint changes. By contrast, our
offboard pipeline constructs a unified and multi-view consistent HD map with clearer lanes. Our key design is a
region-centric framework that aggregates single-frame information for each target HD map region.
as illustrated in Fig. 1. However, the mainstream solutions
generally involve human annotators, as seen in widely-used
datasets [3, 4, 8, 39]. This design is based on the consideration of the infrastructure role and high re-usability of HD
maps, which can serve autonomous vehicles for virtually
infinite times after a single construction process before any
environmental changes. Even so, the expense of manual
annotation obstructs the expansion of autonomous driving
to new locations, and we aim to develop reliable algorithms
that can decrease or replace the need for human labor in HD
map construction.
Towards this goal, there have been recent attempts
that automatically generate HD maps using bird’s-eye-view
(BEV) perception [11, 13, 15]. However, their results are
often unreliable, as illustrated by noticeable inconsistencies
in the predicted HD maps from different viewpoints (a representative example is in Fig. 1). We argue that multi-view
consistency is an intrinsic property of HD maps, because
the rigid and static HD maps shouldn’t change significantly
after simply switching viewpoints. The violations of consistency arise from the fact that existing BEV perception

8658

