This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Multi-Contrast MRI Super-Resolution: Rectangle-Window
Cross-Attention Transformer and Arbitrary-Scale Upsampling
Guangyuan Li1 , Lei Zhao1,∗ , Jiakai Sun1 , Zehua Lan1 , Zhanjie Zhang1 ,
Jiafu Chen1 , Zhijie Lin2 , Huaizhong Lin1,∗ , Wei Xing1,∗
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Zhejiang University of Science and Technology, Hangzhou, China
{cslgy, cszhl, csjk, zjucslzh, cszzj, chenjiafu, linhz, wxing}@zju.edu.cn
linzhijie@zust.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can provide clear
information on tissue structure and function by acquir*Corresponding author.

5.6×
7.2×

Recently, several methods have explored the potential of multi-contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
super-resolution (SR) and obtain results superior to singlecontrast SR methods. However, existing approaches still
have two shortcomings: (1) They can only address fixed integer upsampling scales, such as 2×, 3×, and 4×, which
require training and storing the corresponding model separately for each upsampling scale in clinic. (2) They lack
direct interaction among different windows as they adopt
the square window (e.g., 8×8) transformer network architecture, which results in inadequate modelling of longerrange dependencies. Moreover, the relationship between
reference images and target images is not fully mined.
To address these issues, we develop a novel network for
multi-contrast MRI arbitrary-scale SR, dubbed as McASSR.
Specifically, we design a rectangle-window cross-attention
transformer to establish longer-range dependencies in MR
images without increasing computational complexity and
fully use reference information. Besides, we propose the
reference-aware implicit attention as an upsampling module, achieving arbitrary-scale super-resolution via implicit
neural representation, further fusing supplementary information of the reference image. Extensive and comprehensive experiments on both public and clinical datasets show
that our McASSR yields superior performance over SOTA
methods, demonstrating its great potential to be applied
in clinical practice. Code will be available at https:
//github.com/GuangYuanKK/McASSR.

4.0×

Abstract

Crop Area

LTE*

Ours

Target HR

Figure 1: Visual comparison with SOTA arbitrary-scale SR
method LTE [13], the reconstructed SR images by our network contain sharper edges, more visual details, and fewer
blurring artefacts. ∗ means our implementation that uses
SwinIR [17] as the backbone and concatenates the reference and target image as input.

ing high-resolution (HR) magnetic resonance (MR) images, which is a non-invasive, radiation-free clinical imaging technique. However, acquiring these HR MR images
is time-consuming, and the long acquisition time will cause
discomfort to patients and introduce motion artifacts [15, 5].
Image super-resolution (SR) technology is utilized to alleviate this problem by generating the corresponding HR version from the low-resolution (LR) images obtained by MRI.
At the early stage, the model-based [27, 23] and
learning-based [37, 40] traditional methods are utilized to
generate SR images. However, these methods have insufficient reconstruction performance under high upsampling scale, such as 4×. Recently, some deep learning

21230

