This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient-VQGAN: Towards High-Resolution Image
Generation with Efficient Vision Transformers
Shiyue Cao1,2∗ , Yueqin Yin1,2∗ , Lianghua Huang3 , Yu Liu3 , Xin Zhao1,2,4† , Deli Zhao3 , Kaiqi Huang1,2,4
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab,Alibaba Group, China
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, China
caoshiyue2021@ia.ac.cn, {xuangen.hlh, ly103369}alibaba-inc.com,
xzhaopersonal@foxmail.com, {yinyueqin0314, zhaodeli}@gmail.com, kqhuang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Vector-quantized image modeling has shown great potential in synthesizing high-quality images. However, generating high-resolution images remains a challenging task
due to the quadratic computational overhead of the selfattention process. In this study, we seek to explore a
more efficient two-stage framework for high-resolution image generation with improvements in the following three
aspects. (1) Based on the observation that the first quantization stage has solid local property, we employ a local
attention-based quantization model instead of the global attention mechanism used in previous methods, leading to better efficiency and reconstruction quality. (2) We emphasize
the importance of multi-grained feature interaction during
image generation and introduce an efficient attention mechanism that combines global attention (long-range semantic consistency within the whole image) and local attention
(fined-grained details). This approach results in faster generation speed, higher generation fidelity, and improved resolution. (3) We propose a new generation pipeline incorporating autoencoding training and autoregressive generation
strategy, demonstrating a better paradigm for image synthesis. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority
of our approach in high-quality and high-resolution image
reconstruction and generation.

1. Introduction
High-fidelity image synthesis has achieved promising
performance thanks to the progress of generative models, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) [12,
∗ This work was done during an internship at Machine Intelligence
Technology Lab, Alibaba Group.
† Corresponding author.

21, 22], diffusion models [15, 8] and autoregressive models [11, 44]. Moreover, high-resolution image generation, a
vital generation task with many practical applications, provides better visual effects and user experience in the advertising and design industries. Some recent studies have attempted to achieve high-resolution image generation. StyleGAN [21, 22] leverages progressive growth to generate
high-resolution images. However, GAN-based models often suffer from training stability and poor mode coverage [35, 48]. As diffusion models continue to evolve, recent
studies [31, 34] have begun to explore the utilization of cascaded diffusion models for generating high-resolution images. This approach involves training multiple independent
and enormous models to collectively accomplish a generation task. On another note, some researchers [11, 44, 5]
leverage a two-stage vector-quantized (VQ) framework for
image generation, which first quantizes images into discrete
latent codes and then model the data distribution over the
discrete space in the second stage. Nonetheless, under the
limited computational resources (e.g., memory and training time), the architectures of the existing vector-quantized
methods are inferior. In this paper, to solve the problems of
existing models, we would like to explore a more efficient
two-stage vector quantized framework for high-resolution
image generation and make improvements from the following three aspects.
Firstly, prior methods [11, 44] claim the importance of
the attention mechanism in the first quantization stage for
better image understanding, and they leverage global attention to capture long-range interactions between discrete tokens. However, we find this global attention not necessary
for image quantization based on the observation that the alteration of several tokens will only influence their nearby
tokens. Hence, local attention can yield satisfactory reconstruction results and circumvent the computationally in-

7368

