This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D IFF G UARD: Semantic Mismatch-Guided Out-of-Distribution Detection
using Pre-trained Diffusion Models
Ruiyuan Gao† Chenchen Zhao† Lanqing Hong‡ Qiang Xu†
The Chinese University of Hong Kong ‡ Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

†

{rygao, cczhao, qxu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Given a classifier, the inherent property of semantic Outof-Distribution (OOD) samples is that their contents differ
from all legal classes in terms of semantics, namely semantic mismatch. There is a recent work that directly applies it
to OOD detection, which employs a conditional Generative
Adversarial Network (cGAN) to enlarge semantic mismatch
in the image space. While achieving remarkable OOD detection performance on small datasets, it is not applicable
to I MAGE N ET-scale datasets due to the difficulty in training
cGANs with both input images and labels as conditions.
As diffusion models are much easier to train and
amenable to various conditions compared to cGANs, in this
work, we propose to directly use pre-trained diffusion models for semantic mismatch-guided OOD detection, named
D IFF G UARD. Specifically, given an OOD input image and
the predicted label from the classifier, we try to enlarge
the semantic difference between the reconstructed OOD
image under these conditions and the original input image. We also present several test-time techniques to further
strengthen such differences. Experimental results show that
D IFF G UARD is effective on both C IFAR -10 and hard cases
of the large-scale I MAGE N ET, and it can be easily combined with existing OOD detection techniques to achieve
state-of-the-art OOD detection results.

1. Introduction
The effectiveness of deep learning models is largely contingent on the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
data assumption, i.e., test sets follow the same distribution
as training samples [22]. However, in real-world scenarios,
this assumption often does not hold true [6]. Consequently,
the task of out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is essential
for practical applications, so that OOD samples can be rejected or taken special care of without harming the system’s
performance [12].
Code: https://github.com/cure-lab/DiffGuard

honglanqing@huawei.com

For image classifiers, a primary objective of OOD
detection is to identify samples having semantic shifts,
whose contents differ from all legal classes in the training dataset [50]. To differentiate such OOD samples and
in-distribution (InD) ones, some existing solutions utilize
information from the classifier itself, such as internal features [44], logits [11], or both [46]. While simple, these solutions inevitably face a trade-off between the InD classification accuracy and the over-confidence of the trained classifier for OOD detection [32], especially on hard OOD inputs. Some other methods propose using an auxiliary module for OOD detection based on either reconstruction quality [3] or data density [34]. The auxiliary module does not
affect the training process of the classifier, but these methods tend to have a low OOD detection capability.
To the best of our knowledge, MoodCat [51] is the only
attempt that directly models the semantic mismatch of OOD
samples for detection. Specifically, it employs a conditional
Generative Adversarial Network (cGAN) to synthesize an
image conditioned on the classifier’s output label together
with the input image. For InD samples with correct labels, the synthesis procedure tries to reconstruct the original input; while for OOD samples with semantically different labels, ideally the synthesis result is dramatically different from the input image, thereby enabling OOD detection.
While inspiring, due to the difficulty in cGAN training with
potentially conflicting conditions, MoodCat is not applicable to I MAGE N ET-scale datasets.
Recently, diffusion models have surpassed GANs in
terms of both training stability and generation quality.
Moreover, they are amenable to various conditions during
generation, including both label conditions [42, 16] and
image-wise conditions through DDIM inversion [40]. With
the above benefits, we propose a new semantic mismatchguided OOD detection framework based on diffusion models, called D IFF G UARD. Similar to [51], D IFF G UARD takes
both the input image and the classifier’s output label as conditions for image synthesis and detects OODs by measuring
the similarity between the input image and its conditional
synthesis result.

1579

