This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CRN: Camera Radar Net for Accurate, Robust, Efficient 3D Perception
Youngseok Kim1 Juyeb Shin1 Sanmin Kim1 In-Jae Lee1 Jun Won Choi2 Dongsuk Kum1
1
KAIST 2 Hanyang University
{youngseok.kim, juyebshin, sanmin.kim, injaelee, dskum}@kaist.ac.kr, junwchoi@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract

60

Autonomous driving requires an accurate and fast 3D
perception system that includes 3D object detection, tracking, and segmentation. Although recent low-cost camerabased approaches have shown promising results, they are
susceptible to poor illumination or bad weather conditions
and have a large localization error. Hence, fusing camera with low-cost radar, which provides precise long-range
measurement and operates reliably in all environments, is
promising but has not yet been thoroughly investigated. In
this paper, we propose Camera Radar Net (CRN), a novel
camera-radar fusion framework that generates a semantically rich and spatially accurate bird’s-eye-view (BEV) feature map for various tasks. To overcome the lack of spatial information in an image, we transform perspective view
image features to BEV with the help of sparse but accurate radar points. We further aggregate image and radar
feature maps in BEV using multi-modal deformable attention designed to tackle the spatial misalignment between
inputs. CRN with real-time setting operates at 20 FPS
while achieving comparable performance to LiDAR detectors on nuScenes, and even outperforms at a far distance
on 100m setting. Moreover, CRN with offline setting yields
62.4% NDS, 57.5% mAP on nuScenes test set and ranks first
among all camera and camera-radar 3D object detectors.

55

1. Introduction
Accurate and robust 3D perception system is crucial for
many applications, such as autonomous driving and mobile robot. For efficient 3D perception, obtaining a reliable bird’s eye view (BEV) feature map from sensor inputs
is necessary since various downstream tasks can be operated on BEV space (e.g., object detection & tracking [80],
BEV segmentation [82], HD map generation [64], trajectory prediction [17], and motion planning [52]). Another
important ingredient for deploying 3D perception to the
real world is to build a system that relies less on LiDAR
disadvantaged from high-cost, high-maintenance, and lowreliability. Apart from the drawbacks of LiDAR, 3D per-

NDS [%]

CRN (Ours)
SOLOFusion
CRAFT

50

BEVDepth

BEVFormer

45

256×704
384×1056
512×1408
900×1600

PETR

40

35
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

FPS [frame/s]

Figure 1. FPS vs. accuracy on nuScenes val set. We show
that fusing radar can significantly boost camera-only method with
marginal computational cost. CRN outperforms all methods with
much faster speed. See Table 1 and Fig. 6 for more details.

ception system is required to identify semantic information
on the road (e.g., traffic lights, road sign) that can be easily leveraged by camera. In addition to the need for rich
semantic information, detecting distant objects is essential,
and this can be benefited from radar.
Recently, camera-based 3D perception in BEV [19, 52,
57] has drawn great attention. Thanks to rich semantic information in dense image pixels, camera approaches can
distinguish objects even at a far distance. Despite the advantage of cameras, localizing the accurate position of objects
from a monocular image is naturally a challenging ill-posed
problem. Moreover, cameras can be significantly affected
by illumination conditions (e.g., glare, low-contrast, or lowlighting) due to the nature of the passive sensor. To address
this, we aim to generate a BEV feature map using a camera
with the help of a cost-effective range sensor, radar.
Radar has advantages not only in cost but also in highreliability, long-range perception (up to 200m for typical
automotive radar [8]), robustness in various conditions (e.g.,
snow, fog, or rain), and providing velocity estimation from
a single measurement. However, radar also brings its challenges such as sparsity (typically 180× fewer than LiDAR
points per single frame in nuScenes [2]), noisy and ambiguous measurements (false negatives by low resolution,

17615

