This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VI-Net: Boosting Category-level 6D Object Pose Estimation via Learning
Decoupled Rotations on the Spherical Representations
Jiehong Lin1,2

Zewei Wei1
Yabin Zhang3
Kui Jia1 *
South China University of Technology
2
3
DexForce Technology Co. Ltd.
Hong Kong Polytechnic University
1

https://github.com/JiehongLin/VI-Net

Abstract
Rotation estimation of high precision from an RGB-D
object observation is a huge challenge in 6D object pose estimation, due to the difficulty of learning in the non-linear
space of SO(3). In this paper, we propose a novel rotation estimation network, termed as VI-Net, to make the task
easier by decoupling the rotation as the combination of a
viewpoint rotation and an in-plane rotation. More specifically, VI-Net bases the feature learning on the sphere with
two individual branches for the estimates of two factorized
rotations, where a V-Branch is employed to learn the viewpoint rotation via binary classification on the spherical signals, while another I-Branch is used to estimate the in-plane
rotation by transforming the signals to view from the zenith
direction. To process the spherical signals, a Spherical Feature Pyramid Network is constructed based on a novel design of SPAtial Spherical Convolution (SPA-SConv), which
settles the boundary problem of spherical signals via feature padding and realizes viewpoint-equivariant feature extraction by symmetric convolutional operations. We apply
the proposed VI-Net to the challenging task of categorylevel 6D object pose estimation for predicting the poses
of unknown objects without available CAD models; experiments on the benchmarking datasets confirm the efficacy
of our method, which outperforms the existing ones with a
large margin in the regime of high precision.

1. Introduction
The task of 6D object pose estimation [35, 30, 13, 16, 31]
from an RGB-D object observation is to learn the transformation from the canonical object system to the camera
system, represented by a 3D rotation R ∈ SO(3) and a
3D translation t ∈ R3 . It is demanded in many real-world
applications, such as robotic grasping [34, 24], augmented
reality [1], and autonomous driving [15, 33, 6, 7].
* Correspondence to Kui Jia <kuijia@gmail.com>

𝑹𝑇

𝑍′
Z

𝑍 ′ (Z)

𝑌′
X

𝑌 ′ (Y)

𝑹 = 𝑹𝑣𝑝 𝑹𝑖𝑝 = 𝑹𝑍 (𝜑)𝑹𝑌 𝜃 𝑹𝑍 (𝛽)

Y

𝑋′

𝑹𝑇𝑖𝑝

𝑹𝑇𝑣𝑝
𝑍′

𝜃
𝜑
𝑋′

𝑋 ′ (X)

𝑍 ′ (Z)

Z
(𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣𝑦 , 𝑣𝑧 )

𝑍 ′ (Z)
𝑌′

𝑌′

Y

X
𝑋′

𝑌′

𝛽
X

𝑋′

Y

Figure 1. An illustration of the factorization of rotation R into
a viewpoint (out-of-plane) rotation Rvp and an in-plane rotation
Rip (around Z-axis). Notations are explained in Sec. 3.

For the 6D object pose, translation is easier to be estimated, e.g., initialized as the centroid of the object points,
while learning rotation in the whole space of SO(3) is more
challenging due to the non-linearity of SO(3). Things become more complicated when estimating rotations of unknown objects without available CAD models. Taking the
task of category-level 6D object pose estimation as an example, one typical way [31, 28, 32, 4] is to learn the correspondence between the camera system and the canonical
one to solve the poses via Umeyama algorithm[29], with the
surrogate objectives of canonical coordinates rather than the
true ones of object poses. Another strategy is to learn in the
SO(3) space with rotation-aware features extracted from
specially designed encoders, e.g., 3D Graph Convolutional
(3DGC) autoencoder [5], Spherical CNN (in the spectral
domain) [9, 20], and 3D Steerable CNN [18], whose results, however, are less satisfactory than those based on correspondence learning.
Recently, OVE6D [3] narrows the learning space of rotation R by factorizing it, as shown in Fig. 1, into a viewpoint
rotation Rvp and an in-plane rotation Rip around the canonical zenith direction (the positive direction of Z-axis in Fig.
1), and renders images of object CAD models with various
of discrete rotations to construct the codebook for viewpoint

14001

