This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Object Detection from Egocentric Videos
Peri Akiva1,2

Jing Huang2
Kevin J Liang2
Rama Kovvuri2
Matt Feiszli2
Kristin Dana1
Tal Hassner2
1
2
Rutgers University
Meta AI

Xingyu Chen2

Abstract
Understanding the visual world from human perspectives has been a long-standing challenge in computer vision. Egocentric videos exhibit high scene complexity
and irregular motion flows compared to typical video understanding tasks. With the egocentric domain in mind,
we address the problem of self-supervised, class-agnostic
object detection, aiming to locate all objects in a given
view, without any annotations or pre-trained weights. Our
method, self-supervised object detection from egocentric
videos (DEVI), generalizes appearance-based methods to
learn features end-to-end that are category-specific and invariant to viewing angle and illumination. Our approach
leverages natural human behavior in egocentric perception to sample diverse views of objects for our multi-view
and scale-regression losses, and our cluster residual module learns multi-category patches for complex scene understanding. DEVI results in gains up to 4.11% AP50 , 0.11%
AR1 , 1.32% AR10 , and 5.03% AR100 on recent egocentric datasets, while significantly reducing model complexity.
We also demonstrate competitive performance on out-ofdomain datasets without additional training or fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
The ability to detect objects in complex scenes is essential in smart applications and systems, such as autonomous
vehicles [31], precision agriculture [3], 3D reconstruction
and mapping [58], episodic memory [36], and remote sensing [4]. Broadly stated, the best performing object detection methods require large amounts of densely annotated
data, providing bounding boxes for all or most objects in
the scene [27, 54, 88]. Such annotations are costly, time
consuming to produce, and difficult to scale over large or
complex datasets [8]. Recent methods address the costly
procedure by using either weak annotations [2, 44, 70, 71],
or general self-supervision pre-training [12, 41]. However,
such methods lack generalizability to complex scenes, often depending on image-wise features which lack feature
granularity, leading to poor object localization and attention coverage. In this work, we aim to both maximize ap-

Figure 1. Image-cluster map pairs. DEVI learns categoryspecific, dense features end-to-end from egocentric videos without using any annotations. Our method is able to distinguish
different-category objects, while also remaining consistent for
same-category objects. Best viewed in color; colors are random.

plicable scene complexity and minimize annotation costs by
learning a class-agnostic object detector from highly diverse
videos without using any annotations.
We take particular interest in egocentric settings, for several reasons. The first is its complexity: the way humans
perceive the world is markedly different from that of many
popular datasets (also referred to as “internet images” or
exocentric views), resulting in notable new challenges. Internet images [22, 27, 54]–until recently the primary focus of most computer vision methods–capture highly curated, object-centric, specific instances in time removed
from global context and filtered from noise and undesired
frames; many involve professional and/or manual framing
with clear composite objectives. In contrast, egocentric
videos typically capture unscripted, “in-the-wild” scenes,
replete with dense environments filled with many, diverse
objects in varying scales. These significant domain differences result in a weak inductive bias between the internet
images domain (e.g. COCO [54], ImageNet [22]) and the
egocentric domain (e.g. Ego4D [36], EpicKitchens [18]),
making transfer learning highly difficult [52, 72]; methods
designed for and trained on non-egocentric datasets struggle
when directly applied to egocentric settings, motivating the
development of egocentric-specific methods [9, 19, 51, 67].

5225

