This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Concise and Descriptive Attributes for Visual Recognition
An Yan⇤} , Yu Wang⇤} , Yiwu Zhong⇤| , Chengyu Dong} , Zexue He} ,
Yujie Lu , William Yang Wang , Jingbo Shang} , Julian McAuley}
}
UC San Diego, | University of Wisconsin-Madison,  UC Santa Barbara
{ayan,yuw164,cdong,zehe,jshang,jmcauley}@ucsd.edu
{yujielu,william}@cs.ucsb.edu, yzhong52@wisc.edu

LLM

Abstract
Recent advances in foundation models present new opportunities for interpretable visual recognition – one can
first query Large Language Models (LLMs) to obtain a set
of attributes that describe each class, then apply visionlanguage models to classify images via these attributes. Pioneering work shows that querying thousands of attributes
can achieve performance competitive with image features.
However, our further investigation on 8 datasets reveals
that LLM-generated attributes in a large quantity perform
almost the same as random words. This surprising finding suggests that significant noise may be present in these
attributes. We hypothesize that there exist subsets of attributes that can maintain the classification performance
with much smaller sizes, and propose a novel learning-tosearch method to discover those concise sets of attributes.
As a result, on the CUB dataset, our method achieves performance close to that of massive LLM-generated attributes
(e.g., 10k attributes for CUB), yet using only 32 attributes in
total to distinguish 200 bird species. Furthermore, our new
paradigm demonstrates several additional benefits: higher
interpretability and interactivity for humans, and the ability
to summarize knowledge for a recognition task.

1. Introduction
Explaining black-box neural models is a critical research
problem. For visual recognition, one line of research tries
to classify objects with descriptions or attributes [12, 8, 39,
18, 22], which provide additional information beyond visual cues such as activation maps [41, 40]. However, they
require in-depth human analysis and intensive annotation to
obtain key attributes for a particular recognition task. Such
a paradigm is costly and thus impractical to scale up when
the number of classes and domains grows.
The recent advance of foundation models creates new
⇤ equal contributions.

Attribute Pool

Concise & Descriptive Attributes

Class
Names

Visual
Data
VLM

Visual Features

Recognition
Interpretability
Interactivity
Knowledge

Figure 1: Our proposed paradigm for visual recognition via
learning a concise set of descriptive attributes.
opportunities for building interpretable visual recognition
models, as demonstrated by the powerful capabilities of
models such as GPT-3 and ChatGPT in encoding world
knowledge [5, 32, 21]. One can query useful visual attributes from LLMs and classify images via these attributes
by converting visual features from vision-language models
(VLMs) (e.g., CLIP [36]) into attribute scores [56]. One
recent work [52] shows that a large set of attributes from
LLMs (e.g., 50 attributes per class) can achieve comparable performance to image features in a linear probing setting. However, two key observations motivate us to re-think
this formulation: (1) A large number of attributes dramatically hurts the interpretability of a model. It is unrealistic to
manually check thousands of attributes to fully understand
model decisions. (2) We surprisingly find that when the
number of attributes is large enough (e.g., the dimension of
image features), random words drawn from the entire vocabulary can perform equally well as LLM-generated attributes. Moreover, reducing the number of random words
by 25% can still attain competitive performance. This indicates that redundant and noisy information exists in the
massive LLM-generated attributes.
With our findings, we ask the research question: Can we
learn a concise set of representative visual attributes in the
form of natural language to explain how visual recognition
works? For example, can we find a few representative
attributes to distinguish 200 bird species? This is a nontrivial problem. Even for humans, it is not easy to summa-

3090

