This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Betrayed by Captions: Joint Caption Grounding and Generation for Open
Vocabulary Instance Segmentation
Jianzong Wu1 * Xiangtai Li2∗ † Henghui Ding2 Xia Li3
Guangliang Cheng4 Yunhai Tong1 Chen Change Loy2
1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

jzwu@stu.pku.edu.cn

3

ETH Zurich

4

SenseTime Research

{xiangtai.li, henghui.ding, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

extract all words / nouns + adj
A teddy bear, alarm clock
and key, and flask on a bed

1. Introduction
Instance Segmentation [39] is a core vision task that goes
beyond object detection [38, 37, 49] via segmenting and
* The first two authors contributed equally to this work. † Corresponding Author and Leader. Code and model are available at https:
//github.com/jianzongwu/betrayed-by-captions.

sentence
feature

VE

contrastive
loss

(a) VLM image-text pre-training
A teddy bear, alarm clock
and key, and flask on a bed

A teddy bear, alarm clock
and key, and flask on a bed

word
features

grounding
loss

VE

(b) Extracting all words / nouns + adjectives

TE
word features

extract object nouns

TE

TE

Text
Encoder

VE

Vision
Encoder

CG

Caption
Generator

s

In this work, we focus on open vocabulary instance
segmentation to expand a segmentation model to classify
and segment instance-level novel categories. Previous approaches have relied on massive caption datasets and complex pipelines to establish one-to-one mappings between
image regions and words in captions. However, such methods build noisy supervision by matching non-visible words
to image regions, such as adjectives and verbs. Meanwhile,
context words are also important for inferring the existence
of novel objects as they show high inter-correlations with
novel categories. To overcome these limitations, we devise
a joint Caption Grounding and Generation (CGG) framework, which incorporates a novel grounding loss that only
focuses on matching object nouns to improve learning efficiency. We also introduce a caption generation head that
enables additional supervision and contextual modeling as
a complementation to the grounding loss. Our analysis and
results demonstrate that grounding and generation components complement each other, significantly enhancing the
segmentation performance for novel classes. Experiments
on the COCO dataset with two settings: Open Vocabulary
Instance Segmentation (OVIS) and Open Set Panoptic Segmentation (OSPS) demonstrate the superiority of the CGG.
Specifically, CGG achieves a substantial improvement of
6.8% mAP for novel classes without extra data on the OVIS
task and 15% PQ improvements for novel classes on the
OSPS benchmark.

TE

TE

object nouns
features

VE

grounding
loss

generation
loss

CG

A teddy bear sleeping
with alarm clock on a bed

Weight
Sharing

(c) Caption grounding with object nouns + generation

Figure 1: (a) VLMs learn image-level visual-linguistic
alignment using caption data. (b) Previous open vocabulary detection/segmentation methods extract all words [63]
or nouns + adjectives [20] for caption grounding. (c) The
proposed CGG extracts object nouns for a finer alignment
between objects in the caption and visible entities in the image and then combines a caption generation loss to utilize
the contextual knowledge in the caption fully.

classifying each object. Despite it continues to attract significant research effort [25, 53, 12, 2, 56, 72, 13, 8, 4, 5,
7, 36, 35, 34, 66, 67], current solutions mainly focus on
a closed-set problem that assumes a pre-defined set of object categories [39, 31, 23]. In practice, many applications
need to detect and segment new categories. To save the
need of annotating new object categories, zero-shot object
detection/segmentation [47, 3] is proposed, where models
are trained on base classes and equipped with the ability to
segment new classes. However, the zero-shot setting performs poorly on novel classes, as high-level word embeddings cannot effectively encode fine-grained visual information.
To address this issue, recent work [63] proposes an

21938

