This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Simple Framework for Open-Vocabulary Segmentation and Detection
Hao Zhang1,2 ,* Feng Li1,2∗ , Xueyan Zou4 , Shilong Liu2,5
Chunyuan Li3 , Jianwei Yang3†, Lei Zhang2†
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
2

3

International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA).

Microsoft Research at Redmond. 4 University of Wisconsin-Madison.

5
{hzhangcx, fliay}@connect.ust.hk

Dept. of CST., BNRist Center, Institute for AI, Tsinghua University.
{xueyan}@cs.wisc.edu

{liusl20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{jianwyan,chunyl}@microsoft.com

{leizhang}@idea.edu.cn

guitar

cymbal

rail

Instance seg & od
Zero-shot
segmentation

Semantic

Panoptic
SegInW

36.1

Cityscapes
Instance 33.2

33.9

Conditioned seg on unseen concepts

Segmentation in the wild

Cityscapes
ADE Instance
15.0
Panoptic 41.4
13.9

Task-specific
transfer

COCO Panoptic

ADE Panoptic

59.4

53.4

59.5

53.7

ADE Instance
42.6

Cityscapes
Instance 49.3
48.7

40.2

38.1
24.9

XDecoder

XDecoder

XDecoder

ODISE

Mask DINO

OneFormer

OneFormer

OneFormer

Figure 1: Top row: visualizations of OpenSeeD for open-vocabulary instance segmentation and detection, panoptic and semantic segmentation, instance
segmentation in the wild, and conditioned segmentation given referring box location and concept. Bottom row: Our OpenSeeD model outperforms previous
state-of-the-art methods (listed below each gray bar) on eight benchmarks in zero-shot and task-specific transfer settings.

Abstract
We present OpenSeeD, a simple Open-vocabulary
Segmentation and Detection framework that jointly learns
from different segmentation and detection datasets. To
bridge the gap of vocabulary and annotation granularity,
we first introduce a pre-trained text encoder to encode all
the visual concepts in two tasks and learn a common semantic space for them. This gives us reasonably good results compared with the counterparts trained on segmentation task only. To further reconcile them, we identify
two discrepancies: i) task discrepancy – segmentation requires extracting masks for both foreground objects and
background stuff, while detection merely cares about the
former; ii) data discrepancy – box and mask annotations
are with different spatial granularity, and thus not directly
interchangeable. To address these issues, we propose a decoupled decoding to reduce the interference between foreground/background and a conditioned mask decoding to
assist in generating masks for given boxes. To this end,

we develop a simple encoder-decoder model encompassing all three techniques and train it jointly on COCO and
Objects365. After pre-training, our model exhibits competitive or stronger zero-shot transferability for both segmentation and detection. Specifically, OpenSeeD beats the
state-of-the-art method for open-vocabulary instance and
panoptic segmentation across 5 datasets, and outperforms
previous work for open-vocabulary detection on LVIS and
ODinW under similar settings. When transferred to specific
tasks, our model achieves new SoTA for panoptic segmentation on COCO and ADE20K, and instance segmentation on
ADE20K and Cityscapes (The bottom row in Fig. 1 shows
a comparison of the performance of OpenSeeD and previous SoTA methods). Finally, we note that OpenSeeD is
the first to explore the potential of joint training on segmentation and detection, and hope it can be received as
a strong baseline for developing a single model for both
tasks in the open world. Code will be released at https:
//github.com/IDEA-Research/OpenSeeD.

∗ Equal contribution. List in random.
† Equal advisory contribution.

This work is developed during an internship at IDEA.

1020

