This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neglected Free Lunch – Learning Image Classifiers Using Annotation Byproducts
Dongyoon Han⋆

Junsuk Choe⋆

Seonghyeok Chun

John Joon Young Chung

NAVER AI Lab

Sogang University

Dante Company

University of Michigan

Minsuk Chang†

Sangdoo Yun

Jean Y. Song

Seong Joon Oh

NAVER AI Lab

NAVER AI Lab

DGIST

University of Tübingen

Abstract
Supervised learning of image classifiers distills human
knowledge into a parametric model fθ through pairs of images and corresponding labels {(Xi , Yi )}N
i=1 . We argue that
this simple and widely used representation of human knowledge neglects rich auxiliary information from the annotation
procedure, such as the time-series of mouse traces and clicks
left after image selection. Our insight is that such annotation byproducts Z provide approximate human attention
that weakly guides the model to focus on the foreground
cues, reducing spurious correlations and discouraging shortcut learning. To verify this, we create ImageNet-AB and
COCO-AB. They are ImageNet and COCO training sets enriched with sample-wise annotation byproducts, collected
by replicating the respective original annotation tasks. We
refer to the new paradigm of training models with annotation byproducts as learning using annotation byproducts
(LUAB). We show that a simple multitask loss for regressing
Z together with Y already improves the generalisability and
robustness of the learned models. Compared to the original
supervised learning, LUAB does not require extra annotation
costs. ImageNet-AB and COCO-AB are at github.com/naverai/NeglectedFreeLunch.

Figure 1: Annotation byproducts from ImageNet. Annotators
leave traces like click locations as they select images with “Border
Collie”. We argue that such byproducts contain signals that may
improve model generalisation and robustness.

Image X

1. Introduction
Supervised learning of image classifiers requires the transfer of human intelligence to a parametric model fθ . The
transfer consists of two phases. First, human annotators
execute human computation tasks [99] to put labels Y on
each image X. The resulting labeled dataset {(X i , Y i )}N
i=1
contains the gist of human knowledge about the visual task
in a computation-friendly format. In the second phase, the
model is trained to predict the labels Y for each input X.
In this work, we question the practice of collecting and
utilising only the labels Y for each image X for training
the models. In fact, common practise simply forgoes a large
⋆ Equal contribution. † currently at Google. Correspondence to Seong
Joon Oh: coallaoh@gmail.com.

Image X

Image X

Model

Model

Task
Human annotator

Bird
Task label Y

Byproducts Z

Bird
Task label Y

Bird
Task label Y

Supervised learning

Annotation phase

Byproducts Z

LUAB

Training phase

Figure 2: Learning using Annotation Byproducts (LUAB).
LUAB exploits annotation byproducts Z that are unintentionally
generated during the human intelligence tasks for annotation.

amount of additional signals from human annotators other
than mere labels. When humans interact with computers

20200

