This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

L OGIC S EG: Parsing Visual Semantics with Neural Logic Learning and Reasoning
Liulei Li1, 2 , Wenguan Wang1 ,* Yang Yi1
1

ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University 2 ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
https://github.com/lingorX/LogicSeg/

Abstract
Current high-performance semantic segmentation models
are purely data-driven sub-symbolic approaches and blind
to the structured nature of the visual world. This is in stark
contrast to human cognition which abstracts visual perceptions at multiple levels and conducts symbolic reasoning with
such structured abstraction. To fill these fundamental gaps,
we devise L OGIC S EG, a holistic visual semantic parser that
integrates neural inductive learning and logic reasoning with
both rich data and symbolic knowledge. In particular, the
semantic concepts of interest are structured as a hierarchy,
from which a set of constraints are derived for describing the
symbolic relations and formalized as first-order logic rules.
After fuzzy logic-based continuous relaxation, logical formulae are grounded onto data and neural computational graphs,
hence enabling logic-induced network training. During inference, logical constraints are packaged into an iterative
process and injected into the network in a form of several
matrix multiplications, so as to achieve hierarchy-coherent
prediction with logic reasoning. These designs together make
L OGIC S EG a general and compact neural-logic machine
that is readily integrated into existing segmentation models.
Extensive experiments over four datasets with various segmentation models and backbones verify the effectiveness and
generality of L OGIC S EG.We believe this study opens a new
avenue for visual semantic parsing.

1. Introduction
Interpreting high-level semantic concepts of visual stimuli
is an integral aspect of human perception and cognition, and
has been a subject of interest in computer vision for nearly
as long as this discipline has existed. As an exemplar task of visual semantic interpretation, semantic segmentation aims to
group pixels into different semantic units. Progress in this
field has been notable since the seminal work of fully convolution networks (FCNs)[1] and been further advanced by the
recent launch of fully attention networks (Transformer) [2].
Despite these technological strides, we still observe current prevalent segmentation systems lack in-depth reflection
1 Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang.

Figure 1: (a) We humans abstract our perception in a structured
manner, and conduct reasoning through symbol manipulation over
such multi-level abstraction. (b) We aim to holistically interpret
visual semantics, through the integration of both data-driven subsymbolic learning and symbolic knowledge-based logic reasoning.

on some intrinsic nature of human cognition. First, standard
segmentation systems simply assume the semantic concepts
in the set of interest have no underlying relation and predict
all these concepts exclusively. By contrast, humans interpret
a scene by components. For example in Fig. 1, we can effortlessly recognize many pieces of furniture, such as
chairs and tables, and identify various utensils, e.g.,
bottles, and plates. Such capacity of structured understanding of visual semantics is an innate aspect of human
perception [3], complies with our way of the organization
of knowledge [4, 5], and has a close relation to many metacognitive skills including compositional generalization (i.e.,
making infinite use of finite means) [6], systematicity (i.e.,
cognitive capacity comes in groups of related behaviours) [7],
and interpretability (i.e., interpreting complex concepts with
simpler ones) [8, 9]. Despite its significance and ubiquity,
surprisingly little has been done on the computational mod-

4122

