This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EfficientTrain: Exploring Generalized Curriculum Learning
for Training Visual Backbones
Yulin Wang1 * Yang Yue1∗ Rui Lu1 Tianjiao Liu2
Shiji Song1 Gao Huang1,3

Zhao Zhong2

1
3
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University 2 Huawei Technologies Ltd.
BAAI
{wang-yl19, yueyang22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The superior performance of modern deep networks usually comes with a costly training procedure. This paper
presents a new curriculum learning approach for the efficient training of visual backbones (e.g., vision Transformers). Our work is inspired by the inherent learning dynamics of deep networks: we experimentally show that at an
earlier training stage, the model mainly learns to recognize some ‘easier-to-learn’ discriminative patterns within
each example, e.g., the lower-frequency components of images and the original information before data augmentation. Driven by this phenomenon, we propose a curriculum where the model always leverages all the training data at each epoch, while the curriculum starts with
only exposing the ‘easier-to-learn’ patterns of each example, and introduces gradually more difficult patterns. To
implement this idea, we 1) introduce a cropping operation in the Fourier spectrum of the inputs, which enables
the model to learn from only the lower-frequency components efficiently, 2) demonstrate that exposing the features
of original images amounts to adopting weaker data augmentation, and 3) integrate 1) and 2) and design a curriculum learning schedule with a greedy-search algorithm.
The resulting approach, EfficientTrain, is simple, general,
yet surprisingly effective. As an off-the-shelf method, it reduces the wall-time training cost of a wide variety of popular models (e.g., ResNet, ConvNeXt, DeiT, PVT, Swin, and
CSWin) by > 1.5× on ImageNet-1K/22K without sacrificing accuracy. It is also effective for self-supervised learning (e.g., MAE). Code is available at https://github.
com/LeapLabTHU/EfficientTrain.

1. Introduction
The success of modern visual backbones is largely fueled
by the interest in exploring big models on large-scale bench* Equal contribution.

Corresponding author.

(a) Sample-wise CL (existing works)

(b) Generalized CL (ours)

Discrete-selection: ‘selecting
easier-to-harder samples’

Soft-selection: ‘uncovering
progressively more difficult patterns’

Figure 1: (a) Sample-wise curriculum learning (CL): making a discrete
decision on whether each example should be leveraged to train the model.
(b) Generalized CL: we consider a continuous function Tt (·), which only
exposes the ‘easier-to-learn’ patterns within each example at the beginning
of training (e.g., lower-frequency components; see: Section 4), while gradually introducing relatively more difficult patterns as learning progresses.

mark datasets [1, 2, 3, 4]. In particular, the recent introduction of vision Transformers (ViTs) scales up the number of
model parameters to more than 1.8 billion, with the training
data expanding to 3 billion samples [3, 5]. Although stateof-the-art accuracy has been achieved, this huge-model and
high-data regime results in a time-consuming and expensive training process. For example, it takes 2,500 TPUv3core-days to train ViT-H/14 on JFT-300M [3], which may
be unaffordable for practitioners in both academia and industry. Additionally, the power consumption leads to significant carbon emissions [6, 7]. Due to both economic and
environmental concerns, there has been a growing demand
for reducing the training cost of modern deep networks.
In this paper, we contribute to this issue by revisiting the
idea of curriculum learning [8], which reveals that a model
can be trained efficiently by starting with the easier aspects
of a given task or certain easier subtasks, and increasing the
difficulty level gradually. Most existing works implement
this idea by introducing easier-to-harder examples progressively during training [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. However, obtaining a light-weighted and generalizable difficulty
measurer is typically non-trivial [9, 10]. In general, these
methods have not exhibited the capacity to be a universal

5852

