This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Rain Location Prior for Nighttime Deraining
Fan Zhang1 Shaodi You2 Yu Li3 Ying Fu1 *
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 University of Amsterdam
3
International Digital Economy Academy

Abstract
Rain can significantly degrade image quality and visibility, making deraining a critical area of research in computer
vision. Despite recent progress in learning-based deraining methods, there is a lack of focus on nighttime deraining due to the unique challenges posed by non-uniform local illuminations from artificial light sources. Rain streaks
in these scenes have diverse appearances that are tightly
related to their relative positions to light sources, making it difficult for existing deraining methods to effectively
handle them. In this paper, we highlight the importance
of rain streak location information in nighttime deraining.
Specifically, we propose a Rain Location Prior (RLP) that
is learned implicitly from rainy images using a recurrent
residual model. This learned prior contains location information of rain streaks and, when injected into deraining models, can significantly improve their performance.
To further improve the effectiveness of the learned prior,
we also propose a Rain Prior Injection Module (RPIM) to
modulate the prior before injection, increasing the importance of features within rain streak areas. Experimental
results demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods by about 1dB and effectively
improves the performance of deraining models. We also
evaluate our method on real night rainy images to show
the capability to handle real scenes with fully synthetic
data for training. Our method represents a significant step
forward in the area of nighttime deraining and highlights
the importance of location information in this challenging problem. The code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/zkawfanx/RLP.

1. Introduction
While rain degrades image quality and visibility, it can
be particularly problematic at night, because the low light
condition and complex illuminations make it more difficult
to distinguish rain streaks from other image features. This
* Corresponding author: fuying@bit.edu.cn

(a) Rainy

(b) Uformer

(c) RLP

(d) Ours

Figure 1: (a) In night scenes, appearances of rain are highly
dependent on locations relative to light sources. (b) Derain
result of state-of-the-art method Uformer [34]. (c) Visualization of the proposed Rain Location Prior (RLP), which
indicates the location of rain streaks and suppresses areas
of light sources. (d) Derain result of our method.
not only hinders the performance of high-level vision algorithms, e.g., object detection [13, 29] and tracking [2, 35],
but also poses a safety risk for autonomous vehicles [6, 28]
and other applications that rely on accurate visual information. Therefore, there is an increasing need for developing
nighttime deraining methods.
Unfortunately, despite recent advances in deep learning
[34, 39, 40], which have significantly improved the performance, current endeavors predominantly focus on daytime scenarios, leaving the realm of nighttime deraining still
largely unexplored. The most frequently utilized datasets
[16, 32] scarcely encompass night scenes, neither does the
synthesizing procedure consider interactions between rain
and light sources. This hinders the direct application of
existing methods to nighttime deraining. Recently, some
datasets [20, 42] have started to cover previously ignored
night scenes, which may enable careful study on nighttime
deraining. Since there is no prior method specifically targeting nighttime deraining, we attempt to handle real night
rainy scenes with the help of the recently developed dataset.
Night scenes differ from day scenes in that there is no
uniform global illumination; instead, darkness and nonuniform local illuminations dominate [12, 22, 25, 41, 45].
It results in the totally different appearance of night rain,
which varies drastically at different spatial locations (i.e.

13148

