This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SQAD: Automatic Smartphone Camera Quality Assessment and Benchmarking
Zilin Fang1 *, Andrey Ignatov2 , Eduard Zamfir3 , Radu Timofte2,3
1
National University of Singapore, 2 ETH Zurich, 3 University of Wurzburg

Abstract
Smartphone photography is becoming increasingly popular, but fitting high-performing camera systems within the
given space limitations remains a challenge for manufacturers. As a result, powerful mobile camera systems are in high
demand. Despite recent progress in computer vision, camera
system quality assessment remains a tedious and manual
process. In this paper, we present the Smartphone Camera
Quality Assessment Dataset (SQAD), which includes natural images captured by 29 devices. SQAD defines camera
system quality based on six widely accepted criteria: resolution, color accuracy, noise level, dynamic range, Point
Spread Function, and aliasing. Built on thorough examinations in a controlled laboratory environment, SQAD provides objective metrics for quality assessment, overcoming
previous subjective opinion scores. Moreover, we introduce the task of automatic camera quality assessment and
train deep learning-based models on the collected data to
perform a precise quality prediction for arbitrary photos.
The dataset, codes and pre-trained models are released at
https://github.com/aiff22/SQAD.

1. Introduction
Image quality, meaning the representation of details,
color, realism, etc., has shown to directly influence computer
vision algorithms in achieving a more comprehensive understanding of the natural world. Consequently, this evokes
the question of precisely quantifying and estimating the perceived image quality by human viewers, as they are usually
the ultimate receivers [57]. Besides subjective methods that
study human perceptions given physical stimuli [28, 43],
objective assessment methods fall into three main categories
based on the amount of information available: no-reference,
reduced-reference, or full-reference.
No-reference (NF) methods for estimating image quality directly, without requiring undistorted counterparts, are
more convenient in realistic vision scenarios. Common quality metrics include image statistical differences, such as
BRISQUE [41], BLIINDS-II [48] parameterized by DCT
* Work done while at ETH Zurich

Figure 1: Sample images of the identical scene from our
benchmark captured using different devices. The training
and testing images are captured in hand-held mode in the
wild, while the optical patterns, e.g. PSF, are obtained under
controlled conditions with a fixed tripod 2 meters apart for
benchmarking purposes.
coefficients, NIQE [42] with spatial domain features, and
the successor IL-NIQE [62] based on multivariate Gaussian models. Recently, learning-based approaches have
led to improved quality assessment methods [36, 13, 38].
However, gaps still exist between perceivable image quality and predicted quantitative results even with neural networks providing better solutions than traditional methods.
To address this, new algorithms [9, 29] are being proposed,
inspired by GANs [23] and perceptual-oriented optimization [30, 60, 46], that aim to further reduce this gap.
An orthogonal direction in assessing image quality is
to consider the device used to take those pictures, which
requires not only the recorded imagery but the corresponding camera devices and photometric settings. In this case,
manual impairments are not employed to imitate different
situations, and quality is measured directly in a more accurate way. Optical patterns are widely applied, making
measurements more objective and meaningful [52, 11, 12].
They cover a wide range of distinct quality factors related to

20532

