This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-Aware Generative Model for Improved Side-View Image Synthesis
Kyungmin Jo1,∗

Wonjoon Jin2,∗

Jaegul Choo1

1

Hyunjoon Lee3

Sunghyun Cho2

2

KAIST
Daejeon, Korea

POSTECH
Pohang, Gyeongbuk, Korea

{bttkm, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

{jinwj1996, s.cho}@postech.ac.kr
3

Kakao Brain
Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, Korea

Ours

EG3D

𝜋-GAN

malfo.lee@kakaobrain.com

Frontal view

Side view Frontal view

Side view

Figure 1: Our method robustly produces high-quality images of human faces, regardless of the camera pose while the baselines (π-GAN [2] and EG3D [1]) generate blurry images at the steep pose. The images are rendered with horizontal rotation
from the frontal view to the side view.

Abstract
While recent 3D-aware generative models have shown
photo-realistic image synthesis with multi-view consistency,
the synthesized image quality degrades depending on the
camera pose (e.g., a face with a blurry and noisy boundary
at a side viewpoint). Such degradation is mainly caused by
the difficulty of learning both pose consistency and photorealism simultaneously from a dataset with heavily imbalanced poses. In this paper, we propose SideGAN, a novel
3D GAN training method to generate photo-realistic im∗ Both authors contributed equally to this research. Also, this work was
done during an internship at Kakao Brain.

ages irrespective of the camera pose, especially for faces of
side-view angles. To ease the challenging problem of learning photo-realistic and pose-consistent image synthesis, we
split the problem into two subproblems, each of which can
be solved more easily. Specifically, we formulate the problem as a combination of two simple discrimination problems, one of which learns to discriminate whether a synthesized image looks real or not, and the other learns to
discriminate whether a synthesized image agrees with the
camera pose. Based on this, we propose a dual-branched
discriminator with two discrimination branches. We also
propose a pose-matching loss to learn the pose consistency
of 3D GANs. In addition, we present a pose sampling strat-

22862

