This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Active Contours for Real-time 6-DoF Object Tracking
Long Wang1∗ Shen Yan2∗ Jianan Zhen1 Yu Liu2
Maojun Zhang2 Guofeng Zhang3 Xiaowei Zhou3†
1

SenseTime Research

2

National University of Defense Technology

3

Zhejiang University

Abstract
This paper solves the problem of real-time 6-DoF object tracking from an RGB video. Prior optimization-based
methods optimize the object pose by aligning the projected
model to the image based on handcrafted features, which
are prone to suboptimal solutions. Recent learning-based
methods use neural networks to predict the pose, which
suffer from limited generalizability or computational efﬁciency. We propose a learning-based active contour model
to make the best use of both worlds. Speciﬁcally, given an
initial pose, we project the object model to the image plane
to obtain the initial contour and use a lightweight network
to predict how the contour should move to match the true
object boundary, which provides the gradients to optimize
the object pose. We also devise an efﬁcient optimization
algorithm to train our model end-to-end with pose supervision. Experimental results on semi-synthetic and realworld 6-DoF object tracking datasets demonstrate that our
model outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a substantial
margin in pose accuracy, while achieving real-time performance on mobile devices. Code is available on our project
page: https://zju3dv.github.io/deep_ac/.

1. Introduction
Video-based 6-DoF object tracking is the task of tracking the pose of a rigid object from an RGB image sequence,
given a predeﬁned object CAD model and an initial pose
in the ﬁrst frame, which has a broad range of applications
from augmented reality and robotic manipulation to humancomputer interaction. These applications require the tracking algorithms to be real-time and avoid the need for objectspeciﬁc training.
The predominant methods for 6-DoF object tracking optimize the object pose based on keypoint, edge, or regionbased features. Keypoint-based methods [34, 42, 18, 17,
∗ The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally. The authors from Zhejiang
University are afﬁliated with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG and ZJUSenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision.
† Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

14034

Sample

Network

Optimize

Figure 1. The basic idea of deep active contours. Given the initial object pose, we project the object model to the image, sample
a set of points on the projected contours, use a network to predict
the distribution of true boundary location along the normal at each
sampled point, and optimize the pose to align the projected contours with the predicted boundary.

43, 27] involve matching keypoints between a 2D image
and a 3D real model. Keypoint features such as SIFT [25],
ORB [30], or BRISK [19] have been widely employed in
such tasks. Nevertheless, the reliance on rich texture narrows down the applicability of these methods. Instead,
edge-based tracking methods [6, 33, 53, 32] rely on edges
(explicit or implicit) to calculate the relative pose between
two consecutive images. Unfortunately, these approaches
face challenges when dealing with background clutter and
motion blur, thus limiting their effectiveness. To solve this
issue, more recent edge-based methods [46, 44, 14, 13, 39]
further incorporate local color information to improve accuracy. Recent progress is mainly achieved by region-based
approaches [28, 40, 41, 36]. The underlying premise is
that color statistics of object regions can be distinguished
from the background. With constant advancements in recent years, region-based approaches now possess the capability to track objects with efﬁciency and accuracy even in
noisy and cluttered images, only utilizing a texture-less 3D
model. However, a drawback of these optimization-based
methods is the requirement for handcrafted features and
carefully tuned hyper-parameters, which may not be robust
in real-world scenarios.
Recently, end-to-end learning-based approaches have

