This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shatter and Gather:
Learning Referring Image Segmentation with Text Supervision
Dongwon Kim1∗ Namyup Kim1∗
Cuiling Lan2
Suha Kwak1
1
2
POSTECH
Microsoft Research Asia
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/sag

Abstract

(1) Training on image-text pairs
K, V

Referring image segmentation, the task of segmenting
any arbitrary entities described in free-form texts, opens up
a variety of vision applications. However, manual labeling
of training data for this task is prohibitively costly, leading
to lack of labeled data for training. We address this issue by
a weakly supervised learning approach using text descriptions of training images as the only source of supervision.
To this end, we first present a new model that discovers semantic entities in input image and then combines such entities relevant to text query to predict the mask of the referent.
We also present a new loss function that allows the model
to be trained without any further supervision. Our method
was evaluated on four public benchmarks for referring image segmentation, where it clearly outperformed the existing method for the same task and recent open-vocabulary
segmentation models on all the benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Referring image segmentation is the task of segmenting
the referent corresponding to a natural language expression
given as a query. Unlike the conventional semantic segmentation that aims at segmenting a pre-defined set of classes,
referring image segmentation enables segmentation of any
arbitrary entities described in free-form texts and thus opens
up a wide variety of applications such as human-computer
interaction [8, 57] and text-based image editing [7, 17].
Thanks to the development of deep neural networks, recent studies have demonstrated remarkable results on referring image segmentation in the supervised learning setting [14, 22, 25, 27, 67, 68, 69]. However, obtaining manual
annotation of training data for referring image segmentation is prohibitively costly since the data requires two types
of labels for each image, i.e., natural language expressions
describing the entities that appear in the image and segmentation labels corresponding to them. This typically demands
tremendously more manpower than annotation for semantic
∗ Equal contribution.

Top-down attention

Q
Slots

Q

Bottom-up attention
K, V

“A man throws
frisbee”

(2) Inference of referring image segmentation
“A red jacket
kid hood up”

Top-down
attention

Prediction

𝐴fuse ∈ ℝ𝐾

𝐴slot ∈ ℝ𝑁×𝐾
Bottom-up
attention

Figure 1: Our model consists of two different attention
modules: bottom-up attention that identifies individual entities in an image, and top-down attention that combines the
entities based on a referring expression. It is trained in a
contrastive manner to ensure consistency between matching image-text pairs. In inference, a segmentation mask is
predicted by combining the entities found by bottom-up attention with weights derived by top-down attention.
segmentation, leading to lack of labeled data for training.
A solution to this issue is weakly supervised learning,
which trains a model on a dataset providing weaker forms
of supervision than the conventional ones. In this paper, we
particularly focus on learning referring image segmentation
only with natural language expressions describing the associated images. Since these labels are readily available in
many vision-language datasets [28, 47], the issue on lack
of labeled training data can be alleviated by our approach.
However, learning referring image segmentation in this setting introduces another challenge: Since natural language
expressions often contain relations between visual entities
such as instances and object parts (e.g., “The cat next to the

15547

