This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sample-wise Label Confidence Incorporation for Learning with Noisy Labels
Chanho Ahn*

Kikyung Kim
Ji-won Baek
Jongin Lim
Seungju Han
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), Korea

{chanho.ahn, kk87.kim, jw0328.baek, jonny.lim, sj75.han}@samsung.com

Abstract
Deep learning algorithms require large amounts of labeled data for effective performance, but the presence of
noisy labels often significantly degrade their performance.
Although recent studies on designing a robust objective
function to label noise, known as the robust loss method,
have shown promising results for learning with noisy labels, they suffer from the issue of underfitting not only noisy
samples but also clean ones, leading to suboptimal model
performance. To address this issue, we propose a novel
learning framework that selectively suppresses noisy samples while avoiding underfitting clean data. Our framework incorporates label confidence as a measure of label
noise, enabling the network model to prioritize the training
of samples deemed to be noise-free. The label confidence is
based on the robust loss methods, and we provide theoretical evidence that our method can reach the optimal point of
the robust loss, subject to certain conditions. Furthermore,
the proposed method is generalizable and can be combined
with existing robust loss methods, making it suitable for a
wide range of applications of learning with noisy labels.
We evaluate our approach on both synthetic and real-world
datasets, and the experimental results demonstrate its effectiveness in achieving outstanding classification performance compared to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have led to remarkable
image classification performance that surpasses human ability [8, 9]. However, the challenge is that deep learning models require a substantial amount of labeled data to maintain
their desired performance. Image classification benchmark
datasets often contain tens of thousands [14] to millions [24]
of labeled data. Despite extensive efforts to curate these
datasets, mislabeling is inevitable due to the complexity of
samples and errors made by experts [1]. This issue is particularly problematic given the capacity of deep networks to
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparison with robust loss functions against to
label noise. (a) Cross-entropy loss cannot prevent the learning of
mislabeled samples, as it imposes a stronger penalty on predictions
that are more misaligned. (b) Noise-robust loss prevents the model
from learning mislabeled samples by suppressing strong penalties,
but it carries the risk of underfitting. (c) Ours adjusts the penalty
based on the confidence of each sample, imposing a strong penalty
only on samples with high confidence in their labels.

overfit data samples [35]. Consequently, preventing overfitting on mislabeled data is a critical challenge.
To tackle this challenge, researchers have focused on developing methods for learning with noisy labels in deep
learning frameworks. These methods can be categorized
into three topics: noise estimation, sample selection, and
robust loss. While noise estimation methods [6, 10, 22, 25]
assume the availability of prior knowledge about the noise
model, obtaining this information in real-world practice can
be challenging. Sample selection methods [7, 12, 31, 34,
13] aim to eliminate noisy labels in the dataset and train the
network model on the refined set. However, the success of
these methods heavily depends on the quality of noise elimination, and the human-designed criteria for configuring the
refined set may not generalize well across various datasets
[33]. Robust loss methods [4, 5, 30, 37], on the other hand,
aim to design loss functions that are theoretically less affected by label noise. However, these methods can also encourage underfitting, resulting in lower performance.
This paper presents a novel training strategy aimed at
addressing the underfitting problem commonly encountered

1823

