This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Preserve Your Own Correlation: A Noise Prior for Video Diffusion Models
Songwei Ge*

Seungjun Nah

Guilin Liu

Tyler Poon

Andrew Tao

University of Maryland

NVIDIA

NVIDIA

University of Chicago

NVIDIA

Bryan Catanzaro

David Jacobs

Jia-Bin Huang

Ming-Yu Liu

Yogesh Balaji

NVIDIA

University of Maryland

University of Maryland

NVIDIA

NVIDIA

A very happy fuzzy panda dressed as a chef
A high-quality 3D render of hyperrealist, suThe supernova explosion of a white dwarf in
eating pizza in the New York street food
per strong, multicolor stripped, and fluffy
the universe, photo realistic.
truck.
bear with wings, highly detailed.

Figure 1: Given a text description, our approach can faithfully generate videos that are consistent with the input text while
being photorealistic and temporally consistent. Best viewed with Acrobat Reader. Click the images to play the video clips.

Abstract
Despite tremendous progress in generating high-quality
images using diffusion models, synthesizing a sequence of
animated frames that are both photorealistic and temporally coherent is still in its infancy. While off-the-shelf
billion-scale datasets for image generation are available,
collecting similar video data of the same scale is still challenging. Also, training a video diffusion model is computationally much more expensive than its image counterpart.
In this work, we explore finetuning a pretrained image diffusion model with video data as a practical solution for
the video synthesis task. We find that naively extending
the image noise prior to video noise prior in video diffusion leads to sub-optimal performance. Our carefully designed video noise prior leads to substantially better performance. Extensive experimental validation shows that our
* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

model, Preserve Your Own COrrelation (PYoCo), attains
SOTA zero-shot text-to-video results on the UCF-101 and
MSR-VTT benchmarks. It also achieves SOTA video generation quality on the small-scale UCF-101 benchmark with
a 10× smaller model using significantly less computation
than the prior art. The project page is available at https:
//research.nvidia.com/labs/dir/pyoco/.

1. Introduction
Large-scale diffusion-based text-to-image models [38, 42,
2] have demonstrated impressive capabilities in turning complex text descriptions into photorealistic images. They can
generate images with novel concepts unseen during training. Sophisticated image editing and processing tasks can
easily be accomplished through guidance control and embedding techniques. Due to the immense success in several
applications [30, 67, 5], these models are established as pow1
22930

