This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Haircut: Prior-Guided Strand-Based Hair Reconstruction
Vanessa Sklyarova1
1

Samsung AI Center

Jenya Chelishev2,∗
Victor Lempitsky4
2

Rockstar Games

3

Andreea Dogaru3,∗
Egor Zakharov1

FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg

Igor Medvedev1
4

Cinemersive Labs

Stage I: Volumetric hair
Stage II: Strand-based
reconstruction
reconstruction
Figure 1: We propose a two-stage pipeline for image-based hair reconstruction. Our first stage reconstructs coarse hair, head,
and shoulder geometry using volumetric representations. The second stage fits hair strands to the coarse reconstruction via a
joint optimization process that incorporates rendering-based losses and priors learned on the synthetic data.
Multi-view images

Abstract
Generating realistic human 3D reconstructions using
image or video data is essential for various communication and entertainment applications. While existing methods achieved impressive results for body and facial regions,
realistic hair modeling still remains challenging due to its
high mechanical complexity. This work proposes an approach capable of accurate hair geometry reconstruction at
a strand level from a monocular video or multi-view images
captured in uncontrolled lighting conditions. Our method
has two stages, with the first stage performing joint reconstruction of coarse hair and bust shapes and hair orientation using implicit volumetric representations. The second stage then estimates a strand-level hair reconstruction
by reconciling in a single optimization process the coarse
volumetric constraints with hair strand and hairstyle priors learned from the synthetic data. To further increase the
reconstruction fidelity, we incorporate image-based losses
into the fitting process using a new differentiable renderer.
The combined system, named Neural Haircut, achieves high
realism and personalization of the reconstructed hairstyles.
For video results, please refer to our project page† .
∗ Work done at Samsung AI Center
† https://samsunglabs.github.io/NeuralHaircut/

1. Introduction
We propose a new image-based modeling method that
recovers human hair from multi-view photographs or video
frames. Hair reconstruction remains one of the most challenging problems in human 3D modeling because of its
highly complex geometry, physics, and reflectance. Nevertheless, it is critical for many applications, such as special
effects, telepresence, and gaming.
In computer graphics, the dominant representation for
hair is 3D polylines, or strands, which can facilitate both
realistic rendering and physics simulation [6]. At the same
time, modern image- and video-based human reconstruction systems often model hairstyles using data structures
that have fewer degrees of freedom and are easier to estimate, such as meshes with fixed topology [12, 20] or volumetric representations [4, 7, 9, 10, 11, 15, 27, 28, 31, 39,
40, 43, 48, 49, 56, 59, 60]. As a result, these methods often
obtain over-smoothed hair geometries and can only model
the “outer shell” of the hairstyle without its inner structure.
Accurate strand-based hair reconstruction can be accomplished via controlled lighting equipment and dense capture
setup with synchronized cameras, i.e. using light stages [8].
Recently, impressive results were achieved [30, 33, 44, 50,
51] by relying on uniform or structured lighting and camera
calibration to facilitate the reconstruction process. The latest work [44] further utilized manual frame-wise annotation

19762

