This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LightDepth: Single-View Depth Self-Supervision from Illumination Decline
Ruben Martinez-Cantin1
Javier Rodrı́guez-Puigvert1 * Vı́ctor M. Batlle1 * J.M.M. Montiel1
Pascal Fua2
Juan D. Tardós1
Javier Civera1
1

I3A - Universidad de Zaragoza

2

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne

Abstract

RGB image

LightDepth
Encoder

Single-view depth estimation can be remarkably effective if there is enough ground-truth depth data for supervised training. However, there are scenarios, especially in medicine in the case of endoscopies, where such
data cannot be obtained. In such cases, multi-view selfsupervision and synthetic-to-real transfer serve as alternative approaches, however, with a considerable performance
reduction in comparison to supervised case. Instead, we
propose a single-view self-supervised method that achieves
a performance similar to the supervised case. In some
medical devices, such as endoscopes, the camera and light
sources are co-located at a small distance from the target
surfaces. Thus, we can exploit that, for any given albedo
and surface orientation, pixel brightness is inversely proportional to the square of the distance to the surface, providing a strong single-view self-supervisory signal. In our
experiments, our self-supervised models deliver accuracies
comparable to those of fully supervised ones, while being
applicable without depth ground-truth data.

1. Introduction
Minimally invasive medical procedures such as gastroscopies, colonoscopies and bronchoscopies rely on endoscopes that should be as small as possible. As a result, they
usually house a single camera and several light points, but
neither depth nor stereo cameras. 3D reconstruction is relevant in endoscopies, as it may unlock several functionalities such as the accurate estimation of the size and shape
of tumors. However, both single- and multi-view depth estimation methods present significant challenges in this domain. The lack of sufficient depth annotated data hinders
the use of supervised depth learning. The presence of fluids that either obscure the view or generate specularities,
the sudden illumination changes, the paucity of texture and
the surface deformations hamper multi-view methods both
* equal contribution

Albedo prediction

Albedo
decoder

Depth
decoder

Depth prediction

Losses

Rendered view

Normals from depth

Figure 1. Single-view depth self-supervision in LightDepth. A
two-headed deep network predicts albedo and depth from a single
image and estimates surface normals from predicted depths. These
are used to render a new image, that takes into account illumination decline and the endoscope’s photometric calibration, and can
be compared to the original one. Minimizing the difference between the original and rendered images is used at training time to
compute the network weights and at inference time to refine the
depth predictions.

for self-supervising deep networks and for geometry estimation. Real in-body textures and fluids are hard to simulate realistically, and the synthetic-to-real gap may be large.
In this work, we propose a novel approach to depth in endoscopies that overcomes all the above challenges related to
depth supervision, multi-view estimation and synthetic-toreal gaps. Our key insight is that, by exploiting a key property of endoscopic imagery, we can provide strong depth
self-supervision signals from just one view. In endoscopes,
the light source is rigidly located next to the camera and
is close to the surface to be reconstructed. As a result, unlike in traditional shape-from-shading (SfS), points with the
same albedo are imaged darker the further they are, being
the decrease of intensity a function of the square distance
to the light source. To exploit this, we introduce a deep
network, as depicted by Figure 1, that estimates depths and
albedos from the image, infers normals from depths, and
then renders an image while taking into account the atten-

21273

