This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inherent Redundancy in Spiking Neural Networks
Man Yao1,2,3∗ , Jiakui Hu4,2 ,* Guangshe Zhao1† , Yaoyuan Wang5 , Ziyang Zhang5 , Bo Xu2 , Guoqi Li2†
1
School of Automation Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
Peking University Health Science Center, Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Advanced Computing and Storage Lab, Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd.
manyao@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, jkhu29@stu.pku.edu.cn, zhaogs@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, guoqi.li@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are well known as a
promising energy-efficient alternative to conventional artificial neural networks. Subject to the preconceived impression that SNNs are sparse firing, the analysis and optimization of inherent redundancy in SNNs have been largely
overlooked, thus the potential advantages of spike-based
neuromorphic computing in accuracy and energy efficiency
are interfered. In this work, we pose and focus on three
key questions regarding the inherent redundancy in SNNs.
We argue that the redundancy is induced by the spatiotemporal invariance of SNNs, which enhances the efficiency
of parameter utilization but also invites lots of noise spikes.
Further, we analyze the effect of spatio-temporal invariance on the spatio-temporal dynamics and spike firing of
SNNs. Then, motivated by these analyses, we propose an
Advance Spatial Attention (ASA) module to harness SNNs’
redundancy, which can adaptively optimize their membrane
potential distribution by a pair of individual spatial attention sub-modules. In this way, noise spike features are accurately regulated. Experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed method can significantly drop the spike firing with better performance than state-of-the-art SNN baselines. Our code is available in https://github.com/
BICLab/ASA-SNN .

1. Introduction
By mimicking the spatio-temporal dynamics behaviors
of biological neurons, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs)
pose a paradigm shift in information encoding and transmitting [36, 37, 25]. Spiking neurons only fire when the membrane potential is greater than the threshold (Figure 1a), in
* These authors contribute equally to this work
† Corresponding author

theory, these complex internal dynamics make the representation ability to spiking neurons more powerful than existing artificial neurons [31]. Moreover, spike-based binary
communication (0/1 spike) enables SNNs to be event-driven
when deployed on neuromorphic chips [3, 34, 49], i.e., performing cheap synaptic Accumulation (AC) and bypassing
computations on zero inputs or activations [6, 4].
For a long time, when referring to spike-based neuromorphic computing, people naturally believe that its computation is sparse due to the event-driven feature. Subject to this preconceived impression, although it is generally agreed that sparse spike firing is the key to achieving
high energy efficiency in neuromorphic computing, there is
a lack of systematic and in-depth analysis of redundancy in
SNNs. Existing explorations are limited to specific methods of dropping spike counts. For instance, several algorithms have been proposed to exploit spike-aware sparsity regularization and compression by adding a penalty
function[5, 53, 55, 52, 33, 24], designing network structures
with fewer spikes using neural architecture search techniques [32, 23], or developing data-dependent models to
regulate spike firing based on the input data [48, 51]. Generally, employing these methods to reduce spikes incurs a
loss of accuracy or significant additional computation.
In this work, we provide a novel perspective to understand the redundancy of SNNs by analyzing the relationship between spike firing and spatio-temporal dynamics of
spiking neurons. This analysis could be extended by asking
three key questions. (i) Which spikes are redundant? (ii)
Why is there redundancy in SNNs? (iii) How to efficiently
drop the redundant spikes?
To perfectly demonstrate redundancy in SNNs, we select
event-based vision tasks to observe spike responses. Eventbased cameras, such as the Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS)
[27], are a novel class of bio-inspired vision sensors that
only encode the vision scene’s brightness change information into a stream of events (spike with address information)

16924

