This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scalable Multi-Temporal Remote Sensing Change Data Generation
via Simulating Stochastic Change Process
Zhuo Zheng1,2 , Shiqi Tian1 , Ailong Ma1 , Liangpei Zhang1 , Yanfei Zhong1,∗
1
Wuhan University 2 Stanford University
https://github.com/Z-Zheng/Changen

Figure 1. This village is disappearing, which is a stochastic change process simulated by our generative probabilistic change model (GPCM).
This is also synthetic multi-temporal change data produced by our change generator (Changen), a GAN-based GPCM, enabling object
change data generation with controllable object property (e.g., scale, position, orientation), and change event.

Abstract
Understanding the temporal dynamics of Earth’s surface is a mission of multi-temporal remote sensing image
analysis, significantly promoted by deep vision models with
its fuel—labeled multi-temporal images. However, collecting, preprocessing, and annotating multi-temporal remote
sensing images at scale is non-trivial since it is expensive
and knowledge-intensive. In this paper, we present a scalable multi-temporal remote sensing change data generator via generative modeling, which is cheap and automatic,
alleviating these problems. Our main idea is to simulate
a stochastic change process over time. We consider the
stochastic change process as a probabilistic semantic state
transition, namely generative probabilistic change model
(GPCM), which decouples the complex simulation problem
into two more trackable sub-problems, i.e., change event
simulation and semantic change synthesis. To solve these
two problems, we present the change generator (Changen),
a GAN-based GPCM, enabling controllable object change
data generation, including customizable object property, and
change event. The extensive experiments suggest that our
Changen has superior generation capability, and the change
detectors with Changen pre-training exhibit excellent transferability to real-world change datasets.
* corresponding author (zhongyanfei@whu.edu.cn)

1. Introduction
Change detection is one of the most fundamental Earth
vision tasks to understand the temporal dynamics of Earth’s
surface. Tremendous progress in change detection has been
achieved by joint efforts of remote sensing and computer
vision communities. Deep change detection models [7,39,40,
42] represented by Siamese networks [3] have dominated in
recent years. The key behind their success lies in large-scale
training datasets [6, 27, 31, 32]. However, building a largescale remote sensing change detection dataset is difficult
and expensive, because collecting, preprocessing, annotating
remote sensing images needs more expertise and efforts.
Synthetic data, as an alternative, is a promising direction to alleviate the data hungry. There are currently two
main paradigms for change detection data synthesis in the
remote sensing domain, i.e., graphics-based [2, 19] and data
augmentation-based [4] approaches. The graphics-based
methods synthesize images by rendering manual constructed
3D models. IAug [4], as a data augmentation-based approach, synthesizes new image pairs by pasting object instances into existing bitemporal image pairs.
However, the scalability and diversity of these conventional synthetic change datasets remain limited. This is because 3D modeling and rendering need expertise and tremendous efforts for graphics-based approaches, and an existing

21818

