This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Chaos Comes Order:
Ordering Event Representations for Object Recognition and Detection
Nikola Zubić∗
Daniel Gehrig*
Mathias Gehrig
Davide Scaramuzza
Robotics and Perception Group, University of Zurich, Switzerland

(a) Method overview

(b) GW Discrepancy vs. Performance

Figure 1: Selecting dense event representations for deep neural networks is exceedingly slow since it involves training a
neural network for each representation and selecting the best one based on the validation score. In this work, we eliminate
this bottleneck by selecting the representation based on the Gromov-Wasserstein Discrepancy (GWD) on the validation set
(a). This metric is 200 times faster to compute and preserves the task performance ranking of event representations across
multiple representations, network backbones, datasets and tasks (b, showing object detection performance on the Gen1 [9]
dataset). We use it to, for the first time, perform a hyperparameter search on a large family of event representations, revealing
new and powerful event representations that exceed the state-of-the-art.

Abstract
Today, state-of-the-art deep neural networks that process
events first convert them into dense, grid-like input representations before using an off-the-shelf network. However,
selecting the appropriate representation for the task traditionally requires training a neural network for each representation and selecting the best one based on the validation score, which is very time-consuming. This work eliminates this bottleneck by selecting representations based on
the Gromov-Wasserstein Discrepancy (GWD) between raw
events and their representation. It is about 200 times faster
to compute than training a neural network and preserves the
task performance ranking of event representations across
multiple representations, network backbones, datasets, and
tasks. Thus finding representations with high task scores is
equivalent to finding representations with a low GWD. We
use this insight to, for the first time, perform a hyperparameter search on a large family of event representations,
revealing new and powerful representations that exceed the
* Equal contribution

state-of-the-art. Our optimized representations outperform
existing representations by 1.7 mAP on the 1 Mpx dataset
and 0.3 mAP on the Gen1 dataset, two established object
detection benchmarks, and reach a 3.8% higher classification score on the mini N-ImageNet benchmark. Moreover,
we outperform state-of-the-art by 2.1 mAP on Gen1 and
state-of-the-art feed-forward methods by 6.0 mAP on the 1
Mpx datasets. This work opens a new unexplored field of explicit representation optimization for event-based learning.

Multimedia Material
For open-source code please visit https://github.
com/uzh-rpg/event_representation_study.

1. Introduction
Event cameras are biologically inspired vision sensors
that function in a fundamentally distinct way [12]. Unlike traditional cameras that capture images at a fixed rate,

12846

