This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Whole Slide Image Classiﬁcation from the Perspectives of Distribution,
Correlation and Magniﬁcation
Linhao Qu1,2∗ Zhiwei Yang1,2∗ Minghong Duan1,2
Yingfan Ma1,2 Shuo Wang1,2 Manning Wang1,2† Zhijian Song1,2†
1
Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Key Lab of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention
Abstract
Bag-based multiple instance learning (MIL) methods
have become the mainstream for Whole Slide Image (WSI)
classiﬁcation. However, there are still three important issues that have not been fully addressed: (1) positive bags
with a low positive instance ratio are prone to the inﬂuence
of a large number of negative instances; (2) the correlation between local and global features of pathology images
has not been fully modeled; and (3) there is a lack of effective information interaction between different magniﬁcations. In this paper, we propose MILBooster, a powerful
dual-scale multi-stage MIL framework to address these issues from the perspectives of distribution, correlation, and
magniﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, to address issue (1), we propose a plug-and-play bag ﬁlter that effectively increases
the positive instance ratio of positive bags. For issue (2),
we propose a novel window-based Transformer architecture called PiceBlock to model the correlation between local and global features of pathology images. For issue
(3), we propose a dual-branch architecture to process different magniﬁcations and design an information interaction module called Scale Mixer for efﬁcient information
interaction between them. We conducted extensive experiments on four clinical WSI classiﬁcation tasks using three
datasets. MILBooster achieved new state-of-the-art performance on all these tasks. Codes will be available at
https://github.com/miccaiif/MILBooster.

1. Introduction
Computer-aided diagnosis based on pathology Whole
Slide Images (WSIs) has important clinical signiﬁcance, but
using deep-learning techniques in WSI classiﬁcation faces
great challenges [29, 38, 23, 26, 21]. On one hand, WSIs are
very large, typically being muti-gigapixel images, so they
must be divided into many small patches to be processed by
∗ Co-ﬁrst author. † Co-corresponding author.

Figure 1. Motivation of our proposed bag ﬁlter. Left ﬁgure: the
positive instance ratio of the middle positive bag is low so its bag
feature is biased towards negative instances and it is mis-classiﬁed.
Right ﬁgure: after ﬁltering a large number of negative instances
(and possibly some positive instances), the bag feature of the middle positive bag is rectiﬁed, and it is correctly classiﬁed.

deep neural networks. On the other hand, although the label of the whole slide can often be obtained, obtaining ﬁnegrained annotations for the huge number of small patches
is extremely expensive, which makes supervised learning at
the patch level infeasible. Therefore, WSI classiﬁcation is
usually formulated as a Multiple Instance Learning (MIL)
problem [34, 9, 6, 22, 24], in which each slide is treated as
a bag and the patches cut from the slide are treated as instances of the bag. In the MIL formulation, all instances in
a negative bag are negative, while at least one instance in
a positive bag is positive. The goal of WSI classiﬁcation
is to accurately classify each bag, while the label of each
instance is unavailable.
Deep learning-based MIL methods can generally be divided into instance-based methods [3, 10, 30, 15, 41] and
bag-based methods [14, 13, 45, 43, 36, 17, 44, 35, 18, 7,
24, 19]. Instance-based methods typically assign a pseudolabel to each instance, and then train an instance classiﬁer to
predict the positive score of instances. Finally, bag classiﬁcation is achieved by aggregating the positive scores of all
instances in a bag. Since the true label of each instance is
unknown, the pseudo-labels used in this method often contain a large amount of noise, which limits their performance

21463

