This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-modal Scalable Hyperbolic Hierarchical Clustering
Teng Long
University of Amsterdam

Nanne van Noord
University of Amsterdam

uestc.longteng@gmail.com

n.j.e.vannoord@uva.nl

ℝ𝒏
Plain Clustering

Abstract
Hierarchical clustering is a natural approach to discover
ontologies from data. Yet, existing approaches are hampered by their inability to scale to large datasets and the discrete encoding of the hierarchy. We introduce scalable Hyperbolic Hierarchical Clustering (sHHC) which overcomes
these limitations by learning continuous hierarchies in hyperbolic space. Our hierarchical clustering is of high quality and can be obtained in a fraction of the runtime.
Additionally, we demonstrate the strength of sHHC on
a downstream cross-modal self-supervision task. By using the discovered hierarchies from sound and vision to
construct continuous hierarchical pseudo-labels we can efficiently optimize a network for activity recognition and
obtain competitive performance compared to recent selfsupervised learning models. Our findings demonstrate the
strength of Hyperbolic Hierarchical Clustering and its potential for Self-Supervised Learning.

𝔻𝒏
Hierarchical Clustering

Visual Space
Video

Video
Concert

Home

Classical

Electronic

Audio Space

Figure 1. Example clustering result. Our model subdivides “playing guitar” for the visual modality into sub-categories playing
guitar in concert/at home and for the audio modality into playing classical/electronic guitar. (Left) The plain clustering in Euclidean space Rn with randomly distributed clusters, no subordinate relationship between sub-categories, and no corresponding
super-category. (Right) The proposed hierarchical clustering in
hyperbolic space Dn , similar clusters are grouped in the same fanshaped zone, enabling us to subdivide sub-categories and aggregate super-categories.

1. Introduction
Concept hierarchies have been introduced for a variety
of tasks including recognition [20, 7], retrieval [6], segmentation [30], fine-grained classification [15]. In many
datasets, the hierarchy is manually defined [8] in terms of
vision [11] or auditory [14] taxonomy. Those hierarchy
definitions are subjective and may not suit domain-specific
tasks. For example, vision hierarchy does not suit sound
tasks and vice versa. In contrast to the abundance of applications of pre-defined hierarchies, models discovering hierarchy from data [39, 31] are scarce and outdated. In this
paper, we strive for discovering the audio-visual hierarchy
from video data in a self-supervised manner.
By learning the concept hierarchy we can, for example, use it as a pseudo-labeling scheme for training.
Previous works on clustering-based self-supervised learning [9, 3, 42, 35, 27] have shown the benefits of assigning pseudo-labels to guide training. Continuous pseudolabeling [25, 44, 10], in particular, draws attention as it
can further improve self-supervision. Despite the appeal of

continuous labels, hierarchical clustering models are naturally discrete [18], limiting their power to enhance selfsupervision. Existing approaches for encoding discrete hierarchy into a continuous form have led to a noticeable information loss [38].
However, hyperbolic geometry [37] allows lossless embedding of hierarchical trees [34, 21] into hyperbolic space
Dn . Previous work explored how hyperbolic geometry
helps hierarchical clustering [33, 12]. Unfortunately, the
application of these techniques to self-supervised learning
has been limited by the computational complexity, they can
hardly scale to datasets with >∼20K data points. We solve
this problem by breaking the hyperbolic clustering down
into a two-stage process. The first stage, elaborated in Section 3.1, aims to generate K evenly distributed clusters. The
second stage, described in Section 3.2 then aims to build a
hierarchy from K clusters. This two-stage process enables
us to efficiently train on large-scale video datasets, thereby

16655

