This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RSFNet: A White-Box Image Retouching Approach using Region-Specific Color
Filters
Wenqi Ouyang1 , Yi Dong2 , Xiaoyang Kang1 , Peiran Ren1 , Xin Xu1 , Xuansong Xie1
1
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, 2 Nanyang Technological University
wenqi.oywq@alibaba-inc.com, ydong004@ntu.edu.sg,
{peiran.rpr, kangxiaoyang.kxy, chris.xx, xingtong.xxs}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

linear
sum

…

Photos and videos recorded by the camera usually lack
aesthetic quality due to poor shooting condition and inexperienced photographer. Artists often use professional-grade
softwares (e.g., PhotoShop for image, Davinci Resolve for
video) to enhance image and video quality. However, it requires professional retouching skills to conduct a series of
sophisticated manual adjustments. The use of fool-proof
applications that present various style templates simplifies
the retouching procedure, but it is unable to achieve opti-

+

…

1. Introduction

midtones
+ 0.67

…

Retouching images is an essential aspect of enhancing
the visual appeal of photos. Although users often share
common aesthetic preferences, their retouching methods
may vary based on their individual preferences. Therefore,
there is a need for white-box approaches that produce satisfying results and enable users to conveniently edit their
images simultaneously. Recent white-box retouching methods rely on cascaded global filters that provide image-level
filter arguments but cannot perform fine-grained retouching. In contrast, colorists typically employ a divide-andconquer approach, performing a series of region-specific
fine-grained enhancements when using traditional tools like
Davinci Resolve. We draw on this insight to develop a
white-box framework for photo retouching using parallel
region-specific filters, called RSFNet. Our model generates
filter arguments (e.g., saturation, contrast, hue) and attention maps of regions for each filter simultaneously. Instead
of cascading filters, RSFNet employs linear summations of
filters, allowing for a more diverse range of filter classes
that can be trained more easily. Our experiments demonstrate that RSFNet achieves state-of-the-art results, offering satisfying aesthetic appeal and increased user convenience for editable white-box retouching. Code is available
at https://github.com/Vicky0522/RSFNet.

saturation
+ 2.57

highlights
+ 0.62

Figure 1: Architecture of our white-box retouching framework. Our model generates filter arguments (e.g., saturation, midtones, highlights) and attention maps of regions for
corrsponding filter simultaneously. Final result is obtained
by conducting linear summations on filtered results.
mal results due to the lack of enhancement capability.
Recent learning-based methods have demonstrated the
strong capability of deep neural nets for automatic photo
retouching. Automatic systems are established to generate
the optimal result end-to-end. However, one of the most
significant considerations is that retouching is not a problem
with an exclusive solution. People have different retouching
preferences. Even the same artist may retouch the same image in different styles to meet various demands. In order to
provide convenience for manual edits, automatic retouching
systems must provide not only the suggested result, but also
the retouching strategy in a way understandable by humans.
Taking these considerations into account, we propose
a white-box framework that uses the divide-and-conquer
strategy employed by artists in traditional retouching tools.
Our model generates attention maps of regions as well as
filter arguments for traditional edits for these regions. This
allows users to alter the suggested results to their preferences.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
• We redefine the retouching problem according to the

12160

