This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

End2End Multi-View Feature Matching with Differentiable Pose Optimization
Barbara Roessle and Matthias Nießner
Technical University of Munich

Figure 1. We connect feature matching and pose optimization in an end-to-end trainable approach that enables matches and confidence
weights to be informed by the pose estimation objective. To this end, we introduce GNN-based multi-view feature matching to predict
matches and confidences tailored to a differentiable pose solver, which significantly improves pose estimation performance.

Abstract

Erroneous feature matches have severe impact on subsequent camera pose estimation and often require additional, time-costly measures, like RANSAC, for outlier rejection. Our method tackles this challenge by addressing
feature matching and pose optimization jointly. To this
end, we propose a graph attention network to predict image correspondences along with confidence weights. The
resulting matches serve as weighted constraints in a differentiable pose estimation. Training feature matching with
gradients from pose optimization naturally learns to downweight outliers and boosts pose estimation on image pairs
compared to SuperGlue by 6.7% on ScanNet. At the same
time, it reduces the pose estimation time by over 50% and
renders RANSAC iterations unnecessary. Moreover, we integrate information from multiple views by spanning the
graph across multiple frames to predict the matches all at
once. Multi-view matching combined with end-to-end training improves the pose estimation metrics on Matterport3D
by 18.5% compared to SuperGlue.

1. Introduction
Feature matching is a key component in many 3D vision
applications such as structure from motion (SfM) or simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). Conventional
pose estimation is a multi-step process: feature detection
finds interest points, for which local descriptors are computed. Based on the descriptors, pairs of keypoints from different images are matched, which defines constraints in the
pose optimization. A major challenge lies in the ambiguity
of matching local descriptors by nearest-neighbor search,
which is error-prone, particularly in texture-less areas or in
presence of repetitive patterns. Hand-crafted heuristics or
outlier filters become necessary to circumvent this problem
to some degree.
Recent learning-based approaches [45, 48, 26, 35] instead leverage the greater image context to improve the
matching, e.g., SuperGlue [45] introduces a graph neural
network (GNN) for descriptor matching on an image pair.
Graph edges connect keypoints from arbitrary locations and
enable reasoning in a broad context, leading to globally
well-informed solutions compared to convolutional neural
networks (CNN) with limited receptive field. The receptive
field in SuperGlue, however, remains limited by the two-

477

