This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Meta-ZSDETR: Zero-shot DETR with Meta-learning
Lu Zhang1 Chenbo Zhang1 Jiajia Zhao2 Jihong Guan3 Shuigeng Zhou1 *
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of
Computer Science, Fudan University, China
2
Science and Technology on Complex System Control and
Intelligent Agent Cooperation Laboratory, China
3
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tongji University, China
{l zhang19,sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn, cbzhang21@m.fudan.edu.cn
zhaojiajia1982@gmail.com, jhguan@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Object detection [34] is one of the most fundamental
tasks in computer vision. Most existing object detection
methods require huge amounts of annotated training data,
which is expensive and time-consuming to acquire. Meanwhile, in reality novel categories constantly emerge, and
there is seriously lack or even nonexistent of visual data of
* correspondence author

Backbone

(a)

semantic vectors
dog

Visual-Semantic
Alignment

RPN
Proposals Generation

dog

(b)

Backbone

Zero-shot object detection aims to localize and recognize objects of unseen classes. Most of existing works face
two problems: the low recall of RPN in unseen classes and
the confusion of unseen classes with background. In this
paper, we present the first method that combines DETR
and meta-learning to perform zero-shot object detection,
named Meta-ZSDETR, where model training is formalized
as an individual episode based meta-learning task. Different from Faster R-CNN based methods that firstly generate class-agnostic proposals, and then classify them with
visual-semantic alignment module, Meta-ZSDETR directly
predict class-specific boxes with class-specific queries and
further filter them with the predicted accuracy from classification head. The model is optimized with meta-contrastive
learning, which contains a regression head to generate the
coordinates of class-specific boxes, a classification head to
predict the accuracy of generated boxes, and a contrastive
head that utilizes the proposed contrastive-reconstruction
loss to further separate different classes in visual space. We
conduct extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets
MS COCO and PASCAL VOC. Experimental results show
that our method outperforms the existing ZSD methods by a
large margin.

background
cat
dog

Transformer
Encoder

Transformer
Decoder

cat

cat

dog

semantic vectors

Figure 1. Zero-shot object detection: Faster R-CNN based methods vs. Meta-ZSDETR. (a): Faster R-CNN based methods firstly
generate class-agnostic proposals, and then classify them with different visual-semantic alignment modules. (b): Meta-ZSDETR directly predict class-specific boxes with class-specific queries and
further filter them with classification head.

those novel categories for model training, such as endangered species in the wild. The above issues motivates the
investigation of zero-shot object detection, which aims to
localize and recognize objects of unseen classes.
A mainstream framework of the existing works that are
based on Faster R-CNN, is illustrated in Fig. 1(a), where the
RPN remains unchanged and the RoI classification head is
replaced with different visual-semantic alignment modules,
such as mapping to the same embedding space to calculate
similarity between proposals and semantic vectors [2, 40,
41, 32, 44, 12, 25, 18, 7], synthesizing visual features from
semantic vectors [17, 14, 42, 47, 27] etc.
However, we observe that the existing methods are suboptimal, due to their obvious inherent shortcomings: i) The
proposals from RPN are often not reliable enough to cover
all unseen classes objects in an image because of lacking
training data, which has also been identified by a recent
study [19]. ii) The confusion between background and un-

6845

