This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SHERF: Generalizable Human NeRF from a Single Image
Shoukang Hu1 * Fangzhou Hong1 * Liang Pan1 Haiyi Mei2 Lei Yang2 Ziwei Liu1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 SenseTime Research

Drive &
Render

SHERF
Inference
Single Input Image

Novel View Synthesis

Canonical Space Human NeRF

Novel Pose Synthesis

Figure 1: SHERF is a single image-based generalizable Human NeRF. With just one inference pass on a single image,
SHERF reconstructs Human NeRF in the canonical space which can be driven and rendered for novel view and pose synthesis.

Abstract
Existing Human NeRF methods for reconstructing 3D humans typically rely on multiple 2D images from multi-view
cameras or monocular videos captured from fixed camera
views. However, in real-world scenarios, human images
are often captured from random camera angles, presenting
challenges for high-quality 3D human reconstruction. In
this paper, we propose SHERF, the first generalizable Human NeRF model for recovering animatable 3D humans
from a single input image. SHERF extracts and encodes 3D
human representations in canonical space, enabling rendering and animation from free views and poses. To achieve
high-fidelity novel view and pose synthesis, the encoded
3D human representations should capture both global appearance and local fine-grained textures. To this end, we
propose a bank of 3D-aware hierarchical features, including
global, point-level, and pixel-aligned features, to facilitate
informative encoding.Global features enhance the information extracted from the single input image and complement
the information missing from the partial 2D observation.
Point-level features provide strong clues of 3D human structure, while pixel-aligned features preserve more fine-grained
details. To effectively integrate the 3D-aware hierarchical
feature bank, we design a feature fusion transformer. Extensive experiments on THuman, RenderPeople, ZJU_MoCap,
and HuMMan datasets demonstrate that SHERF achieves
state-of-the-art performance, with better generalizability for
novel view and pose synthesis. Our code is available at
* Equal contribution

https://github.com/skhu101/SHERF.

1. Introduction
Human NeRFs aim to recover high-quality 3D humans
from 2D observations, avoiding the need to capture ground
truth 3D geometry information [58, 13, 57, 78, 54, 75, 68,
30, 31, 73, 39, 23, 15, 84]. The development of Human
NeRFs addresses a long-standing scientific request and has
the potential to enable real-world applications e.g. VR/AR.
By leveraging Human NeRF, we can reconstruct 3D humans
directly from 2D observations, saving time and effort to
collect ground truth 3D information.
Existing Human NeRF methods can be classified into two
categories. The first category focuses on reconstructing 3D
humans from monocular or multi-view videos [58, 13, 57,
78, 54, 75, 68, 30, 31, 73]. These methods optimize subjectspecific Human NeRF, which are time-consuming and not
suitable for the rapid applications of Human NeRF. To address the slow optimization process, the second category of
Human NeRF methods [39, 23, 15, 84] propose to learn generalizable Human NeRF models. These methods can reconstruct Human NeRF from a few multi-view human images in
a single forward pass, which largely speeds-up the process.
Although these methods can achieve acceptable performance
in 3D human reconstruction, they require multi-view images
under well-defined camera angles, limiting their applicability in real-world scenarios where only a single image with
a random angle is available. MonoNHR [15] addresses this
gap by exploring novel view synthesis from a single image.

9352

