This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Long-range Information with Dual-Scale Transformers for
Indoor Scene Completion
Ziqi Wang1 , Fei Luo * 1 , Xiaoxiao Long † 1 , Wenxiao Zhang2 , and Chunxia Xiao *1
1

2

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
ISTD, Singapore University of Technology and Design

Abstract
Due to the limited resolution of 3D sensors and the inevitable mutual occlusion between objects, 3D scans of real
scenes are commonly incomplete. Previous scene completion methods struggle to capture long-range spatial context,
resulting in unsatisfactory completion results. To alleviate
the problem, we propose a novel Dual-Scale Transformer
Network (DST-Net) that efficiently utilizes both long-range
and short-range spatial context information to improve the
quality of 3D scene completion. To reduce the heavy computation cost of extracting long-range features via transformers, DST-Net adopts a self-supervised two-stage completion strategy. In the first stage, we split the input scene
into blocks and perform completion on individual blocks. In
the second stage, the blocks are merged together as a whole
and then further refined to improve completeness. More
importantly, we propose a contrastive attention training
strategy to encourage the transformers to learn distinguishable features for better scene completion. Experiments on
datasets of Matterport3D, ScanNet, and ICL-NUIM demonstrate that our method can generate better completion results, and our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Indoor 3D reconstruction is an essential part of many applications like AR/VR [19, 1], building information modeling (BIM) [24, 32], automatic robot indoor navigation
[14] and so on [36, 38]. Due to the limited resolution of 3D
sensors and the inevitable occlusion between objects in the
scene, there always exist incomplete surfaces in the reconstruction results.
Recently, scene 3D completion based on deep learning
* Fei Luo and Chunxia Xiao are co-corresponding authors
† Xiaoxiao Long was interning at Wuhan University

(a) Input

(b) SG-NN

(c) SPSG

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Indoor scene completion on one case in the Matterport3D dataset. Comparison with the state-of-the-art
methods SG-NN [6] and SPSG [8].

has made great progress. Dai et al. [6] proposed a selfsupervised method called SG-NN to complete the indoor
scene with incomplete real-world scan data, which can get
a more complete result compared to the training data. Dai
et al. [8] further proposed SPSG to complete the 3D surface
and texture. Most of the current methods use convolutional
neural networks (CNN) for completion and achieve impressive progress. Nonetheless, receptive fields in CNN remain
local at a certain resolution, limiting its ability to capture
long-range information. This is very important for the scene
completion task with incomplete inputs.
Recently, Vision Transformer (ViT) [27, 18, 10] has
made great stride in the computer vision field, owing
to its ability to sense long-range information. For the
task of single object 3D completion, some methods [30,

18569

