This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoCUS: Learning Multiscale 3D-consistent Features from Posed Images
Dominik A. Kloepfer1 , Dylan Campbell2 , João F. Henriques1
1

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
2
Australian National University
{dominik, joao}@robots.ox.ac.uk, dylan.campbell@anu.edu.au

Abstract
An important challenge for autonomous agents such as
robots is to maintain a spatially and temporally consistent
model of the world. It must be maintained through occlusions, previously-unseen views, and long time horizons
(e.g., loop closure and re-identification). It is still an open
question how to train such a versatile neural representation
without supervision. We start from the idea that the training objective can be framed as a patch retrieval problem:
given an image patch in one view of a scene, we would like
to retrieve (with high precision and recall) all patches in
other views that map to the same real-world location. One
drawback is that this objective does not promote reusability
of features: by being unique to a scene (achieving perfect
precision/recall), a representation will not be useful in the
context of other scenes. We find that it is possible to balance retrieval and reusability by constructing the retrieval
set carefully, leaving out patches that map to far-away locations. Similarly, we can easily regulate the scale of the
learned features (e.g., points, objects, or rooms) by adjusting the spatial tolerance for considering a retrieval to
be positive. We optimize for (smooth) Average Precision
(AP), in a single unified ranking-based objective. This objective also doubles as a criterion for choosing landmarks
or keypoints, as patches with high AP. We show results creating sparse, multi-scale, semantic spatial maps composed
of highly identifiable landmarks, with applications in landmark retrieval, localization, semantic segmentation and instance segmentation.

1. Introduction
For an autonomous agent to be able to take useful actions, it must maintain a spatially and temporally consistent

Figure 1: Problem setting. Our goal is to train a network to
extract features that are identifiable and 3D-consistent, so
that features at image locations corresponding to the same
region in 3D space, but viewed from different positions, are
similar. This can be done at multiple scales, from large (e.g.,
the kitchen islands in the large green circles) to small (e.g.,
the drawers in the small red circles). However, simply optimizing for “unique” representations at each location (e.g.,
via contrastive learning) runs the risk of over-fitting to the
training scenes, as such objectives will discourage reuse of
the same representation for different places. Instead, we
encourage reusable landmark representations, such as the
concept of a kitchen island, which may appear in different
scenes (top and bottom panels) with appearance variations.

Code and model weights for this project can be found at https:
//www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/locus.

16634

