This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Collecting The Puzzle Pieces: Disentangled Self-Driven Human Pose
Transfer by Permuting Textures
Nannan Li
Boston University

Kevin J Shih
NVIDIA

nnli@bu.edu

Bryan A. Plummer
Boston University
bplum@bu.edu

Abstract
Human pose transfer synthesizes new view(s) of a
person for a given pose. Recent work achieves this
via self-reconstruction, which disentangles a person’s
pose and texture information by breaking the person
down into parts, then recombines them for reconstruction. However, part-level disentanglement preserves
some pose information that can create unwanted artifacts. In this paper, we propose Pose Transfer by
Permuting Textures (PT2 ), an approach for self-driven
human pose transfer that disentangles pose from texture at the patch-level. Specifically, we remove pose
from an input image by permuting image patches so
only texture information remains. Then we reconstruct
the input image by sampling from the permuted textures for patch-level disentanglement. To reduce noise
and recover clothing shape information from the permuted patches, we employ encoders with multiple kernel
sizes in a triple branch network. Extensive experiments
on DeepFashion and Market-1501 PT2 reports significant gains on automatic metrics over other self-driven
methods, and even outperforms some fully-supervised
methods. A user study also reports images generated
by our method are preferred in 68% of cases over selfdriven approaches from prior work. Code is available at
https: // github. com/ NannanLi999/ pt_ square

1. Introduction
The goal of human pose transfer is to change the
pose of a person while preserving the person’s appearance and clothing textures. It has wide applications
such as virtual try-on [42, 3, 43], controllable person
image manipulation [3, 17] and person re-identification
[46]. Recent work focused on using paired image data
(i.e., two images of the same person before and after reposing) [49, 45], but collecting such data can be
very labor intensive. Alternatively, self-driven meth-

(a) Prior work.

(b) Our approach.

Figure 1: Self-driven pose transfer methods extract
texture and pose representations and then learn to reconstruct the original image. (a) Most recent work
breaks down the person into several parts to disentangle textures [23, 24, 39]. However, pose information may still appear in the part-wise texture features.
Without supervision, disentangling them is difficult
[19]. (b) Our approach disentangles textures from pose
by permuting the image patches, effectively eliminating
pose information, which enables more effective separation of pose and texture features than prior work.
ods train pose transfer models without paired images
[24, 35]. However, they face two major challenges: effectively disentangling texture and pose, and preserving texture details across changes in pose. As illustrated in Fig. 1a, most prior works attempt to achieve
the pose and texture disentanglement at a part-level
[23, 41, 24, 39], but each body part may retain some
pose information. Without direct supervision from
pose-invariant textures, disentangling pose and textures in the image is difficult [19].
To address the above issues, we propose Pose Transfer by Permuting Textures (PT2 ), a self-driven pose
transfer method that uses input permutation to transfer clothing patterns to the target pose. The input
permutation function geometrically disentangles texture from pose in raw images without requiring supervision. As shown in Fig. 1b, this creates a disentangled

7126

