This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Geometrized Cartoon Line Inbetweening
Li Siyao1

Tianpei Gu2∗ Weiye Xiao3 Henghui Ding1 Ziwei Liu1 Chen Change Loy1 B
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Lexica 3 Southeast University

{siyao002, henghui.ding, ziwei.liu, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg, gutianpei@ucla.edu, 230189776@seu.edu.cn

Inbetweened (⇥4 ) by AnimeInbet (ours)

Source frame 0

VFIformer

EISAI

FILM

Source frame 1

RIFE

Figure 1: Inbetweening on two source cartoon line drawings of Monkey D. Luffy extracted from ONE PIECE. We compare our
proposed AnimeInbet with state-of-the-art frame interpolation methods VFIformer [14], EISAI [5], FILM [23] and RIFE [6].

Abstract
We aim to address a significant but understudied problem
in the anime industry, namely the inbetweening of cartoon
line drawings. Inbetweening involves generating intermediate frames between two black-and-white line drawings
and is a time-consuming and expensive process that can
benefit from automation. However, existing frame interpolation methods that rely on matching and warping whole
raster images are unsuitable for line inbetweening and often produce blurring artifacts that damage the intricate line
structures. To preserve the precision and detail of the line
drawings, we propose a new approach, AnimeInbet, which
geometrizes raster line drawings into graphs of endpoints
and reframes the inbetweening task as a graph fusion problem with vertex repositioning. Our method can effectively
capture the sparsity and unique structure of line drawings
while preserving the details during inbetweening. This is
made possible via our novel modules, i.e., vertex geometric embedding, a vertex correspondence Transformer, an
effective mechanism for vertex repositioning and a visibility predictor. To train our method, we introduce MixamoLine240, a new dataset of line drawings with ground truth
vectorization and matching labels. Our experiments demonstrate that AnimeInbet synthesizes high-quality, clean, and
B Corresponding author. ∗ Work completed at UCLA.

complete intermediate line drawings, outperforming existing
methods quantitatively and qualitatively, especially in cases
with large motions. Data and code are available at https:
//github.com/lisiyao21/AnimeInbet.

1. Introduction
Cartoon animation has undergone significant transformations since its inception in the early 1900s, when consecutive frames were manually drawn on paper. Although
automated techniques now exist to assist with some specific
procedures during animation production, such as colorization [22, 32, 10, 39, 4] and special effects [38], the core
element – the line drawings of characters – still needs handdrawing each frame individually, making 2D animation a
labor-intensive industry. Developing an automated algorithm
that can produce intermediate line drawings from two input
key frames, commonly referred to as “inbetweening”, has
the potential to significantly improve productivity.
Line inbetweening is not a trivial subset of general frame
interpolation, as the structure of line drawings is extremely
sparse. Unlike full-textured images, line drawings contain
only around 3% black pixels, with the rest of the image being
white background. As illustrated in Figure 2, this poses two
significant challenges for existing raster-image-based frame
interpolation methods. 1) The lack of texture in line drawings
makes it challenging to compute pixel-wise correspondence

7291

