This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature Proliferation — the “Cancer” in StyleGAN and its Treatments
Shuang Song

Yuanbang Liang Jing Wu Yu-Kun Lai
Cardiff University

Yipeng Qin*

{songs7,liangy32,wuj11,laiy4,qiny16}@cardiff.ac.uk

Abstract
Despite the success of StyleGAN in image synthesis,
the images it synthesizes are not always perfect and the
well-known truncation trick has become a standard postprocessing technique for StyleGAN to synthesize high quality images. Although effective, it has long been noted that
the truncation trick tends to reduce the diversity of synthesized images and unnecessarily sacrifices many distinct image features. To address this issue, in this paper, we first
delve into the StyleGAN image synthesis mechanism and
discover an important phenomenon, namely Feature Proliferation, which demonstrates how specific features reproduce with forward propagation. Then, we show how the
occurrence of Feature Proliferation results in StyleGAN image artifacts. As an analogy, we refer to it as the “cancer”
in StyleGAN from its proliferating and malignant nature.
Finally, we propose a novel feature rescaling method that
identifies and modulates risky features to mitigate feature
proliferation. Thanks to our discovery of Feature Proliferation, the proposed feature rescaling method is less destructive and retains more useful image features than the
truncation trick, as it is more fine-grained and works in
a lower-level feature space rather than a high-level latent space. Experimental results justify the validity of our
claims and the effectiveness of the proposed feature rescaling method. Our code is available at https:// github.com/
songc42/ Feature-proliferation.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has entered the era of large models. For
instance, the GPT-3 [7] developed by OpenAI has 175 billion parameters and can easily cost around 15 million dollars to train for a single run, let alone the GPT-3.5 underpinning the recently hyped ChatGPT1 ; Stability.ai trained
their Stable-diffusion-v1-42 using 256 Nvidia A100 GPUs
for 150,000 GPU hours; Nvidia spent 92 GPU years and
* Corresponding author: Yipeng Qin
1 https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt
2 https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4

225 MWh of electricity with an in-house cluster of NVIDIA
V100 GPUs to develop StyleGAN3 [15] and 4 weeks on 64
NVIDIA A100s for a “constrained” training of their recent
StyleGAN-T [27]. As a result, although the performance
of large models is impressive, their high costs have become
a critical concern, e.g., OpenAI admitted that there was a
bug in their GPT-3 model but cannot afford to retrain it due
to the high cost [7]. This motivates us to do our best to
avoid retraining large neural network models. In this work,
we focus on the StyleGAN family [16, 17, 15, 27] as they
are inherently more efficient (i.e., generating images with
a single pass), allow for excellent semantic interpolation
in their latent spaces, and are comparable to the quality of
diffusion models [27]. For the StyleGAN series, although
there were no obvious bugs in the training, the synthesized
images are not always perfect. While instead of attempting to solve this problem by improving the model design
which requires multiple retraining, StyleGAN follows the
“no retraining” philosophy and resorts to a post-processing
technique called truncation trick [20, 6]. In short, the truncation trick improves the quality of StyleGAN synthesized
images by normalizing their corresponding latent codes towards their mean in the latent space. However, despite its
popularity, it has long been noted that the truncation trick
tends to reduce the diversity of synthesized images and unnecessarily sacrifices many distinct image features [16].
In this paper, we address the low-quality images synthesized by StyleGAN from a different perspective, i.e., its
mechanism for image synthesis in the feature space. Specifically, we delved into the architectural details of the StyleGAN generator and discovered an important phenomenon,
namely Feature Proliferation, which demonstrates how specific features reproduce with forward propagation. In short,
Feature Proliferation denotes the phenomenon where the
ratio of the occurrence of a certain type of feature (those
with abnormally large values) in a layer increases with forward propagation. Our analysis points out that such a phenomenon is a by-product of the weight modulation and demodulation techniques used in StyleGAN2/3 [17, 15] and
the latest StyleGAN-T [27]. Interestingly, we observed
that Feature Proliferation usually leads to artifacts in Style-

2360

