This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Integrally Migrating Pre-trained Transformer Encoder-decoders
for Visual Object Detection
Feng Liu1 * Xiaosong Zhang1 * Zhiliang Peng1 Zonghao Guo1
Fang Wan1† Xiangyang Ji2 Qixiang Ye1
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Tsinghua University
liufeng20@mails.ucas.ac.cn

zhangxiaosong18@mails.ucas.ac.cn

pengzhiliang19@mails.ucas.ac.cn
wanfang@ucas.ac.cn

guozhonghao19@mails.ucas.ac.cn

xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

qxye@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Modern object detectors have taken the advantages of
backbone networks pre-trained on large scale datasets. Except for the backbone networks, however, other components
such as the detector head and the feature pyramid network
(FPN) remain trained from scratch, which hinders the generalization capacity of detectors. In this study, we propose to integrally migrate pre-trained transformer encoderdecoders (imTED) to a detector, constructing a feature extraction path which is “fully pre-trained” so that detectors’ generalization capacity is maximized. The essential
differences between imTED with the baseline detector are
twofold: (1) migrating the pre-trained transformer decoder
to the detector head while removing the randomly initialized FPN from the feature extraction path; and (2) defining
a multi-scale feature modulator (MFM) to enhance scale
adaptability. Such designs not only reduce randomly initialized parameters significantly but also unify detector training with representation learning intendedly. Experiments
on the MS COCO object detection dataset show that imTED
consistently outperforms its counterparts by ∼2.4 AP. Without bells and whistles, imTED improves the state-of-the-art
of few-shot object detection by up to 7.6 AP. Code is released at https://github.com/LiewFeng/imTED.

1. Introduction
Over the past two years, vision transformers (ViTs) [6]
have been promising representation models. The vanilla
transformer trained with a sophisticated self-supervised
learning method, e.g., masked autoencoder (MAE) [11],
demonstrated great potential. Since the introduction of
transformers [35] to computer vision, the effort of taming
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

Pre-trained

Encoder

Randomly initialized

FPN

Detector
head

Detection

Input
Integrally Migrated Pre-trained Models

Encoder

Input

Decoder

Detection

Figure 1: Comparison of the baseline detector e.g., Faster
R-CNN [30] using a transformer backbone (upper) with
the proposed imTED (lower). The baseline detector solely
transfers a pre-trained backbone network, e.g., the encoder,
but training the detector head and FPN from scratch. By
contrast, our imTED approach integrally migrates the pretrained transformer encoder-decoder. It significantly reduces the proportion of randomly initialized parameters and
improves detector’s generalization capability.

them for object detection has never stopped [3, 19]. This
is motivated by the observation that ViTs pre-trained on extraordinarily large datasets incorporate over-completed and
versatile features, which guarantee the performance and
generalization capability of detectors finetuned on small
datasets. [19, 17].
Modern object detectors, such as Faster R-CNN and
Mask R-CNN [30, 12], typically consist of a backbone network, a neck component and a detector head. However,
except for the backbone network, other components that occupy a significant proportion of parameters remain trained

6825

