This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text2Performer: Text-Driven Human Video Generation
Yuming Jiang1

Shuai Yang1 Tong Liang Koh1 Wayne Wu2 Chen Change Loy1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory

{yuming002, shuai.yang, koht0029, ccloy, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg
This woman wears a dress. It has long sleeves, and
it is of long length. The texture of it is graphic. She
is swinging to the right.

This woman wears a dress. It has long sleeves, and
it is of long length. The texture of it is graphic. She
is swinging to the right.

Ziwei Liu1B

wuwenyan0503@gmail.com

The person is wearing a sleeveless dress. It is of
short length. Its pattern is pure color. She turns
right from the front to the side.

Figure 1: High-resolution videos generated by Text2Performer. The videos are generated by taking the text descriptions
as the only input. The generated videos contain diverse appearances and flexible motions. Identities are well maintained.

Abstract
Text-driven content creation has evolved to be a transformative technique that revolutionizes creativity. Here we
study the task of text-driven human video generation, where
a video sequence is synthesized from texts describing the appearance and motions of a target performer. Compared to
general text-driven video generation, human-centric video
generation requires maintaining the appearance of synthesized human while performing complex motions. In this
work, we present Text2Performer to generate vivid human
videos with articulated motions from texts. Text2Performer
has two novel designs: 1) decomposed human representation and 2) diffusion-based motion sampler. First, we decompose the VQVAE latent space into human appearance
and pose representation in an unsupervised manner by utilizing the nature of human videos. In this way, the appearance is well maintained along the generated frames.
Then, we propose continuous VQ-diffuser to sample a
sequence of pose embeddings. Unlike existing VQ-based
methods that operate in the discrete space, continuous VQdiffuser directly outputs the continuous pose embeddings
for better motion modeling. Finally, motion-aware masking
strategy is designed to mask the pose embeddings spatialtemporally to enhance the temporal coherence. Moreover,

to facilitate the task of text-driven human video generation, we contribute a Fashion-Text2Video dataset with manually annotated action labels and text descriptions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that Text2Performer generates high-quality human videos (up to 512 × 256 resolution) with diverse appearances and flexible motions.
Our project page is https://yumingj.github.io/
projects/Text2Performer.html

1. Introduction
Since its emergence, text-guided image synthesis
(e.g. DALLE [37, 38]) has attracted substantial attention.
Recent works [9, 10, 14, 18, 40, 47] have demonstrated fascinating performance for the quality of synthesized images
and their consistency with the texts. Beyond image generation, text-driven video generation [22, 24, 44, 53] is an advanced topic to explore. Existing works rely on large-scale
datasets to drive large models. Although they have achieved
surprising performance on general objects, when applied to
the generation of some specific tasks, such as generating
videos of garment presents for e-commerce websites, they
fail to generate plausible results. Take the CogVideo [24] as
an example. As shown in Fig. 2, the generated human objects contain incomplete human structures, and the temporal

22747

