This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Iterative Superquadric Recomposition of 3D Objects from Multiple Views
Stephan Alaniz
University of Tübingen

Superquadrics-based
Recomposition

Massimiliano Mancini
University of Trento

Example use-case:
Abstract

Zeynep Akata
University of Tübingen, MPI-IS

Multi-view Images

Silhouettes

Mixed Reality

Humans are good at recomposing novel objects, i.e. they
can identify commonalities between unknown objects from
general structure to finer detail, an ability difficult to replicate by machines. We propose a framework, ISCO, to recompose an object using 3D superquadrics as semantic
parts directly from 2D views without training a model that
uses 3D supervision. To achieve this, we optimize the superquadric parameters that compose a specific instance of
output
the object,
comparing its rendered 3D view and 2D image silhouette. Our ISCO framework iteratively adds new
direct wherever
superquadrics the
fittingreconstruction error is high,
superquadrics
abstracting first coarse regions and then finer details of
the target object. With this simple coarse-to-fine inductive bias, ISCO x times
provides consistent superquadrics for related object parts, despite not having any semantic supervision. Since ISCO does not train any neural network, it
is also inherently robust to out-of-distribution objects. Experiments show that, compared to recent single instance
informed initialization of superquadric
superquadrics reconstruction approaches, ISCO provides
Iterative Superquadrics
reComposition
consistently
more accurate
3D reconstructions, even from
images in the wild. Code available at https://github.
com/ExplainableML/ISCO.

1. Introduction
Although the Jeff Koons sculpture “Balloon Dog” does
not have a nose or teeth of a dog, we are able to recognize
the dog when we look at the sculpture as a whole. This is
because we can decompose the sculpture into semantically
meaningful parts and recompose them in our minds to give
it the name of a familiar object. Equipping machines with
the same perceptual grouping capabilities would improve
how they process and interact with the environment [46].
In this context, decomposing 3D objects by means of
simple 3D shapes [45, 10] abstract away complex details
of the object, providing a parsimonious representation useful in many applications, such as robotics [62] and virtual
reality [35]. Recent works addressed this task by training
a a neural network on a collection of 3D shapes, showing
that semantically consistent part decompositions emerge,
i.e. networks predict the same semantic parts (e.g. back,

Instance
Segmentation

recomposition

Iterative Superquadrics reComposition
direct superquadrics fitting
x times
initializing superquadrics
mixed reality app

Figure 1: ISCO recomposes 3D objects from real-world images using superquadrics. It acts on 2D silhouettes and not
3D models learned via a neural network, placing new superquadrics iteratively into the scene. The final 3D abstraction and simple parts can then be used for mixed reality.

legs) across shapes (e.g. chairs, sofa) [60, 44, 43]. However, the data collection is costly in the real world, where the
need for simple compositional representations is more evident. At the same time, instance-based approaches [29, 66]
sidestep such need, but they require 3D inputs (e.g. point
clouds) and do not extract semantically relatable parts.
In this work we take a different perspective, proposing Iterative Superquadric reComposition of Objects (ISCO), an
instance-level self-supervised algorithm that, given multiple 2D views of an object, recomposes its 3D shape using
superquadrics [45, 44], without access to 3D data. ISCO
compares real and synthesized 2D views via a differentiable
rendering pipeline [33], directly optimizing the primitive
parameters. To extract more precise abstractions, we perform an iterative recomposition of the object i) initializing
primitives in regions with high reconstruction error; ii) fitting them by prioritizing local accuracy over global coverage, representing finer details as the number of primitives
increases. Results on ShapeNet [5] and ShapeNet-Part [74]
show that ISCO achieves accurately reconstructs 3D shapes,
identifying semantic parts much better than recent instance-

18013

