This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FunnyBirds: A Synthetic Vision Dataset for a
Part-Based Analysis of Explainable AI Methods
Robin Hesse1
1

Simone Schaub-Meyer1,2

Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

1. Introduction
Even though deep learning models have achieved breakthrough results in computer vision, their inner workings remain largely opaque. As a result, deep networks sometimes
receive only limited user trust and cannot be applied blindly
in safety-critical domains. To overcome this issue, a growing interest in the field of explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI) has emerged, attempting to explain the inner workings of deep neural models in a human-comprehensible
way. However, since there are generally no ground-truth explanations, evaluating XAI methods remains an open chalDataset and code available at github.com/visinf/funnybirds/.

2

hessian.AI

Input

Abstract
The field of explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) aims
to uncover the inner workings of complex deep neural models. While being crucial for safety-critical domains, XAI
inherently lacks ground-truth explanations, making its automatic evaluation an unsolved problem. We address this
challenge by proposing a novel synthetic vision dataset,
named FunnyBirds, and accompanying automatic evaluation protocols. Our dataset allows performing semantically
meaningful image interventions, e.g., removing individual
object parts, which has three important implications. First,
it enables analyzing explanations on a part level, which
is closer to human comprehension than existing methods
that evaluate on a pixel level. Second, by comparing the
model output for inputs with removed parts, we can estimate ground-truth part importances that should be reflected
in the explanations. Third, by mapping individual explanations into a common space of part importances, we can analyze a variety of different explanation types in a single common framework. Using our tools, we report results for 24
different combinations of neural models and XAI methods,
demonstrating the strengths and weaknesses of the assessed
methods in a fully automatic and systematic manner.

Stefan Roth1,2

Intervention Annotation

GT part importance

0.61

B.I.

Model explanation
Estimated part importance

Com.

0.47

.62

0.5

1.0
Acc.

Cor.
Con.

Figure 1. Schematic illustration of our proposed dataset and analysis framework. For each input image, we render the corresponding part annotation and part interventions (e.g., removed beak).
The interventions are used to estimate ground-truth importance
scores of each input part, which are then compared to the estimated
part importances from the explanation method under inspection
(here [44]). We evaluate multiple dimensions of explainability to
draw a more conclusive picture. Please refer to Sec. 4.1 for details.

lenge. In fact, a third of XAI papers lack sound quantitative
evaluation [38], while other work has limited comparability [31] or problematic evaluation protocols [23, 38].
To overcome the issue of missing ground-truth explanations, automatic evaluations are often done via proxy tasks
that adhere to the idea of performing image interventions
by removing certain input features to then measure the resulting impact on the model output [21, 23, 55]. As image interventions are non-trivial to perform on existing vision datasets, they are usually applied on a pixel level, e.g.,
masking out single pixels [21, 23, 27, 52, 55]. However, this
and related approaches share several downsides. First, performing interventions, as well as evaluating explanations
on a pixel level, is disconnected from the downstream task
of providing human-understandable explanations since humans perceive images in concepts rather than pixels. Second, existing automatic evaluation protocols are developed
for specific explanation types, e.g., pixel-level attribution
maps, and thus, cannot be extended to other explanation

3981

