This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sample-adaptive Augmentation for Point Cloud Recognition
Against Real-world Corruptions
Jie Wang1 , Lihe Ding1 , Tingfa Xu1,† , Shaocong Dong1 , Xinli Xu1 , Long Bai2 , Jianan Li1,†
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
https://github.com/Roywangj/AdaptPoint

Abstract

Discriminator

Robust 3D perception under corruption has become an
essential task for the realm of 3D vision. While current data
augmentation techniques usually perform random transformations on all point cloud objects in an ofﬂine way and
ignore the structure of the samples, resulting in over-orunder enhancement. In this work, we propose an alternative to make sample-adaptive transformations based on
the structure of the sample to cope with potential corruption via an auto-augmentation framework, named as AdaptPoint. Specially, we leverage a imitator, consisting of a
Deformation Controller and a Mask Controller, respectively in charge of predicting deformation parameters and
producing a per-point mask, based on the intrinsic structural information of the input point cloud, and then conduct corruption simulations on top. Then a discriminator
is utilized to prevent the generation of excessive corruption that deviates from the original data distribution. In
addition, a perception-guidance feedback mechanism is incorporated to guide the generation of samples with appropriate difﬁculty level. Furthermore, to address the paucity
of real-world corrupted point cloud, we also introduce a
new dataset ScanObjectNN-C, that exhibits greater similarity to actual data in real-world environments, especially
when contrasted with preceding CAD datasets. Experiments show that our method achieves state-of-the-art results
on multiple corruption benchmarks, including ModelNet-C,
our ScanObjectNN-C, and ShapeNet-C.

1. Introduction
3D vision has gained attention for its potential applications in robotics and autonomous driving. Existing methods [14, 15, 22, 16] primarily focused on clean data [26, 1]
with few corruptions, whereas practical applications often
entail numerous corruptions. Consequently, these models
exhibit poor performance in such scenarios. As such, im† Correspondence to: Jianan Li and Tingfa Xu.

14330

Guidance

Classifier

Imitator

Input
Sample

Augmented
Sample

Feedback

Figure 1. Workﬂow of AdaptPoint. The AdaptPoint framework
involves a co-evolving strategy where the imitator, discriminator,
and point cloud classiﬁer are jointly trained. During the training
process, the imitator is trained to transform clean data into realistic corruptions while receiving feedback and guidance from the
classiﬁer and discriminator, respectively.

proving the robustness of point cloud models against corruption remains a crucial but challenging problem.
To enhance the model’s resistance to corruption, a frequently employed technique in prior studies is data augmentation [7, 9, 18]. Despite their effectiveness, these methods
are subject to two common limitations. Firstly, these ofﬂine
methods fail to consider the structure of the classiﬁer, which
may lead to the generation of samples that are not beneﬁcial for enhancing model robustness. Additionally, they often overlook intrinsic features of the data and apply random
transformations to all samples, resulting in augmentations
that are either overly difﬁcult or overly simplistic.
To tackle the issues at hand, we introduce a new autoaugmentation framework, AdaptPoint, that is speciﬁcally
tailored to generate augmented samples that consider the
inherent structure of input point cloud. At the heart of our
proposed method lies the sample-adaptive imitator network,
which is designed to generate point cloud that are representative of real-world scenarios. It ﬁrst extracts local geometric features from the input point cloud, resulting in a subset
of points that encode these features. Subsequently, the imitator network is divided into two branches, namely the Deformation Controller and the Mask Controller. The former module, is tasked with modifying the point cloud struc-

