This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Autoencoder for Point-Cloud Self-Supervised Representation Learning
Siming Yan1 Zhenpei Yang1 Haoxiang Li2 Chen Song1 Li Guan2 Hao Kang2
Gang Hua2
1

Qixing Huang1

The University of Texas at Austin

2

Wormpex AI Research

Abstract
This paper advocates the use of implicit surface representation in autoencoder-based self-supervised 3D representation learning. The most popular and accessible 3D
representation, i.e., point clouds, involves discrete samples
of the underlying continuous 3D surface. This discretization
process introduces sampling variations on the 3D shape,
making it challenging to develop transferable knowledge
of the true 3D geometry. In the standard autoencoding
paradigm, the encoder is compelled to encode not only the
3D geometry but also information on the specific discrete
sampling of the 3D shape into the latent code. This is
because the point cloud reconstructed by the decoder is
considered unacceptable unless there is a perfect mapping
between the original and the reconstructed point clouds.
This paper introduces the Implicit AutoEncoder (IAE), a
simple yet effective method that addresses the sampling
variation issue by replacing the commonly-used point-cloud
decoder with an implicit decoder. The implicit decoder
reconstructs a continuous representation of the 3D shape,
independent of the imperfections in the discrete samples.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed IAE
achieves state-of-the-art performance across various selfsupervised learning benchmarks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/SimingYan/IAE.

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement and growing accessibility of
commodity scanning devices have made it easier to capture
vast amounts of 3D data represented by point clouds. The
success of point-based deep networks [46, 47] additionally
enables many 3D vision applications to exploit this natural
and flexible representation. Exciting results have emerged
in recent years, ranging from object-level understanding,
including shape classification [5] and part segmentation [55,
75, 77], to scene-level understanding, such as 3D object
detection [11, 17, 56] and 3D semantic segmentation [3].
Annotating point-cloud datasets is a highly labor-

Sample 1

Sample 2

Sample 3

Figure 1: The Sampling Variation Problem. Given a continuous
3D shape, there are infinitely many ways to sample a point cloud.
The proposed Implicit AutoEncoder (IAE) learns a latent representation of the true 3D geometry independent of the specific discrete
sampling process. By alleviating the sampling variation problem,
IAE improves existing point-cloud self-supervised representation
learning methods in various downstream tasks.

intensive task due to the challenges involved in designing
3D interfaces and visualizing point clouds. As a result,
researchers are motivated to explore self-supervised representation learning paradigms. The fundamental concept
is to pre-train deep neural networks on large unlabeled
datasets and fine-tune them on smaller datasets annotated
based on specific task requirements. A carefully designed
self-supervised representation learning paradigm effectively
initializes the network weights, enabling fine-tuning on
downstream tasks (e.g., classification and segmentation)
to avoid weak local minima and achieve improved stability [15].
Research in self-supervised representation learning predates the history of 3D computer vision. Notably, significant
effort has been dedicated to developing self-supervised
learning methods for 2D images [6,12,31,41,69,82,83], with
autoencoders being one of the most popular tools [4, 21, 41,
59,63]. An autoencoder-based self-supervised representation
learning pipeline comprises an encoder that transforms the
input into a latent code and a decoder that expands the

14530

