This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

P ROMPT C AP: Prompt-Guided Image Captioning for VQA with GPT-3
Yushi Hu1 * Hang Hua2⇤ Zhengyuan Yang3
Weijia Shi1 Noah A. Smith1,4 Jiebo Luo2
1
University of Washington 2 University of Rochester
3
Microsoft 4 Allen Institute for AI
https://yushi-hu.github.io/promptcap_demo/
Abstract
Knowledge-based visual question answering (VQA) involves questions that require world knowledge beyond the
image to yield the correct answer. Large language models (LMs) like GPT-3 are particularly helpful for this task
because of their strong knowledge retrieval and reasoning
capabilities. To enable LM to understand images, prior work
uses a captioning model to convert images into text. However,
when summarizing an image in a single caption sentence,
which visual entities to describe are often underspecified.
Generic image captions often miss visual details essential
for the LM to answer visual questions correctly. To address
this challenge, we propose P ROMPT C AP (Prompt-guided
image Captioning), a captioning model designed to serve as
a better connector between images and black-box LMs. Different from generic captions, P ROMPT C AP takes a naturallanguage prompt to control the visual entities to describe
in the generated caption. The prompt contains a question
that the caption should aid in answering. To avoid extra
annotation, P ROMPT C AP is trained by examples synthesized
with GPT-3 and existing datasets. We demonstrate P ROMPTC AP’s effectiveness on an existing pipeline in which GPT-3
is prompted with image captions to carry out VQA. P ROMPTC AP outperforms generic captions by a large margin and
achieves state-of-the-art accuracy on knowledge-based VQA
tasks (60.4% on OK-VQA and 59.6% on A-OKVQA). Zeroshot results on WebQA show that P ROMPT C AP generalizes
well to unseen domains.1

1. Introduction
Knowledge-based visual question answering (VQA) [37]
extends traditional VQA tasks [3] with questions that require
* Equal contribution. Correspondance to <Yushi Hu: yushihu@uw.edu>,
<Hang Hua: hhua2@cs.rochester.edu>
1 All codes, data, and demos are available on the project page.
HF checkpoint: https://huggingface.co/tifa-benchmark/
promptcap-coco-vqa

What is the time of the day?
PromptCap
ChatGPT

A street with traffic lights in the evening.
Evening.
What kind of food does the
restaurant on the sign serve?

PromptCap
ChatGPT

A traffic light on a street corner with a
McDonalds sign.
Fast food. Specifically, McDonald's serves
burgers, fries, and other fast food items.

v.s. COCO caption: A traffic light on a pole on a city street.

Figure 1. Illustration of VQA with P ROMPT C AP and ChatGPT.
P ROMPT C AP is designed to work with black-box language models
(e.g., GPT-3, ChatGPT) by describing question-related visual information in the text. Different from generic captions, P ROMPT C AP
customizes the caption according to the input question prompt,
which helps ChatGPT understand the image and give correct answers to the user. In contrast, ChatGPT cannot infer the answers
from the vanilla human-written caption from MSCOCO.

broad knowledge and commonsense reasoning to yield the
correct answer. Existing systems on knowledge-based VQA
retrieve external knowledge from various sources, including
knowledge graphs [13, 36, 63], Wikipedia [36, 63, 12, 15,
29], and web search [35, 63]. Recent work [67] finds that
modern language models (LMs) like GPT-3 [5] are particularly useful for this task because of their striking knowledge
retrieval and reasoning abilities. The current state-of-the-art
methods [67, 15, 29, 1] all make use of recent large language
models (GPT-3 or Chinchilla).
One key challenge is to allow LMs to understand images.
Many top-performing LMs (e.g., GPT-3, ChatGPT) are only

2963

