This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stochastic Segmentation with Conditional Categorical Diffusion Models
Lukas Zbinden∗
Adrian Thomas Huber

Lars Doorenbos∗
Raphael Sznitman

Theodoros Pissas
Pablo Márquez-Neila

University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
{lukas.zbinden,lars.doorenbos,theodoros.pissas,raphael.sznitman,pablo.marquez}@unibe.ch

Abstract
Semantic segmentation has made significant progress in
recent years thanks to deep neural networks, but the common objective of generating a single segmentation output
that accurately matches the image’s content may not be
suitable for safety-critical domains such as medical diagnostics and autonomous driving. Instead, multiple possible correct segmentation maps may be required to reflect
the true distribution of annotation maps. In this context,
stochastic semantic segmentation methods must learn to
predict conditional distributions of labels given the image,
but this is challenging due to the typically multimodal distributions, high-dimensional output spaces, and limited annotation data. To address these challenges, we propose a conditional categorical diffusion model (CCDM) for semantic segmentation based on Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models. Our model is conditioned to the input image,
enabling it to generate multiple segmentation label maps
that account for the aleatoric uncertainty arising from divergent ground truth annotations. Our experimental results
show that CCDM achieves state-of-the-art performance on
LIDC, a stochastic semantic segmentation dataset, and outperforms established baselines on the classical segmentation dataset Cityscapes.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has significantly progressed in
recent years due to powerful deep neural networks. For
most methods, the key objective is to generate a single segmentation output that accurately matches the image’s content. However, this may not be suitable for safety-critical
domains such as medical diagnostics and autonomous driving, as images in these applications often suffer from inherent ambiguity or annotations that have differences in opinion. In these cases, generating a single coherent segmentation may be hopeless to fully describe the set of correct
* Equal contribution

Ground-truth

Generated samples

Figure 1: Examples from the LIDC dataset, where expert
radiologists were asked to annotate lung nodules. Despite
their expertise, they disagree significantly on many cases.
Standard segmentation networks fail to capture these variations, thereby giving a false sense of confidence in model
predictions. Our approach learns the distribution of possible
labels, allowing us to generate realistic and diverse segmentations.

labeling.
Instead, multiple possible correct segmentation maps
may be required to reflect the true distribution of annotations. For instance, Fig. 1 illustrates the task of lung nodule segmentation from CT scans where expert annotators
provide multiple valid segmentation maps. In this context, stochastic semantic segmentation methods must learn
to predict conditional distributions of labels given the image. Doing so is challenging, however, as the distribution is
typically multimodal, the output space is high-dimensional,
and annotation data is limited.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) appear well-suited to overcome these challenges. DDPMs
have recently drawn strong interest in computer vision as
a framework for learning complex distributions in highdimensional spaces. After achieving state-of-the-art performance on image synthesis [13], they have been successfully extended to solve tasks such as text-to-image generation [41], counterfactual explanation generation [24], inpainting [34], but also image classification [56] and seman-

1119

