This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pre-training Vision Transformers with Very Limited Synthesized Images
Ryo Nakamura1,2,∗ , Hirokatsu Kataoka1,∗ , Sora Takashima1,3 ,
Edgar Josafat Martinez Noriega1,3 , Rio Yokota1,3 , Nakamasa Inoue1,3
1
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST),
2
Fukuoka University, 3 Tokyo Institute of Technology

Abstract
Formula-driven supervised learning (FDSL) is a pretraining method that relies on synthetic images generated
from mathematical formulae such as fractals. Prior work
on FDSL has shown that pre-training vision transformers
on such synthetic datasets can yield competitive accuracy
on a wide range of downstream tasks. These synthetic images are categorized according to the parameters in the
mathematical formula that generate them. In the present
work, we hypothesize that the process for generating different instances for the same category in FDSL, can be
viewed as a form of data augmentation. We validate this
hypothesis by replacing the instances with data augmentation, which means we only need a single image per category. Our experiments shows that this one-instance fractal
database (OFDB) performs better than the original dataset
where instances were explicitly generated. We further scale
up OFDB to 21,000 categories and show that it matches, or
even surpasses, the model pre-trained on ImageNet-21k in
ImageNet-1k fine-tuning. The number of images in OFDB
is 21k, whereas ImageNet-21k has 14M. This opens new
possibilities for pre-training vision transformers with much
smaller datasets.

1. Introduction
Pre-training has become a standard procedure when
training deep neural networks in computer vision [5, 45].
Pre-trained models are known to exhibit superior convergence and generalization for downstream tasks as compared
to models that are trained from scratch. However, pretraining large vision models requires enormous data, which
makes pre-training state-of-the-art vision models very expensive regarding the required amount of data and computation.
During the past decade, ImageNet has served as a common dataset for pre-training vision models [13]. Models
pre-trained on the classification task of 1.28M images in
∗ equal contribution

GitHub code : https://github.com/ryoo-nakamura/OFDB/

(a)

(b) Inside Fractal Category
FractalDB

1,000 instances per category

OFDB
One-instance FractalDB

yo
Onl

ne

Ins t

a nc

e !!

Figure 1: (a) Fine-tuning accuracy on CIFAR-100 for
the number of images for pre-training. The line plot for
ImageNet-1k indicates the results when using random sampling to reduce the data for pre-training. (b) One-instance
fractal database (OFDB) consists of only 1,000 images in
total. The figure shows the category representation. OFDB
contains a single instance per category.
ImageNet were transferred to Object Detection [15, 38, 45],
Semantic Segmentation [40, 34], and Video Recognition [8,
2]. In the 2020s, the pre-training of Vision Transformers (ViT) [14] has become increasingly popular. However
large vision transformers are said to require datasets that are
much larger than ImageNet, such as JFT-300M/3B [36], in
order to achieve their true potential.
Pre-training increasingly larger models on increasingly
larger datasets has shown a monotonic improvement in the
accuracy of downstream tasks. However, creating datasets
with billions of labeled images is not the ultimate solution
to all our problems. First, the cost of manually labeling such

20360

