This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

R3D3: Dense 3D Reconstruction of Dynamic Scenes from Multiple Cameras
Aron Schmied1 *

Martin Danelljan1
Marc Pollefeys1,2
1
ETH Zürich 2 Microsoft
https://www.vis.xyz/pub/r3d3/

Single-Camera

Abstract

Correlation

Dense 3D reconstruction and ego-motion estimation are
key challenges in autonomous driving and robotics. Compared to the complex, multi-modal systems deployed today,
multi-camera systems provide a simpler, low-cost alternative. However, camera-based 3D reconstruction of complex dynamic scenes has proven extremely difficult, as existing solutions often produce incomplete or incoherent results. We propose R3D3, a multi-camera system for dense
3D reconstruction and ego-motion estimation. Our approach iterates between geometric estimation that exploits
spatial-temporal information from multiple cameras, and
monocular depth refinement. We integrate multi-camera
feature correlation and dense bundle adjustment operators
that yield robust geometric depth and pose estimates. To
improve reconstruction where geometric depth is unreliable, e.g. for moving objects or low-textured regions, we
introduce learnable scene priors via a depth refinement network. We show that this design enables a dense, consistent
3D reconstruction of challenging, dynamic outdoor environments. Consequently, we achieve state-of-the-art dense
depth prediction on the DDAD and NuScenes benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Translating sensory inputs into a dense 3D reconstruction of the environment and tracking the position of the observer is a cornerstone of robotics and fundamental to the
development of autonomous vehicles (AVs). Contemporary
systems rely on fusing many sensor modalities like camera, LiDAR, RADAR, IMU and more, making hardware
and software stacks complex and expensive. In contrast,
multi-camera systems provide a simpler, low-cost alternative already widely available in modern consumer vehicles.
However, image-based dense 3D reconstruction and egomotion estimation of large-scale, dynamic scenes is an open
research problem as moving objects, uniform and repetitive
textures, and optical degradations pose significant algorithmic challenges.
* Equal contribution.

Fisher Yu1

Tobias Fischer1 *

Optimization

Multi-Camera

Depth Prediction

R3D3 (Ours)
Correlation

Multi-Cam
Optimization

Refine Depth

Figure 1. Many methods use temporal context but neglect intercamera information, leading to incomplete results (top). Other
works focus on exploiting inter-camera context but neglect temporal information, yielding incoherent predictions (middle). In contrast, our method achieves a consistent, dense 3D reconstruction
by iteratively integrating geometric depth estimation from multiple cameras with monocular depth refinement (bottom).

Existing works approaching the aforementioned task can
be divided into two lines of research. Many methods have
focused on recovering 3D scene structure via structurefrom-motion (SfM). In particular, simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) methods focus on accurate egomotion estimation and usually only recover sparse 3D structure [9, 29, 34, 12, 11]. They typically treat dynamic objects
or uniformly textured regions as outliers yielding an incomplete 3D reconstruction result, which makes them less suitable for AVs and robotics. In addition, only a few works
have focused on multi-camera setups [24, 8, 33, 30, 26]. In
contrast, multi-view stereo (MVS) methods [31, 32, 41, 28,

3216

