This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlipNeRF: Flipped Reflection Rays for Few-shot Novel View Synthesis
Seunghyeon Seo Yeonjin Chang Nojun Kwak
Seoul National Univeristy
{zzzlssh, yjean8315, nojunk}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has been a mainstream in
novel view synthesis with its remarkable quality of rendered
images and simple architecture. Although NeRF has been
developed in various directions improving continuously its
performance, the necessity of a dense set of multi-view images still exists as a stumbling block to progress for practical application. In this work, we propose FlipNeRF, a novel
regularization method for few-shot novel view synthesis by
utilizing our proposed flipped reflection rays. The flipped
reflection rays are explicitly derived from the input ray directions and estimated normal vectors, and play a role of
effective additional training rays while enabling to estimate
more accurate surface normals and learn the 3D geometry
effectively. Since the surface normal and the scene depth are
both derived from the estimated densities along a ray, the
accurate surface normal leads to more exact depth estimation, which is a key factor for few-shot novel view synthesis.
Furthermore, with our proposed Uncertainty-aware Emptiness Loss and Bottleneck Feature Consistency Loss, FlipNeRF is able to estimate more reliable outputs with reducing
floating artifacts effectively across the different scene structures, and enhance the feature-level consistency between
the pair of the rays cast toward the photo-consistent pixels
without any additional feature extractor, respectively. Our
FlipNeRF achieves the SOTA performance on the multiple
benchmarks across all the scenarios.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [24] has achieved great
success in rendering photo-realistic images from novel
viewpoints. However, the necessity of a dense set of training images remains as a practical bottleneck since it suffers from significant performance degradation when trained
with sparse views.
There are two mainstreams for few-shot novel view synthesis: pre-training and regularization methods, both of
which focus on learning the 3D geometry efficiently from
sparse inputs. The pre-training methods [43, 5, 6, 39, 20,

(a) Sparse training views
mip-NeRF [1]

Ref-NeRF [36]

MixNeRF [31]

FlipNeRF (Ours)

(b) Synthesized unseen views

Figure 1: Synthesis results from sparse inputs. Our FlipNeRF significantly improves rendering quality compared to
other baselines. Compared to the vanilla mip-NeRF [1] and
MixNeRF [31], which is the state-of-the-art regularization
method, ours reduces the noises and floating artifacts noticeably with superior surface normal estimation. Although
Ref-NeRF [36] estimates smooth normal vectors, it shows
much inferior rendering results to ours with a large chunk
of noise under the few-shot setting.

12, 19, 29, 35, 14] require large-scale datasets consisting of
different scenes with multi-view images for injecting prior
knowledge during the pre-training, while the regularization
methods [25, 31, 15, 11, 30, 8, 17] are optimized per scene,
exploiting additional training resources, e.g. unseen viewpoints [25, 15, 17], depth map generation [8, 30], off-the-

22883

