This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ExposureDiffusion: Learning to Expose for Low-light Image Enhancement
Yufei Wang1 , Yi Yu1 , Wenhan Yang2 , Lanqing Guo1 , Lap-Pui Chau3 , Alex C. Kot1 , Bihan Wen1 *
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{yufei001, yuyi0010, lanqing001, eackot, bihan.wen}@ntu.edu.sg
yangwh@pcl.ac.cn

lap-pui.chau@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

Over the past few years, learning-based methods for lowlight image enhancement [22, 21, 17] have gained significant attention and made remarkable progress, and most of
them are conducted in the sRGB space. Recently, the enhancement in the raw space is demonstrated to have unique
* Corresponding author.

𝑋!"#

Shared 𝐹%

𝑋#

𝑋$

Shared 𝐹%

Shared 𝐹%

Learned exposure process 𝒑𝚯 (𝑿𝟎:𝑻 )
Synthesizing using paired real data (X ! , 𝑋$ )

…
𝑋!

𝑋!"#

𝑋#

Synthesizing using 𝑋$ and noise model

𝑋$

!

1. Introduction

…
𝑋!

arg min 𝐷"# (𝑝! (𝑋$:& )||𝑞 𝑋$:& )

Previous raw image-based low-light image enhancement
methods predominantly relied on feed-forward neural networks to learn deterministic mappings from low-light to
normally-exposed images. However, they failed to capture
critical distribution information, leading to visually undesirable results. This work addresses the issue by seamlessly integrating a diffusion model with a physics-based
exposure model. Different from a vanilla diffusion model
that has to perform Gaussian denoising, with the injected
physics-based exposure model, our restoration process can
directly start from a noisy image instead of pure noise.
As such, our method obtains significantly improved performance and reduced inference time compared with vanilla
diffusion models. To make full use of the advantages of different intermediate steps, we further propose an adaptive
residual layer that effectively screens out the side-effect in
the iterative refinement when the intermediate results have
been already well-exposed. The proposed framework can
work with both real-paired datasets, SOTA noise models,
and different backbone networks. We evaluate the proposed
method on various public benchmarks, achieving promising
results with consistent improvements using different exposure models and backbones. Besides, the proposed method
achieves better generalization capacity for unseen amplifying ratios and better performance than a larger feedforward neural model when few parameters are adopted. The
code is released at https://github.com/wyf0912/
ExposureDiffusion.

Physics-based exposure process 𝒒(𝑿𝟎:𝑻 )

Figure 1: We propose to simulate the physics-based exposure process using a shared neural network FΘ in a progressive manner. The learned exposure process is optimized to
approximate the physics-based exposure process by minimizing the derived variational upper bound of the KL divergence of their distributions. Besides, the proposed strategy
can be applied on real-captured paired data (blue array) and
synthetic data with different noise models (orange array),
and in different backbone networks. Benefiting from learning a continuous exposure process, the proposed method
can be applied to work with an arbitrary amplifying factor, and better performance can be achieved by the iterative
refinement process.

advantages over sRGB spaces [14]. For example, raw images provide a higher dynamic range, leading to better performance in extremely dark environments. Besides, the linear correlation between the low-light and normally-exposed
images prevents improper exposure level adjustment in the
enhancement process. In addition, the noise modeling in
the raw space is more straightforward than that in the sRGB
space by ruling out the effect of increasingly complicated
image signal processing pipelines. In such space, the domain gap between synthetic and captured data is small
and the model trained with paired synthetic images ex-

12438

