This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Locally Stylized Neural Radiance Fields
Hong-Wing Pang1 , Binh-Son Hua2,3 , and Sai-Kit Yeung1
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

2

Trinity College Dublin

3

VinAI Research, Vietnam

Abstract
In recent years, there has been increasing interest in applying stylization on 3D scenes from a reference style image,
in particular onto neural radiance fields (NeRF). While performing stylization directly on NeRF guarantees appearance
consistency over arbitrary novel views, it is a challenging
problem to guide the transfer of patterns from the style image
onto different parts of the NeRF scene. In this work, we propose a stylization framework for NeRF based on local style
transfer. In particular, we use a hash-grid encoding to learn
the embedding of the appearance and geometry components,
and show that the mapping defined by the hash table allows
us to control the stylization to a certain extent. Stylization
is then achieved by optimizing the appearance branch while
keeping the geometry branch fixed. To support local style
transfer, we propose a new loss function that utilizes a segmentation network and bipartite matching to establish region
correspondences between the style image and the content
images obtained from volume rendering. Our experiments
show that our method yields plausible stylization results with
novel view synthesis while having flexible controllability via
manipulating and customizing the region correspondences.

1. Introduction
Stylizing a visual world is an increasingly popular and
demanding task in games, movies, or extended reality applications. Imagine that one can navigate in an artistic virtual world that resembles the painting styles by different
renowned artists. This problem is generally known as 3D
style transfer.
Traditionally, 3D style transfer can be achieved via postprocessing. For example, in the well-known traditional computer graphics pipeline, it typically involves a programmable
shading stage to post-process the appearance of the rendered
geometry or screen images. Neural radiance field [19] is a
recent advance in 3D deep learning that aims to represent
a 3D scene implicitly by using a neural network trained
with multi-view images and differentiable volume render-

Figure 1. We propose a stylization method for NeRF, aware of
correspondences between different style patterns and local regions
within the rendered image.

ing. Since this pioneer work, significant milestones have
been made to greatly improve the performance of neural
radiance fields in practice, including improved spatial representation [16], training convergence [20], explicit geometry
representation [30]. It is therefore promising to revisit the
3D style transfer problem by stylizing a 3D scene implicitly
represented by a neural radiance field.
In this work, our goal is to transfer the appearance from a
reference style image to a neural radiance field and keep the
style transfer consistent across novel views rendered from
the radiance field. We are inspired by works in image [2, 6]
and video style transfer methods that have received great
attention since the introduction of modern neural networks.
While previous works [21, 31] have proposed adapting the
style transfer problem to neural radiance fields as well, the
stylization results lack diversity and controllability.
To address these limitations, we devise a new style transfer method that considers the local transfer between a reference style image and the radiance field rendering. In particular, our method treats style transfer as a post-processing
step after the original geometry and appearance of the neural
radiance field is learned and therefore aim to perform style
transfer while keeping the geometry implicitly represented

307

