This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Taxonomy Adaptive Cross-Domain Adaptation in Medical Imaging via
Optimization Trajectory Distillation
Jianan Fan1 , Dongnan Liu1 , Hang Chang2 , Heng Huang3 , Mei Chen4 , and Weidong Cai1
1

University of Sydney

2

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

3

University of Maryland at College Park

4

Microsoft

jfan6480@uni.sydney.edu.au
dongnan.liu@sydney.edu.au
hchang@lbl.gov
henghuanghh@gmail.com
Mei.Chen@microsoft.com
tom.cai@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
The success of automated medical image analysis depends on large-scale and expert-annotated training sets.
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has been raised
as a promising approach to alleviate the burden of labeled
data collection. However, they generally operate under
the closed-set adaptation setting assuming an identical label set between the source and target domains, which is
over-restrictive in clinical practice where new classes commonly exist across datasets due to taxonomic inconsistency.
While several methods have been presented to tackle both
domain shifts and incoherent label sets, none of them take
into account the common characteristics of the two issues
and consider the learning dynamics along network training. In this work, we propose optimization trajectory distillation, a unified approach to address the two technical
challenges from a new perspective. It exploits the lowrank nature of gradient space and devises a dual-stream
distillation algorithm to regularize the learning dynamics
of insufficiently annotated domain and classes with the external guidance obtained from reliable sources. Our approach resolves the issue of inadequate navigation along
network optimization, which is the major obstacle in the
taxonomy adaptive cross-domain adaptation scenario. We
evaluate the proposed method extensively on several tasks
towards various endpoints with clinical and open-world
significance. The results demonstrate its effectiveness and
improvements over previous methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/camwew/TADA-MI.

1. Introduction
Automated and objective analysis of medical images is
an important research topic and has been explored in various clinical applications [57, 13]. To relieve the burden
of acquiring massive annotated data for model development on new domains, several unsupervised domain adapta-

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the issue of taxonomic inconsistency
with nuclei recognition. The category label sets are incoherent
across datasets. Different colours indicate the class each nucleus
belongs to. The red asterisks denote novel classes only existing
in Dataset 2. (b) Concept of the proposed method. We perform
optimization trajectory distillation to deliver external navigation
for learning target domain and new classes where the optimization
steps tend to be restricted and unreliable.

tion (UDA) methods [7, 38, 37] are proposed to mitigate the
data distribution bias [51] between a richly labeled source
domain and a target domain with no explicit supervision.
However, these works assume a closed-set adaptation
setting that the source and target domains should necessarily share the identical category label space and definition
[44]. The restriction limits their practical applicability in
the clinical wild [15]. Unlike natural images where the definitions of different entity categories (e.g., cat v.s. dog) are
structured and globally unified, in the medical domain, inconsistency in taxonomy across different countries or institutes is a common issue compromising the feasibility of
cross-domain adaptation [12]. Take nuclei recognition in
histology images as an example, the ambiguous biologi-

21174

