This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SILT: Shadow-aware Iterative Label Tuning for
Learning to Detect Shadows from Noisy Labels
Han Yang1,∗ , Tianyu Wang1,2 *, Xiaowei Hu3,1,†, and Chi-Wing Fu1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The Shun Hing Institute of Advanced Engineering
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Abstract
Existing shadow detection datasets often contain missing
or mislabeled shadows, which can hinder the performance
of deep learning models trained directly on such data. To
address this issue, we propose SILT, the Shadow-aware Iterative Label Tuning framework, which explicitly considers noise in shadow labels and trains the deep model in
a self-training manner. Specifically, we incorporate strong
data augmentations with shadow counterfeiting to help the
network better recognize non-shadow regions and alleviate
overfitting. We also devise a simple yet effective label tuning strategy with global-local fusion and shadow-aware filtering to encourage the network to make significant refinements on the noisy labels. We evaluate the performance of
SILT by relabeling the test set of the SBU [55] dataset and
conducting various experiments. Our results show that even
a simple U-Net [42] trained with SILT can outperform all
state-of-the-art methods by a large margin. When trained
on SBU / UCF [78] / ISTD [56], our network can successfully reduce the Balanced Error Rate by 25.2% / 36.9% /
21.3% over the best state-of-the-art method.

1. Introduction
Detecting shadows is very challenging, since shadows
have no specific shapes, colors, or textures, and their intensity may just be slightly lower than the surroundings.
Thanks to the advances in deep learning, many works [81,
80, 3, 73] have been developed and they show great progress
in detecting shadows. They mostly propose new and delicate network architectures and train the network directly on
shadow datasets with labeled shadow regions.
However, it can be observed that labels in existing
datasets [78, 13] may not be accurate. For example, as
Fig. 1 shows, the training samples may lack details (row
1); some shadows could be incomplete (row 2); some self
* Joint first authors
† Corresponding author (xwhu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk)

(a) Training images
in existing datasets

(b) Original labels
in existing datasets

(c) Our refined
labels

Figure 1. Column (b): Labels in existing datasets may not be accurate. Column (c): Our automatically-refined annotations. Note
that row 1 is from UCF [78] and rows 2-4 are from SBU [55].

shadows may be missed (row 3); and the annotations could
be rough (row 4). Fundamentally, there are two main reasons. First, the annotations of the SBU [55] dataset are
generated from a manually lazy-labeled dataset using an
LSSVM-based method, so the resulting annotations can be
noisy, and some detailed and background shadows may be
ignored. Second, the perception of shadow can be subjective, especially for self shadow and soft shadow. Since
datasets are typically prepared by several human annotators,
shadow and non-shadow regions could be labeled inconsistently in the same dataset. Hence, existing methods trained
on such noisy datasets could be easily biased by the noisy
labels, which hinder them to achieve better performance.
To learn from data with noisy labels, it is intuitive to
adopt a self-training framework [65], i.e., train a network

12687

