This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Clothing and Pose Invariant 3D Shape Representation
for Long-Term Person Re-Identification
Feng Liu, Minchul Kim, ZiAng Gu, Anil Jain, Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{liufeng6,kimminc2,guziang,jain,liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract
Long-Term Person Re-Identification (LT-ReID) has become increasingly crucial in computer vision and biometrics. In this work, we aim to extend LT-ReID beyond pedestrian recognition to include a wider range of real-world human activities while still accounting for cloth-changing scenarios over large time gaps. This setting poses additional
challenges due to the geometric misalignment and appearance ambiguity caused by the diversity of human pose and
clothing. To address these challenges, we propose a new
approach 3DInvarReID for (i) disentangling identity from
non-identity components (pose, clothing shape, and texture)
of 3D clothed humans, and (ii) reconstructing accurate 3D
clothed body shapes and learning discriminative features
of naked body shapes for person ReID in a joint manner.
To better evaluate our study of LT-ReID, we collect a realworld dataset called CCDA, which contains a wide variety of human activities and clothing changes. Experimentally, we show the superior performance of our approach
for person ReID. Code is available at http://cvlab.
cse.msu.edu/project-reid3dinvar.html.

1. Introduction
Person Re-Identification (ReID) aims to recognize and
match a specific pedestrian in various locations and at different times [1, 26, 29, 57, 62]. This is a crucial task for
various applications, including crime prevention, forensic
identification and security monitoring [13, 63].
Most existing works [11, 12, 24, 25] in this field concentrate on the short-term scenarios, assuming that pedestrians’
clothing remains unchanged. However, in this paper, we focus on a more challenging yet practical scenario of LongTerm Person Re-Identification (LT-ReID), where the objective is to recognize individuals over long time periods while
taking into account variations in clothing and diverse human activities. For the first time, we extend person re-

Short-Term
Person ReID

Cloth-Changing
Person ReID







(a)

Market-1501
MSMT17



Celeb re-ID
PRCC

(b)

Long-Term
Person ReID



LaST
CCDA

(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of the differences between various person reidentification (ReID) settings. Both (a) conventional/short-term
and (b) cloth-changing person ReID benchmarks often restrict
subjects to walking or standing, limiting their applications in realworld scenarios. This paper expands on the long-term person reidentification (LT-ReID) setting by tackling a wider range of human activities, increasing its practicality.

identification beyond pedestrian recognition to encompass
a wider range of human activities, such as identifying students playing tennis or soldiers crawling in the field (see
Fig. 1). This setting poses new challenges due to the geometric misalignment and appearance ambiguity caused by
the diversity of human poses and their clothing.
Recently, various approaches [14,18,20,23,27,46,56,59]
have been proposed to investigate LT-ReID under clothing
changes. They extract clothing-irrelevant features for robust person ReID by custom-designed architectures [19,20],
training process [27], loss functions [14], and data augmentation [64]. However, these methods only attempt to
mine texture-insensitive body-structural cues in 2D space
while ignoring the prior knowledge that the human body is
a 3D non-rigid object. A new line of research introduces
3D priors for LT-ReID by either lifting 2D images to a 3D
space [67] or including 3D body reconstruction as an auxil-

19617

