This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

When Noisy Labels Meet Long Tail Dilemmas:
A Representation Calibration Method
Manyi Zhang1, * Xuyang Zhao2,∗
1

Jun Yao3

Chun Yuan1,† Weiran Huang4,†

SIGS, Tsinghua University 2 Peking University 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
4
Qing Yuan Research Institute, SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Real-world large-scale datasets are both noisily labeled
and class-imbalanced. The issues seriously hurt the generalization of trained models. It is hence significant to address
the simultaneous incorrect labeling and class-imbalance,
i.e., the problem of learning with noisy labels on longtailed data. Previous works develop several methods for the
problem. However, they always rely on strong assumptions
that are invalid or hard to be checked in practice. In this
paper, to handle the problem and address the limitations
of prior works, we propose a representation calibration
method RCAL. Specifically, RCAL works with the representations extracted by unsupervised contrastive learning. We
assume that without incorrect labeling and class imbalance,
the representations of instances in each class conform to a
multivariate Gaussian distribution, which is much milder
and easier to be checked. Based on the assumption, we recover underlying representation distributions from polluted
ones resulting from mislabeled and class-imbalanced data.
Additional data points are then sampled from the recovered
distributions to help generalization. Moreover, during classifier training, representation learning takes advantage of
representation robustness brought by contrastive learning,
which further improves the classifier performance. We derive theoretical results to discuss the effectiveness of our
representation calibration. Experiments on multiple benchmarks justify our claims and confirm the superiority of the
proposed method.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has made rapid progress in many
fields [16], primarily driven by large-scale and high-quality
annotated datasets [30, 5, 18, 71, 62, 35]. Unfortunately, it
* Equal contributions. This work was completed when the first two authors were interns guided by the last author.
† Correspondance to Weiran Huang (weiran.huang@outlook.com) and
Chun Yuan (yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn).

Figure 1: The illustration of the problem setup. The observed data exhibit a long-tailed distribution. The number
of clean data and mislabeled data varies in each class.
is hard to obtain such perfect datasets in practice, mainly
from two aspects: (1) a part of data is wrongly labeled
due to its intrinsic ambiguity and mistakes of annotators [44, 34, 66, 60, 37]; (2) data is class-imbalanced, where
a long-tailed class distribution exhibits [55, 83, 24]. In
real-world settings, both imperfect situations usually coexist (see Figure 1). For example, the WebVision dataset [36],
a large-scale image dataset crawled from the web, contains
about 20% mislabeled data. Meanwhile, the number of examples in the most frequent class is over 20 times that of
examples in the most scarce class [28].
Although many previous works have emerged to address
the problems of learning with noisy labels and learning with
long-tailed data separately, they cannot work well when the
two imperfect situations exist simultaneously. Namely, they
are weak for learning with noisy labels on long-tailed data.
Concretely, the methods specialized for learning with noisy
labels always rely on some assumptions. Nevertheless, the
assumptions are invalid due to the long-tailed issue. For

15890

