This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Audiovisual Masked Autoencoders
Mariana-Iuliana Georgescu1, 2 *†
Eduardo Fonseca1
Radu Tudor Ionescu2
Mario Lucic1
Cordelia Schmid1
Anurag Arnab1 *
1
2
Google Research
University of Bucharest
Pretraining

Abstract
Can we leverage the audiovisual information already
present in video to improve self-supervised representation
learning? To answer this question, we study various pretraining architectures and objectives within the masked autoencoding framework, motivated by the success of similar methods in natural language and image understanding. We show that we can achieve significant improvements
on audiovisual downstream classification tasks, surpassing
the state-of-the-art on VGGSound and AudioSet. Furthermore, we can leverage our audiovisual pretraining scheme
for multiple unimodal downstream tasks using a single audiovisual pretrained model. We additionally demonstrate
the transferability of our representations, achieving stateof-the-art audiovisual results on Epic Kitchens without pretraining specifically for this dataset.

Audiovisual MAE
Encoder
Decoder

1. Introduction
The computer vision community has witnessed rapid
progress across a wide range of tasks and domains, driven
by progressively larger models and datasets [11, 24, 58,
63, 78]. However, pretraining models on large labelled
datasets [21, 50, 67] and then finetuning on smaller target datasets is not scalable: Annotating large pretraining
datasets is expensive and time-consuming, and larger, more
performant models require more pretraining data [24]. This
has led to growing research in self-supervised pretraining methods which learn feature representations from unlabelled data, and has been extremely successful in natural
language processing (NLP) for developing large language
models [13, 22, 65]. More recently, similar methods have
been adopted in the vision community as well [10, 37, 76].
In this paper, we propose to leverage the audiovisual
information present in video to improve self-supervised
representation learning. Despite recent advances in selfsupervised image- [10, 37] and video-representation learning [26, 70, 76], these works still ignore the additional auditory information that is already present in their pretraining
* Equal contribution. Correspondence to aarnab@google.com.
† Work done during an internship at Google.

Finetuning

Encoder

Encoder

Encoder

Video
classi cation

Audio
classi cation

Audiovisual
classi cation

Figure 1: Overview of our Audiovisual Masked Autoencoder. We
jointly encode and reconstruct audiovisual inputs, to leverage the
correlations between the two modalities to learn stronger representations of the data. Our pretrained encoder can then be used for
audiovisual, audio-only and video-only downstream tasks.

sets. Intuitively, we aim to exploit the correlations between
the modalities already present in video to learn stronger representations of the data for unimodal and multimodal downstream tasks. Our approach is further motivated by the fact
that the world, and human perception of it, is inherently
multimodal [61, 64].
Our approach is inspired by the masked autoencoding
framework [10, 37], which itself is based on similar masked
data modelling approaches in NLP [22] and earlier works

16144

