This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeTO:Neural Reconstruction of Transparent Objects with
Self-Occlusion Aware Refraction-Tracing
Zongcheng Li1∗ Xiaoxiao Long2∗ Yusen Wang1 Tuo Cao1
Wenping Wang3 Fei Luo1 Chunxia Xiao1†
1

2

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
The University of Hong Kong 3 Texas A&M University

Abstract
We present a novel method called NeTO, for capturing the 3D geometry of solid transparent objects from 2D
images via volume rendering. Reconstructing transparent objects is a very challenging task, which is ill-suited
for general-purpose reconstruction techniques due to the
specular light transport phenomena. Although existing
refraction-tracing-based methods, designed especially for
this task, achieve impressive results, they still suffer from
unstable optimization and loss of fine details since the explicit surface representation they adopted is difficult to be
optimized, and the self-occlusion problem is ignored for
refraction-tracing. In this paper, we propose to leverage
implicit Signed Distance Function (SDF) as surface representation and optimize the SDF field via volume rendering with a self-occlusion aware refractive ray tracing. The
implicit representation enables our method to be capable
of reconstructing high-quality reconstruction even with a
limited set of views, and the self-occlusion aware strategy makes it possible for our method to accurately reconstruct the self-occluded regions. Experiments show that our
method achieves faithful reconstruction results and outperforms prior works by a large margin. Visit our project page
at https://www.xxlong.site/NeTO/.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D models of real-world objects has
been one of the longstanding problems. It has been researched for decades in computer vision and graphics,
which boosts the development of many applications, such as
augmented reality, automatic driving, and robots. However,
existing general-purpose multi-view reconstruction methods [15, 16, 17, 39, 47, 50] are only suitable for opaque
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

Ground Truth

Ours

DRT [23]

Our synthesized view

Figure 1: Illustration of a sparse setting using only one
fourth of the camera images, i.e., {Ii }i=1,5,9... , to recover
the model Dog in the DRT dataset. Compared with DRT,
our method produces more accurate renderings, which indicates the high quality of our reconstruction. The synthesized view is obtained via Blender.

objects whose surfaces are approximately Lambertian, and
few of them can tackle transparent objects. The light paths
passing through transparent objects are extremely complex
and involve refractions and reflections.
Recently, some state-of-the-art methods have been proposed to reconstruct solid transparent objects in a nonintrusive manner, capturing refraction-tracing consistency
with specially designed hardware systems, and have produced impressive results. This is achieved by optimizing
correspondences between camera rays and locations on the
background monitor [23] or enforcing consistency between

18547

