This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mastering Spatial Graph Prediction of Road Networks
Anagnostidis Sotirisµ,1

Current State

Aurelien Lucchiν
µ
ETH Zürich ν University of Basel

Thomas Hofmannµ

Prior policy

Simulate next steps
Prior policy

Text

Simulate
next steps

: Reward estimates
: Value estimates

Figure 1. Our agent interacts with the currently generated spatial graph by proposing new edges to be added. A tree-based search produces
a sequence of actions that maximizes a reward function based on complex geometrics priors.

Abstract
Accurately predicting road networks from satellite images requires a global understanding of the network topology. We propose to capture such high-level information
by introducing a graph-based framework that given a partially generated graph, sequentially adds new edges. To
deal with misalignment between the model predictions and
the intended purpose, and to optimize over complex, noncontinuous metrics of interest, we adopt a reinforcement
learning (RL) approach that nominates modifications that
maximize a cumulative reward. As opposed to standard supervised techniques that tend to be more restricted to commonly used surrogate losses, our framework yields more
power and flexibility to encode problem-dependent knowledge. Empirical results on several benchmark datasets
demonstrate enhanced performance and increased highlevel reasoning about the graph topology when using a treebased search. We further demonstrate the superiority of our
approach in handling examples with substantial occlusion
and additionally provide evidence that our predictions better match the statistical properties of the ground dataset.

1. Introduction
Road layout modelling from satellite images constitutes
an important task of remote sensing, with applications in
1 Correspondence sotirios.anagnostidis@inf.ethz.ch.

everyday life, such as traffic flow prediction and navigation.
The vast amounts of data available from the commercialization of geospatial data, in addition to the need for accurately
establishing the connectivity of roads in remote areas, have
led to an increased interest in the precise representation of
existing road networks. By nature, these applications require structured data types that provide efficient representations to encode geometry, in this case, graphs, a de facto
choice in domains such as computer graphics, virtual reality, gaming, and the film industry. These structured-graph
representations are also commonly used to label recent road
network datasets [60] and map repositories [40]. When
dealing with complex predicted structures, however, how
well the model optimizes a surrogate objective is not always
the best indication of how well the model’s predictions are
aligned with the required task risk, i.e. the targeted final
utilization.
Problems of this nature have been recently extensively
studied in the regime of natural language processing, where
the misalignment between training objectives for tasks such
as machine translation and summarization has garnered
considerable attention among the academic community,
who have devoted significant efforts to its analysis and elucidation. A popular emerging technique is to first learn to
imitate some example outputs and then fix any misalignment issues by using reinforcement learning to adjust the
predictions based on a reward function. The reward usually
comes in the form of external human evaluation [41, 4].

5408

