This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perceptual Grouping in Contrastive Vision-Language Models
Kanchana Ranasinghe* , Brandon McKinzie, Sachin Ravi,
Yinfei Yang, Alexander Toshev, Jonathon Shlens†
Apple
kranasinghe@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in zero-shot image recognition suggest
that vision-language models learn generic visual representations with a high degree of semantic information that may
be arbitrarily probed with natural language phrases. Understanding an image, however, is not just about understanding
what content resides within an image, but importantly, where
that content resides. In this work we examine how well visionlanguage models are able to understand where objects reside
within an image and group together visually related parts
of the imagery. We demonstrate how contemporary vision
and language representation learning models based on contrastive losses and large web-based data capture limited
object localization information. We propose a minimal set of
modifications that results in models that uniquely learn both
semantic and spatial information. We measure this performance in terms of zero-shot image recognition, unsupervised
bottom-up and top-down semantic segmentations, as well
as robustness analyses. We find that the resulting model
achieves state-of-the-art results in terms of unsupervised
segmentation, and demonstrate that the learned representations are uniquely robust to spurious correlations in datasets
designed to probe the causal behavior of vision models.

1. Introduction
Learning a representation for visual imagery requires
resolving not only what resides within an image, but also
where that information resides [72]. In many applications,
knowledge of where information resides is sometimes more
important than a precise description of the content [33, 98].
Hence, our ability to learn more generic and robust visual
representations requires learning the geometry of visual semantics, and how visual information may be grounded by
specific regions of the visual field.
While recent vision-language models trained under weak
supervision demonstrate a remarkable ability to learn generic
and transferable visual representations [50, 85, 117, 24], they
* Work performed as part of Apple internship.
† Work performed at Apple.

Figure 1: Semantic localization in contrastive VLMs. We measure the ability of vision-language models to predict a label at each
spatial position in a zero shot manner based on the similarity of
location tokens to the corresponding language tokens on selected
examples. CLIP / ALIGN [50, 85] have minimal understanding
of the spatial location of individual objects (row 4). Our proposed
CLIPpy (row 3) predicts the label at locations that correspond
closely to human annotation for semantic segmentation (row 2).
All predictions were performed with no access to any segmentation
data during training or inference. More visualizations in App. B.

showcase a profound inability to associate visual content
with individual objects (Fig. 1, bottom row). In other words,
models trained on large weakly-supervised data have a limited ability to group together visually related content [36].
Because the representations have a poor understanding of
where an object resides, they easily conflate background
with foreground content. Hence, the learned representations
are unable to learn the spatial layout of a scene [97, 101],
and are susceptible to learning spurious correlations between
a semantic label and extraneous content [91, 65].
Recent work [113, 114] attempts to bridge this gap
through grouping mechanisms under the same weakly supervised training paradigm, but focus more on foreground

5571

