This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Adaptive Model Ensemble Adversarial Attack for
Boosting Adversarial Transferability
Bin Chen1
Jiali Yin1
Shukai Chen1
Bohao Chen2
Ximeng Liu1
1
2
Fuzhou University, Fujian, China
Yuan Ze University, Taipei, Taiwan
c chenbin@foxmail.com, jlyin@fzu.edu.cn, chenshukai770@163.com, {hd840207, snbnix}@gmail.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs), including convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [10, 36, 15] and vision transformers (ViTs) [6, 26, 19], have brought impressive advances to
the state-of-the-art across various machine-learning tasks.
At the moment, however, they are found to be vulnerable to

Adversarial example

Decision
boundary

Attack direction

Decision
boundary-1

Decision boundary
of target model

Surrogate attack direction
Decision
boundary-1

Decision boundary
of target model

Decision boundary
of target model

Decision boundary-2

Decision boundary-2

2.02
CNNs

ViTs

(a) Transfer-based attack

18.54
8.74
CNNs

ViTs

(b) Ensemble attack

Average ASR (%)

17.66

Average ASR (%)

35.98
Average ASR (%)

While the transferability property of adversarial examples allows the adversary to perform black-box attacks (i.e.,
the attacker has no knowledge about the target model), the
transfer-based adversarial attacks have gained great attention. Previous works mostly study gradient variation or
image transformations to amplify the distortion on critical
parts of inputs. These methods can work on transferring
across models with limited differences, i.e., from CNNs to
CNNs, but always fail in transferring across models with
wide differences, such as from CNNs to ViTs. Alternatively,
model ensemble adversarial attacks are proposed to fuse
outputs from surrogate models with diverse architectures
to get an ensemble loss, making the generated adversarial example more likely to transfer to other models as it
can fool multiple models concurrently. However, existing
ensemble attacks simply fuse the outputs of the surrogate
models evenly, thus are not efﬁcacious to capture and amplify the intrinsic transfer information of adversarial examples. In this paper, we propose an adaptive ensemble attack,
dubbed AdaEA, to adaptively control the fusion of the outputs from each model, via monitoring the discrepancy ratio of their contributions towards the adversarial objective.
Furthermore, an extra disparity-reduced ﬁlter is introduced
to further synchronize the update direction. As a result, we
achieve considerable improvement over the existing ensemble attacks on various datasets, and the proposed AdaEA
can also boost existing transfer-based attacks, which further demonstrates its efﬁcacy and versatility. The source
code: https://github.com/CHENBIN99/AdaEA

Clean image

28.94

CNNs

ViTs

(c) AdaEA (Ours)

Figure 1. Overview of different attack schemes and performance.
(a) Transfer-based methods strengthen the critical parts in images
to improve the attack transferability, but fail to transfer across
DNNs with wide differences due to the limited adversarial information. (b) Model ensemble attacks integrate multiple surrogate models for ﬁnding the more transferable attack, but existing works generally neglect the individual characteristics of each
model, leading to under-optimal results. (c) Our AdaEA performs
adaptive ensemble by amplifying the transferable information in
each surrogate model and achieves remarkable improvements.

adversarial examples [25], i.e., adding imperceptible handcrafted perturbations to the original inputs can lead to wrong
prediction behavior of DNNs. This discovery arises severe
security hazards in the deployment of DNNs. More importantly, some well-designed adversarial examples can transfer across models. That is, an adversarial example crafted
from a surrogate model can also disturb other models. This
property of adversarial examples, known as tranferability,
allows the adversary to attack a target model without knowing its interior, thus poses a more realistic threat to blackbox applications (i.e., the architectures and parameters are
inaccessible to users).
To set up the ﬁrst step for improving model robustness
and prevent potential threats from black-box attacks, the research on improving the transferability of adversarial examples has attracted wide attention in recent years. The attack

4489

