This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Window-Based Early-Exit Cascades for Uncertainty Estimation:
When Deep Ensembles are More Efficient than Single Models
Guoxuan Xia
Imperial College London

Christos-Savvas Bouganis
Imperial College London

g.xia21@imperial.ac.uk

christos-savvas.bouganis@imperial.ac.uk

Deep Ensembles are a simple, reliable, and effective
method of improving both the predictive performance and
uncertainty estimates of deep learning approaches. However, they are widely criticised as being computationally
expensive, due to the need to deploy multiple independent
models. Recent work has challenged this view, showing
that for predictive accuracy, ensembles can be more computationally efficient (at inference) than scaling single models within an architecture family. This is achieved by cascading ensemble members via an early-exit approach. In
this work, we investigate extending these efficiency gains
to tasks related to uncertainty estimation. As many such
tasks, e.g. selective classification, are binary classification,
our key novel insight is to only pass samples within a window close to the binary decision boundary to later cascade
stages. Experiments on ImageNet-scale data across a number of network architectures and uncertainty tasks show that
the proposed window-based early-exit approach is able to
achieve a superior uncertainty-computation trade-off compared to scaling single models. For example, a cascaded
EfficientNet-B2 ensemble is able to achieve similar coverage at 5% risk as a single EfficientNet-B4 with <30% the
number of MACs. We also find that cascades/ensembles
give more reliable improvements on OOD data vs scaling
models up. Code for this work is available at:
https://github.com/Guoxoug/window-early-exit.

1. Introduction
It is important for deep learning systems to provide
reliable estimates of predictive uncertainty in scenarios
where it is costly to make mistakes, e.g. healthcare [2] and
autonomous driving [33]. A model should know when to
defer a prediction to a human expert or simply discard it
as too uncertain. Deep Ensembles [39], where multiple
networks of the same architecture are trained independently
and combined at inference, are a simple approach to

Cov@5

Abstract
64
62
60
58
56
54

EfficientNet-B4
single model
ensemble
window-based cascade (ours)

EfficientNet-B0
0

2

4

Average MACs

6

8

1e9

Figure 1. Coverage at risk=5% (selective classification performance) against average computation per sample (MACs). Ensembles are able to outperform scaling single models at higher levels
of computation. Our window-based cascade approach is able to
achieve a better uncertainty-computation trade-off compared
to single models via adaptive inference. The models are EfficientNets, ensembles are size M = 2 and the dataset is ImageNet-1k.

improving both the predictive and uncertainty-related
performance of deep neural networks. Moreover, as it is an
easy-to-implement baseline, the approach has accumulated
a large volume of empirical evidence in support of its
efficacy across a wide range of data types and uncertaintyrelated tasks [3, 14–17, 19, 22, 34, 47–49, 52, 81, 83].
A common criticism of Deep Ensembles is that they
are expensive to deploy [14, 24, 49], as the cost scales
linearly with the ensemble size. However, recent work
[7, 35, 46, 76, 87], has shown that ensembling can be
more efficient than scaling a single model when evaluating
for predictive accuracy. In particular, Wang et al. [76]
show that cascading ensemble members via adaptive
early-exiting [40, 71, 77] enables ensembles to obtain
consistently better accuracy-computation trade-offs vs
scaling single models within an architecture family. This
approach involves sequentially running inference on each
member and exiting computation early if the ensemble up
to that point is sufficiently confident. Thus computation
is saved by only passing the most difficult samples to
the more powerful later cascade stages. Although Wang
et al. [76] have shown promising results for accuracy, the

17368

