This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DetermiNet: A Large-Scale Diagnostic Dataset for Complex Visually-Grounded
Referencing using Determiners
Clarence Lee∗1 , M Ganesh Kumar∗2 , Cheston Tan2
Design and Artificial Intelligence, SUTD 1 , Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR 2
clarence leesheng@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, m ganeshkumar@u.nus.edu, cheston tan@cfar.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
State-of-the-art visual grounding models can achieve
high detection accuracy, but they are not designed to distinguish between all objects versus only certain objects of
interest. In natural language, in order to specify a particular object or set of objects of interest, humans use determiners such as “my”, “either” and “those”. Determiners,
as an important word class, are a type of schema in natural language about the reference or quantity of the noun.
Existing grounded referencing datasets place much less emphasis on determiners, compared to other word classes such
as nouns, verbs and adjectives. This makes it difficult to develop models that understand the full variety and complexity of object referencing. Thus, we have developed and released the DetermiNet dataset 1 , which comprises 250,000
synthetically generated images and captions based on 25
determiners. The task is to predict bounding boxes to identify objects of interest, constrained by the semantics of the
given determiner. We find that current state-of-the-art visual grounding models do not perform well on the dataset,
highlighting the limitations of existing models on reference
and quantification tasks.

1. Introduction
Humans combine visual and linguistic cues to perform
object localization, referencing and quantification tasks on
a daily basis. For example, when someone says “pass me a
cup”, we first locate any cups present, and then select one
cup based on other criterias, such as the nearest or cleanest
one. Deep learning models [5, 9, 10, 11, 16, 19, 29, 37, 39,
41] can localize object impressively to achieve the first part
of the task. However, the ability to deal with a variety of
complex referencing and quantification to achieve the second part of the tasks has yet to be properly investigated.
* Equal contribution
1 https://github.com/clarence-lee-sheng/
DetermiNet contains the dataset and code

A determiner is an English part-of-speech (word class)
that quantifies or references the noun following it. For instance, the determiner in “my apple” versus “your apple”
takes reference from different owners. The number of apples being referenced differs for “some apples” versus “all
apples”. Such semantic differences are succinctly captured
by determiners, and not by other word classes.
Determiners like “a”, “the” and “my” are ubiquitous and
among the most common English words [1, 22]. Most children learn to use determiners at a near-mastery level by 3
years of age [3, 6]. Since determiners play an important role
in the semantics of a phrase, they are distinctly classified in
natural language processing libraries [26, 35].
Unlike numerous nouns, verbs and adjectives, there are
only about 50 determiners in the English language [22].
Nevertheless, determiners can be highly complex, and a
hardcoded or fixed-rule approach to using or understanding determiners simply will not work. For instance, take the
determiner “some” – in its simplest form, “some” refers to
a relatively small number or quantity. However, this can be
highly noun-specific and context-specific, e.g. the absolute
physical quantities for “add some salt” versus “drink some
water” are very different. Furthermore, determiners that describe ownership or possession, such as “my” and “your”,
are highly context-dependent and dynamic, as possession
can change on the fly, e.g. after handing over an object. In
general, there are many such subtleties and complexities for
determiners. Hence, a learning-based approach is needed,
along with suitable training data.
If state-of-the-art models could learn a schema of determiners [33, 20, 34], it could facilitate flexible combination in novel contexts [21, 17, 28] and improve visual reasoning. However, existing vision-language models such as
CLIP [31] and BLIP-2 [23] do not capture the semantic organization of determiners well (see Supplementary Material), and there is no visual grounding dataset that focuses
on Determiners. Existing grounded referring expression
datasets [4, 13, 15, 18, 27, 36, 38] exclusively focus on “the”
and “a”, making an unambiguous reference to a specific single object. Some examples include “bottle with a lid”, “the

20019

