This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoNeRF: Learning a Generalizable Dynamic Radiance Field
from Monocular Videos
Fengrui Tian1 Shaoyi Du1 Yueqi Duan2†
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
tianfr@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, dushaoyi@gmail.com, duanyueqi@tsinghua.edu.cn

Input Videos

Novel Views

Move Foreground

Unseen
Frames
Training
Frames

Unseen Video

Duplicate Foreground

Change Background

Novel Views from Unseen Frames

DynNeRF (500 Steps)

Ours (100 Steps)

Ours (200 Steps)

Ours (500 Steps)

Figure 1: MonoNeRF learns a generalizable dynamic radiance ﬁeld from multiple monocular videos. While video-based
NeRF learns the ﬁeld from positional encoding, we propose to learn from the extracted video features, which are generalizable
to scenes. In this way, MonoNeRF supports scene editing applications (Top) and unseen frame synthesis (Middle). Compared
with DynNeRF [13], MonoNeRF could adapt to novel scenes (Bottom) with hundreds of ﬁne-tuning steps (about 10 minutes).

Abstract

ity. As a result, these methods have to train one independent model for each scene and suffer from heavy computational costs when applying to increasing monocular
In this paper, we target at the problem of learning
videos in real-world applications. To address this, We
a generalizable dynamic radiance ﬁeld from monocular
propose MonoNeRF to simultaneously learn point features
videos. Different from most existing NeRF methods that
and scene ﬂows with point trajectory and feature correare based on multiple views, monocular videos only contain
spondence constraints across frames. More speciﬁcally,
one view at each timestamp, thereby suffering from ambiwe learn an implicit velocity ﬁeld to estimate point traguity along the view direction in estimating point features
jectory from temporal features with Neural ODE, which
and scene ﬂows. Previous studies such as DynNeRF disis followed by a ﬂow-based feature aggregation module
ambiguate point features by positional encoding, which is
to obtain spatial features along the point trajectory. We
not transferable and severely limits the generalization abiljointly optimize temporal and spatial features in an end17903to-end manner. Experiments show that our MonoNeRF is
† : Corresponding author.
1

