This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Image Borders: Learning Feature Extrapolation for
Unbounded Image Composition
Xiaoyu Liu1 , Ming Liu1( ) , Junyi Li1 , Shuai Liu, Xiaotao Wang, Lei Lei, Wangmeng Zuo1,2
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
liuxiaoyu1104@gmail.com, csmliu@outlook.com, nagejacob@gmail.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
For improving image composition and aesthetic quality, most existing methods modulate the captured images
by striking out redundant content near the image borders.
However, such image cropping methods are limited in the
range of image views. Some methods have been suggested
to extrapolate the images and predict cropping boxes from
the extrapolated image. Nonetheless, the synthesized extrapolated regions may be included in the cropped image,
making the image composition result not real and potentially with degraded image quality. In this paper, we circumvent this issue by presenting a joint framework for both unbounded recommendation of camera view and image composition (i.e., UNIC). In this way, the cropped image is a
sub-image of the image acquired by the predicted camera
view, and thus can be guaranteed to be real and consistent in image quality. Specifically, our framework takes the
current camera preview frame as input and provides a recommendation for view adjustment, which contains operations unlimited by the image borders, such as zooming in
or out and camera movement. To improve the prediction
accuracy of view adjustment prediction, we further extend
the field of view by feature extrapolation. After one or several times of view adjustments, our method converges and
results in both a camera view and a bounding box showing
the image composition recommendation. Extensive experiments are conducted on the datasets constructed upon existing image cropping datasets, showing the effectiveness of
our UNIC in unbounded recommendation of camera view
and image composition. The source code, dataset, and pretrained models is available at https://github.com/
liuxiaoyu1104/UNIC.

1. Introduction
With the prevalence of electronic devices such as smartphones, taking photos has become a common activity in everyday life. Due to the lack of professional photography
knowledge and skills, taking photos with harmonious im-

cpred
UNIC

Left (←) Up (↑)
Zoom Out
Init View Iinit

Predict View Ipre

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed UNIC for unbounded recommendation of camera view and image composition. On the left
is the initial view provided by the user. Given the current view,
our model can predict camera operations (e.g., zoom out and the
movement) and a image composition solution (e.g., cpred ). The
prediction can be executed multiple times until convergence.

age composition and high aesthetic quality is still difficult
for non-professional users. As a remedy, image composition, which aims to find an aesthetic region of a scene, has
attracted much attention in recent years.
In order to facilitate the training of image composition
models, several datasets [33, 38, 6] have been established,
and each image comes along with one or multiple bounding boxes indicating the cropping schemes. Despite the
notable progress, most existing image composition methods [33, 12, 18, 19, 38, 25, 43, 15] generally adopt a postprocessing form on the already captured images, i.e., they
only adjust the composition in an image cropping manner. In other words, the captured images are modulated
by striking out redundant content near the image borders.
Nonetheless, a sub-optimal solution will inevitably be obtained when the best cropping is not entirely in the acquired
image. To alleviate this issue, Zhong et al. [43] proposed
to expand the image via out-painting, and then predict the
cropped view on the expanded image. It is a practical solution in post-processing manner, but may suffers from outpainting artifacts.
To tackle the limitations of existing image composi-

13023

