This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HMD-NeMo: Online 3D Avatar Motion Generation From Sparse Observations
Sadegh Aliakbarian

Fatemeh Saleh

David Collier

Pashmina Cameron

Darren Cosker

Microsoft Mixed Reality & AI Lab, Cambridge, UK

Abstract
Generating both plausible and accurate full body avatar
motion is the key to the quality of immersive experiences in
mixed reality scenarios. Head-Mounted Devices (HMDs)
typically only provide a few input signals, such as head and
hands 6-DoF. Recently, different approaches achieved impressive performance in generating full body motion given
only head and hands signal. However, to the best of our
knowledge, all existing approaches rely on full hand visibility. While this is the case when, e.g., using motion controllers, a considerable proportion of mixed reality experiences do not involve motion controllers and instead rely on
egocentric hand tracking. This introduces the challenge of
partial hand visibility owing to the restricted field of view
of the HMD. In this paper, we propose the first unified approach, HMD-NeMo, that addresses plausible and accurate
full body motion generation even when the hands may be
only partially visible. HMD-NeMo is a lightweight neural
network that predicts the full body motion in an online and
real-time fashion. At the heart of HMD-NeMo is the spatiotemporal encoder with novel temporally adaptable mask tokens that encourage plausible motion in the absence of hand
observations. We perform extensive analysis of the impact
of different components in HMD-NeMo and introduce a new
state-of-the-art on AMASS dataset through our evaluation.

1. Introduction
Mixed reality technology opens up new means of communication and interaction between people. With people at
the heart of this technology, generating faithful and believable avatar motion is key to the quality of immersive experiences. Despite great advances in this area, generating full
body avatar motion given HMD signal remains a challenge:
in many current solutions, avatars only have upper bodies.
Prior works attempted to generate full body avatar motion given sparse or partial observations, such as images [17,
4, 33], 2D joints/keypoints [21, 5], markers [35, 18, 34, 11],
and IMUs [28, 14, 32, 31]. While such observations are

Figure 1. HMD-NeMo generates full body avatar motion given
HMD signals, i.e., head and hand 6-DoFs, from hand tracking signal from the HMD as well as hand motion controllers.

considered partial or sparse, they provide much richer input
signal compared to a typical HMD’s head and hand 6-DoF.
More recently, great progress has been made to generate full
body motion given only a HMD signal [1, 30, 22, 15], however, they all rely on the availability and full visibility of
both hands. While this is the case when, e.g., using motion
controllers, many mixed reality experiences do not involve
motion controllers and instead rely on hand tracking. This
introduces the challenge of partial hand visibility owing to
the restricted field of view (FoV) of the HMD sensors.
In this paper, we address this problem via HMD-NeMo
(a neural motion model of human given HMD signal).
Within a unified framework, HMD-NeMo generates full
body motion in real time, regardless of whether hands are
fully or partially observed, or not observed at all. Our approach is built upon recurrent neural networks to efficiently
capture temporal information, and a transformer to capture complex relations between different components of the
input signal. At the heart of our approach is the TAMT
(temporally adaptable mask token) module, allowing us to
handle missing hand observations.
Our contributions are: (1) The first full body avatar motion generation approach capable of generating accurate and
plausible motions with full or partial hand visibility. This is
a step forward for unlocking fully immersive experiences in
mixed reality with fewer limitations on the hardware. (2)
Temporally adaptable Mask Tokens (TAMT), a simple yet

9622

