This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How to choose your best allies for a transferable attack?
Thibault Maho*
Univ. Rennes, Inria, CNRS
IRISA, Rennes, France

Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli
Imperial College London, UK
seyed.moosavi@imperial.ac.uk

Teddy Furon †
Univ. Rennes, Inria, CNRS
IRISA, Rennes, France

thibault.maho@inria.fr

teddy.furon@inria.fr

Abstract
Attack Success Rate

The transferability of adversarial examples is a key issue
in the security of deep neural networks. The possibility of
an adversarial example crafted for a source model fooling
another targeted model makes the threat of adversarial attacks more realistic. Measuring transferability is a crucial
problem, but the Attack Success Rate alone does not provide
a sound evaluation. This paper proposes a new methodology for evaluating transferability by putting distortion in a
central position. This new tool shows that transferable attacks may perform far worse than a black box attack if the
attacker randomly picks the source model. To address this
issue, we propose a new selection mechanism, called FiT,
which aims at choosing the best source model with only a
few preliminary queries to the target. Our experimental results show that FiT is highly effective at selecting the best
source model for multiple scenarios such as single-model
attacks, ensemble-model attacks and multiple attacks.

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

Transferable attack on average
Transferable attack with FiT
Black box attack
White box attack

0.2

0.0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Distortion

Figure 1: Evaluation of transferability by comparing the
Attack Success Rate vs. distortion trade-off of a white
box, transferable, and black box attacks against model
CoatLitesmall (See Sect. 4.1 for details). The blue area
is the range of trade-off operated by a transferable attack
with random source models. A transferable attack may be
worse than a black box attack without a good source selection (like FiT).

1. Introduction
Transferability is one of the most intriguing properties of
adversarial examples. A white box attack crafting adversarial examples for an open-source model is likely to fool other
models too [1, 14, 20, 25, 34]. This makes the threat of adversarial examples more realistic. In practice, the model targeted is usually unknown but accessible as a black box. This
prevents directly applying any white box gradient-based attack [10, 16, 19, 35]. Black box attacks do exist but they
require some thousands of queries to find an adversarial example of low distortion [4, 11, 17, 24]. Transferable attacks
require no or few queries to fine-tune an adversarial example thanks to the help of a publicly available model similar
enough to the target.
Transferability is usually measured by the Attack Success Rate (ASR), i.e., the probability that the adversarial
* Thanks to Rennes Métropole for its funding for international mobility.
† Thanks to ANR and AID french agencies for funding Chaire SAIDA.

example crafted for the source model also deludes the target model. We argue that this measure leads to an unfair
evaluation of transferability. In the context of adversarial
examples, it is not just a matter of discovering data that is
not well classified, but rather identifying the perturbation
that can fool a classifier with minimal distortion. This principle should also apply to transferable attacks.
For illustration purposes, let us consider two models, one
is robust in the sense that the necessary amount of adversarial perturbation is large, whereas the other model is weak.
If the attacker uses the robust model as the source to attack
the weak target network, the ASR of the transferable attack
will certainly be big. It does not mean that this is the right
choice. The ASR is high because the robust source model
needs large perturbation to be deluded, which will fool any
weaker model. The ASR alone does not reflect the overshooting in distortion. The converse, using the weak to at-

4542

