This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling Large Vision-Language Model with Out-of-Distribution Generalizability
Xuanlin Li*

Yunhao Fang*

Minghua Liu
Zhan Ling
UC San Diego

Abstract
Large vision-language models have achieved outstanding
performance, but their size and computational requirements
make their deployment on resource-constrained devices and
time-sensitive tasks impractical. Model distillation, the process of creating smaller, faster models that maintain the performance of larger models, is a promising direction towards
the solution. This paper investigates the distillation of visual representations in large teacher vision-language models
into lightweight student models using a small- or mid-scale
dataset. Notably, this study focuses on open-vocabulary outof-distribution (OOD) generalization, a challenging problem
that has been overlooked in previous model distillation literature. We propose two principles from vision and language
modality perspectives to enhance student’s OOD generalization: (1) by better imitating teacher’s visual representation
space, and carefully promoting better coherence in visionlanguage alignment with the teacher; (2) by enriching the
teacher’s language representations with informative and finegrained semantic attributes to effectively distinguish between
different labels. We propose several metrics and conduct
extensive experiments to investigate their techniques. The
results demonstrate significant improvements in zero-shot
and few-shot student performance on open-vocabulary outof-distribution classification, highlighting the effectiveness
of our proposed approaches. Code released at this link.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a significant growth and
development of large vision language models (large VLMs)
such as CLIP [39], GLIP [28], OFA [49], SimVLM [53],
BEiT [50], Florence [60], and Flamingo [1], which have
been pretrained on massive amounts of internet-scale data.
These models have demonstrated enormous potential in
a wide range of downstream applications, including classification/detection, image-to-text generation, and visionlanguage reasoning, especially for the out-of-distribution
(OOD) samples and open-vocabulary settings. Despite their
* Equal contributions.
yuf026@ucsd.edu

Corresponding authors: xul012@ucsd.edu,

Zhuowen Tu

Hao Su

potential, the large model sizes, high computational resource
requirements, and inefficient inference speed of these models restrict their deployment on mobile and IoT edge devices [21, 44], as well as in scenarios like robotic control [4]
that require rapid network inference. Thus, it would be ideal
if we can obtain small and compact models that still possess
strong generalizability towards diverse open-set concepts
encountered in the real world.
We note that the internet-scale data has endowed foundation models with well-aligned vision and language representation spaces across diverse domains and datasets. Ideally,
if such representation spaces can be perfectly distilled into
smaller models, the resulting models can naturally possess
similar open-set OOD generalization ability as their larger
counterparts. However, it is usually not the case, as demonstrated in our later experiments. Therefore, we ask the following question: How to effectively distill representation
spaces of large vision-language teacher models to benefit
OOD generalization of smaller student models?
In this study, we investigate the principles and techniques for distilling visual representations from large visionlanguage models using small- to mid-scale datasets, with a
specific focus on out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization.
Although large-scale datasets with image-text pairs exist,
as a pioneer work in this direction, we argue that small- to
mid-scale datasets has many practical scenarios for vision
application researchers (e.g., for robotics), because this is
more flexible, allowing for faster research and development
cycles with fewer resource dependencies. Additionally, as
we shall see, extensive experiments yield a deeper understanding of the representation spaces of vision-language
models, which can be beneficial for future tasks like distilling image-based foundation models for detection [22, 49],
segmentation [24, 10], and other data modalities like 3D
geometries [58, 36, 29]. To keep study focused and fundamental, we also choose the image classification task to
explore many possible strategies.
Based on extensive experimental results, we propose to
preserve the internal structure of the representation spaces.
Specifically, we propose techniques to maintain the relationship between the visual and language representation spaces
of the teacher models and a novel strategy to enhance the

2492

