This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unleashing Text-to-Image Diffusion Models for Visual Perception
Wenliang Zhao1,2 *

Yongming Rao1,2 *
1

Tsinghua University

Zuyan Liu1,2 *
2

Benlin Liu3

BNRist 3 University of Washington

Abstract

Denoising
Process

Denoising UNet

Diffusion models (DMs) have become the new trend of
generative models and have demonstrated a powerful ability of conditional synthesis. Among those, text-to-image diffusion models pre-trained on large-scale image-text pairs
are highly controllable by customizable prompts. Unlike
the unconditional generative models that focus on lowlevel attributes and details, text-to-image diffusion models
contain more high-level knowledge thanks to the visionlanguage pre-training. In this paper, we propose VPD (Visual Perception with pre-trained Diffusion models), a new
framework that exploits the semantic information of a pretrained text-to-image diffusion model in visual perception
tasks. Instead of using the pre-trained denoising autoencoder in a diffusion-based pipeline, we simply use it as a
backbone and aim to study how to take full advantage of
the learned knowledge. Specifically, we prompt the denoising decoder with proper textual inputs and refine the text
features with an adapter, leading to a better alignment to
the pre-trained stage and making the visual contents interact with the text prompts. We also propose to utilize the
cross-attention maps between the visual features and the
text features to provide explicit guidance. Compared with
other pre-training methods, we show that vision-language
pre-trained diffusion models can be faster adapted to downstream visual perception tasks using the proposed VPD.
Extensive experiments on semantic segmentation, referring
image segmentation, and depth estimation demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method. Notably, VPD attains 0.254
RMSE on NYUv2 depth estimation and 73.3% oIoU on
RefCOCO-val referring image segmentation, establishing
new records on these two benchmarks. Code is available
at https://github.com/wl-zhao/VPD.

1. Introduction
Recently, large text-to-image diffusion models [45, 42]
have demonstrated phenomenal power in generating di* Equal contribution.

Jiwen Lu1,2†

Jie Zhou1,2

…

a cat is sitting on a table
Cross-Attention
Maps

(a) Denoising Diffusion Process for Text-to-Image Generation
text prompts

Denoising UNet
Feature Maps

Cross-Attention Maps

C

Visual Perception Tasks
Semantic Segmentation
Depth Estimation
…

Decoder

(b) VPD: Visual Perception with Pre-trained Diffusion Models

Figure 1: The main idea of the proposed VPD framework. Motivated by the compelling generative semantic of
a text-to-image diffusion model, we propose a new framework named VPD to exploit the pre-trained knowledge in
the denoising UNet to provide semantic guidance for downstream visual perception tasks.
verse and high-fidelity images with high customizability [45, 19, 38, 6], attracting growing attention from both
the research community and the public eye. By leveraging large-scale datasets of image-text pairs (e.g., LAION5B [48]), text-to-image diffusion models exhibit favorable
scaling ability. Large-scale text-to-image diffusion models are able to generate high-quality images with rich texture, diverse content and reasonable structures while having
compositional and editable semantics. This phenomenon
potentially suggests that large text-to-image diffusion models can implicitly learn both high-level and low-level visual
concepts from massive image-text pairs. Moreover, recent
research [19, 38] also has highlighted the clear correlations
between the latent visual features and corresponding words
in text prompts in text-to-image diffusion models.

† Corresponding author.

The compelling generative semantic and compositional

5729

