This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SupFusion: Supervised LiDAR-Camera Fusion for 3D Object Detection
Yiran Qin1 *, Chaoqun Wang1∗ , Zijian Kang2 , Ningning Ma2 , Zhen Li3 , Ruimao Zhang1†
1
School of Data Science, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China 2 NIO
3
School of Science and Engineering, Future Intelligent Network Research Institute,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China
{yiranqin@link, chaoqunwang@link, lizhen@, ruimaozhang@}cuhk.edu.hk, {zijiankang, ningningma}@nio.com

Abstract

* Equal contribution. Work done during an internship at NIO.
† Corresponding author.

Camera
Lidar Feat.
Extractor

ℒ*+'

Head

Prediction

LiDAR
Ours
Camera Feat.
Extractor
Camera
Lidar Feat.
Extractor

Fusion Module

LiDAR-Camera fusion-based 3D detection is a critical
task for automatic driving. In recent years, many LiDARCamera fusion approaches sprung up and gained promising
performances compared with single-modal detectors, but
always lack carefully designed and effective supervision for
the fusion process. In this paper, we propose a novel training strategy called SupFusion, which provides an auxiliary
feature level supervision for effective LiDAR-Camera fusion
and significantly boosts detection performance. Our strategy
involves a data enhancement method named Polar Sampling,
which densifies sparse objects and trains an assistant model
to generate high-quality features as the supervision. These
features are then used to train the LiDAR-Camera fusion
model, where the fusion feature is optimized to simulate the
generated high-quality features. Furthermore, we propose
a simple yet effective deep fusion module, which contiguously gains superior performance compared with previous
fusion methods with SupFusion strategy. In such a manner,
our proposal shares the following advantages. Firstly, SupFusion introduces auxiliary feature-level supervision which
could boost LiDAR-Camera detection performance without
introducing extra inference costs. Secondly, the proposed
deep fusion could continuously improve the detector’s abilities. Our proposed SupFusion and deep fusion module is
plug-and-play, we make extensive experiments to demonstrate its effectiveness. Specifically, we gain around 2% 3D
mAP improvements on KITTI benchmark based on multiple LiDAR-Camera 3D detectors. Our code is available at
https://github.com/IranQin/SupFusion.

Fusion Module

Previous
Camera Feat.
Extractor

ℒ*+'

Head

ℒ!"#$%&'"()

Prediction

LiDAR
Polar Sampling
Lidar Feat.
Extractor
LiDAR

Figure 1: Top: The previous LiDAR-Camera 3D detector,
the fusion module is optimized by detection loss. Bottom:
Our proposed SupFusion, we introduce auxiliary supervision
via high-quality features provided by an assistant model.

1. Introduction
LiDAR-Camera fusion-based 3D object detection is a
critical and challenging task for autonomous driving and
robotics [32, 35]. Previous approaches [20, 22, 34, 19] always project the camera inputs to LiDAR BEV or voxel
space via intrinsic and extrinsic to align the LiDAR and camera features. Then, simple concatenation or summation is
employed to obtain the fusion features for final detection.
Also, some deep learning-based fusion approaches [1, 21]
sprung up and gained promising performances. However,
the previous fusion approaches always directly optimized the
3D/2D feature extraction as well as the fusion module by the

22014

