This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-metrics adaptively identifies backdoors in Federated learning
Siquan Huang1

Yijiang Li2

Chong Chen1

cssiquanhuang@mail.scut.edu.cn

yli556@jhu.edu

cschenchong@mail.scut.edu.cn

1

Leyu Shi1

Ying Gao1 *

csshileyu@mail.scut.edu.cn

gaoying@scut.edu.cn

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
The decentralized and privacy-preserving nature of federated learning (FL) makes it vulnerable to backdoor attacks aiming to manipulate the behavior of the resulting
model on specific adversary-chosen inputs. However, most
existing defenses based on statistical differences take effect
only against specific attacks, especially when the malicious
gradients are similar to benign ones or the data are highly
non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID). In
this paper, we revisit the distance-based defense methods
and discover that i) Euclidean distance becomes meaningless in high dimensions and ii) malicious gradients with diverse characteristics cannot be identified by a single metric. To this end, we present a simple yet effective defense
strategy with multi-metrics and dynamic weighting to identify backdoors adaptively. Furthermore, our novel defense
has no reliance on predefined assumptions over attack settings or data distributions and little impact on benign performance. To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach, we
conduct comprehensive experiments on different datasets
under various attack settings, where our method achieves
the best defensive performance. For instance, we achieve
the lowest backdoor accuracy of 3.06% under the most difficult Edge-case PGD, showing significant superiority over
previous defenses. The experiments also demonstrate that
our method can be well-adapted to a wide range of non-IID
degrees without sacrificing the benign performance.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [26, 35] is a distributed machine
learning paradigm that enables multiple participants to train
a quality model collaboratively without exchanging their local data. During each round of training, the central server
* Corresponding Author

distributes the global model to a subset of clients. Each
client updates the model with the local data and submits
the parameters to the server for aggregation. By training an
efficient and quality model in a decentralized manner without sacrificing the privacy of participants, FL alleviates the
possible conflict between technological developments and
regulations for data privacy protection(e.g., General Data
Protection Regulation). FL has already been applied and
achieved success in multiple fields, such as image processing [32], word prediction [36], medical imaging [30], and
edge computing [56, 51].
However, FL is vulnerable to backdoors manipulating the model towards the targeted behavior on specific
adversary-chosen inputs [24, 4, 6, 47, 50, 11, 33, 39, 19, 31].
The backdoor attack is more difficult to be detected compared with the untargeted poisoning attacks [6, 7, 33, 11, 19]
since it does not affect the regular function of the model and
its gradient is more similar to benign ones [47, 38]. Multiple defenses have been proposed to improve the robustness
of FL, such as the scoring-based methods [17, 8, 53, 41, 10,
55, 16, 29, 2, 20], which leverage a particular metric to distinguish malicious gradients from the benign ones. Despite
its effectiveness against some backdoors, researchers discovered that well-designed attacks (termed stealthy backdoors) whose gradients are indistinguishable from benign
ones (through scaling [4, 47] or trigger split [50]) could easily bypass these defenses. Differential privacy (DP) -based
method [46, 40, 38, 49] builds upon the observation that the
DP method [14], traditionally used against DP attacks, is
also effective against backdoors. By adding Gaussian noise
to the global model, these methods can dilute the impact
of potentially poisoned model updates. Surprisingly, DPbased methods show great ability in resisting stealthy backdoors (e.g., Edge-case PGD [47]). Despite its ability to resist the stealthy backdoors, the noises added by the DP significantly decrease the overall performance and the convergence speed. In comparison, the distance-based method less

4652

