This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Human from Blur: Human Pose Tracking from Blurry Images
Yiming Zhao1
Denys Rozumnyi1
Jie Song1
Otmar Hilliges1
Marc Pollefeys1,2
Martin R. Oswald1,3
2
3
1
ETH Zürich
Microsoft
University of Amsterdam

Accurate tracking of human motion is often crucial for
understanding dynamic scenes from images. Human motion estimation has a wide field of applications such as improving human-robot collaboration [2], human-machine interaction in general [12], better safety for autonomous driving [20], markerless human motion capture [36, 35, 27],
sports analysis, and the movie and entertainment industry. A particular difficulty occurs when the human motion
is fast, or low light conditions demand longer camera exposure times, which can both lead to blurry images from
which it is significantly harder to estimate the human pose.
The main goal of our method is accurate 3D human
pose tracking from substantially blurred images or videos.
Hence, it is related to both human pose estimation and image deblurring methods. On the one hand, while there is a
variety of methods that address 3D human pose estimation
from RGB or RGB-D images, there is no method that is de-

Matting [28]

Novel View

1. Introduction

Rendered

We propose a method to estimate 3D human poses from
substantially blurred images. The key idea is to tackle the
inverse problem of image deblurring by modeling the forward problem with a 3D human model, a texture map, and
a sequence of poses to describe human motion. The blurring process is then modeled by a temporal image aggregation step. Using a differentiable renderer, we can solve
the inverse problem by backpropagating the pixel-wise reprojection error to recover the best human motion representation that explains a single or multiple input images.
Since the image reconstruction loss alone is insufficient, we
present additional regularization terms. To the best of our
knowledge, we present the first method to tackle this problem. Our method consistently outperforms other methods
on significantly blurry inputs since they lack one or multiple key functionalities that our method unifies, i.e. image
deblurring with sub-frame accuracy and explicit 3D modeling of non-rigid human motion.

Background

Blur

GT Frames

Abstract

|

{z
Inputs

}|

{z
Outputs (Estimated sub-frame pose)

Figure 1. Human from Blur (HfB) on a real-world sequence.
Given a blurry image with human motion and the corresponding
background, HfB recovers the human shape and sub-frame motion. We visualize sub-frame human pose and show the reconstructed mesh from a novel view.

signed to handle substantially blurred images. Moreover,
none of the human pose estimation methods is able to estimate human pose at sub-frame accuracy. On the other hand,
there is a large amount of methods that aim at deblurring
images and videos, but they mostly only assume simplified
scenarios, e.g. without out-of-image-plane object rotations,
or only for rigidly moving objects [45, 46]. So far, human
pose estimation and image deblurring has not been studied
jointly. Also, there is no public dataset to evaluate such task
since none of standard datasets for human pose estimation
include significant amounts of motion blur.
We propose the first method that recovers human pose at
sub-frame accuracy from blurry inputs, even from a single
blurry image (Fig. 1). We make the following contributions:
(1) We present the first method for human pose estimation
from substantially blurred images that recovers subframe accurate poses as well as texture and body shape.
(2) We generate a synthetic dataset and collected realworld motion-blurred data of humans for evaluation
purposes. We further propose corresponding evaluation
metrics to assess and compare to future methods.
(3) The proposed method only relies on test-time optimization and is learning-free, apart from the initialization

14905

}

