This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SegPrompt: Boosting Open-world Segmentation
via Category-level Prompt Learning
Muzhi Zhu1 , Hengtao Li1 ,
1

Hao Chen1 *, Chengxiang Fan1 , Weian Mao2,1 ,
Yifan Liu2 , Chunhua Shen1,3

Zhejiang University, China

2

The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
Current closed-set instance segmentation models rely
on pre-defined class labels for each mask during training and evaluation, largely limiting their ability to detect
novel objects. Open-world instance segmentation (OWIS)
models address this challenge by detecting unknown objects in a class-agnostic manner. However, previous OWIS
approaches completely erase category information during
training to keep the model’s ability to generalize to unknown objects. In this work, we propose a novel training mechanism termed SegPrompt that uses category information to improve the model’s class-agnostic segmentation
ability for both known and unknown categories. In addition,
the previous OWIS training setting exposes the unknown
classes to the training set and brings information leakage,
which is unreasonable in the real world. Therefore, we provide a new open-world benchmark closer to a real-world
scenario by dividing the dataset classes into known-seenunseen parts. For the first time, we focus on the model’s
ability to discover objects that never appear in the training
set images.
Experiments show that SegPrompt can improve the overall and unseen detection performance by 5.6% and 6.1%
in AR on our new benchmark without affecting the inference efficiency. We further demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method on existing cross-dataset transfer and strongly
supervised settings, leading to 5.5% and 12.3% relative improvement. Code and data are released at:
https:// github.com/ aim-uofa/ SegPrompt

1. Introduction
Datasets are one of the most important driving force
for deep learning. For general foundation models, massive
paired text-image data harvested from the internet is a convenient and valuable resource. However, for instance-level
* HC is the corresponding author.

sity.

WM was visiting Zhejiang Univer-

3

Chenchen Jing1 ,

Ant Group

perception tasks such as detection and segmentation, it is
still very challenging to collect datasets at similar scales because every instance requires pixel-level annotations. Increasing the number of categories will introduce ambiguity
and cause unrealistic manual labor. Category-level annotations prevail in these tasks, and an object can be discovered only if it is classified into one of the known classes
in the training set. One promising solution is to decouple
detection and classification tasks to increase the semantic
complexity. For example, in open-vocabulary segmentation
[3, 8, 28], a class-agnostic segmentation network is often
adopted to locate objects, and the classification part relies
on a vision language model. Under this framework, the
ability to discover novel objects becomes crucial. In other
words, we need to figure out how to discover more novel
objects given the appropriate annotations. This task fits into
the definition of open-world instance segmentation (OWIS)
[23], where the model is required to not only segment the
known categories but also the unknown categories.
Recent works [18] have shown that class-agnostic training encourages cross-dataset generalization. Previous
works on OWIS also have agreed that class-aware training harms the model’s ability to generalize to unknown objects. Thus, they all completely discard category information in the training phase. Consistent with this, our preliminary experimental results indicate that a stronger closedworld model generalizes better to unseen classes and classagnostic training further improves the results. Specifically,
Mask2Former [1] surpasses Mask R-CNN by 3.9% AR and
class-agnostic training leads to another 2.5% AR improvement. All phenomena show that the direct inclusion of category information damages the generalization ability of the
model.
In this work, we explore an interesting question: is
the category information really useless? To make use of
the category information while maintaining the generalization ability, we propose a prompt learning mechanism—
SegPrompt—which serves as a training time auxiliary supervision to improve class-agnostic segmentation quality in

999

