This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchically Decomposed Graph Convolutional Networks for
Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Jungho Lee1 , Minhyeok Lee1 , Dogyoon Lee1 , Sangyoun Lee1,2
1

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University
2
AIonFlow Research
{2015142131, hydragon516, nemotio, syleee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) are the most
commonly used methods for skeleton-based action recognition and have achieved remarkable performance. Generating adjacency matrices with semantically meaningful
edges is particularly important for this task, but extracting such edges is challenging problem. To solve this,
we propose a hierarchically decomposed graph convolutional network (HD-GCN) architecture with a novel hierarchically decomposed graph (HD-Graph). The proposed
HD-GCN effectively decomposes every joint node into several sets to extract major structurally adjacent and distant
edges, and uses them to construct an HD-Graph containing those edges in the same semantic spaces of a human
skeleton. In addition, we introduce an attention-guided hierarchy aggregation (A-HA) module to highlight the dominant hierarchical edge sets of the HD-Graph. Furthermore, we apply a new six-way ensemble method, which
uses only joint and bone stream without any motion stream.
The proposed model is evaluated and achieves state-ofthe-art performance on four large, popular datasets. Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our model with
various comparative experiments. Code is available at
https://github.com/Jho-Yonsei/HD-GCN.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition (HAR) is a task that categorizes action classes by receiving video data as input. HAR is
used in many applications, such as human–computer interaction and virtual reality. Recently, several RGB-based and
skeleton-based HAR methods have been proposed with the
development of deep learning technology. However, RGBbased methods [31, 29] cannot robustly recognize human
actions because they are strongly influenced by environmental noises such as background color, brightness of light,

Edge Set

Set 1

Set 2

Set 3

Set 1

Set 2

Set 3

Set 4

Attention Map

Squat Down

Set 4

Figure 1. The framework of HD-GCN. The input skeleton is applied with various edge sets through a hierarchically decomposed
graph (HD-Graph). The red lines are the edges included in the
corresponding hierarchy edge set. The network highlights the major edge sets through the attention map. The darker the color of
red line, the more highlighted the edge set, and dotted lines denote
unconnected edges.

and clothing. Therefore, methods using skeleton modality [35, 24, 36, 26, 5, 4, 18, 2, 15] have attracted attention
because they are not affected by these noises. These methods recognize action by receiving 2D or 3D coordinates of
major human joints as time-series inputs.
Recent approaches [24, 18, 4, 2] have adopted graph
convolutional networks (GCNs) to apply human-skeleton
graphs to convolutional layers. However, existing GCNbased methods [35, 24, 25, 4, 2] have the following limitations. (1) With the widely used handcrafted graph, the
relationships between distant joint nodes are not identified
since they use only the relationships of PC edges in the human skeleton. Although the graph with PC edges has a semantic significance, the graph with only PC edges suffers
from long-range dependency problem as they are heuristically fixed. However, for humans to recognize actions,
relationships between structurally distant joints as well as
between adjacent joints are strongly correlated. Although
several methods [24, 2] have attempted to solve such limita-

10444

