This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-bit Flip is All You Need: When Bit-flip Attack Meets Model Training
Jianshuo Dong1 , Han Qiu1,2 , Yiming Li3,4,5 *, Tianwei Zhang6 , Yuanjie Li1,2
Zeqi Lai1,2 , Chao Zhang1,2 , Shu-Tao Xia1
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Zhongguancun Laboratory, 3 Zhejiang University, 4 HIC-ZJU
5
Ant Group, 6 Nanyang Technological University
dongjs23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{qiuhan, yuanjiel, zeqilai, chaoz}@tsinghua.edu.cn
liyiming.tech@gmail.com; tianwei.zhang@ntu.edu.sg
xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are widely deployed on
real-world devices. Concerns regarding their security have
gained great attention from researchers. Recently, a new
weight modification attack called bit flip attack (BFA) was
proposed, which exploits memory fault inject techniques
such as row hammer to attack quantized models in the deployment stage. With only a few bit flips, the target model
can be rendered useless as a random guesser or even be
implanted with malicious functionalities. In this work, we
seek to further reduce the number of bit flips. We propose
a training-assisted bit flip attack, in which the adversary
is involved in the training stage to build a high-risk model
to release. This high-risk model, obtained coupled with a
corresponding malicious model, behaves normally and can
escape various detection methods. The results on benchmark datasets show that an adversary can easily convert
this high-risk but normal model to a malicious one on victim’s side by flipping only one critical bit on average in
the deployment stage. Moreover, our attack still poses a
significant threat even when defenses are employed. The
codes for reproducing main experiments are available at
https://github.com/jianshuod/TBA.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely and
successfully deployed in many mission-critical applications, such as facial recognition [14, 31, 18] and speech
recognition [36, 33, 29]. Accordingly, their security issues
are of great significance and deserve in-depth explorations.
Currently, many studies have illustrated that DNNs are
vulnerable to various attacks, such as data poisoning [26,
* Corresponding Author: Yiming Li (liyiming.tech@gmail.com).

Figure 1. The illustration of the optimization process for our
training-assisted bit-flip attack. We alternately optimize the objective of the released model and that of the flipped model. Accordingly, this process will gradually move the original model Mo
from the low-risk area to the high-risk state (i.e., Mr3 ), serving
as the released model Mr passed to victims. The adversaries will
turn it into malicious Mf for the attack in the deployment stage.

13, 17], and adversarial attacks [7, 1, 8]. Specifically, data
poisoning is a training-stage attack, designed to implant malicious prediction behaviors in the victim model by manipulating some training samples. Adversarial attacks target
the inference process of victim DNNs, leading to malicious
predictions by adding small perturbations to target images.
Most recently, a few research [20, 21, 22, 6, 4, 3] demonstrated that DNNs are also vulnerable in the deployment
stage. In particular, the adversaries can alter a victim
model’s parameters in the memory of the devices where it is
deployed by flipping their bit-level representations (e.g., ‘0’
→ ‘1’) to trigger malicious prediction behaviors. This threat

4688

