This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Confidence-aware Pseudo-label Learning for Weakly Supervised
Visual Grounding
Yang Liu1,2 * Jiahua Zhang1 Qingchao Chen3 Yuxin Peng1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
3
National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University
1

{yangliu, qingchao.chen, pengyuxin}@pku.edu.cn

{zhangjiahua}@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual grounding aims at localizing the target object in
image which is most related to the given free-form natural language query. As labeling the position of target
object is labor-intensive, the weakly supervised methods,
where only image-sentence annotations are required during
model training have recently received increasing attention.
Most of the existing weakly-supervised methods first generate region proposals via pre-trained object detectors and
then employ either cross-modal similarity score or reconstruction loss as the criteria to select proposal from them.
However, due to the cross-modal heterogeneous gap, these
method often suffer from high confidence spurious association and model prone to error propagation. In this paper, we
propose Confidence-aware Pseudo-label Learning (CPL) to
overcome the above limitations. Specifically, we first adopt
both the uni-modal and cross-modal pre-trained models and
propose conditional prompt engineering to automatically
generate multiple ‘descriptive, realistic and diverse’ pseudo
language queries for each region proposal, and then establish reliable cross-modal association for model training
based on the uni-modal similarity score (between pseudo
and real text queries). Secondly, we propose a confidenceaware pseudo label verification module which reduces the
amount of noise encountered in the training process and the
risk of error propagation. Experiments on five widely used
datasets validate the efficacy of our proposed components
and demonstrate state-of-the-art performance. Code can be
found at https://github.com/zjh31/CPL.git

1. Introduction
Visual grounding is an important task with vast potential applications in visual question answering [1], robot manipulation [38, 51], etc. The goal is to find the target ob* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Our method compare with other weakly supervised visual grounding methods. (a) Existing weakly supervised methods.
(b) Our approach.

ject (region) in an image associated with a given free-form
natural language query. Fully supervised visual grounding [6, 42, 43, 46, 48, 15, 21] has witnessed remarkable
progress recently. However, accurate box annotations for
each target object are unfortunately expensive to obtain and
thus difficult to scale. Therefore the weakly supervised setting, where only image-level descriptions are available during training, is more practical and draws increasing attention from the community.
Most existing weakly supervised solutions generate region proposals via pre-trained object detectors and then employ either the contrastive learning-based or reconstructionbased paradigms to select from them. As shown in Figure 1(a), the proposal selection is conducted based on the
cross-modal (region-textual) (directly compute the matching score between the proposal and query). Specifically,
contrastive learning-based methods learn the cross-modal
alignment in the image level by maximizing the matching
scores of the image and the paired descriptions while suppressing that of the unpaired ones. Reconstruction-based

2828

