This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Superpixel for Active Learning in Semantic Segmentation
Hoyoung Kim1

Minhyeon Oh2

Sehyun Hwang2

Graduate School of AI, POSTECH1 ,

Suha Kwak1,2

Jungseul Ok1,2 *

Dept. of CSE, POSTECH2

{cskhy16, minhyeonoh, sehyun03, suha.kwak, jungseul}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Learning semantic segmentation requires pixel-wise annotations, which can be time-consuming and expensive. To
reduce the annotation cost, we propose a superpixel-based
active learning (AL) framework, which collects a dominant
label per superpixel instead. To be specific, it consists
of adaptive superpixel and sieving mechanisms, fully dedicated to AL. At each round of AL, we adaptively merge
neighboring pixels of similar learned features into superpixels. We then query a selected subset of these superpixels using an acquisition function assuming no uniform
superpixel size. This approach is more efficient than existing methods, which rely only on innate features such as
RGB color and assume uniform superpixel sizes. Obtaining a dominant label per superpixel drastically reduces annotators’ burden as it requires fewer clicks. However, it
inevitably introduces noisy annotations due to mismatches
between superpixel and ground truth segmentation. To address this issue, we further devise a sieving mechanism that
identifies and excludes potentially noisy annotations from
learning. Our experiments on both Cityscapes and PASCAL VOC datasets demonstrate the efficacy of adaptive superpixel and sieving mechanisms.

1. Introduction
With the advent of deep learning, many computer vision tasks including semantic segmentation have dramatically evolved in recent years. Such advances are thanks to
complex deep network models that can learn huge datasets.
However, labeling such large datasets is prohibitively timeconsuming and labor-intensive, in particular, for semantic
segmentation tasks that demand a dense annotation on each
pixel [8, 11]. Active learning (AL) offers an approach to alleviate the annotation cost by selectively querying only the
most informative samples to annotators.
Designing an effective form of annotation query is crit* Corresponding author.

(a) Over-segmented (t = 0)

(b) Adaptive merged (t = 2)

(c) Adaptive merged (t = 4)

(d) Oracle

Figure 1: Examples of adaptive superpixels. (a) We begin
active learning with over-segmented superpixels. (b, c) In
each round t, we merge superpixels in an adaptive manner
using the model from the previous round. (d) As the round
progresses, adaptive superpixels look similar to oracle ones.
ical in practice as it determines the actual annotation cost
such as the number of clicks required and the informativeness per annotation query. For semantic segmentation, an
image-wise query can be asked for a complete annotation on
the semantic of every pixel in an image [9, 10, 34, 38, 40].
This is a daunting task requiring an enormous amount of
clicks to indicate boundaries (using polygons or contours)
for each semantic segment or to annotate semantic pixelwisely, while the diversity of contexts which we can observe
in a single image is restricted. Alternatively, one can design
a region-based query enquiring only about the dominant label of a small region such as rectangle patch [5, 27, 37] or
superpixel [4, 33]. This is known to be simple yet effective
as it requires only a single click per query while enabling
AL to put more focus on significant regions and to avoid
annotation wastes.
AL with the region-based query needs a delicate generation of candidate regions to be queried. A small region size
dilutes the budget efficiency, whereas the dominant labeling even by a perfect annotator is prone to give noisy labels

943

