This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Partition-and-Debias: Agnostic Biases Mitigation via
A Mixture of Biases-Specific Experts
Jiaxuan Li
The University of Tokyo, Japan

Duc Minh Vo
The University of Tokyo, Japan

li@nlab.ci.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

vmduc@nlab.ci.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Hideki Nakayama
The University of Tokyo, Japan
nakayama@ci.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

72.16

20.35%

Young
Young

✓

Male
Attractive

✓

Lipstick

✓

21.36%

59.16

✓
55.71

9.68%

Old

Male

Old

✓

✓

66.22

67.27

43.75%

✓
✓

66.76

14.53%

70.99

67.59

53.75

15.20%
12.42%
62.69%

✓

Attractive
Lipstick

Gender

✓

0 bias

(a)

1 bias

2 biases

3 biases

(b)

ResNet-18

Attractive or not

Wearing lipstick or not

DebiAN

PnD (ours)

(c)

Figure 1: Taking the age attribute in the CelebA dataset as an example for analyzing the agnostic biases problem. (a)
Representative samples in CelebA containing multiple biases. By analyzing the attribute distribution of all data within
the young/old category, we found that three attributes can be biased: gender (female/male), attractiveness (attractive/not
attractive), and wearing lipstick (lipstick/no lipstick). (b) Proportion of samples with 0 – 3 biases in a single image within the
young and old groups. This indicates that the number of images with multiple biases dominated other cases in the dataset.
(c) Age classification accuracy (%) of the existing methods for the worst groups of three bias attributes in CelebA degrades
under this realistic bias scenario. For clarification, when discussing biases in this paper, we refer to abstract words like age
as “attribute”, and the italic words which describe the labels of age like young/old as “category”.

Abstract
Bias mitigation in image classification has been widely
researched, and existing methods have yielded notable results. However, most of these methods implicitly assume
that a given image contains only one type of known or unknown bias, failing to consider the complexities of realworld biases. We introduce a more challenging scenario,
agnostic biases mitigation, aiming at bias removal regardless of whether the type of bias or the number of types is
unknown in the datasets. To address this difficult task, we
present the Partition-and-Debias (PnD) method that uses
a mixture of biases-specific experts to implicitly divide the

bias space into multiple subspaces and a gating module to
find a consensus among experts to achieve debiased classification. Experiments on both public and constructed benchmarks demonstrated the efficacy of the PnD. Code is available at: https://github.com/Jiaxuan-Li/PnD.

1. Introduction
One of the reasons for poor generalization in image
classification is the presence of biased features in training
data [19, 31, 13], which distracts the model from learning
the target features associated with the classification objects.

4924

