This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Talking Head Generation with Probabilistic Audio-to-Visual Diffusion Priors
Zhentao Yu1∗

Zixin Yin1,2 *† Deyu Zhou1,3∗† Duomin Wang1
Finn Wong1 Baoyuan Wang1‡
1
Xiaobing.AI.
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou).
(yuzhentao,wangduomin,wangwenlan,wangbaoyuan)@xiaobing.ai
zyinaf@connect.ust.hk, dzhou861@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn

Figure 1. Given only an audio source and an arbitrary identity image, our system can generate a video with natural-looking and diverse
facial motions (pose, expression, blink & gaze), while maintaining accurate audio-lip synchronization. Here we show randomly sampled
sequences from our diffusion prior for two identities, note that the lip-irrelevant facial motion varies but the lip is still in-sync.

Abstract
We introduce a novel framework for one-shot audiodriven talking head generation. Unlike prior works that
require additional driving sources for controlled synthesis
in a deterministic manner, we instead sample all holistic
lip-irrelevant facial motions (i.e. pose, expression, blink,
gaze, etc.) to semantically match the input audio while still
maintaining both the photo-realism of audio-lip synchronization and overall naturalness. This is achieved by our
newly proposed audio-to-visual diffusion prior trained on
top of the mapping between audio and non-lip representations. Thanks to the probabilistic nature of the diffusion
prior, one big advantage of our framework is it can synthe* These authors have contributed equally to this work.
† This work was done when Zixin Yin and Deyu Zhou were interns at

XiaoBing.AI.
‡ Corresponding author.

size diverse facial motion sequences given the same audio
clip, which is quite user-friendly for many real applications.
Through comprehensive evaluations of public benchmarks,
we conclude that (1) our diffusion prior outperforms autoregressive prior significantly on all the concerned metrics;
(2) our overall system is competitive with prior works in
terms of audio-lip synchronization but can effectively sample rich and natural-looking lip-irrelevant facial motions
while still semantically harmonized with the audio input.

1. Introduction
Audio-driven face reenactment and talking head generation have received raising attention due to the broad killer
applications in movie production, gaming, virtual digital
avatars, and potentially more while we move toward the era

7645

