This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CDUL: CLIP-Driven Unsupervised Learning for Multi-Label Image Classification
Rabab Abdelfattah1 , Qing Guo2 , Xiaoguang Li3 , Xiaofeng Wang3 , and Song Wang3
1

University of Southern Mississippi, USA
rabab.abdelfattah@usm.edu
2
IHPC and CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
tsingqguo@ieee.org
3
University of South Carolina, USA
xl22@email.sc.edu, {wangxi, songwang}@cec.sc.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a CLIP-based unsupervised learning
method for annotation-free multi-label image classification,
including three stages: initialization, training, and inference. At the initialization stage, we take full advantage of
the powerful CLIP model and propose a novel approach
to extend CLIP for multi-label predictions based on globallocal image-text similarity aggregation. To be more specific,
we split each image into snippets and leverage CLIP to generate the similarity vector for the whole image (global) as
well as each snippet (local). Then a similarity aggregator is
introduced to leverage the global and local similarity vectors.
Using the aggregated similarity scores as the initial pseudo
labels at the training stage, we propose an optimization
framework to train the parameters of the classification network and refine pseudo labels for unobserved labels. During
inference, only the classification network is used to predict
the labels of the input image. Extensive experiments show
that our method outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised
methods on MS-COCO, PASCAL VOC 2007, PASCAL VOC
2012, and NUS datasets and even achieves comparable results to weakly supervised classification methods.

1. Introduction
A multi-label classification task aims to predict all the
objects within the input image, which is advantageous for
various applications, including content-based image retrieval
and recommendation systems, surveillance systems, and assistive robots, to name a few [9, 8, 6]. However, getting clean
and complete multi-label annotations is very challenging and
not scalable, especially for large-scale datasets, because an
image usually contains multiple labels (Figure 1.a).
To alleviate the annotation burden, weakly supervised
learning approaches have been studied [15, 20, 12, 1], in

Figure 1. A comparison of our solution with fully and weaklysupervised multi-label classification. (a) The training dataset images for fully-supervised learning are fully labeled. (b) The training
images used in weakly-supervised are partially labeled. (c) Our unsupervised multi-label classification method is annotation-free. (d)
CLIP focuses on one class in the whole image, and the embedding
is denoted by blue circle. Some classes are ignored such as "person". (e) In our approach, image snippets are mapped separately to
the embedded space, where each snippet’s embedding is denoted
by squares. Local alignment allows to predict more labels.

which only a limited number of objects are labeled on a
subset of training images (Figure 1.b). Though less than the
fully-labeled case, it still requires intensive manpower and
time for annotations.
To go one step further, we consider unsupervised multilabel image classification, leveraging the off-the-shelf visionlanguage models such as contrastive language-image pretraining (CLIP) [31]. CLIP is trained by matching each input

1348

