This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RFLA: A Stealthy Reflected Light Adversarial Attack in the Physical World
Donghua Wang1 , Wen Yao* 2 , Tingsong Jiang∗2 , Chao Li3 , and Xiaoqian Chen2
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
Defense Innovation Institute, Chinese Academy of Military Science
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University
wangdonghua@zju.edu.cn, {wendy0782,lichaoedu}@126.com, tingsong@pku.edu.cn,
chenxiaoqian@nudt.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Physical adversarial attacks against deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently gained increasing attention.
The current mainstream physical attacks use printed adversarial patches or camouflage to alter the appearance of the
target object. However, these approaches generate conspicuous adversarial patterns that show poor stealthiness. Another physical deployable attack is the optical attack, featuring stealthiness while exhibiting weakly in the daytime
with sunlight. In this paper, we propose a novel Reflected
Light Attack (RFLA), featuring effective and stealthy in both
the digital and physical world, which is implemented by
placing the color transparent plastic sheet and a paper cut
of a specific shape in front of the mirror to create different
colored geometries on the target object. To achieve these
goals, we devise a general framework based on the circle
to model the reflected light on the target object. Specifically, we optimize a circle (composed of a coordinate and
radius) to carry various geometrical shapes determined by
the optimized angle. The fill color of the geometry shape
and its corresponding transparency are also optimized. We
extensively evaluate the effectiveness of RFLA on different
datasets and models. Experiment results suggest that the
proposed method achieves over 99% success rate on different datasets and models in the digital world. Additionally,
we verify the effectiveness of the proposed method in different physical environments by using sunlight or a flashlight.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have increasingly been
applied to daily life as their dramatic capabilities, such as
* Corresponding Author.

Color & Geometry Shape Controller

mirror

DNN
Color Transparent
Plastic Sheet

Paper Cut

Speed limit 45

Figure 1. The reflected light is modulated by the color transparency plastic sheet and paper cut of the specific shape for better
attack performance. The Reflected light source can be sunlight or
a flashlight (when the sunlight is unreachable).

automatic driving, facial payment, and computer-aided diagnosis. However, DNN-based systems have exposed security risks caused by adversarial examples [39]. Adversarial examples are crafted by carefully designed noise that
is invisible to humans but can deceive the DNNs. Furthermore, recent researches [34, 21] reported that physically deployed DNN-based systems are also exposed to such security risks. Therefore, exploring various potential risks in
security-sensitive systems to avoid possible loss is urgent.
Existing adversarial attack methods can be categorized
into digital attacks and physical attacks. The former focus
on pursuing higher attack performance on limitation conditions, such as breaking the model equipped with adversarial defense [20, 3, 7, 24], preventing the attacker from accessing the target model’s information (e.g., architecture or
dataset), i.e., black-box attack [1, 22, 23]. Although some
researchers suggested that adversarial examples generated
by the digital attack can be applied to physical attacks [21],
14455

