This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-shot Continual Infomax Learning
Ziqi Gu# , Chunyan Xu# , Jian Yang, Zhen Cui∗
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional
Information of Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
{ziqigu, cyx, csjyang, zhen.cui}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot continual learning is the ability to continually
train a neural network from a sequential stream of fewshot data. In this paper, we propose a Few-shot Continual Infomax Learning (FCIL) framework that makes a deep
model to continually/incrementally learn new concepts from
few labeled samples, relieving the catastrophic forgetting
of past knowledge. Specifically, inspired by the theoretical
definition of transfer entropy, we introduce a feature embedding infomax to effectively perform the few-shot learning, which can transfer the strong encoding capability of the
base network to learn the feature embedding of these novel
classes by maximizing the mutual information of differentlevel feature distributions. Further, considering that the
learned knowledge in the human brain is a generalization of
actual information and exists in a certain relational structure, we perform continual structure infomax learning to
relieve the catastrophic forgetting problem in the continual
learning process. The information structure of this learned
knowledge can be preserved through maximizing the mutual information across these continual-changing relations
of inter-classes. Comprehensive evaluations on CIFAR100,
miniImageNet, and CUB200 datasets demonstrate the superiority of our FCIL when compared against state-of-the-art
methods on the few-shot continual learning task.

1. Introduction
Recent deep learning technologies [23, 30, 13] have
made great progress in many computer vision tasks. The
success of deep neural networks is achieved by employing
a large number of labeled training data. However, it is difficult to collect large-scale supervised data in advance, while
we would encounter a sequential data stream with unknown
new classes in many realistic situations. This would require
# Equal Contribution.
∗

Corresponding Author.

a neural network with continual learning ability, especially
when some new classes with very few labeled samples often appear. Therefore, this work focuses on dealing with the
few-shot continual/incremental learning task [28, 26]. They
are two critical challenges in a few-shot continual learning task: i) how to learn new knowledge with few-shot instances, and ii) how to avoid catastrophic forgetting of the
preceding learned knowledge.
Recently, numerous previous works [31] have been devoted to few-shot continual learning from various perspectives. In [31, 35, 8], the topological structure of the knowledge space formed by different classes has been considered
to perform few-shot continual learning by using a neural
gas network or graph model. Cheraghian et al. [8] have
proposed a semantic-aware knowledge distillation method
to solve few-shot class-incremental learning by making use
of word embeddings. Several meta-learning based methods [7, 18] have been also proposed to enable the model
to preserve old knowledge and adapt to the new classes
for continual learning. By assigning virtual prototypes to
squeeze the embedding of known classes and reserve for
new ones, the forward compatible training method [37] has
efficiently incorporated new classes with forward compatibility and meanwhile resists forgetting old ones. Similarly,
the mixture of subspaces and synthesized features [6] have
been used to alleviate the forgetting and over-fitting problem in the few-shot continual learning process. In [38],
the self-promoted prototype learning scheme has been proposed to explicitly learn the feature representation under
the few-shot learning situation and thus facilitated subsequent incremental tasks. The self-supervised strategy has
been also used to enhance the feature extraction ability of
the model by adding self-supervised loss function assistance during the training process [20, 26]. Moreover, to
minimize over-fitting and the catastrophic forgetting problem, Mazumder et al. [26] have selected very few unimportant model parameters to perform few-shot learning on new
classes. In [11], mutual information (MI) maximization has
been first used as a solution method to deal with the catas-

19224

