This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

When Epipolar Constraint Meets Non-local Operators in Multi-View Stereo
Tianqi Liu Xinyi Ye Weiyue Zhao Zhiyu Pan Min Shi* Zhiguo Cao
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education; School of Artificial
Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
{tianqiliu,xinyiye,zhaoweiyue,zhiyupan,min shi,zgcao}@hust.edu.cn

Reference View

Abstract

Tanks and Temples Benchmark

38

0.21s

0.17s
1.24s

CasMVSNet
TransMVSNet

0.64s
0.99s

GBiMVSNet
UniMVSNet

34

MVSTer
0.49s

30

Advanced F-scores↗

42

DTU

52

56

38

* Corresponding author

(a) Non-Local feature aggregation on epipolar lines

32

As a fundamental topic in computer vision, Multi-view
stereo (MVS) aims to reconstruct dense 3D representations
from multiple calibrated images given corresponding camera parameters. MVS can facilitate many applications such
as automatic driving and augmented reality [12]. A critical part of MVS is to match pixels to find the corresponding points. This matching process heavily relies on the fea-

Feature
Aggregation

30

1. Introduction

Epipolar Line

28

Learning-based multi-view stereo (MVS) method heavily relies on feature matching, which requires distinctive
and descriptive representations. An effective solution is
to apply non-local feature aggregation, e.g., Transformer.
Albeit useful, these techniques introduce heavy computation overheads for MVS. Each pixel densely attends to the
whole image. In contrast, we propose to constrain nonlocal feature augmentation within a pair of lines: each
point only attends the corresponding pair of epipolar lines.
Our idea takes inspiration from the classic epipolar geometry, which shows that one point with different depth hypotheses will be projected to the epipolar line on the other
view. This constraint reduces the 2D search space into
the epipolar line in stereo matching. Similarly, this suggests that the matching of MVS is to distinguish a series
of points lying on the same line. Inspired by this point-toline search, we devise a line-to-point non-local augmentation strategy. We first devise an optimized searching algorithm to split the 2D feature maps into epipolar line pairs.
Then, an Epipolar Transformer (ET) performs non-local
feature augmentation among epipolar line pairs. We incorporate the ET into a learning-based MVS baseline, named
ET-MVSNet. ET-MVSNet achieves state-of-the-art reconstruction performance on both the DTU and Tanks-andTemples benchmark with high efficiency. Code is available
at https://github.com/TQTQliu/ET-MVSNet.

Source View

60

64

Intermediate F-scores ↑

ET-MVSNet (Ours)

68

Overall (mm) ↓

(b) Performance and efficiency comparison with other MVS approaches

Figure 1. Our methods and results. (a) Inspired by classic epipolar geometry in stereo matching, we propose an efficient non-local
feature aggregation paradigm that aggregates features on the corresponding epipolar line pairs. (b) We instantiate the proposed
non-local mechanism with a Transformer, termed Epipolar Transformer (ET), which attains state-of-the-art performance with limited computation overhead.

ture representation: corresponding points in different views
should be close in the embedding space. Traditional MVS
approaches [11, 14, 27, 28] adopt hand-craft feature representation, which faces challenges on repetitive-pattern,
weak-texture, and reflective regions.
To remedy the weak representation of the traditional
MVS approaches, learning-based methods are proposed
and show superior performance. Learning-based MVS approaches adopt deep neural networks to encode features,
which forms the foundation for the subsequent feature
matching and depth generation. Powerful as convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) are, they still prefer to aggregate
local context [22], which may be less accurate for matching.

18088

