This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Object Localization with Representer Point Selection
Yeonghwan Song1
Seokwoo Jang1
1
AI Graduate School, GIST
{yeonghwan.song, jangseokwoo}@gm.gist.ac.kr

dina@csail.mit.edu

com/yeonghwansong/UOLwRPS

1. Introduction
Object localization is one of the most fundamental problems in computer vision which aims to find a bounding
box of a particular object category in a given image. Recent object localization methods achieve impressive performances thanks to advances in deep neural networks
(DNNs) [19, 13] and large-scale datasets [33, 37]. Despite
their successes, the biggest concern in this task is that collecting datasets with precise box-level annotations is laborintensive and time-consuming. Recently, object localization methods with less supervision, i.e. weakly-supervised
methods [25, 52, 48, 12, 53, 46, 31, 44, 3], have been wellstudied to mitigate those problems, nevertheless, they require image-level class labels.

Jeany Son1
jeany@gist.ac.kr

75

Abstract

70

GT-Known

We propose a novel unsupervised object localization
method that allows us to explain the predictions of the
model by utilizing self-supervised pre-trained models without additional finetuning. Existing unsupervised and selfsupervised object localization methods often utilize classagnostic activation maps or self-similarity maps of a pretrained model. Although these maps can offer valuable information for localization, their limited ability to explain
how the model makes predictions remains challenging. In
this paper, we propose a simple yet effective unsupervised
object localization method based on representer point selection, where the predictions of the model can be represented
as a linear combination of representer values of training
points. By selecting representer points, which are the most
important examples for the model predictions, our model
can provide insights into how the model predicts the foreground object by providing relevant examples as well as
their importance. Our method outperforms the state-ofthe-art unsupervised and self-supervised object localization
methods on various datasets with significant margins and
even outperforms recent weakly supervised and few-shot
methods. Our code is available at: https://github.

Dina Katabi2
2
MIT CSAIL

65

60

55

Ours

LOST

TC

Unsupervised
Object Localization

TSCAM

LCTR

ViTOL

SCM

Weakly supervised
Object Localization

Figure 1. GT-Known Loc scores of various methods with respect to
different levels of supervision on ImageNet-1K dataset. All methods use ViT-S [13] as a backbone and TC denotes TokenCut [39].

Beyond learning with less supervision, most recent
works [42, 41, 51, 1, 21, 27, 36, 45, 35, 39] focus on the
object localization task using self-supervised or unsupervised learning that does not require any human annotated labels. These works address the problem of identifying which
regions are more likely to contain the foreground object,
which is a salient object in an image. In order to discover
foreground object regions, several methods [1, 21, 27, 36]
attempt to use the magnitude of feature vectors as a clue for
class-agnostic activation maps (CAAM) [1]. Most of these
methods rely heavily on pre-trained models designed for the
image classification task. However transferring these models to the object localization task is challenging, since foreground features are not easily distinguished from the background. To address this problem, these works have been
focusing on learning to discriminate foreground and background representations from the pre-trained model.
Recent approaches for unsupervised object localization
face a limitation in terms of the explainability of the predictions. DNNs are powerful predictors across various domains, but their complicated structure often makes them
black-box functions. Class activation maps (CAM) [56] are
frequently used to provide visually interpretable information about a specific class the model has learned, but a detailed explanation of how the model makes its predictions

6534

