This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HairNeRF: Geometry-Aware Image Synthesis for Hairstyle Transfer
Seunggyu Chang*
NAVER Cloud

Gihoon Kim†
KAIST

Hayeon Kim†
UNIST

Figure 1: Given portrait images of hairstyle and identity (thumnails) that differ in viewing angle, head shape, and size, we seamlessly
transfer hairstyle from one image to another utilizing neural rendering. Our method preserves fine-level details of the hairstyle structural
geometry and generates diverse range of pose variant transferred images without requiring additional transfer process.

Abstract
We propose a novel hairstyle transferred image synthesis method considering the underlying head geometry of
two input images. In traditional GAN-based methods, transferring hairstyle from one image to the other often makes
the synthesized result awkward due to differences in pose,
shape, and size of heads. To resolve this, we utilize neural
rendering by registering two input heads in the volumetric
space to make a transferred hairstyle fit on the head of a
target image. Because of the geometric nature of neural rendering, our method can render view varying images of synthesized results from a single transfer process without causing distortion from which extant hairstyle transfer methods
built upon traditional GAN-based generators suffer. We verify that our method surpasses other baselines in view of pre* Corresponding author: seunggyu.chang@navercorp.com
† This work was done during internship at NAVER Cloud.

serving the identity and hairstyle of two input images when
synthesizing a hairstyle transferred image rendered at any
point of view.

1. Introduction
Selecting an appropriate hairstyle can be difficult as it is
hard to imagine how it will look on your face without trying
it out for yourself. The reason can be attributed to the inherent variability of individual head shape, resulting in the
frequent occurrence of disparate outcomes when attempting to emulate celebrity hairstyles. To address this issue,
we propose a novel image synthesis method for hairstyle
transfer tailored to fit an individual head shape. We named
our method HairNeRF as it considers geometric alignment
in the volumetric space of neural rendering [33]. Hairstyle
transfer synthesizes an image where the hairstyle from one

2448

