This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Root Pose Decomposition Towards Generic Non-rigid 3D Reconstruction
with Monocular Videos
Yikai Wang1 Yinpeng Dong1,2 Fuchun Sun1B Xiao Yang1
1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University 2 RealAI
{yikaiw,dongyinpeng,fcsun}@tsinghua.edu.cn, yangxiao19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This work focuses on the 3D reconstruction of non-rigid
objects based on monocular RGB video sequences. Concretely, we aim at building high-fidelity models for generic
object categories and casually captured scenes. To this end,
we do not assume known root poses of objects, and do not
utilize category-specific templates or dense pose priors. The
key idea of our method, Root Pose Decomposition (RPD), is
to maintain a per-frame root pose transformation, meanwhile building a dense field with local transformations to
rectify the root pose. The optimization of local transformations is performed by point registration to the canonical
space. We also adapt RPD to multi-object scenarios with
object occlusions and individual differences. As a result,
RPD allows non-rigid 3D reconstruction for complicated
scenarios containing objects with large deformations, complex motion patterns, occlusions, and scale diversities of
different individuals. Such a pipeline potentially scales to
diverse sets of objects in the wild. We experimentally show
that RPD surpasses state-of-the-art methods on the challenging DAVIS, OVIS, and AMA datasets. We provide video
results in https://rpd-share.github.io.

1. Introduction
The reconstruction of non-rigid (or deformable) 3D objects with monocular RGB videos is a long-standing and
challenging task in computer vision and graphics [34]. It
is needed for a variety of applications ranging from XR
to robotics. Traditionally, a typical prior pipeline leverages template-based models such as human skeleton models
SMPL [19], SMPL-X [25], GHUM(L) [42], and reconstruct
models for specific categories like the human body or human face. These methods do not scale to diverse categories.
B Corresponding author: Fuchun Sun.

With the success of Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [21],
several representative works [5, 23] unify frames to a canonical space and do not rely on pre-defined skeleton models. Whilst a variety of methods have been proposed to
improve the reconstruction fidelity, the performance degenerates when encountering large object deformations or
movements. Meanwhile, they are not suitable for casual
videos when background Structure from Motion (SfM) does
not provide root poses for the object. As a typical work
to address the issues, BANMo [41] initializes approximate
camera poses by leveraging continuous surface embeddings
(CSE) [22] or pre-trained DensePose models [12]. Nevertheless, CSE is acquired by annotations and only applies to
specific categories in the training set, e.g., quadruped animals. DensePose is learned with the aid of manual UV
fields from SMPL and is thus also highly category-limited.
Such a pipeline that relies on off-the-shelf pose or surface
models of a certain categories does not generalize to reconstruct generic object categories.
As a result, it is an open problem when considering the
non-rigid construction in the wild that might contain complicated factors, e.g., multiple categories, complex motion
patterns, individual diversities, or object occlusions. Based
on casually captured monocular videos, our effort is devoted to building articulated models for generic categories,
without explicitly incorporating priors that might limit the
generalization of categories. Towards this goal, we propose Root Pose Decomposition (RPD), a method for nonrigid 3D reconstruction based on monocular RGB videos.
RPD does not rely on known camera poses or poses compensated by background-SfM, category-specific skeletons,
or pre-trained dense pose models (e.g., DensePose, CSE),
while could achieve articulated reconstruction for objects
with rapid object deformations, complex motion patterns,
and large pose changes.
Concretely, RPD follows the common approach for nonrigid reconstruction that builds a canonical space for dif-

13890

