This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Optical Flow from Event Camera with Rendered Dataset
Xinglong Luo1,3 , Kunming Luo2 , Ao Luo3 , Zhengning Wang1 , Ping Tan2 , and Shuaicheng Liu1,3 *
1

2

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Megvii Technology
{luoboom@std.,zhengning.wang@,liushuaicheng@}uestc.edu.cn
{kluoad@connect,pingtan@}.ust.hk luoao02@megvii.com

Abstract
We study the problem of estimating optical flow from
event cameras. One important issue is how to build a highquality event-flow dataset with accurate event values and
flow labels. Previous datasets are created by either capturing real scenes by event cameras or synthesizing from images with pasted foreground objects. The former case can
produce real event values but with calculated flow labels,
which are sparse and inaccurate. The latter case can generate dense flow labels but the interpolated events are prone to
errors. In this work, we propose to render a physically correct event-flow dataset using computer graphics models. In
particular, we first create indoor and outdoor 3D scenes by
Blender with rich scene content variations. Second, diverse
camera motions are included for the virtual capturing, producing images and accurate flow labels. Third, we render
high-framerate videos between images for accurate events.
The rendered dataset can adjust the density of events, based
on which we further introduce an adaptive density module (ADM). Experiments show that our proposed dataset
can facilitate event-flow learning, whereas previous approaches when trained on our dataset can improve their
performances constantly by a relatively large margin. In
addition, event-flow pipelines when equipped with our ADM
can further improve performances. Our code is available at
https://github.com/boomluo02/ADMFlow.

1. Introduction
Event cameras [29] record brightness changes at a varying framerate [4]. When a change is detected in a pixel, the
camera returns an event in the form e = (x, y, t, p) immediately, where x, y stands for the spatial location, t refers to
the timestamp in microseconds, and p is the polarity of the
* Corresponding author

（a）

（b）

（c）

（d）
Images

Events

Flow GT

Figure 1: (a) the captured dataset from real event camera [55, 54]. (b) the synthesized dataset with flying chairs
foreground [50]. (c) the synthesized dataset by moving
a foreground image [42]. (d) Our synthesized dataset by
graphics rendering, which not only reflects the real motions
under correct scene geometries, but also produces accurate
dense flow labels and events.

change, indicating a pixel become brighter or darker. On
the other hand, optical flow estimation predicts motions between two frames [44], which is fundamental and important
for many applications [49, 52, 7]. In this work, we study the
problem of estimating optical flow from event camera data,
instead of from RGB frames. Different from traditional images, events are sparse and are often integrated in short intervals as the input for the prediction. As such, early works

9847

