This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Keep It SimPool:
Who Said Supervised Transformers Suffer from Attention Deficit?
Bill Psomas1,2

Ioannis Kakogeorgiou1

Konstantinos Karantzalos1

Yannis Avrithis2

1

2

input
image

supervised
CLS

National Technical University of Athens
Institute of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence (IARAI)

supervised
SimPool

DINO [7]
CLS

DINO [7]
SimPool

input
image

supervised
CLS

supervised
SimPool

DINO [7]
CLS

DINO [7]
SimPool

Figure 1. We introduce SimPool, a simple attention-based pooling method at the end of network, obtaining clean attention maps under
supervision or self-supervision. Attention maps of ViT-S [14] trained on ImageNet-1k [11]. For baseline, we use the mean attention map
of the CLS token. For SimPool, we use the attention map a (15). Input image: 896 × 896; patches: 16 × 16; attention map: 56 × 56.

Abstract
Convolutional networks and vision transformers have
different forms of pairwise interactions, pooling across layers and pooling at the end of the network. Does the latter
really need to be different? As a by-product of pooling, vision transformers provide spatial attention for free, but this
is most often of low quality unless self-supervised, which is
not well studied. Is supervision really the problem?
In this work, we develop a generic pooling framework
and then we formulate a number of existing methods as
instantiations. By discussing the properties of each group
of methods, we derive SimPool, a simple attention-based
pooling mechanism as a replacement of the default one for
both convolutional and transformer encoders. We find that,
whether supervised or self-supervised, this improves performance on pre-training and downstream tasks and provides
attention maps delineating object boundaries in all cases.
One could thus call SimPool universal. To our knowledge,
we are the first to obtain attention maps in supervised transformers of at least as good quality as self-supervised, without explicit losses or modifying the architecture. Code at:
https://github.com/billpsomas/simpool.

1. Introduction
Extracting visual representations and spatial pooling
have been two interconnected processes since the study of
2D Gabor filters [10] and early convolutional networks [17].
Modern convolutional networks [20, 32] gradually perform
local pooling and downsampling throughout the architecture to extract a low-resolution feature tensor, followed by
global spatial pooling. Vision transformers [14] only downsample at input tokenization and then preserve resolution,
but pooling takes place again throughout the architecture
via the interaction of patch tokens with a CLS token, inherited from language models [13].
The pooling operation has been studied extensively in
instance-level tasks on convolutional networks [3, 42], but
less so in category-level tasks or transformers. Pooling
in transformers is based on weighted averaging, using as
weights the 2D attention map of the CLS token at the last
layer. However, this attention map is typically of low quality, unless under self-supervision [7].
In this work, we argue that vision transformers can be reformulated in two streams, where one is extracting a visual
representation on patch tokens and the other is performing
spatial pooling on the CLS token; whereas, convolutional
networks undergo global spatial pooling at the very last

5350

