This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Lightweight Hierarchical Vision Transformers
for Efﬁcient Visual Tracking
Ben Kang1,∗ Xin Chen1,∗ Dong Wang1,† Houwen Peng2,† Huchuan Lu1
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
2
Microsoft Research
Abstract
4.7灤 faster

Transformer-based visual trackers have demonstrated
signiﬁcant progress owing to their superior modeling capabilities. However, existing trackers are hampered by low
speed, limiting their applicability on devices with limited
computational power. To alleviate this problem, we propose
HiT, a new family of efﬁcient tracking models that can run
at high speed on different devices while retaining high performance. The central idea of HiT is the Bridge Module,
which bridges the gap between modern lightweight transformers and the tracking framework. The Bridge Module incorporates the high-level information of deep features into
the shallow large-resolution features. In this way, it produces better features for the tracking head. We also propose a novel dual-image position encoding technique that
simultaneously encodes the position information of both
the search region and template images. The HiT model
achieves promising speed with competitive performance.
For instance, it runs at 61 frames per second (fps) on the
Nvidia Jetson AGX edge device. Furthermore, HiT attains
64.6% AUC on the LaSOT benchmark, surpassing all previous efﬁcient trackers. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/kangben258/HiT.

Non-real-time

Real-time

Figure 1: Comparison of our HiT with other trackers on LaSOT in terms of speed (horizontal axis) on the edge AI platform of Nvidia Jetson AGX Xavier and success rate (AUC)
(vertical axis). Following the VOT real-time setting [23],
we set the real-time line at 20 fps. Our HiT achieves the
best real-time result, surpassing other efﬁcient trackers.
While these trackers may achieve real-time speed on powerful GPUs, they lack competitiveness and advantages on
resource-limited devices. For instance, TransT [8], which
is a high-performance tracker, only achieves a speed of 5
frames per second (fps) on the Intel Core i9-9900K CPU
and 13 fps on the Nvidia Jetson AGX. Consequently, a highperformance tracker with fast speed is critical.
The one-stream structure has gained popularity in tracking applications [52, 5, 48, 10]. This structure performs
feature extraction and feature fusion jointly, leveraging the
capabilities of the backbone network [14] that has been
pre-trained for image classiﬁcation. In our work, we also
adopt the one-stream architecture, leveraging a pre-trained
lightweight transformer backbone network. However, there
exists a substantial gap between the tracking ﬁeld and the
image classiﬁcation ﬁeld. In the image classiﬁcation ﬁeld,
lightweight networks [18, 33, 47] frequently incorporate
a hierarchical architecture with high-stride downsampling
to decrease computational expenses. However, large-stride
downsampling often leads to a loss of critical information,

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is a fundamental task in computer vision, which aims to track an arbitrary object given
its initial state in a video sequence. In recent years, with
the development of deep neural networks [25, 20, 39, 42],
tracking has made signiﬁcant progress. In particular, the
utilization of transformers [42] has played a pivotal role
in the development of several high-performance trackers [8, 50, 43, 53, 10, 52, 7]. Unfortunately, much of
the research [27, 2, 8] has concentrated solely on achieving high performance without considering tracking speed.
∗ Equal contribution.

† Corresponding authors: Dong Wang (wdice@dlut.edu.cn), Houwen
Peng (houwen.peng@microsoft.com).

9612

