This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FocalFormer3D : Focusing on Hard Instance for 3D Object Detection
Yilun Chen1 * Zhiding Yu3† Yukang Chen1
Shiyi Lan3 Anima Anandkumar2,3 Jiaya Jia1 Jose M. Alvarez3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Caltech 3 NVIDIA

Abstract

* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
† Corresponding author.

Masked Region

Targets for next stage

Ignore Easy Objects

Targets for next stage
Ignore Easy Objects

Stage=3

3D object detection is an important yet challenging perception task. Recent state-of-the-art 3D object detectors
mainly rely on bird’s eye view (BEV) representation [1–3],
where features from multiple sensors are aggregated to construct a unified representation in the ego-vehicle coordinate
space. There is a rich yet growing literature on BEV-based
3D detection, including multi-modal fusion [4–10], secondstage refinements (surface point pooling [3], RoIPool [11–
14], and cross attention modules [4, 15]).

False Negatives

Stage=2

1. Introduction

True Positives

Stage=1

False negatives (FN) in 3D object detection, e.g., missing predictions of pedestrians, vehicles, or other obstacles, can lead to potentially dangerous situations in autonomous driving. While being fatal, this issue is understudied in many current 3D detection methods. In this
work, we propose Hard Instance Probing (HIP), a general pipeline that identifies FN in a multi-stage manner
and guides the models to focus on excavating difficult
instances. For 3D object detection, we instantiate this
method as FocalFormer3D, a simple yet effective detector
that excels at excavating difficult objects and improving
prediction recall. FocalFormer3D features a multi-stage
query generation to discover hard objects and a box-level
transformer decoder to efficiently distinguish objects from
massive object candidates. Experimental results on the
nuScenes and Waymo datasets validate the superior performance of FocalFormer3D. The advantage leads to strong
performance on both detection and tracking, in both LiDAR and multi-modal settings. Notably, FocalFormer3D
achieves a 70.5 mAP and 73.9 NDS on nuScenes detection benchmark, while the nuScenes tracking benchmark
shows 72.1 AMOTA, both ranking 1st place on the nuScenes
LiDAR leaderboard. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/NVlabs/FocalFormer3D.

Heatmap Predictions

Figure 1. Visual example for Hard Instance Probing (HIP). By
utilizing this multi-stage prediction approach, our model can progressively focus on hard instances and facilitate its ability to gradually detect them. At each stage, the model generates some Positive object candidates (represented by green circles). Object candidates assigned to the ground-truth objects can be classified as
either True Positives (TP, represented by green boxes) and False
Negatives (FN, represented by red boxes) during training. We explicitly model the unmatched ground-truth objects as the hard instances, which become the main targets for the subsequent stage.
Conversely, Positives are considered easy samples (represented by
gray boxes) and will be ignored in subsequent stages at both training and inference time. At last, all heatmap predictions across
stages are collected as the initial object candidates. We ignored
the False Positives for better visualizations.

Despite the tremendous efforts, there has been limited
exploration to explicitly address false negatives or missed

8394

