This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TM2D: Bimodality Driven 3D Dance Generation via Music-Text Integration

Fig-1: demo
Kehong Gong1 *
Zihang Jiang1
1

Text input

Heng Chang2
Michael Bi Mi2

Dongze Lian1 *
Xinxin Zuo2

National University of Singapore

2

Chuan Guo2
Xinchao Wang1†

Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.

Effect range : 16s ~ 18s
A person does a spin.

Effect range: 6s ~ 8s
A person does a cartwheel.

Dance output

Audio input
Figure 1: Generated 3D dance examples conditioned music and text with our method. Given an audio input and text input
with a specific starting time and duration, our method is able to generate a sequence of dance motions that fit the music and
text instruction. The character is from Mixamo [1].

Abstract
We propose a novel task for generating 3D dance movements that simultaneously incorporate both text and music modalities. Unlike existing works that generate dance
movements using a single modality such as music, our goal
is to produce richer dance movements guided by the instructive information provided by the text. However, the lack
of paired motion data with both music and text modalities
limits the ability to generate dance movements that integrate both. To alleviate this challenge, we propose to utilize a 3D human motion VQ-VAE to project the motions of
the two datasets into a latent space consisting of quantized
vectors, which effectively mix the motion tokens from the
two datasets with different distributions for training. Additionally, we propose a cross-modal transformer to integrate text instructions into motion generation architecture
for generating 3D dance movements without degrading the
performance of music-conditioned dance generation. To
better evaluate the quality of the generated motion, we introduce two novel metrics, namely Motion Prediction Distance (MPD) and Freezing Score (FS), to measure the coherence and freezing percentage of the generated motion.
Extensive experiments show that our approach can gener* Equal contribution: gongkehong@u.nus.edu,
†

Corresponding author: xinchao@nus.edu.sg

dongze@nus.edu.sg

ate realistic and coherent dance movements conditioned on
both text and music while maintaining comparable performance with the two single modalities. Code is available at
https://garfield-kh.github.io/TM2D/.

1. Introduction
The music-conditioned dance generation has become a
topic of great interest in recent years. The ability to generate dance movements that are synchronized with music
has numerous applications, such as behavior understanding,
simulation, and benefiting the community of dancers and
musicians [25, 9, 29, 44]. Although music has been used
as a guidance to generate dance movements, another important modality cue, text (or language), which provides richer
actions and more flexible motion guidance, and is studied
in other tasks such as image classification [38], detection
[15], segmentation [50], and text-driven image generation
[42], has not been fully explored in dance generation. To
this end, we first propose a novel task for generating 3D
dance movements that simultaneously incorporate both text
and music modalities, enabling the generated human to perform rich dancing movements in accordance with the music
and text.
Designing a system pipeline for this bimodality driven
3D dance generation task is non-trivial. There exist two

9942

