This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Online Lane Graph Extraction by Object-Lane Clustering
Yigit Baran Can1 Alexander Liniger1 Danda Pani Paudel1,3 Luc Van Gool1,2,3
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich 2 VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven 3 INSAIT, Sofia University
{yigit.can, alex.liniger, paudel, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Autonomous driving requires accurate local scene understanding information. To this end, autonomous agents
deploy object detection and online BEV lane graph extraction methods as a part of their perception stack. In this
work, we propose an architecture and loss formulation to
improve the accuracy of local lane graph estimates by using
3D object detection outputs. The proposed method learns to
assign the objects to centerlines by considering the centerlines as cluster centers and the objects as data points to be
assigned a probability distribution over the cluster centers.
This training scheme ensures direct supervision on the relationship between lanes and objects, thus leading to better
performance. The proposed method improves lane graph
estimation substantially over state-of-the-art methods. The
extensive ablations show that our method can achieve significant performance improvements by using the outputs of
existing 3D object detection methods. Since our method
uses the detection outputs rather than detection method intermediate representations, a single model of our method
can use any detection method at test time. The code will be
made publicly available.

1. Introduction
Accurate road scene understanding is essential for autonomous driving. Two of the most important aspects of
road scene understanding are lane graph representation and
object detection. While the former defines the action environment of the autonomous agent, the latter provides information on the other traffic agents. The resulting representations are crucial for downstream tasks such as predicting the motion of agents [16, 26, 41] and planning
the ego-motion [3, 13, 19]. Although object detection has
to be carried out online, lane graphs are frequently obtained from offline generated HD-Maps [27, 44, 35, 40, 11].
However, traffic scenes are highly dynamic and the offline maps have to be complemented by online components
[29, 33, 32, 48, 49]. Moreover, the geographically limited
coverage of HD-Maps severely limits the widespread appli-

cability of autonomous driving.
Online scene understanding has been studied widely in
literature. Some methods focus on Bird’s-Eye-View occupancy grid representations [43, 8, 47, 38, 50, 10, 39, 53].
These methods combine the onboard sensor information
on a BEV grid with each grid location being a semantic
vector representing the properties of that location. While
BEV semantic segmentation provides crucial information
for downstream tasks such as drivable area, walkways and
pedestrian crossings; they fail to provide adequate information on the road network. A complementary line of work is
extraction of lane boundaries [36, 20, 25]. Building on previous works, HD-Maps aim to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the traffic scene by incorporating lane
boundaries as well as other static elements such as pedestrian crossings [29, 33, 32, 49]. However, all these lines of
work lack the structured representation that the downstream
tasks require. Recently, directly estimating the lane graph
from onboard sensors was proposed [6, 7]. The lane graph
provides instances of centerlines with traffic directions and
provides connectivity of these centerlines.
Some scene understanding methods output object detections as well and it has been shown that the auxiliary task
of object detection helps with lane graph extraction performance [6]. In this paper, we focus on a related yet different question: Can the object detection results be used to
improve the online lane graph extraction? Given the object detection methods use the same onboard sensors as online scene understanding methods and are an indispensable
part of the perception stack, using the outputs of object detection methods creates no overhead. Moreover, using the
outputs rather than intermediate representations means lane
graph extraction can use different object detection methods
in train and test time and does not require re-training as the
object detection method changes. To this end, we devise a
network architecture that takes the onboard image and a set
of 3D bounding boxes as input and outputs the BEV lane
graph. Additionally, we propose a novel clustering based
formulation where the centerlines act as cluster centers and
the object detections are assigned to clusters. The network
learns to output membership probability estimates for each

8591

