This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty-aware Unsupervised Multi-Object Tracking
Kai Liu1 ,* Sheng Jin2 , Zhihang Fu2†, Ze Chen2 , Rongxin Jiang1 , Jieping Ye2
1

Zhejiang University,

2

Alibaba DAMO Academy

Abstract
Without manually annotated identities, unsupervised
multi-object trackers are inferior to learning reliable feature embeddings. It causes the similarity-based inter-frame
association stage also be error-prone, where an uncertainty
problem arises. The frame-by-frame accumulated uncertainty prevents trackers from learning the consistent feature
embedding against time variation. To avoid this uncertainty
problem, recent self-supervised techniques are adopted,
whereas they failed to capture temporal relations. The interframe uncertainty still exists. In fact, this paper argues that
though the uncertainty problem is inevitable, it is possible to leverage the uncertainty itself to improve the learned
consistency in turn. Specifically, an uncertainty-based metric is developed to verify and rectify the risky associations.
The resulting accurate pseudo-tracklets boost learning the
feature consistency. And accurate tracklets can incorporate temporal information into spatial transformation. This
paper proposes a tracklet-guided augmentation strategy to
simulate the tracklet’s motion, which adopts a hierarchical uncertainty-based sampling mechanism for hard sample mining. The ultimate unsupervised MOT framework,
namely U2MOT, is proven effective on MOT-Challenges
and VisDrone-MOT benchmark. U2MOT achieves a SOTA
performance among the published supervised and unsupervised trackers.

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) [31, 4, 46] has been widely
deployed in real-world applications, including surveillance
analysis [32, 56], autonomous driving [13, 38], intelligent
robots [34, 3], etc. The goal of MOT task is to detect all target objects and simultaneously keep their respective feature
embeddings consistent, regardless of the change of their
shapes and angles over a period of time [46, 55]. However,
the core issue of unsupervised MOT task is lacking the annotated ID-supervision to confirm the consistency of a cer* This work was done when Kai Liu worked as a research intern at Alibaba DAMO Academy. Email: kail@zju.edu.cn.
† Corresponding author. Email: zhihang.fzh@alibaba-inc.com.

Figure 1: Method Comparison. a) Previous methods utilize pseudo-labeled (PL) adjacent frames or randomly augmented (RA) samples. b) Our method adopts
uncertainty-aware tracklet-labeling (UTL) to maintain consistent pseudo-tracklets, and exploits tracklet-guided augmentation (TGA) to improve the embedding consistency

tain target, especially when its shape and angle are varied
over time [19, 43, 24, 22, 37]. When training an unsupervised tracker, since the learned feature embedding is unreliable, the similarity-based association stage is error-prone.
Propagating pseudo identities frame-by-frame leads to uncertainty in the resulting pseudo-tracklets, which accumulates in per-frame associations. This prevents trackers from
learning a consistent feature embedding [43, 24].
To avoid this problem, self-supervised techniques [24,
37, 52] are utilized to generate augmented samples with
perfectly-accurate identities. However, these commonlyused methods merely take a single frame for augmentation,
while the inter-frame temporal relation is totally ignored.
It usually leads to sub-optimal performance [55]. The
uncertainty problem seems inevitable but remains underexplored. In fact, we argue that the uncertainty can be leveraged to maintain consistency in turn, as shown in Fig. 1.
First, uncertainty can guide the construction of pseudotracklets. When the similarity-based inter-frame object association is inaccurate, we propose to introduce a quan-

9996

