This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GlueStick: Robust Image Matching by Sticking Points and Lines Together
Rémi Pautrat* 1

Yifan Yu1

Marc Pollefeys1,3

(b) Ours

Line segments are powerful features complementary to
points. They offer structural cues, robust to drastic viewpoint and illumination changes, and can be present even in
texture-less areas. However, describing and matching them
is more challenging compared to points due to partial occlusions, lack of texture, or repetitiveness. This paper introduces a new matching paradigm, where points, lines, and
their descriptors are unified into a single wireframe structure. We propose GlueStick, a deep matching Graph Neural Network (GNN) that takes two wireframes from different images and leverages the connectivity information between nodes to better glue them together. In addition to
the increased efficiency brought by the joint matching, we
also demonstrate a large boost of performance when leveraging the complementary nature of these two features in
a single architecture. We show that our matching strategy outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches independently matching line segments and points for a wide variety of datasets and tasks. The code is available at https:
//github.com/cvg/GlueStick.

Qualcomm XR Labs Europe
4
Lund University

(c) LineTR [73]

Abstract

2

(a) SuperGlue [47]

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
3
Microsoft Mixed Reality and AI Zurich lab

Viktor Larsson4

(d) Ours

1

Iago Suárez* 2

1. Introduction
Line segments are high-level geometric structures useful in a wide range of computer vision tasks such as
SLAM [18, 81, 41], pose estimation [68], construction monitoring [25, 4], and 3D reconstruction [21, 74, 80]. Lines
are ubiquitous in structured scenes and offer stronger constraints than feature points. In particular, lines shine in lowtextured scenes where point-based approaches struggle.
However, compared to keypoints, line segments are often
poorly localized in the image and suffer from lower repeatability. Line segments are also more challenging to describe
since they can cover a large spatial extent in the image and
suffer from occlusions and perspective effects due to viewpoint changes. Furthermore, lines often appear as part of
repetitive structures in human-made environments, making
* Authors contributed equally.

Figure 1: Joint matching of points and lines. Matching feature points often fails in textureless areas (a), while
current line matching methods struggle with large viewpoint changes (c). We propose GlueStick, a network jointly
matching points and lines. While none of the methods were
trained on the rotations of (a)(b), line matches can guide
GlueStick while SuperGlue [47] fails, and vice-versa in (d)
where points can complement the line matching. For clarity
reasons, we show here only the correct matches.
classical descriptor-based matching fail. For this reason,
typical matching heuristics such as mutual nearest neighbor
and Lowe’s ratio test [34] are often less effective for lines.
Recently, deep learning has ushered in a new paradigm
for feature point matching using Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) [47, 57]. This new approach bypasses the need

9706

