This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Similarity Bootstrapping for Self-Distillation based
Representation Learning
Tim Lebailly1⇤
Thomas Stegmüller2⇤
Behzad Bozorgtabar2,3
2,3
Jean-Philippe Thiran
Tinne Tuytelaars1
1
2
3
KU Leuven
EPFL
CHUV
1

2

{firstname}.{lastname}@esat.kuleuven.be

{firstname}.{lastname}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Most self-supervised methods for representation learning leverage a cross-view consistency objective i.e. they
maximize the representation similarity of a given image’s
augmented views. Recent work NNCLR goes beyond the
cross-view paradigm and uses positive pairs from different
images obtained via nearest neighbor bootstrapping in a
contrastive setting. We empirically show that as opposed
to the contrastive learning setting which relies on negative
samples, incorporating nearest neighbor bootstrapping in a
self-distillation scheme can lead to a performance drop or
even collapse. We scrutinize the reason for this unexpected
behavior and provide a solution. We propose to adaptively
bootstrap neighbors based on the estimated quality of the
latent space. We report consistent improvements compared
to the naive bootstrapping approach and the original baselines. Our approach leads to performance improvements
for various self-distillation method/backbone combinations
and standard downstream tasks. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/tileb1/AdaSim.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) methods have seen a lot
of breakthroughs over the past few years. Most recent
self-supervised methods train features invariant to data augmentation by maximizing the similarity between two augmentations of a single input image. However, this task
is ill-posed as this optimization procedure admits trivial
solutions (resulting in a “collapsed” scenario). Similarity
maximization (or cross-view consistency) SSL methods can
be categorized based on how they avoid trivial solutions.
The most famous subset are contrastive learning methods
[10, 9, 25, 11, 13] in which the collapse is avoided by using
negative pairs. On the one hand, the learning procedure is
* denotes equal contribution.

Figure 1: The selection of positive image pairs used for
cross-view consistency in self-supervised representation
learning is key for good performance. With our method,
given the query (or anchor) image on the left, similar images are successfully ranked according to pwin (xj |xi ) (illustrated as a green bar on the bottom left of each image).
Our algorithm enforces similarity between the query xi and
an image xj sampled from pwin (xj |xi ). These results are
non-cherry-picked and obtained at the final epoch (800) of
the pretraining. Best viewed in color and zoomed-in.
robust since collapse avoidance is explicitly modeled in the
training objective, but on the other hand, it requires large
batches to have a sufficient pool of negative samples. This
makes them GPU memory inefficient and limits research to
those who dispose of large distributed computing infrastructure.

16505

