This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lip Reading for Low-resource Languages by Learning and Combining
General Speech Knowledge and Language-specific Knowledge
Minsu Kim*
Jeong Hun Yeo*
Jeongsoo Choi
Yong Man Ro†
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
{ms.k, sedne246, jeongsoo.choi, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel lip reading framework, especially for low-resource languages, which has not been
well addressed in the previous literature. Since lowresource languages do not have enough video-text paired
data to train the model to have sufficient power to model
lip movements and language, it is regarded as challenging
to develop lip reading models for low-resource languages.
In order to mitigate the challenge, we try to learn general
speech knowledge, the ability to model lip movements, from
a high-resource language through the prediction of speech
units. It is known that different languages partially share
common phonemes, thus general speech knowledge learned
from one language can be extended to other languages.
Then, we try to learn language-specific knowledge, the
ability to model language, by proposing Language-specific
Memory-augmented Decoder (LMDecoder). LMDecoder
saves language-specific audio features into memory banks
and can be trained on audio-text paired data which is more
easily accessible than video-text paired data. Therefore,
with LMDecoder, we can transform the input speech units
into language-specific audio features and translate them
into texts by utilizing the learned rich language knowledge. Finally, by combining general speech knowledge and
language-specific knowledge, we can efficiently develop lip
reading models even for low-resource languages. Through
extensive experiments using five languages, English, Spanish, French, Italian, and Portuguese, the effectiveness of the
proposed method is evaluated.

1. Introduction
It is a fascinating ability to understand the conversation
by only looking at the speaker’s lip movements without
listening [1]. If this were possible, we could easily hold
conversations in crowded places, such as at concerts, and
even with people who have trouble speaking up. With the
* Both authors have contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author

great advance of deep learning, a technology called lip reading has made it possible to accurately infer what a speaker
is saying without having to approach the speaker’s voice.
In recent years, the performance of lip reading has significantly improved from 60.1% Word Error Rate (WER) to
26.9% WER [2, 3] in LRS3 [4], a popular English benchmark database.
Such rapid progress could be made with large-scale
audio-visual datasets [4–8], improved neural network architecture [9–15], enhanced multi-modal learning strategies [3, 16–22], and carefully designed training methods
[23–25]. Among these progresses, self-supervised learning
methods using audio-visual data show remarkable advancement in both audio-visual speech recognition and lip reading. Recently, AV-HuBERT [3] which pre-trains the transformer encoder with multi-modal inputs (i.e., audio and
video) through masked prediction in a self-supervised manner, outperforms other previous lip reading methods once it
is finetuned on lip reading tasks. Despite these advances,
lip reading technologies have been developed primarily in
English rather than in other languages. One main reason
for this is the lack of enough labeled video-text paired data
in other languages. For example, the popular lip reading
dataset in English, LRS3 [4], consists of about 443 hours of
video, while the available video-text paired dataset in Italian [26] is only about 47 hours, which is not enough for the
model to learn the characteristics of both lip movements and
language. Therefore, to build lip reading models for other
languages rather than English, a new method considering
the insufficient training data should be developed.
In this paper, we focus on developing a novel lip reading
method for low-resource languages which has not been well
explored in previous literature. Specifically, we propose a
novel training method for low-resource language lip reading
that learns 1) general speech knowledge and 2) languagespecific knowledge, and combines the two learned knowledge. First, general speech knowledge refers to the knowledge of modelling short-term speech that can be regarded
as speech units (i.e., phonemes or visemes). Since different languages partially share common phonemes [27–29],

15359

