This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Predicate Visual Context in Detecting of Human–Object Interactions
Frederic Z. Zhang1† Yuhui Yuan2 Dylan Campbell1 Zhuoyao Zhong2 Stephen Gould1
1
The Australian National University 2 Microsoft Research Asia
frederic.zhang@anu.edu.au

yuhui.yuan@microsoft.com

§ https://github.com/fredzzhang/pvic

Abstract
Recently, the DETR framework has emerged as the dominant approach for human–object interaction (HOI) research. In particular, two-stage transformer-based HOI
detectors are amongst the most performant and trainingefficient approaches. However, these often condition HOI
classification on object features that lack fine-grained contextual information, eschewing pose and orientation information in favour of visual cues about object identity and box
extremities. This naturally hinders the recognition of complex or ambiguous interactions. In this work, we study these
issues through visualisations and carefully designed experiments. Accordingly, we investigate how best to re-introduce
image features via cross-attention. With an improved query
design, extensive exploration of keys and values, and box
pair positional embeddings as spatial guidance, our model
with enhanced predicate visual context (PViC) outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on the HICO-DET and V-COCO
benchmarks, while maintaining low training cost.

1. Introduction
Detecting human–object interactions (HOI) is the task of
localising and recognising interactive human–object pairs.
It extends the detection of objects to include their relationships and facilitates a deeper understanding of visual
scenes. Recent developments in the detection of human–
object interactions have largely adhered to the encoder–
decoder style introduced by the detection transformers
(DETR) [2], where learnable queries are randomly initialised with Gaussian noise at the start of training, and progressively decoded into the desired human-predicate-object
triplets. Such one-stage detectors [33, 15, 47, 4, 42, 13]
require pre-trained DETR weights for initialisation to facilitate stable convergence. As we will demonstrate empirically, the pre-trained encoder features have overfitted to object cues and lack the necessary information for recognising
† Work done at Microsoft Research Asia.

(a) Attn. for human (DETR)

(b) Attn. for bike (DETR)

(c) Attn. for triplet (QPIC)

(d) Attn. for predicate (Ours)

Figure 1. Visual context for the (a, b) two-stage HOI detector
UPT [44], (c) one-stage HOI detector QPIC [33] and (d) our
method. Cross-attention weights from the last decoder layer are
used for visualisation. UPT uses coarse object features that favour
visual cues about object identity and box extremities. QPIC fails to
detect the triplet person-washing-bike as it struggles to locate the
relevant visual context (person, bike, and the water hose). The box
pair with the highest IoUs against the ground truth is selected for
display. Our two-stage method with pre-detected objects successfully recognises the predicate washing as it pinpoints the location
of the image region containing the water hose.

human–object interactions. This means that the transformer
encoder weights need to change significantly to produce
discriminative features for such tasks. Together with the
need to repurpose the decoder to detect HOI triplets rather
than unary objects, this results in long training schedules
that often amount to hundreds of GPU hours. On the other
hand, two-stage detectors adopt a different methodology,
wherein an object detector is fine-tuned and then frozen,
which only introduces a one-off cost. These approaches focus on the extraction and exploitation of the rich information residing in the frozen detector. Naturally, two-stage detectors require significantly less time and resources to train,

10411

