This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Compatibility of Fundamental Matrices for Complete Viewing Graphs
Martin Bråtelund
University of Oslo
Moltke Moes vei 35, 0851 Oslo, Norway

Felix Rydell
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Lindstedtsvägen 25, Stockholm, Sweden

mabraate@math.uio.no

felixry@kth.se

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of recovering cameras
from a set of fundamental matrices. A set of fundamental
matrices is said to be compatible if a set of cameras exists
for which they are the fundamental matrices. We focus on
the complete graph, where fundamental matrices for each
pair of cameras are given. Previous work has established
necessary and sufficient conditions for compatibility as rank
and eigenvalue conditions on the n-view fundamental matrix obtained by concatenating the individual fundamental
matrices. In this work, we show that the eigenvalue condition is redundant in the generic and collinear cases. We provide explicit homogeneous polynomials that describe necessary and sufficient conditions for compatibility in terms of
the fundamental matrices and their epipoles. In this direction, we find that quadruple-wise compatibility is enough to
ensure global compatibility for any number of cameras. We
demonstrate that for four cameras, compatibility is generically described by triple-wise conditions and one additional
equation involving all fundamental matrices.

Introduction
The problem of finding camera matrices that correspond to a given set of fundamental matrices is crucial in
3D reconstructions from 2D images. Typically, multiview
structure-from-motion pipelines start by estimating fundamental matrices from point correspondences, with early
methods for such estimations dating back to the 1990s and
new methods still being developed today [21, 25, 26, 29].
However, these methods usually only estimate a subset of
all possible fundamental matrices between cameras. To describe this incomplete set of fundamental matrices, viewing
graphs are often used [17].
In this paper, we focus on understanding the conditions
under which a reconstruction of n cameras can be obtained
given complete knowledge of n2 fundamental matrices,
but we also give a result for general graphs at the end.
Here, a camera refers to a full-rank 3 × 4 matrix, and the

fundamental matrix of two cameras P1 and P2 with distinct
kernels is a 3 × 3 rank-2 matrix that encodes all point correspondences between them. For any given rank-2 3 × 3
matrix F 12 , there exists a pair of cameras P1 and P2 for
which F 12 is the fundamental matrix, this pair is unique up
to global projective transformation. However, for a set of
n
ij
2 rank-2 3 × 3 matrices F , where n > 2, it is not always guaranteed that there exist cameras P1 , . . . , Pn such
that F ij is the fundamental matrix of Pi and Pj for each
i, j. Following the notation of [12] we say that the set F ij
is compatible if such cameras do exist. Note that some recent literature uses the term consistent instead [15].
Finding necessary and sufficient conditions for compatibility of fundamental matrices has practical applications as
well as theoretical ones. [15] proposes an algorithm for projective structure-from-motion that employs their necessary
and sufficient condition for compatibility. The algorithm
is designed to handle collections of measured fundamental
matrices, both complete and partial, and aims to find camera matrices that minimize a global algebraic error for the
given set of matrices. As for theoretical purposes, [5, 6, 11]
uses necessary and sufficient conditions for compatibility to
give a classification of critical configurations.
In the case of n = 3, a classical result [12, Section 15.4]
provides triple-wise constraints on F 12 , F 13 , F 23 in terms
of the fundamental matrices and their epipoles, where the ith epipole in the j-th image is defined as eij := ker F ij . For
non-collinear cameras, [15, Theorem 1] provides necessary
and sufficient conditions for compatibility for any n. These
conditions rely on the eigenvalues and rank of the n-view
fundamental matrix, which is obtained by stacking all fundamental matrices into a 3n × 3n matrix. In the follow-up
work, [9, Theorem 2] arrives at a similar condition in the
collinear case. Both methods rely on fixing a correct scaling of each matrix and are therefore not projectively welldefined, nor are the conditions expressed in terms of the
fundamental matrices and their epipoles, as in the n = 3
case.
The contributions of this paper include giving explicit
homogeneous polynomials that provide necessary and suf-

3328

