This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Snake Convolution based on Topological Geometric Constraints for
Tubular Structure Segmentation
Yaolei Qi1 , Yuting He1 , Xiaoming Qi1 , Yuan Zhang1 , and Guanyu Yang1,2,3 *
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its
Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, Nanjing 210096, China
2
Jiangsu Province Joint International Research Laboratory of Medical Information Processing,
Southeast University, Nanjing, China
3
Centre de Recherche en Information Biomédicale Sino-Français (CRIBs), Strasbourg, France
1

yaolei710@seu.edu.cn, yang.list@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurate segmentation of topological tubular structures,
such as blood vessels and roads, is crucial in various
fields, ensuring accuracy and efficiency in downstream
tasks. However, many factors complicate the task, including thin local structures and variable global morphologies.
In this work, we note the specificity of tubular structures
and use this knowledge to guide our DSCNet to simultaneously enhance perception in three stages: feature extraction, feature fusion, and loss constraint. First, we propose
a dynamic snake convolution to accurately capture the features of tubular structures by adaptively focusing on slender and tortuous local structures. Subsequently, we propose a multi-view feature fusion strategy to complement the
attention to features from multiple perspectives during feature fusion, ensuring the retention of important information
from different global morphologies. Finally, a continuity
constraint loss function, based on persistent homology, is
proposed to constrain the topological continuity of the segmentation better. Experiments on 2D and 3D datasets show
that our DSCNet provides better accuracy and continuity
on the tubular structure segmentation task compared with
several methods. Our codes are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
The accurate segmentation of topological tubular structures is paramount in various fields to ensure the precision
and efficiency of downstream tasks. In clinical applications,
a well-delineated blood vessel is a crucial prerequisite for
computational hemodynamics, and it assists radiologists in
* Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/YaoleiQi/DSCNet

Figure 1. Challenges. The above figure shows a 3D heart vascular
dataset and a 2D remote road dataset. Both datasets aim to extract
tubular structures, but this task faces challenges due to fragile local
structures and complex global morphology. Motivation. The standard convolutional kernel is intended to extract local features. On
this basis, deformable convolutional kernels have been designed
to enrich their application and adapt to geometric deformations of
different targets. However, due to the aforementioned challenges,
it is difficult to focus efficiently on the thin tubular structures.

locating and diagnosing lesions [13, 16]. In remote sensing
applications, complete road segmentation provides a solid
foundation for route planning. Regardless of the field, these
structures share common features of being thin and tortuous, which make them challenging to capture due to their
small proportion in images. Therefore, there is an urgent
need to enhance the perception of thin tubular structures.
However, it remains challenging due to the following difficulties: (1) Thin and fragile local structure. As shown

6070

