This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pretrained Language Models as Visual Planners for Human Assistance
Dhruvesh Patel1,2 Hamid Eghbalzadeh1 Nitin Kamra1
Michael Louis Iuzzolino1 Unnat Jain1 * Ruta Desai1 * †
Meta 2 UMass Amherst
https://github.com/facebookresearch/vlamp
1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Imagine assembling a new piece of furniture or following a new recipe for a dinner party. To achieve such a goal,
you might follow a manual or a video tutorial, going back
and forth as you perform the steps. Instead of fumbling
through a manual, imagine an assistive agent capable of being invoked through natural language, having the ability to
understand human actions, and providing actionable multistep guidance for achieving your desired goal. Such multi* equal mentoring

† corresponding author

I want to build
shelf.

VLaMP
untrimmed
visual history

Your next steps:
1. cut shelf
2. sand shelf
3. paint shelf

“What should I
do next?”
Segmentation
The picture can't be
displayed.

The picture can't be
displayed.

Visual
History

Observations

Split
History

In our pursuit of advancing multi-modal AI assistants capable of guiding users to achieve complex multi-step goals,
we propose the task of ‘Visual Planning for Assistance
(VPA)’. Given a succinct natural language goal, e.g., “make
a shelf”, and a video of the user’s progress so far, the aim
of VPA is to devise a plan, i.e. a sequence of actions such
as “sand shelf”, “paint shelf”, etc. to realize the specified goal. This requires assessing the user’s progress from
the (untrimmed) video, and relating it to the requirements
of natural language goal, i.e. which actions to select and
in what order? Consequently, this requires handling long
video history and arbitrarily complex action dependencies.
To address these challenges, we decompose VPA into video
action segmentation and forecasting. Importantly, we experiment by formulating the forecasting step as a multimodal sequence modeling problem, allowing us to leverage
the strength of pre-trained LMs (as the sequence model).
This novel approach, which we call Visual Language Model
based Planner (VLaMP), outperforms baselines across a
suite of metrics that gauge the quality of the generated
plans. Furthermore, through comprehensive ablations, we
also isolate the value of each component – language pretraining, visual observations, and goal information. We
have open-sourced all the data, model checkpoints, and
training code.

Human

Actions

Forecasting
Obs.
Encoder
Action
Encoder

Pretrained
Language
Model

Goal Prompt: “Build a Shelf”

Figure 1: Visual Planning for Assistance overview (top)
and general methodology (bottom). Given a userspecified, natural language goal (“build a shelf”) and corresponding visual history of the user’s progress till now, VPA
involves predicting a sequence of actions, to assist the user
towards the goal (“cut”, “sand”, “paint”). Our approach is
based on multi-modal sequence modeling where we reuse
pre-trained video segmentation and language models.

modal assistive agents should be able to reason human activities from visual observations, contextualize them to the
goal at hand, and plan future actions for providing guidance.
To quantify the progress and aid the development of such
multi-modal neural models, we need a intuitive task, as illustrated in the example in Fig. 1 (top). We call this Visual
Planning for Assistance (VPA) that we detail next. Given
a user-specified goal in natural language (“build shelf”)
and corresponding video observations of the user’s progress
towards this goal, the task objective should be to generate the ordered sequence of next actions towards achieving the goal (“cut ! sand ! paint”). We base VPA off
instructional YouTube videos of such procedural activities
from large, open-sourced datasets – CrossTask [89] and
COIN [73]. This is a natural choice as procedural human activities (cooking, assembly, repair, etc.) are a perfect source of multi-step and complex sequence of actions,
where humans routinely seek guidance. Realistic nature

15302

