This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrastive Feature Masking Open-Vocabulary Vision Transformer
Dahun Kim

Anelia Angelova

Weicheng Kuo

Google DeepMind

Abstract
We present Contrastive Feature Masking Vision Transformer (CFM-ViT) - an image-text pretraining methodology
that achieves simultaneous learning of image- and regionlevel representation for open-vocabulary object detection
(OVD). Our approach combines the masked autoencoder
(MAE) objective into the contrastive learning objective
to improve the representation for localization tasks. Unlike standard MAE, we perform reconstruction in the joint
image-text embedding space, rather than the pixel space as
is customary with the classical MAE method, which causes
the model to better learn region-level semantics. Moreover, we introduce Positional Embedding Dropout (PED)
to address scale variation between image-text pretraining
and detection finetuning by randomly dropping out the positional embeddings during pretraining. PED improves detection performance and enables the use of a frozen ViT
backbone as a region classifier, preventing the forgetting
of open-vocabulary knowledge during detection finetuning.
On LVIS open-vocabulary detection benchmark, CFM-ViT
achieves a state-of-the-art 33.9 APr, surpassing the best approach by 7.6 points and achieves better zero-shot detection
transfer. Finally, CFM-ViT acquires strong image-level representation, outperforming the state of the art on 8 out of 12
metrics on zero-shot image-text retrieval benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The ability to detect a vast array of objects in the real
world is fundamental to computer vision and machine learning. This powers a wide range of applications from autonomous agents to search engines. Unfortunately, to date
most modern object detectors rely on manually annotated
regions and class labels, which is labor-intensive and impractical to scale beyond the order of 103 categories.
A new task called open-vocabulary detection (OVD) has
been introduced to address the vocabulary limitation in object detection by using image-text pairs for training and
text queries from users at test time [62]. Open-vocabulary
detectors represent categories as text embeddings rather
than discrete class labels, allowing them to predict objects

Pretraining: contrastive feature masking
(a)

feature
reconstruction

(c)

contrastive

(d)
dec

(e)
text
enc

ViT

(b)

(b)

mask

(a)

“Christmas lights hanging on the ceiling”

text

image
“Two children are walking by a pond”

Finetuning: open-vocabulary detection
init. with pretrained ViT
open-vocab detection
det head

joystick: 68%

joystick: 44%

joystick: 47%

paperback book: 44%
sofa bed: 61%

ViT
ViT
(finetune)
(finetune) (frozen)
image

Figure 1: We propose CFM-ViT to pretrain vision transformers to
capture more pixel and region information for open-vocabulary detection. CFM-ViT predicts masked contrastive features on top of
the contrastive image-text pretraining. (Top) We visualize (c) the
similarity map between (d) the reconstructed image features (see
top left) and (e) the query text embedding. CFM-ViT correctly predicts the (c) whole-image semantics from (b) heavily truncated images. (Bottom) Our open-vocabulary detector exploits the frozen
ViT backbone to retain pretrained knowledge and is able to detect
base and novel object classes (only novel classes are shown).

unavailable during training. Various techniques, such as
knowledge distillation [18, 13], weak supervision [71], selftraining [68, 46, 65], and frozen backbone [32], have been
suggested. Typically, CNN backbones are utilized in these
approaches. As vision transformers have gained significant
traction in image understanding [12, 63, 21, 3], it is crucial
to explore open-vocabulary detectors based on vision transformers [39]. Moreover, to our knowledge, most current
OVD research assumes the availability of pretrained Vision-

15602

