This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Downstream-agnostic Adversarial Examples
Ziqi Zhou∗1 2 3 4 , Shengshan Hu∗1 2 3 4 , Ruizhi Zhao∗1 2 3 4
Qian Wang‡ , Leo Yu Zhang§ , Junhui Hou¶ , Hai Jin†1 2 5
∗

†

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
‡
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University
§
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University
¶
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{zhouziqi, hushengshan, zhaoruizhi, hjin}@hust.edu.cn
qianwang@whu.edu.cn, leo.zhang@griffith.edu.au, jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk

Classification

Abstract
Self-supervised learning usually uses a large amount of
unlabeled data to pre-train an encoder which can be used as
a general-purpose feature extractor, such that downstream
users only need to perform fine-tuning operations to enjoy the benefit of “large model”. Despite this promising
prospect, the security of pre-trained encoder has not been
thoroughly investigated yet, especially when the pre-trained
encoder is publicly available for commercial use.
In this paper, we propose AdvEncoder, the first framework for generating downstream-agnostic universal adversarial examples based on the pre-trained encoder. AdvEncoder aims to construct a universal adversarial perturbation or patch for a set of natural images that can fool all
the downstream tasks inheriting the victim pre-trained encoder. Unlike traditional adversarial example works, the
pre-trained encoder only outputs feature vectors rather than
classification labels. Therefore, we first exploit the high frequency component information of the image to guide the
generation of adversarial examples. Then we design a generative attack framework to construct adversarial perturbations/patches by learning the distribution of the attack
surrogate dataset to improve their attack success rates and
transferability. Our results show that an attacker can successfully attack downstream tasks without knowing either
the pre-training dataset or the downstream dataset. We
also tailor four defenses for pre-trained encoders, the re1 National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and

System 2 Services Computing Technology and System Lab 3 Hubei Key
Laboratory of Distributed System Security 4 Hubei Engineering Research
Center on Big Data Security 5 Cluster and Grid Computing Lab

Attacker
Retrieval

…

Pre-trained encoder

Fine-tuning
Downstream model

Figure 1: An overview of adversarial examples against different downstream tasks based on a pre-trained encoder
sults of which further prove the attack ability of AdvEncoder. Our codes are available at: https://github.
com/CGCL-codes/AdvEncoder.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning [8, 10] (SSL) is an emerging
machine learning paradigm that seeks to overcome the restrictions of labeled data. It usually uses a large volume
of unlabeled data to pre-train a general-purpose encoder,
which can be used as a feature extractor for various downstream tasks like image classification, image retrieval, object detection, etc. As a result, any resource-constrained
user can enjoy the advantages of “large model” without performing the expensive training from scratch, where only
light-weight fine-tuning operations are needed at its request.
Driven by this promising prospect, pre-training encoders
become popular in industry and many service providers

4345

