This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Vocabulary Video Question Answering: A New Benchmark for
Evaluating the Generalizability of Video Question Answering Models
Dohwan Ko Ji Soo Lee Miso Choi
Jaewon Chu Jihwan Park Hyunwoo J. Kim*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
{ikodoh, simplewhite9, miso8070, allonsy07, jseven7071, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Video Question Answering (VideoQA) is a challenging
task that entails complex multi-modal reasoning. In contrast to multiple-choice VideoQA which aims to predict
the answer given several options, the goal of open-ended
VideoQA is to answer questions without restricting candidate answers. However, the majority of previous VideoQA
models formulate open-ended VideoQA as a classification
task to classify the video-question pairs into a fixed answer
set, i.e., closed-vocabulary, which contains only frequent
answers (e.g., top-1000 answers). This leads the model to
be biased toward only frequent answers and fail to generalize on out-of-vocabulary answers. We hence propose a new
benchmark, Open-vocabulary Video Question Answering
(OVQA), to measure the generalizability of VideoQA models
by considering rare and unseen answers. In addition, in order to improve the model’s generalization power, we introduce a novel GNN-based soft verbalizer that enhances the
prediction on rare and unseen answers by aggregating the
information from their similar words. For evaluation, we
introduce new baselines by modifying the existing (closedvocabulary) open-ended VideoQA models and improve their
performances by further taking into account rare and unseen answers. Our ablation studies and qualitative analyses demonstrate that our GNN-based soft verbalizer further improves the model performance, especially on rare
and unseen answers. We hope that our benchmark OVQA
can serve as a guide for evaluating the generalizability of
VideoQA models and inspire future research. Code is available at https://github.com/mlvlab/OVQA.

1. Introduction
Video question answering (VideoQA) is a multi-modal
understanding task that requires complex reasoning be* Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: MSRVTT-QA statistics of three answer groups.
Illustration of three different answer groups: the 1000 most
frequent answers in the training set (∼ Top-1000), the remaining answers in the training set (Top-1000 ∼), and unseen answers which do not exist during training but appear
in the test set (Unseen). (a) shows the proportion of the
number of unique answers in each group. (b) shows the proportion of the number of samples in each group. (c) shows
the distribution of the number of samples for each sorted
answer. Note that the red lines distinguish each group and
the y-axis is an exponential scale.

tween two modalities to find the correct answer given a
video-question pair. There are usually two task types in
VideoQA, multiple-choice and open-ended. The multiplechoice VideoQA requires the model to select the correct answer among several options. On the other hand, in openended VideoQA, the model needs to predict the answer
without restricting candidate vocabulary.
However, most existing VideoQA models [1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7] formulate the open-ended VideoQA task as a classification problem with a fixed set of answer candidates
which frequently appear in the training set, e.g., top-1000.
Therefore, the out-of-vocabulary answers, not used during training, are automatically regarded as incorrect without any thorough consideration during evaluation. Fig. 1a
highlights that the top-1000 answer categories cover about
17.8% of the answer candidates while they possess about

3101

