This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GO-SLAM: Global Optimization for Consistent 3D Instant Reconstruction
Youmin Zhang

Fabio Tosi

Stefano Mattoccia

Matteo Poggi

Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy
{youmin.zhang2, fabio.tosi5, stefano.mattoccia, m.poggi}@unibo.it

ScanNet – RGB-D

ScanNet – Mono.

https://youmi-zym.github.io/projects/GO-SLAM/

ATE: 70.11 cm

iMAP [35]

ATE: 20.93 cm

ATE: 8.89 cm

ATE: 8.75 cm

ATE: 0.00 cm

ATE: 197.71 cm

ATE: 13.29 cm

Ours

GT

DROID-SLAM [41]

Ours

NICE-SLAM [53] DROID-SLAM [41]

Figure 1: 3D Reconstruction and trajectory error on scene0054 00 (ScanNet [12]). From left to right: RGB-D methods (iMAP [35],
NICE-SLAM [53], DROID-SLAM [41] and ours), ground truth scan, and monocular methods (DROID-SLAM [41] and ours).

Abstract
Neural implicit representations have recently demonstrated compelling results on dense Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (SLAM) but suffer from the accumulation of errors in camera tracking and distortion in the reconstruction. Purposely, we present GO-SLAM, a deeplearning-based dense visual SLAM framework globally optimizing poses and 3D reconstruction in real-time. Robust pose estimation is at its core, supported by efficient
loop closing and online full bundle adjustment, which optimize per frame by utilizing the learned global geometry
of the complete history of input frames. Simultaneously,
we update the implicit and continuous surface representation on-the-fly to ensure global consistency of 3D reconstruction. Results on various synthetic and real-world
datasets demonstrate that GO-SLAM outperforms state-ofthe-art approaches at tracking robustness and reconstruction accuracy. Furthermore, GO-SLAM is versatile and can
run with monocular, stereo, and RGB-D input.

1. Introduction
The demand for high-fidelity 3D object and scene reconstructions grows continuously in various fields, including robotics and augmented/virtual reality applications.
Thus, faithfully representing objects and scenes in three-

dimensional space is paramount to modelling them as continuous surfaces rather than discrete points. However, despite the significant advancements in 3D reconstruction
techniques, obtaining high-quality representations in realtime without compromising accuracy and spatial resolution
remains challenging. This fact is further demanding in online reconstruction scenarios, where handling camera motions and achieving real-time performance are critical.
Dense visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM) systems [28, 45, 32, 13, 46] have been introduced recently, enabling real-time, dense indoor scene reconstructions using RGB-D sensors. In particular, BundleFusion [13] is the first volumetric approach that focuses on
globally consistent 3D reconstruction on large-scale scenes
at a real-time rate. However, consumer depth sensors have
a limited working range [32, 12] and could yield extremely
noisy [27] measurements. This issues make the representation mapped by RGB-D SLAM suffer from blurring or
over-smoothed geometric details, degrading the accuracy
of pose estimation and reconstruction. In parallel, scene
reconstruction from monocular imagery is emerging as a
more convenient solution compared to RGB-D or LiDAR
sensors. Camera sensors are lightweight, inexpensive, and
represent the most straightforward configuration. Several
deep-learning approaches [38, 4, 11, 51, 39, 32, 41] have
advanced monocular 3D reconstruction. However, their surface representations – point cloud, surfel-based and volu-

3727

