This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SOCS: Semantically-aware Object Coordinate Space for Category-Level
6D Object Pose Estimation under Large Shape Variations
Boyan Wan*
Yifei Shi*
Kai Xu†
National University of Defense Technology
wanboyan@163.com {yifei.j.shi, kevin.kai.xu}@gmail.com

Abstract
Most learning-based approaches to category-level 6D
pose estimation are design around normalized object coordinate space (NOCS). While being successful, NOCS-based
methods become inaccurate and less robust when handling
objects of a category containing significant intra-category
shape variations. This is because the object coordinates
induced by global and rigid alignment of objects are semantically incoherent, making the coordinate regression
hard to learn and generalize. We propose Semanticallyaware Object Coordinate Space (SOCS) built by warpingand-aligning the objects guided by a sparse set of keypoints
with semantically meaningful correspondence. SOCS is semantically coherent: Any point on the surface of a object
can be mapped to a semantically meaningful location in
SOCS, allowing for accurate pose and size estimation under
large shape variations. To learn effective coordinate regression to SOCS, we propose a novel multi-scale coordinatebased attention network. Evaluations demonstrate that our
method is easy to train, well-generalizing for large intracategory shape variations and robust to inter-object occlusions. Code is provided at: https://github.com/
wanboyan/SOCS.

1. Introduction
6D object pose estimation, i.e., determining the 3D rotation and translation of a object in the camera coordinate system, is an important computer vision task with a large body
of literature [2, 27, 13, 17]. Category-level object pose estimation attempts to solve the problem without relying on the
exact CAD model of the target object [28], which is hence
more challenging than instance-level one. Since the seminal work of Wang et al. [28], most existing category-level
works are based on a canonical representation of Normalized Object Coordinate Space (NOCS). Given an unseen
object instance, they learn a neural network to map the per* Joint first authors
† Corresponding author

Point-wise error

Point-wise error

Point cloud

Pose estimation

Pose estimation

Input

NOCS

SOCS

Figure 1. NOCS [28], constructed with globally aligned objects,
finds difficulty in handling large intra-category shape variations.
In this example, the coordinates regressed against NOCS for the
long-lens camera contain much error (w.r.t. the CAD model under ground-truth pose and size) and the resulting pose is incorrect
(middle). In contrast, the coordinates regressed against SOCS,
built by semantically-guided non-rigid object alignment, are semantically coherent, leading to better pose estimation (right).

spective projection of the object to the NOCS of the corresponding category from which object pose can be estimated.
Given an object category, NOCS is defined by globally
aligning a set of 3D object instances with normalized size
and poses. It works well for objects with moderate intracategory shape variations. When handling object categories
containing significant shape variations, however, NOCSbased methods become inaccurate and less robust. This is
because the object coordinates induced by global and rigid
alignment are not semantically coherent. For instance, a
point on the lens of a long-lens camera would be mapped to
a semantically incorrect point in NOCS if the NOCS was
constructed with camera models of significantly varying
part proportions. Such misalignment makes the mapping
network hard to learn and generalize, thus causing inferior
pose accuracy under large shape variations (Figure 1).
To tackle this issue, we propose Semantically-aware Object Coordinate Space (SOCS) to achieve accurate and robust category-level 6D object pose and size estimation un-

14065

