This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Navigating to Objects Specified by Images
Jacob Krantz1 *
Chris Paxton3
1

Oregon State

2

Theophile Gervet2
Karmesh Yadav3
Roozbeh Mottaghi3,4
Dhruv Batra3,5
1
Stefan Lee
Devendra Singh Chaplot3

Austin Wang3
Jitendra Malik3,6

Carnegie Mellon 3 Meta AI 4 University of Washington 5 Georgia Tech
Project Page & Videos: jacobkrantz.github.io/modular iin

6

UC Berkeley

Abstract
Goal Image

Goal Image

* Work done while interning at Meta AI’s FAIR Labs.
Correspondence: krantzja@oregonstate.edu

Step 73

Step 95

Step 109

Map
Goal Re-ID

Consider instructing a last-mile delivery agent on where
to deliver a package. Specifying a particular porch receptacle
can be conveniently done via image, provided you are local
to the environment prior to delivery and have foresight to
capture the image. This example motivates the fundamental
embodied skill we study in this paper: navigating to an object
instance specified by an image. As depicted in Fig. 1 (Top),
the agent is provided with egocentric vision and a goal image
(in this case, a bed) and must navigate to that particular bed.
This Image Goal Navigation task requires reasoning over the
relation of objects in the scene (e.g., disambiguating between
instances of similar appearance) and exploring efficiently
(e.g., entering bedrooms while searching for the bed).

Step 21

Agent View

Step 1

1. Introduction

Egocentric Vision

Scene

Images are a convenient way to specify which particular object instance an embodied agent should navigate to.
Solving this task requires semantic visual reasoning and exploration of unknown environments. We present a system
that can perform this task in both simulation and the real
world. Our modular method solves sub-tasks of exploration,
goal instance re-identification, goal localization, and local
navigation. We re-identify the goal instance in egocentric
vision using feature-matching and localize the goal instance
by projecting matched features to a map. Each sub-task is
solved using off-the-shelf components requiring zero finetuning. On the HM3D InstanceImageNav benchmark, this
system outperforms a baseline end-to-end RL policy 7x and
a state-of-the-art ImageNav model 2.3x (56% vs. 25% success). We deploy this system to a mobile robot platform and
demonstrate effective real-world performance, achieving an
88% success rate across a home and an office environment.

Match Score
0.00

Re-ID

Match Score
31.94

Re-ID

Figure 1: Top: InstanceImageNav tasks an agent with
navigating to an object instance described by a goal image.
Bottom: Real-World Deployment. Our method achieves
leading performance in sim and transfers to reality. Here, we
find a chair 10m away. Videos are on the project page.

10916

