This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AvatarCraft: Transforming Text into Neural Human Avatars with
Parameterized Shape and Pose Control
Ruixiang Jiang
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Can Wang
City University of Hong Kong

rui-x.jiang@connect.polyu.hk

cwang355-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Jingbo Zhang
City University of Hong Kong

Menglei Chai
Google

Mingming He
Netflix

jbzhang6-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

cmlatsim@gmail.com

hmm.lillian@gmail.com

Dongdong Chen
Microsoft Cloud AI

Jing Liao*
City University of Hong Kong

cddlyf@gmail.com

jingliao@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Neural implicit fields are powerful for representing 3D
scenes and generating high-quality novel views, but it remains challenging to use such implicit representations for
creating a 3D human avatar with a specific identity and
artistic style that can be easily animated. Our proposed
method, AvatarCraft, addresses this challenge by using diffusion models to guide the learning of geometry and texture for a neural avatar based on a single text prompt. We
carefully design the optimization framework of neural implicit fields, including a coarse-to-fine multi-bounding box
training strategy, shape regularization, and diffusion-based
constraints, to produce high-quality geometry and texture.
Additionally, we make the human avatar animatable by deforming the neural implicit field with an explicit warping
field that maps the target human mesh to a template human
mesh, both represented using parametric human models.
This simplifies animation and reshaping of the generated
avatar by controlling pose and shape parameters. Extensive
experiments on various text descriptions show that AvatarCraft is effective and robust in creating human avatars and
rendering novel views, poses, and shapes. Our project page
is: https://avatar-craft.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Creating human avatars is crucial for content generation
in various immersive media, where users can alter the character to a specific identity, apply an artistic style, or ani* Corresponding Author.

mate with simple motion control. While traditional manual
authoring of digital characters often involves cumbersome
and time-consuming efforts from skilled artists, the recent
progress in human digitization has shown exciting potential
towards more user-friendly solutions. Nevertheless, avatar
generation still faces a set of tough challenges. First of all,
intuitive control is highly coveted for the system to understand specific user needs in the most natural form. Second,
the generated avatars should be immediately ready for applications such as view synthesis, scene composition, and
retargetable animation. Finally, the avatars should be of
high quality, considering both the overall visual fidelity and
preservation of target styles or identities in geometry and
texture, especially when being manipulated or animated.
Significant efforts have been made in search of natural user controls for avatars. One representative stream of
works [7, 2, 11, 47, 52, 51, 50] takes reference images
to stylize an avatar. Unfortunately, finding suitable references that perfectly match the desired shape and appearance is not always easy, substantially limiting real-world
use. On the other hand, text prompts are attracting more
attention as a more natural control for generating highquality 3D avatars, with the recent advances in large-scale
vision-language models. In particular, text-to-3D avatar
creation [16, 56, 31, 53] is explored by leveraging the zeroshot generation ability of Contrastive Language-Image PreTraining (CLIP) [41]. Following this trend, our work also
tackles the problem of text-guided avatar creation. In particular, we aim at high-quality 3D avatar generation, which
not only supports static view synthesis but also allows for
controllable animation.
Text-driven avatar creation poses great challenges in pro-

14371

