This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Clustering based Point Cloud Representation Learning for 3D Analysis
Tuo Feng1 , Wenguan Wang2 , Xiaohan Wang2 , Yi Yang2 ,* Qinghua Zheng3
1

ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney 2 ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University 3 Xi’an Jiaotong University
https://github.com/FengZicai/Cluster3Dseg/

Abstract

data, such as natural images, to point clouds is nontrivial,
as point data are unorganized and irregular. To adapt neural
networks to the geometries of point data, considerable effort
has been made and representative achievements include: i)
projection-/voxel-based networks [1–11] that project irregular point clouds to regular representations, so that mature
2D/3D convolution can be applied for segmentation; and ii)
point-based networks [12–16] that ingest raw point clouds
directly, by using permutation-invariant operator [17–21],
graph convolution [22], customized convolution [23–25], or
self-attention (Transformer) based architecture [26–28].

Point cloud analysis (such as 3D segmentation and detection) is a challenging task, because of not only the irregular
geometries of many millions of unordered points, but also the
great variations caused by depth, viewpoint, occlusion, etc.
Current studies put much focus on the adaption of neural
networks to the complex geometries of point clouds, but are
blind to a fundamental question: how to learn an appropriate
point embedding space that is aware of both discriminative
semantics and challenging variations? As a response, we
propose a clustering based supervised learning scheme for
point cloud analysis. Unlike current de-facto, scene-wise
training paradigm, our algorithm conducts within-class clustering on the point embedding space for automatically discovering subclass patterns which are latent yet representative
across scenes. The mined patterns are, in turn, used to repaint the embedding space, so as to respect the underlying
distribution of the entire training dataset and improve the
robustness to the variations. Our algorithm is principled
and readily pluggable to modern point cloud segmentation
networks during training, without extra overhead during testing. With various 3D network architectures (i.e., voxel-based,
point-based, Transformer-based, automatically searched),
our algorithm shows notable improvements on famous point
cloud segmentation datasets (i.e., 2.0-2.6% on single-scan and
2.0-2.2% multi-scan of SemanticKITTI, 1.8-1.9% on S3DIS,
in terms of mIoU). Our algorithm also demonstrates utility in
3D detection, showing 2.0-3.4% mAP gains on KITTI.

Nevertheless, the challenges in point cloud analysis stem
not only from the intrinsic non-Euclidean nature of point data,
but also from the large intra-class variations caused by depth,
occlusion, viewpoint, shape, etc. Despite various fancy point
structure-aware network designs and their encouraging results, a fundamental issue was long ignored: how to learn
a good point embedding space that is discriminative for
semantic categorization yet robust for point data variations?
Mitigating this issue demands a powerful learning regime
that is aware of latent variation modes (or representative ﬁnegrained patterns) – comprehensively describing the potential
structure of point data. However, in practice, it is infeasible to
precisely annotate, or even roughly identify, the underlying
data patterns in point clouds. This may be the reason behind
the common choice that point cloud segmentation is learned
as point-wise classiﬁcation; any ﬁne-grained patterns that the
point data may possess are left to be ‘mysteriously’ learned
through the supervision from high-level semantic tags.
These novel insights motivate us to devise a clustering
analysis based training scheme for point cloud segmentation.
It complements the standard supervised learning of pointwise classiﬁcation with unsupervised clustering and regularization of the feature space. Speciﬁcally, clustering is conducted inside each labeled semantic class to automatically
discover informative yet hidden subclass patterns without
explicit annotation. The discovered subclass patterns essentially capture the underlying ﬁne-grained distribution of
the whole training dataset. They are then used to reshape
the point embedding space, achieved by explicitly inspiring
inter-subclass/-cluster discriminativeness, and reducing intra-

1. Introduction
During the last few years, point cloud analysis, such as
3D segmentation, has attracted increasing research effort,
due to the wide applications in autonomous driving, intelligent robotics, airborne laser scanning, and virtual reality.
In particular, the advances in deep learning signiﬁcantly
pushed forward the state-of-the-art in this ﬁeld. Applying
standard neural networks which are specialized for grid-like
1 Corresponding author: Yi Yang.

8283

