This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RecRecNet: Rectangling Rectiﬁed Wide-Angle Images by Thin-Plate Spline
Model and DoF-based Curriculum Learning
Kang Liao† Lang Nie† Chunyu Lin* Zishuo Zheng Yao Zhao
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network
{kang liao, nielang, cylin, yzhao}@bjtu.edu.cn

7367UDQVIRUPDWLRQ

The wide-angle lens shows appealing applications in VR
technologies, but it introduces severe radial distortion into
its captured image. To recover the realistic scene, previous works devote to rectifying the content of the wideangle image. However, such a rectiﬁcation solution inevitably distorts the image boundary, which changes related geometric distributions and misleads the current vision perception models. In this work, we explore constructing a win-win representation on both content and boundary by contributing a new learning model, i.e., Rectangling
Rectiﬁcation Network (RecRecNet). In particular, we propose a thin-plate spline (TPS) module to formulate the nonlinear and non-rigid transformation for rectangling images.
By learning the control points on the rectiﬁed image, our
model can ﬂexibly warp the source structure to the target
domain and achieves an end-to-end unsupervised deformation. To relieve the complexity of structure approximation,
we then inspire our RecRecNet to learn the gradual deformation rules with a DoF (Degree of Freedom)-based curriculum learning. By increasing the DoF in each curriculum stage, namely, from similarity transformation (4-DoF)
to homography transformation (8-DoF), the network is capable of investigating more detailed deformations, offering fast convergence on the ﬁnal rectangling task. Experiments show the superiority of our solution over the compared methods on both quantitative and qualitative evaluations. The code and dataset are available at https:
//github.com/KangLiao929/RecRecNet.

1. Introduction
The wide-angle lens has been widely applied in various
applications such as computational imaging, virtual reality
(VR), and autonomous driving, due to their larger ﬁeld of
view (FoV) than conventional lenses [19, 12, 44, 27]. By
* Corresponding author. † The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally.

10800

5HFWDQJOLQJ,PDJH

5HF5HF1HW

5HFWLILHG,PDJH

Abstract

,QIHUHQFH

9LVLRQ3HUFHSWLRQ
0RGHO

'HWHFWLRQDQG6HJPHQWDWLRQ
5HVXOWV

Figure 1. Existing rectiﬁcation methods devote to correcting the
content of the wide-angle image, but they inevitably distort the image boundary. Such a deformed boundary can lead to dramatic performance degradation of the popular vision perception model [16].
By presenting RecRecNet, we can reach a win-win representation
on both the undistorted content and regular boundary. The arrow
marks our perception gain (e.g., the surfboard is rediscovered).

employing a speciﬁc mapping, the wide-angle lens can produce convex and non-rectilinear images rather than images
with straight lines of perspective. However, this mapping
mechanism violates the pinhole camera assumption, and the
captured image suffers from severe radial distortions.
To eliminate the distortion induced by the wide-angle
lens, the distortion rectiﬁcation algorithm is presented. For
example, the traditional approaches calibrate the wideangle lens using the calibration target (e.g., a checkerboard) [48, 19] and speciﬁc scene assumption [9, 2]. In
recent years, deep learning has brought new inspirations
to this ﬁeld. It helps to automatically rectify the radial
distortion in wide-angle images based on learned semantic features. To pursue better performance, the recent
works improve the learning framework through diverse features [46, 43], learning paradigm [26], calibration representation [23, 29], and distortion prior [7, 25], etc.
We notice that the above distortion rectiﬁcation ap-

