This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Face Clustering via Graph Convolutional Networks with Confidence Edges
Yang Wu1,3,4 * Zhiwei Ge2 Yuhao Luo2† Lin Liu2 Sulong Xu2
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
JD.COM 3 SKLCS, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
wuyang2023@ia.ac.cn

{gezhiwei,luoyuhao6,liulin1,xusulong}@jd.com

Abstract
Face clustering is a method for unlabeled image annotation and has attracted increasing attention. Existing
methods have made significant breakthroughs by introducing Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) on the affinity
graph. However, such graphs will contain many vertex pairs
with inconsistent similarities and labels, thus degrading the
model’s performance. There are already relevant efforts
for this problem, but the information about features needs
to be mined further. In this paper, we define a new concept called confidence edge and guide the construction of
graphs. Furthermore, a novel confidence-GCN is proposed
to cluster face images by deriving more confidence edges.
Firstly, Local Information Fusion is advanced to obtain a
more accurate similarity metric by considering the neighbors of vertices. Then Unsupervised Neighbor Determination is used to discard low-quality edges based on similarity differences. Moreover, we elaborate that the remaining
edges retain the most beneficial information to demonstrate
the validity. At last, the confidence-GCN takes the graph as
the input and fully uses the confidence edges to complete the
clustering. Experiments show that our method outperforms
existing methods on the face and person datasets to achieve
state-of-the-art. At the same time, comparable results are
obtained on the fashion dataset.

1. Introduction
In recent years, and thanks to existing works[24, 25],
face recognition has rapidly developed and is now widely
used in face verification, security systems, and other daily
applications. This development relies on high-quality annotated data, but manual annotation is extremely expensive
and time-consuming. Therefore, face clustering emerges
and becomes a primary technology to address the problem.
* This work was done when Yang Wu was an intern at JD.COM
† Corresponding author

Face clustering has gained considerable developments
recently. Existing face clustering methods can be divided into two categories: unsupervised and supervised
[14, 4, 32, 7, 28, 27]. K-means [14], and DBSCAN [4]
are representative unsupervised methods but perform poorly
due to their limited capacities. Recently, a new unsupervised method FaceMap[35] has achieved positive results by
adjusting the relationships between images to fit traditional
clustering methods. Although this is very effective, original
features are not clustering-oriented, so the performance will
undoubtedly be subject to certain limitations.
Supervised learning methods [7, 33, 32, 21, 27] are
mainly based on graph convolution networks (GCNs) [30].
Such methods first build face graphs by deeming images as
vertices and then linking them based on their deep features,
which are extracted from a trained Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) [11]. In existing research [33, 32], such
graphs are often called affinity graphs. The most common
affinity graphs are built based on kNN [3] (k-nearest neighbors) relations, where each vertex is connected to its top k
neighbors. With affinity graphs as input, a GCN can be utilized to capture the structural information and embed it into
the features. Due to its powerful feature propagation capability, the clustering performance is significantly improved.
However, several unfavorable factors limit GCN-based
models. First, since the training and inference of CNN models treat each image as an individual without considering
their associations, images of different identities may have
high similarity. The opposite may also occur in the same
identities. Hence, affinity graphs would inevitably contain
many undesirable edges whose endpoints have incompatible labels and similarities. GCN will propagate harmful information through such edges and obtain polluted features,
hindering performance. Second, real datasets often contain
inaccurate labels. Even if the graph is clean enough, untrusted labels will lead the GCN to learn incorrect information, which is not conducive to clustering.
To amend these drawbacks, we combine labels with similarities to adjust face graphs and propose a novel GCN

20990

