This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReFit: Recurrent Fitting Network for 3D Human Recovery
Yufu Wang
Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
We present Recurrent Fitting (ReFit), a neural network
architecture for single-image, parametric 3D human reconstruction. ReFit learns a feedback-update loop that mirrors
the strategy of solving an inverse problem through optimization. At each iterative step, it reprojects keypoints from the
human model to feature maps to query feedback, and uses
a recurrent-based updater to adjust the model to fit the image better. Because ReFit encodes strong knowledge of the
inverse problem, it is faster to train than previous regression
models. At the same time, ReFit improves state-of-the-art
performance on standard benchmarks. Moreover, ReFit applies to other optimization settings, such as multi-view fitting
and single-view shape fitting. Project website: https://yufuwang.github.io/refit humans/

1. Introduction
Single-view 3D human reconstruction has transformed
the way we analyze and create virtual content. Progress has
primarily been driven by the use of parametric human models [43], powerful neural networks [30], and high-quality
annotated data [61]. However, the best systems to date still
struggle with various difficulties, including occlusion, uncommon poses, and diverse shape variations.
The traditional approach fits a parametric human model
to an image using handcrafted objectives and energy minimization techniques [9]. But this optimization process is
often riddled with local minima and corner cases. Because
of such drawbacks, recent regression methods train a neural
network to predict the parameters directly [30, 35]. Training
such networks robustly requires a large amount of 3D annotated data that is hard to collect outside a lab setting. One
line of research is to design better neural network architectures that can learn efficiently and generalize well to diverse
in-the-wild cases.
In this paper, we propose Recurrent Fitting (ReFit), an
architecture for 3D human reconstruction. ReFit mimics the
structure of model fitting, reducing the regression problem
to a learning-to-optimize problem. This allows ReFit to learn
faster than other architectures and improves state-of-the-art

Figure 1. Overview. ReFit mimics the strategy of model fitting
by constructing a trainable feedback-update loop that adjusts the
human model for a more accurate reconstruction.

accuracy.
ReFit has three main steps. (1) A backbone network extracts pixel-aligned image features. (2) A feedback module
queries feedback features from keypoint reprojection. (3) A
recurrent update module uses a set of disentangled GRUs to
update the body. Feedback and updates are repeated until the
body mesh is well-aligned with the image (Fig. 1).
The design of ReFit mirrors traditional model fitting. In
model fitting, the objective function computes the L2 distance between the reprojected and the detected keypoints [9].
In ReFit, each reprojected keypoint queries a window on a
feature map. A window encodes first-order information, such
as 2D flow, which is the derivative of the L2 objective. The
queried features are fed to the update module to compute
updates for the human model.
Another key element of ReFit is the disentangled and
recurrent update streams. Iterative regression methods commonly map a feature vector to parameter updates with an
MLP [30, 67]. Therefore, the update rules for the parameters
are entangled until the last linear layer. In contrast, parameters in optimization follow update rules based on automatic
differentiation, and the rules can be very different. As an
example, in human pose, an alignment error in the right hand
will produce a gradient for the right arm and shoulder but not
for the left side. This notion of a disentangled update is difficult to achieve within a global feature vector. When learning

14644

