This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Point Contrastive Prediction with Semantic Clustering for
Self-Supervised Learning on Point Cloud Videos
Xiaoxiao Sheng1 *, Zhiqiang Shen1 *, Gang Xiao1†, Longguang Wang2 , Yulan Guo3 , Hehe Fan4
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Aviation University of Air Force
3
4
Sun Yat-sen University
Zhejiang University
{shengxiaoxiao, shenzhiqiang, xiaogang}@sjtu.edu.cn

We propose a unified point cloud video self-supervised
learning framework for object-centric and scene-centric
data. Previous methods commonly conduct representation
learning at the clip or frame level and cannot well capture
fine-grained semantics. Instead of contrasting the representations of clips or frames, in this paper, we propose a unified
self-supervised framework by conducting contrastive learning at the point level. Moreover, we introduce a new pretext task by achieving semantic alignment of superpoints,
which further facilitates the representations to capture semantic cues at multiple scales. In addition, due to the high
redundancy in the temporal dimension of dynamic point
clouds, directly conducting contrastive learning at the point
level usually leads to massive undesired negatives and insufficient modeling of positive representations. To remedy
this, we propose a selection strategy to retain proper negatives and make use of high-similarity samples from other
instances as positive supplements. Extensive experiments
show that our method outperforms supervised counterparts
on a wide range of downstream tasks and demonstrates the
superior transferability of the learned representations.

1. Introduction
Point cloud videos captured by 3D sensors describe the
dynamics of objects and their surrounding environments,
and have been applied in a wide range of fields to perceive
the environment, including robotics and autonomous driving. Early point cloud understanding approaches mainly
focus on the geometric modeling of static point clouds
[7, 18, 46]. Recently, more attention has been paid to
point cloud videos [12, 14, 40, 41]. However, since obtaining point-wise annotation for point cloud videos is laborintensive [1,43], conducting self-supervised learning on dy* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

view1

clip1

view2

frame0
clip2

Predict
Clip
Order

frame0

clip0
clip1

Distillation

Abstract

frame1

clip2

clip0

frame2

(a) Clip Level

frame1

frame2

(b) Frame Level
Contrastive
Prediction
(c) Point Level

Figure 1. Existing works utilize clip-level (a) or frame-level (b)
instances for point cloud video pre-training, while we focus on
point-level (c) pre-training.

namic point clouds has drawn increasing interest. Despite
the great success of recent self-supervised learning on images and static point clouds [4, 16, 17, 44, 45], two questions
still remain for point cloud videos:
(i) How to build a unified self-supervised framework?
Multi-granularity perception of point cloud videos is demanded in different tasks, such as classification, semantic segmentation, and part segmentation. Existing works
conduct self-supervised learning by predicting the orders
of randomly shuffled clips or distilling spatiotemporal
knowledge based on complete-to-partial sequences [9, 35]
(Fig. 1(a-b)). Representations learned by these paradigms
focus more on frame-level semantics and cannot well capture fine-grained semantic cues. Therefore, building a unified self-supervised framework that can learn representation
rich in multi-granularity semantics is highly demanded.
(ii) How to achieve effective learning between local samples? To build a unified self-supervised framework for
multiple point cloud video tasks, it is necessary to learn

16515

