This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EigenTrajectory: Low-Rank Descriptors for Multi-Modal Trajectory Forecasting
Inhwan Bae1 *
Jean Oh2
Hae-Gon Jeon1†
1
2
GIST AI Graduate School
Carnegie Mellon University
inhwanbae@gm.gist.ac.kr, jeanoh@cmu.edu, haegonj@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Capturing high-dimensional social interactions and feasible futures is essential for predicting trajectories. To address
this complex nature, several attempts have been devoted
to reducing the dimensionality of the output variables via
parametric curve fitting such as the Bézier curve and Bspline function. However, these functions, which originate in
computer graphics fields, are not suitable to account for socially acceptable human dynamics. In this paper, we present
EigenTrajectory (ET), a trajectory prediction approach that
uses a novel trajectory descriptor to form a compact space,
known here as ET space, in place of Euclidean space, for
representing pedestrian movements. We first reduce the complexity of the trajectory descriptor via a low-rank approximation. We transform the pedestrians’ history paths into our
ET space represented by spatio-temporal principle components, and feed them into off-the-shelf trajectory forecasting
models. The inputs and outputs of the models as well as
social interactions are all gathered and aggregated in the
corresponding ET space. Lastly, we propose a trajectory
anchor-based refinement method to cover all possible futures
in the proposed ET space. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our EigenTrajectory predictor can significantly
improve both the prediction accuracy and reliability of existing trajectory forecasting models on public benchmarks,
indicating that the proposed descriptor is suited to represent
pedestrian behaviors. Code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/inhwanbae/EigenTrajectory.

1. Introduction
Trajectory prediction involves forecasting the future footsteps of agents based on their past movements. This task
is considered one of the core technologies for autonomous
navigation, social robot platforms and surveillance systems.
Many existing approaches [1, 2, 5, 10, 15, 19, 28, 35, 36,
37, 40, 48, 55, 69, 73, 74, 77, 101, 108, 109] design their prediction models in the Euclidean space, i.e., to directly infer
* Work done during an internship at Carnegie Mellon University.
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. A common pipeline of trajectory prediction models and
the proposed EigenTrajectory. For each observation, (a) existing
models predict future trajectories using the raw data in Euclidean
space; (b) our approach transforms the raw data into our ET space,
then captures the social interaction and predicts the coefficient of
our trajectory descriptor.

a sequence of 2D coordinates of future frames. These approaches force the models to learn both informative behavioral features and their motion dynamics from raw trajectory
data. Such direct predictions can intuitively describe agents’
behaviors in the temporal series of spatial coordinates; however, in a higher-dimensional space, it is hard for the models
to determine explanatory features.
Recent works have described the pedestrian’s movements
using trajectory descriptors instead of dealing with all raw
coordinate information. Inspired by human beings traveling
pathways with a higher level of connotation (e.g., a person
who gradually decelerates to turn right, or makes a sharp
turn while going straight) [66], parametric curve functions
are introduced. In particular, Hug et al. [22, 23] introduce
the Bézier curve, and Jazayeri and Jahangiri [25] propose a
B-spline curve-based representation for effectively modeling
continuous-time trajectories. These methods successfully
reduce the dimensionality of trajectories by abstractly representing lengthy sequential coordinates in a spatial domain
using a smaller set of key points. It is, however, unclear
how well these parametric functions can capture human motions and behaviors as they have been designed for computer
graphics [17, 62, 71] and part modeling [86, 89, 91].
In this paper, departing from existing parametric curve
functions, we present an intuitive trajectory descriptor that
is learnable from real-world human trajectory data as illus-

10017

