This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Modal Neural Radiance Field for Monocular Dense SLAM
with a Light-Weight ToF Sensor
Xinyang Liu1 , Yijin Li1 , Yanbin Teng1 , Hujun Bao1 , Guofeng Zhang1 , Yinda Zhang2 , Zhaopeng Cui1 *
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 Google

Abstract
Light-weight time-of-flight (ToF) depth sensors are compact and cost-efficient, and thus widely used on mobile devices for tasks such as autofocus and obstacle detection.
However, due to the sparse and noisy depth measurements,
these sensors have rarely been considered for dense geometry reconstruction. In this work, we present the first
dense SLAM system with a monocular camera and a lightweight ToF sensor. Specifically, we propose a multi-modal
implicit scene representation that supports rendering both
the signals from the RGB camera and light-weight ToF sensor which drives the optimization by comparing with the
raw sensor inputs. Moreover, in order to guarantee successful pose tracking and reconstruction, we exploit a predicted depth as an intermediate supervision and develop
a coarse-to-fine optimization strategy for efficient learning
of the implicit representation. At last, the temporal information is explicitly exploited to deal with the noisy signals from light-weight ToF sensors to improve the accuracy and robustness of the system. Experiments demonstrate that our system well exploits the signals of lightweight ToF sensors and achieves competitive results both
on camera tracking and dense scene reconstruction. Project
page: https://zju3dv.github.io/tof_slam/.

Figure 1. Monocular Dense SLAM with Our Multi-Modal Implicit Representation. We present a novel SLAM system based
on implicit scene representation. The system does not require
high-precision and high-resolution depth sensors and only takes
RGB images and the signals of light-weight ToF sensors as input.

it would be valuable if we could fully utilize these lightweight sensors for dense SLAM, which further facilitates
other applications like AR/VR and micro-Robot.
Unfortunately, limited by the compact electronic design,
the light-weight ToF sensor can only provide coarse measurement in the form of depth distribution in an extremely
low resolution as illustrated in Fig. 2. Existing RGB-D
dense SLAM systems [38, 46, 31] are designed for accurate and pixel-wise depth inputs, thus cannot work with
the light-weight ToF signals directly. They will also fail
if we simply consider the light-weight ToF signals as a lowresolution depth (i.e., mean depth values in each zone).
In this paper, we aim to design a novel learning-based
dense SLAM system that provides accurate pose tracking
and dense reconstruction taking the RGB sequences from
a color camera and the sparse signals of light-weight ToF
as input (Fig. 1). However, it is non-trivial to design such

1. Introduction
Dense simultaneous localization and mapping (dense
SLAM) [38, 8, 9, 44] has extensive applications in augmented reality [13, 17], indoor robotics, etc. It usually relies
on high-precision and high-resolution depth sensors, such
as time-of-flight (ToF) sensors or structured light sensors.
Due to the size, weight, and price issues, these depth sensors are only used in a few high-end mobile devices until
recent years. In contrast, light-weight ToF sensors, which
are cost-effective, compact, and energy-efficient, were integrated into hundreds of smartphone models1 . As a result,
* Corresponding author.
1 https://www.st.com/content/st_com/en/about/

media-center/press-item.html/t4210.html

1

