This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EPiC: Ensemble of Partial Point Clouds for Robust Classification
Meir Yossef Levi, Guy Gilboa
Viterbi Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
me.levi@campus.technion.ac.il ; guy.gilboa@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Robust point cloud classification is crucial for realworld applications, as consumer-type 3D sensors often
yield partial and noisy data, degraded by various artifacts.
In this work we propose a general ensemble framework,
based on partial point cloud sampling. Each ensemble
member is exposed to only partial input data. Three sampling strategies are used jointly, two local ones, based on
patches and curves, and a global one of random sampling.
We demonstrate the robustness of our method to various
local and global degradations. We show that our framework significantly improves the robustness of top classification netowrks by a large margin. Our experimental setting
uses the recently introduced ModelNet-C database by Ren
et al.[24], where we reach SOTA both on unaugmented and
on augmented data. Our unaugmented mean Corruption
Error (mCE) is 0.64 (current SOTA is 0.86) and 0.50 for
augmented data (current SOTA is 0.57). We analyze and
explain these remarkable results through diversity analysis. Our code is availabe at: https://github.com/
yossilevii100/EPiC

1. Introduction
A major obstacle in data-driven algorithms is the strong
relation between performance and precise knowledge of input statistics. A way to test network robustness is to create
corrupted test sets, where training is unaware of the specific corruptions. In recent years this has been investigated
for images, with the creation of corrupted benchmarks e.g.:
ImageNet-C, CIFAR10-C, CIFAR100-C [11] and MNISTC [17]. In [24] the idea is extended to point cloud classification, with the introduction of ModelNet-C. In our work
we present a generic framework, based on sampling, which
is light, flexible and robust to Out-Of-Distribution (OOD)
samples.
Ensemble learning is a long-standing concept in robust
machine learning [8, 10, 6]. We would like to obtain an ensemble of learners, which are loosely correlated, that gener-

(a) Random

(b) Patch

(c) Curve

Figure 1: EPiC concept. Three sampling mechanism are
used in our ensemble: Random captures global information, Patch holds full local resolution, and Curve is more
exploratory in nature. Blue - anchor point, Red - sampled points. We show and explain why such ensembles are
highly robust to various corruptions.

alize well also to OOD input. There are two main questions:
1) How to form these learners? 2) How to combine their results?
One classical way to form ensembles in deep learning
(see for instance [2]), is to rely on the partial-randomness of
the training process. In this setting, the ensemble consists
of networks of the same architecture trained on the same
training-set. Variations of networks’ output stem from the
different random parameter initialization and the stochastic gradient descent process. This induces Stochastic diversity. Another major approach to generate ensembles (both
in classical machine learning and in deep learning [8, 2, 39])
is to change the sampling distribution of the training set for
each learner. A mixture-of-experts approach is to train different types of classifiers, in neural networks this is accomplished by different network architectures. This induces

14475

