This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Not Every Side Is Equal: Localization Uncertainty Estimation for
Semi-Supervised 3D Object Detection

1

Chuxin Wang1 , Wenfei Yang1 , Tianzhu Zhang1,2, *
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Deep Space Exploration Lab

wcx0602@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yangwf@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Side-aware
Regressor Error

Pseudo-label
IoU: 0.50

1. Introduction
The goal of 3D object detection is to estimate oriented
3D boundary boxes as well as category labels of objects
from a point cloud. Due to its significant potential applications in autonomous driving [5, 6, 1], many fully supervised
3D object detection methods have been proposed over the
past few decades [22, 21], leading to remarkable progress
in this area. However, these methods rely heavily on a large
amount of carefully annotated 3D scene data, which is expensive and time-consuming to collect.
* Corresponding Author

A

(a)

IoU: 0.21

B

Ours
Recall: 0.51
Quantity

(b)

Low Thresholds
Recall: 0.53
Quantity

3DIoUMatch
Recall: 0.44
Quantity

Semi-supervised 3D object detection from point cloud
aims to train a detector with a small number of labeled data
and a large number of unlabeled data. The core of existing methods lies in how to select high-quality pseudo-labels
using the designed quality evaluation criterion. However,
these methods treat each pseudo bounding box as a whole
and assign equal importance to each side during training,
which is detrimental to model performance due to many
sides having poor localization quality. Besides, existing
methods filter out a large number of low-quality pseudolabels, which also contain some correct regression values that can help with model training. To address the
above issues, we propose a side-aware framework for semisupervised 3D object detection consisting of three key designs: a 3D bounding box parameterization method, an uncertainty estimation module, and a pseudo-label selection
strategy. These modules work together to explicitly estimate the localization quality of each side and assign different levels of importance during the training phase. Extensive experiment results demonstrate that the proposed
method can consistently outperform baseline models under different scenes and evaluation criteria. Moreover,
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on three
datasets with different labeled ratios.

Uncertainty
Estimation Value

Figure 1. The motivation of this paper. (a): Red represents
pseudo-labels and green represents ground-truth. Pseudo-labels
with high IoU may be incorrect on some sides, while pseudo-labels
with low IoU may be correct on some sides. Global scores like
IoU are insufficient for pseudo-label selection. (b): The side quality statistics of different methods for 300 scenes. The green bars
indicate the number of sides with error less than 0.1, while the
red bars indicate the number of sides with error greater than 0.1.
The recall indicates the proportion of ground-truth that are covered
by the pseudo-labels. The proposed method can effectively select
sides with high quality for model training.

To reduce the high annotation cost associated with fully
supervised 3D object detection methods, semi-supervised
methods [28, 37, 31, 30, 35] that use a combination of few
labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data for model
training have gained increasing attention. Existing semisupervised methods can be broadly divided into two categories: consistency-based methods [37] and pseudo-label
based methods [31, 30, 35]. For consistency-based methods, the core idea is to encourage the prediction on data
with different augmentations to be consistent. For example, SESS [37] adopts the mean-teacher framework and
utilizes three consistency losses between the student and
13814

