This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

INSTA-BNN: Binary Neural Network with INSTAnce-aware Threshold
Changhun Lee1
1
2

Hyungjun Kim2

Eunhyeok Park1

Jae-Joon Kim3

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Korea

SqueezeBits Inc., Seoul, Korea

3

Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea

Abstract
Binary Neural Networks (BNNs) have emerged as a
promising solution for reducing the memory footprint and
compute costs of deep neural networks, but they suffer from quality degradation due to the lack of freedom
as activations and weights are constrained to the binary
values. To compensate for the accuracy drop, we propose a novel BNN design called Binary Neural Network
with INSTAnce-aware threshold (INSTA-BNN), which controls the quantization threshold dynamically in an inputdependent or instance-aware manner. According to our
observation, higher-order statistics can be a representative metric to estimate the characteristics of the input distribution. INSTA-BNN is designed to adjust the threshold dynamically considering various information, including
higher-order statistics, but it is also optimized judiciously
to realize minimal overhead on a real device. Our extensive study shows that INSTA-BNN outperforms the baseline
by 3.0% and 2.8% on the ImageNet classification task with
comparable computing cost, achieving 68.5% and 72.2%
top-1 accuracy on ResNet-18 and MobileNetV1 based models, respectively.

Figure 1. Instance-wise (a) mean, (b) standard deviation, and
(c) skewness of pre-activation from three different instances. The
percentage in each distribution represents the ratio of +1’s in binary activation when sign function is used as activation function
(threshold is 0). When observing one component (e.g. mean (µ)
for the (a) case), the other two (e.g. std (σ), skewness (γ)) are
matched to be as close as possible. The other two values are displayed on the top right of each subgraph.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are well-known for their
abilities across diverse vision tasks, e.g., image classification [7, 13, 26, 27], object detection [14, 15, 24, 25], and semantic segmentation [19, 21]. These DNNs usually achieve
excellent accuracy by using a large model, but the large
model having massive memory usage and computing cost
prevents us from deploying it on mobile devices having insufficient resources. In order to minimize the computation
and memory overhead, network binarization is an appealing optimization because weights and activations are quantized into 1-bit precision domain. Binary Neural Networks
(BNNs) can achieve 32× reduction in memory requirement
compared to their 32-bit floating point counterparts, and
most modern CPUs or GPUs can serve the binary logic operations much faster than 32-bit floating point operations.

However, BNNs usually suffer from accuracy degradation due to the aggressive data quantization. In spite of the
great efficiency of BNN, the accuracy degradation limits the
deployment of BNNs in real-world applications. Therefore,
a large number of techniques have been introduced to minimize the accuracy degradation of BNNs focusing on weight
binarization [22, 23], shortcut connections [17], and threshold optimization [12, 16, 29].
In BNNs, only two values (+1 and −1) are available for
activations. Therefore, the threshold of quantization that decides the mapping to either +1 or −1 plays a critical role in
BNNs. Some of the previous works tried to train the thresholds of the binary activation function to control the activation distributions via back-propagation, where the threshold
is fixed statically after the training [16, 29]. However, one

17325

