This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Eventful Transformers:
Leveraging Temporal Redundancy in Vision Transformers
Matthew Dutson, Yin Li, and Mohit Gupta
University of Wisconsin–Madison
{dutson,yin.li,mgupta37}@wisc.edu

Abstract

Temporal redundancy in vision Transformers
Identify and update tokens
with large changes

Vision Transformers achieve impressive accuracy across
a range of visual recognition tasks. Unfortunately, their
accuracy frequently comes with high computational costs.
This is a particular issue in video recognition, where models are often applied repeatedly across frames or temporal chunks. In this work, we exploit temporal redundancy
between subsequent inputs to reduce the cost of Transformers for video processing. We describe a method for
identifying and re-processing only those tokens that have
changed significantly over time. Our proposed family of
models, Eventful Transformers, can be converted from existing Transformers (often without any re-training) and give
adaptive control over the compute cost at runtime. We evaluate our method on large-scale datasets for video object
detection (ImageNet VID) and action recognition (EPICKitchens 100). Our approach leads to significant computational savings (on the order of 2-4x) with only minor reductions in accuracy.

1. Introduction
Transformers, initially designed for language modeling [57], have been recently explored as an architecture for
vision tasks. Vision Transformers [16] have achieved impressive accuracy across a range of visual recognition problems, attaining state-of-the-art performance in tasks including image classification [16], video classification [1, 2, 18],
and object detection [8, 37, 40, 61].
One of the primary drawbacks of vision Transformers
is their high computational cost. Whereas typical convolutional networks (CNNs) consume tens of GFlops per image [7], vision Transformers often require an order of magnitude more computation, up to hundreds of GFlops per image. In video processing, the large volume of data further
amplifies these costs. High compute costs preclude vision
Transformers from deployment on resource-constrained or
latency-critical devices, limiting the scope of this otherwise

Downstream
Transformer
operations

Efficiency and adaptivity

Predictions

Flush

0

Reduce budget

50

100

Figure 1. Eventful Transformers. Our method exploits temporal
redundancy between subsequent model inputs. (Top) Within each
Transformer block, we identify and update only those tokens with
significant changes over time. Image: [5]. (Bottom) In addition to
improving efficiency, our method gives fine-grained control over
the compute cost at runtime. “Budget” refers to parameter r as
described in Section 4.3. “Flush” refers to the initialization of all
tokens on the first time step. This example shows the ViTDet [37]
object detection model on a video from the VID [54] dataset.

exciting technology. In this paper, we present one of the
first methods to use temporal redundancy between subsequent inputs to reduce the cost of vision Transformers when
applied to video data.
Temporal redundancy. Consider a vision Transformer that
is applied frame-by-frame or clip-by-clip to a video sequence. This Transformer might be a simple frame-wise

16911

