This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Logic-induced Diagnostic Reasoning for Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation
Chen Liang,

Wenguan Wang,

Jiaxu Miao,

Yi Yang*

ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
https://github.com/leonnnop/LogicDiag

(a) Confidence Thresholding

Abstract
Recent advances in semi-supervised semantic segmentation have been heavily reliant on pseudo labeling to compensate for limited labeled data, disregarding the valuable
relational knowledge among semantic concepts. To bridge
this gap, we devise L OGIC D IAG, a brand new neural-logic
semi-supervised learning framework. Our key insight is
that conﬂicts within pseudo labels, identiﬁed through symbolic knowledge, can serve as strong yet commonly ignored
learning signals. L OGIC D IAG resolves such conﬂicts via
reasoning with logic-induced diagnoses, enabling the recovery of (potentially) erroneous pseudo labels, ultimately
alleviating the notorious error accumulation problem. We
showcase the practical application of L OGIC D IAG in the
data-hungry segmentation scenario, where we formalize
the structured abstraction of semantic concepts as a set of
logic rules. Extensive experiments on three standard semisupervised semantic segmentation benchmarks demonstrate
the effectiveness and generality of L OGIC D IAG. Moreover,
L OGIC D IAG highlights the promising opportunities arising
from the systematic integration of symbolic reasoning into
the prevalent statistical, neural learning approaches.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has revolutionized computer vision tasks,
yielding remarkable breakthroughs [1–5]. However, such
advances are often only possible in the presence of large
labeled training datasets, which are challenging to acquire.
Semantic segmentation, in particular, poses difﬁculties due
to the need for pixel-level manual labeling [6–13], which
is time-consuming and labor-intensive, precluding the application of such methods, especially in domains like medical image analysis. To remedy this issue, there has been a
growing interest in semi-supervised semantic segmentation,
which aims to train segmentation models using a combination of limited labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled

Teacher
Model

Student
Model

(b) Logic-induced Diagnostic Reasoning
Teacher
Model

Unlabeled Data
Prediction
Pseudo Label
Optimization

Student
Model

(c) Symbolic Knowledge Base
Animal
Dog

Vehicle
Cat

Animal cannot be Vehicle
∀x Animal(x) → ¬Vehicle(x)

Cat is Animal
∀x Cat(x) → Animal(x)

͘͘͘

Figure 1: Prevalent data-driven pseudo-labeling methods typically
rely on heuristic conﬁdence thresholding (i.e., (a)). We opt to leverage symbolic knowledge in the form of logic rules (i.e., (c)), to
diagnose and resolve potential errors within predictions (i.e., (b)).

data [14–20]. Pseudo labeling [21, 22] constitutes one such
technique, where the unlabeled data is assigned pseudo labels based on model predictions. The model is then iteratively trained using these pseudo labeled data as if they were
labeled examples. Typically, this method is implemented
within the teacher-student framework [17] (Fig. 1 (a)).
Despite its prevalence, the pseudo labeling paradigm,
a statistical learning approach, is commonly perceived as
unreliable, due to the accumulation of erroneous predictions [23]. Previous works [22, 24, 25] have attempted to
mitigate this issue by rejecting pseudo labels with classiﬁcation scores below a heuristic threshold, known as conﬁdence thresholding [22]. However, relying solely on this
strategy often proves unsatisfactory. First, the conﬁrmation
bias that may occur during the early stages of training can
be difﬁcult, if not impossible, to be rectiﬁed in subsequent
learning [26]. Second, the purely data-driven nature of such
threshold-based methods makes them challenging to interpret. Third, to achieve optimal performance, the threshold
must be manually adjusted for each model and dataset, lim-

* Corresponding author: Yi Yang.

16197

