This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SALAD: Part-Level Latent Diffusion for 3D Shape Generation and Manipulation
Juil Koo∗

Seungwoo Yoo∗

Minh Hieu Nguyen∗
KAIST

Minhyuk Sung

{63days,dreamy1534,hieuristics,mhsung}@kaist.ac.kr

Shape A
(a) Shape Generation

Shape B

A→B

A→B
Refined

(b) Part Mixing Refinement

“a chair with
four legs”

“rectangle
back chair”

(c) Text-Guided Part Compeletion

Figure 1: An overview of SALAD. (a) Our cascaded diffusion model trained on part-level 3D representations produces
high-quality 3D shapes of different classees. Although trained for unconditional generation, SALAD hints its zero-shot
capability in various manipulation scenarios, including (b) part mixing and refinement, and (c) text-guided part completion.

Abstract
We present a cascaded diffusion model based on a
part-level implicit 3D representation. Our model achieves
state-of-the-art generation quality and also enables partlevel shape editing and manipulation without any additional training in conditional setup. Diffusion models have
demonstrated impressive capabilities in data generation as
well as zero-shot completion and editing via a guided reverse process. Recent research on 3D diffusion models has
focused on improving their generation capabilities with various data representations, while the absence of structural
information has limited their capability in completion and
editing tasks. We thus propose our novel diffusion model using a part-level implicit representation. To effectively learn
diffusion with high-dimensional embedding vectors of parts,
we propose a cascaded framework, learning diffusion first
on a low-dimensional subspace encoding extrinsic parameters of parts and then on the other high-dimensional subspace encoding intrinsic attributes. In the experiments, we
demonstrate the outperformance of our method compared
with the previous ones both in generation and part-level
completion and manipulation tasks. Our project page is
https://salad3d.github.io.

1. Introduction
The staggering rise of the recent image generative model
such as DALL-E 2 [49], StableDiffusion [50], and Midjourney [34] has drawn great attention to the diffusion mod* Equal contribution.

els. With the state-of-the-art performance in generating
data [12, 19, 50, 49, 34], diffusion models have quickly
replaced existing generative models in many applications.
Besides the quality of the generated data, another key advantage of the diffusion models is the zero-shot capability
in completion and editing. Recent research [10, 30, 32] has
shown that diffusion models trained without any conditions
can be applied to completion and editing tasks by starting
the reverse process from partial data and properly guiding
the process.
Such capabilities of the diffusion models have prompted
attempts to apply them to 3D generation [3, 31, 41, 65, 62,
27, 39, 22], although likewise the other neural 3D generation and reconstruction work, the key challenge in applying
diffusion to 3D is to find an appropriate representation of
3D data. Particularly, to take full advantage of the diffusion
models, both producing realistic data and being leveraged
to editing and manipulation, a careful design of the 3D data
representation is needed. A naive adaption of the 2D image
diffusion models to the 3D voxels is impractical due to the
order of magnitude more computation time and memory.
Hence, the earlier attempt to apply diffusion or score-based
models to 3D (which has also been continued until recently)
was to use point clouds as 3D representation [3, 31, 41], although the fine details of shapes could not be reproduced
since the training computation is still too heavy to increase
the resolution — 2k points are used in training. Later, some
hybrid representations have been explored, such as points
and voxels [65], points and features [62], voxels and features [27], although these were still limited in being trained

14441

