This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MapFormer: Boosting Change Detection by Using Pre-change Information
Maximilian Bernhard, Niklas Strauß, Matthias Schubert
LMU Munich, MCML
{bernhard,strauss,schubert}@dbs.ifi.lmu.de

1. Introduction
Earth observation data has become increasingly available in recent years, providing valuable insights into various fields such as climate research, disaster management,
and urban planning. In the course of this, enormous efforts have been made towards creating rich semantic maps
of the earth. For instance, OpenStreetMap provides vast
amounts of data containing manual annotations around the
globe. In addition, deep learning techniques are nowadays
used to produce semantic map data at a large scale, e.g., [23]

Feature
Processing
Binary Change
Prediction

Change detection in remote sensing imagery is essential
for a variety of applications such as urban planning, disaster management, and climate research. However, existing
methods for identifying semantically changed areas overlook the availability of semantic information in the form
of existing maps describing features of the earth’s surface.
In this paper, we leverage this information for change detection in bi-temporal images. We show that the simple
integration of the additional information via concatenation of latent representations suffices to significantly outperform state-of-the-art change detection methods. Motivated by this observation, we propose the new task of
Conditional Change Detection, where pre-change semantic information is used as input next to bi-temporal images. To fully exploit the extra information, we propose
MapFormer, a novel architecture based on a multi-modal
feature fusion module that allows for feature processing
conditioned on the available semantic information. We
further employ a supervised, cross-modal contrastive loss
to guide the learning of visual representations. Our approach outperforms existing change detection methods by
an absolute 11.7% and 18.4% in terms of binary change
IoU on DynamicEarthNet and HRSCD, respectively. Furthermore, we demonstrate the robustness of our approach
to the quality of the pre-change semantic information and
the absence pre-change imagery. The code is available at
https://github.com/mxbh/mapformer.

Input

Abstract

Conditional Change
Detection (proposed)

MapFormer (ours)

Existing
Change Detection

ChangeFormer

Ground Truth

Figure 1: Advantage of our approach over existing change
detection methods (represented by ChangeFormer [2] here)
on a sample of DynamicEarthNet [26]. Employing semantic pre-change information allows to extract better features
and improves change detection quality.

generated building footprints for the entire African continent. As a result, we live in a world that has been extensively mapped. However, we live in a constantly changing
world where the earth’s surface is subject to various influences. These influences can be natural, e.g., earthquakes,
extreme weather, floods, wildfires, and changes in vegetation, but also directly caused by humans, e.g., building
construction, deforestation, and agriculture. In fact, the impact of civilization on our planet has never been higher than
in recent years, with drastic consequences for ecosystems
and wildlife [9, 24]. Therefore, monitoring changes in the
earth’s surface with up-to-date earth observation data is becoming increasingly important.
In technical terms, this challenge is addressed by the
task of change detection, where bi-temporal images are
compared in order to segment pixels that have semanti-

16837

