This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PHRIT: Parametric Hand Representation with Implicit Template
Zhisheng Huang1† Yujin Chen2† Di Kang3 Jinlu Zhang1 Zhigang Tu1∗
1
Wuhan University 2 Technical University of Munich 3 Tencent AI Lab

Skeleton-driven hand reconstruction

Parametric Mesh
PHRIT

Hand reconstruction from point clouds

Efficient Recon. by deforming a template

Implicit
functions
(SDF,
occupancy)

Recon. with onerous post-processing
Hands independent of resolution

Implicit Representation

Hands with dense correspondence

Single-view hand reconstruction

Applications

Figure 1: We propose a novel hand representation PHRIT, combing advantages of previous methods on hand geometry modeling (namely
parametric mesh and implicit representation). PHRIT can serve as a learned fully differentiable layer driven by input hand skeleton and
shape latent code, making it easily applicable to downstream tasks.

Abstract
We propose PHRIT, a novel approach for parametric
hand mesh modeling with an implicit template that combines the advantages of both parametric meshes and implicit representations. Our method represents deformable
hand shapes using signed distance fields (SDFs) with partbased shape priors, utilizing a deformation field to execute the deformation. The model offers efficient high-fidelity
hand reconstruction by deforming the canonical template at
infinite resolution. Additionally, it is fully differentiable and
can be easily used in hand modeling since it can be driven
by the skeleton and shape latent codes. We evaluate PHRIT
on multiple downstream tasks, including skeleton-driven
hand reconstruction, shapes from point clouds, and singleview 3D reconstruction, demonstrating that our approach
achieves realistic and immersive hand modeling with stateof-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
The human hand plays a vital role in communication and
interaction, making high-fidelity hand modeling crucial for
† Equal contributions.
∗ Corresponding author.

immersive applications, especially in the era of digital twins
and metaverses. High-fidelity hand modeling can facilitate
immersive applications such as virtual meetings and video
games. However, to drive these real-time applications, it’s
essential to achieve realistic reconstruction results, ensure
stable cross-user generalization, and optimize the reconstruction process for efficiency.
Previous research on hand geometry modeling can be
divided into two broad categories: parametric meshes and
implicit representations. Parametric meshes rely on a predefined mesh template that is deformed to match posed
hands [32, 44, 61]. While this approach is efficient and
provides useful dense correspondence between the reconstructed hand and the canonical template [21, 60], it requires careful supervision to learn the deformation of each
vertex. This can be difficult and expensive, as noted in [32].
This challenge has led previous work to either sacrifice resolution [61] or resort to leveraging weak supervisions [44],
which may limit the model’s generalization to personalized
settings. In contrast, recent implicit representations [13, 26]
take a different approach to hand geometry modeling by focusing on the continuous representation of static shapes. By
learning implicit functions such as signed distance and occupancy fields, they can represent high-fidelity, resolution-

14974

