This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Decision-based Black-box Patch Attacks on Video Recognition
Kaixun Jiang1 * Zhaoyu Chen1 * Hao Huang1 Jiafeng Wang2
Dingkang Yang1 Bo Li3 Yan Wang1† Wenqiang Zhang1,2†
1
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University 3 vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd.
kxjiang22@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zhaoyuchen20, yanwang19, wqzhang}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Although Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated excellent performance, they are vulnerable to adversarial patches that introduce perceptible and localized
perturbations to the input. Generating adversarial patches
on images has received much attention, while adversarial
patches on videos have not been well investigated. Further,
decision-based attacks, where attackers only access the predicted hard labels by querying threat models, have not been
well explored on video models either, even if they are practical in real-world video recognition scenes. The absence of
such studies leads to a huge gap in the robustness assessment for video models. To bridge this gap, this work first
explores decision-based patch attacks on video models. We
analyze that the huge parameter space brought by videos
and the minimal information returned by decision-based
models both greatly increase the attack difficulty and query
burden. To achieve a query-efficient attack, we propose a
spatial-temporal differential evolution (STDE) framework.
First, STDE introduces target videos as patch textures and
only adds patches on keyframes that are adaptively selected
by temporal difference. Second, STDE takes minimizing the
patch area as the optimization objective and adopts spatialtemporal mutation and crossover to search for the global
optimum without falling into the local optimum. Experiments show STDE has demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in terms of threat, efficiency and imperceptibility.
Hence, STDE has the potential to be a powerful tool for
evaluating the robustness of video recognition models.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have showcased excellent efficacy in computer vision tasks [12, 47, 46, 25, 24, 6].
However, recent studies indicate they are vulnerable to ad* indicates equal contributions.
† indicates corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Given a source video and target video, STDE iteratively
optimizes adversarial patches while requiring few queries. Compared to BSCA [4], STDE can achieve more potent attacks (e.g.
targeted attacks) and generate smaller and sparser patches to improve the imperceptibility.

versarial examples, which are carefully crafted inputs with
imperceptible adversarial perturbations. When facing adversarial examples [34], DNNs predict wrong outputs with
high confidence, posing serious security threats. Most
studies of adversarial examples focus on the image models [20, 14]. Wei et al. [39] indicate that the vulnerability
also exists on video models. This vulnerability brings security threats on video-related tasks, such as object tracking [22, 23], video action recognition [19], etc. Therefore,
it is indispensable to conduct thorough research on video
adversarial examples for constructing more secure models.
Early studies of adversarial examples are concerned with
perturbation-based attacks on image models [34, 20, 26, 2],
where attackers add small lp norm perturbations to each
pixel of inputs. Recently, researchers have found that
patch attacks, where attackers add regional and perceptible patches on inputs, pose a significant threat to DNNs.
Further, many defense methods that are effective against
perturbation-based attacks turn ineffective against patch at-

4379

