This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning A Room with the Occ-SDF Hybrid:
Signed Distance Function Mingled with Occupancy Aids Scene Representation
Xiaoyang Lyu1 , Peng Dai1 , Zizhang Li2 , Dongyu Yan3 , Yi Lin4 , Yifan Peng1 , Xiaojuan Qi1 ,
1

The University of Hong Kong , 2 Zhejiang University, 3 Harbin Institute of Technology, 4 DJI

Detailed
Structures

Volume Density

Implicit Neural
Representation

Occupancy

Low
Intensities
RGB Data

SDF

SDF + Geometry Priors

Ours

Figure 1. Overview and reconstruction results of the Occ-SDF hybrid neural scene representation. Aided with the feature rendering
scheme (Sec. 4) and the hybrid representation (Sec. 5), our method yields results with more detailed structures in room-level scenes
compared to the state-of-the-art, particularly for those low intensities and detailed structures.

Abstract

object is present. Accordingly, we explore using the occupancy representation, which encodes each point separately
and is unaffected by objects along a querying ray. Our experimental results demonstrate that the joint forces of the
feature-based rendering loss and Occ-SDF hybrid representation scheme can provide high-quality reconstruction
results, especially in challenging room-level scenarios. The
code is available at https://github.com/shawLyu/Occ-SDFHybrid

Implicit neural rendering, using signed distance function
(SDF) representation with geometric priors like depth or
surface normal, has made impressive strides in the surface
reconstruction of large-scale scenes. However, applying
this method to reconstruct a room-level scene from images
may miss structures in low-intensity areas and/or small, thin
objects. We have conducted experiments on three datasets
to identify limitations of the original color rendering loss
and priors-embedded SDF scene representation.

1. Introduction

Our ﬁndings show that the color rendering loss creates
an optimization bias against low-intensity areas, resulting
in gradient vanishing and leaving these areas unoptimized.
To address this issue, we propose a feature-based color rendering loss that utilizes non-zero feature values to bring
back optimization signals. Additionally, the SDF representation can be inﬂuenced by objects along a ray path, disrupting the monotonic change of SDF values when a single

Reconstructing a 3D scene from a series of multi-view
images is a crucial problem in the realm of computer vision. This process has widespread applications in various
ﬁelds such as animation, gaming, and virtual/augmented reality (VR/AR). The recent trend is to represent a 3D scene
as an implicit function parameterized by a neural network
[13, 19, 26, 21], whose optimization is supervised by ex1
8940

