This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bootstrap Motion Forecasting With Self-Consistent Constraints
Maosheng Ye1 ,* Jiamiao Xu2 , Xunnong Xu2 , Tengfei Wang1 , Tongyi Cao2 , Qifeng Chen1
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Abstract

We present a novel framework to bootstrap Motion forecastIng with Self-consistent Constraints (MISC). The motion forecasting task aims at predicting future trajectories
of vehicles by incorporating spatial and temporal information from the past. A key design of MISC is the proposed
Dual Consistency Constraints that regularize the predicted
trajectories under spatial and temporal perturbation during
training. Also, to model the multi-modality in motion forecasting, we design a novel self-ensembling scheme to obtain
accurate teacher targets to enforce the self-constraints with
multi-modality supervision. With explicit constraints from
multiple teacher targets, we observe a clear improvement
in the prediction performance. Extensive experiments on
the Argoverse motion forecasting benchmark and Waymo
Open Motion dataset show that MISC signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. As the proposed strategies are general and can be easily incorporated into other
motion forecasting approaches, we also demonstrate that
our proposed scheme consistently improves the prediction
performance of several existing methods.

1. Introduction
Motion forecasting has been a crucial task for selfdriving vehicles that aims at predicting the future trajectories of agents (e.g., cars, pedestrians) involved in trafﬁc. The predicted trajectories can further help self-driving
vehicles plan their future actions and avoid potential accidents. Since the future is not deterministic, motion forecasting is intrinsically a multi-modal problem with substantial
uncertainties. This implies that an ideal motion forecasting
method should produce a distribution of future trajectories
or at least multiple most likely ones.
Due to the inherent uncertainty, motion forecasting remains challenging and unsolved yet. Recently, researchers
have proposed different architectures based on various representations to encode the kinematic states and context information from HDMap in order to generate feasible multi* Work done during an internship at DeepRoute.AI.

2

DeepRoute.AI

modal trajectories [2, 7, 15, 18, 28, 29, 36, 51, 55, 56, 58].
These methods follow a traditional static training pipeline,
where frames of each scenario are split into historical
frames (input) and future frames (ground truth) in a ﬁxed
pattern. Nevertheless, the prediction task is a streaming
task in real-world applications, where the current state will
become a historical state as time goes by, and the buffer
of the historical state is a queue structure to make successive predicted trajectories. As a result, temporal consistency thus becomes a crucial requirement for the downstream tasks for fault and noise tolerance. To tackle this
issue, trajectory stitching is widely applied in traditional
planning algorithms [13] to ensure stability along the temporal horizon. However, as the trajectory stitching operation is non-differentiable, it cannot be easily incorporated
into learning-based models. Though deep-learning-based
models show unprecedented motion prediction performance
compared with traditional counterparts, they do not explicitly consider temporal consistency, leading to unstable behaviors in downstream tasks such as planning.
Inspired by these phenomena, we raise a question: can
we explicitly enforce consistency when training a deep motion prediction model? On the one hand, the predicted trajectories should be consistent given the successive inputs
along the temporal horizon, namely temporal consistency.
On the other hand, the predicted trajectories should be stable and robust against small spatial noise or disturbance,
namely spatial consistency. In this work, we propose a
self-supervised scheme, named as MISC, to enforce consistency constraints in both spatial and temporal domains,
namely Dual Consistency Constraints. Dual Consistency
Constraints could be viewed as an inner-model consistency
and can signiﬁcantly improve the quality and robustness of
motion forecasting, without the need for extra data.
On top of the inner-model consistency, we also exploit
the intra-model consistency. Multi-modality is another
core characteristic of the motion prediction task. Existing
datasets [9, 49] only provide a single ground-truth trajectory
for each scenario, which can not satisfy multi-choice situations such as junction scenarios. Most methods adopt the
winner-takes-all (WTA) [26] or its variants [4, 35] to alleviate this situation. However, WTA tends to produce confused

8504

