This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Editing Implicit Assumptions in Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Hadas Orgad∗
Bahjat Kawar∗
Yonatan Belinkov†
Computer Science Faculty, Technion, Israel
{orgad.hadas@cs., bahjat.kawar@cs., belinkov@}technion.ac.il

Edit “A pack of roses” into “A pack of blue roses”

“A field of roses”

“A vase of roses”

“A poppy field”

Edit “A dog” into “A Poodle dog”

“A photo of a dog in a pool”

“A puppy”

“A Rottweiler dog”

Figure 1: TIME edits implicit assumptions in a model (e.g., roses are red). As a result, related prompts (green) change their
behavior, while unrelated ones (gray) do not. For example, after model editing, the roses in “A ﬁeld of roses” become blue.

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models often make implicit assumptions about the world when generating images. While
some assumptions are useful (e.g., the sky is blue), they can
also be outdated, incorrect, or reﬂective of social biases
present in the training data. Thus, there is a need to control these assumptions without requiring explicit user input
or costly re-training. In this work, we aim to edit a given
implicit assumption in a pre-trained diffusion model. Our
Text-to-Image Model Editing method, TIME for short, receives a pair of inputs: a “source” under-speciﬁed prompt
for which the model makes an implicit assumption (e.g., “a
pack of roses”), and a “destination” prompt that describes
the same setting, but with a speciﬁed desired attribute (e.g.,
“a pack of blue roses”). TIME then updates the model’s
cross-attention layers, as these layers assign visual meaning to textual tokens. We edit the projection matrices in
these layers such that the source prompt is projected close
to the destination prompt. Our method is highly efﬁcient, as
∗ Equal contribution.

it modiﬁes a mere 2.2% of the model’s parameters in under
one second. To evaluate model editing approaches, we introduce TIMED (TIME Dataset), containing 147 source and
destination prompt pairs from various domains. Our experiments (using Stable Diffusion) show that TIME is successful in model editing, generalizes well for related prompts
unseen during editing, and imposes minimal effect on unrelated generations.1

1. Introduction
Text-to-image generative models have recently risen to
prominence, achieving unprecedented success and popularity [54, 52, 57, 2]. The generation of high quality images
based on simple textual prompts has been enabled by generative diffusion models [63, 64, 24] and large language
models [51, 50]. These text-to-image models are trained on
huge amounts of web-scraped image-caption pairs [61]. As
a result, the models acquire implicit assumptions about the
world based on correlations and biases found in the training
data. This knowledge manifests during generation as visual
associations to textual concepts.
Such implicit assumptions may be useful in general. For

† Supported by the Viterbi Fellowship in the Center for Computer Engineering at the Technion.

1 https://time-diffusion.github.io/

7053

