This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Effective Real Image Editing with Accelerated Iterative Diffusion Inversion
Zhihong Pan Riccardo Gherardi Xiufeng Xie Stephen Huang
Oppo Mobile Telecommunications Corp.
2479 E Bayshore Rd, Palo Alto, CA, USA

Abstract

ing the number of sampling steps for both image generation
or editing is still nevertheless an open research problem.

Despite all recent progress, it is still challenging to edit and
manipulate natural images with modern generative models.
When using Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), one
major hurdle is in the inversion process mapping a real image to its corresponding noise vector in the latent space,
since it is necessary to be able to reconstruct an image to
edit its contents. Likewise for Denoising Diffusion Implicit
Models (DDIM), the linearization assumption in each inversion step makes the whole deterministic inversion process
unreliable. Existing approaches that have tackled the problem of inversion stability often incur in significant tradeoffs in computational efficiency. In this work we propose an
Accelerated Iterative Diffusion Inversion method, dubbed
AIDI, that significantly improves reconstruction accuracy
with minimal additional overhead in space and time complexity. By using a novel blended guidance technique, we
show that effective results can be obtained on a large range
of image editing tasks without large classifier-free guidance
in inversion. Furthermore, when compared with other diffusion inversion based works, our proposed process is shown
to be more robust for fast image editing in the 10 and 20
diffusion steps’ regimes.

Diffusion models were initially designed for image generation; for this reason, their usefulness for real image editing is limited without a proper inversion process, similar to
the inversion challenge [46] faced by real image editing using a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [17]. GAN
inversion is limited by the reduced dimensionality in latent
space; diffusion inversion is comparably less restricted as
the latent space has the same dimensionality as the original image. Naı̈ve one-step inversion step, i.e. simply perturbing an image with random noise, was initially used for
early image editing works such as SDEdit [31] and Blended
Diffusion [6]. Later, an Euler method based inversion process that applies deterministic step-by-step noise injection
was used for image-to-image translation in DDIB [43] and
DiffusionCLIP [27]. However, as shown in the text-guided
image editing tests in Prompt-to-Prompt (PTP) [19], such
inversion is not reliable for real image editing because the
inversion often leads to failed reconstruction even when no
editing is performed. Follow-up works like null-text inversion (NTI) [32] and exact diffusion inversion (EDICT) [45]
have focused on improving the reconstruction accuracy by
introducing auxiliary variables like the learned null-text embedding in NTI, or processes like the coupled diffusion process in EDICT. The reconstruction accuracy improvements
come however with regressions in computational complexity of the inversion and/or the editing processes.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models are a class of generative models that learn
to generate high-quality images by iteratively applying a denoising process from a random noisy starting point. They
are capable to achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) image quality since the very early stage of denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM) [21] and score-based generative
modeling [42]. While the number of sampling steps required for high quality image generation was initially very
large, several follow-up studies [34, 7, 29, 30] have reduced
significantly the number of steps without degrading the image quality, making the widespread use of diffusion models
possible. In particular, denoising diffusion implicit models
(DDIM) [41] are widely used for their speed and flexibility
in deterministic and stochastic generations. Further reduc-

In this paper, we are the first to look beyond the simple
inversion process that is based on the Euler method and investigate a better numerical solver for improved inversion
stability. Modeling the inversion process as an ordinary differential equation (ODE) problem, the implicit backward
Euler method is well suited as its solution results in an exact reconstruction using Euler’s method, assuming the same
time steps are used. Given that, we propose an Accelerated Iterative Diffusion Iteration (AIDI) method that adopts
a fixed-point iteration process for each inversion step. Combined with Anderson acceleration [5] method which helps
convergence of this iteration, it is demonstrated through experiments of large test set that it results in significantly im-

15912

