This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Semantic Segmentation from the Perspective of
Explicit Class Embeddings
Yuhe Liu1,2 *
1

Chuanjian Liu2

Beihang University

2

Kai Han2†

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

{liuyuhe, zcqin}@buaa.edu.cn

Quan Tang3
3

Zengchang Qin1†

South China University of Technology

{liuchuanjian, kai.han}@huawei.com

csquantang@mail.scut.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer vision, which aims to predict the corresponding
classes for each pixel of the input image. Typically, pixels that share common semantic categories are aggregated
together to form regions on each slice of predicted masks,
* Work done during an internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
† Corresponding author.

…

Per-slice Masks

Divide
Bins

…

Adaptive

FC

Pooling

…

Semantic segmentation is a computer vision task that
associates a label with each pixel in an image. Modern
approaches tend to introduce class embeddings into semantic segmentation for deeply utilizing category semantics, and regard supervised class masks as final predictions.
In this paper, we explore the mechanism of class embeddings and have an insight that more explicit and meaningful class embeddings can be generated based on class
masks purposely. Following this observation, we propose
ECENet, a new segmentation paradigm, in which class embeddings are obtained and enhanced explicitly during interacting with multi-stage image features. Based on this,
we revisit the traditional decoding process and explore inverted information flow between segmentation masks and
class embeddings. Furthermore, to ensure the discriminability and informativity of features from backbone, we
propose a Feature Reconstruction module, which combines
intrinsic and diverse branches together to ensure the concurrence of diversity and redundancy in features. Experiments show that our ECENet outperforms its counterparts on the ADE20K dataset with much less computational
cost and achieves new state-of-the-art results on PASCALContext dataset. The code will be released at https:
//gitee.com/mindspore/models and https://
github.com/Carol-lyh/ECENet.

…

N×M

N×C

N×H×W

Figure 1. Explicit Class Extraction module. Each slice of predicted
masks naturally presents what the model has learned on this category. By extracting class information into embeddings, we allow
the information flow reversely and obtain the explicit class embeddings upon spatial prior knowledge on each region.

which naturally presents the description of each category
the model has learned.
Traditional semantic segmentation methods are dominated by Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN) [33] based
models. With stacked convolutional layers, the semantics
in input images are gradually extracted. The 1 × 1 convolutional layer, which serves as semantic kernels, is usually applied to the representative feature maps in the end.
Previous works [4, 5, 16, 30] focus on enlarging receptive
filed [28, 4, 5], integrating attention modules [16, 51, 24] or
fusing multi-stage features [34, 30, 27]. However, the CNN
architectures are lack of long-range dependencies, which
hinders the performances of FCNs.
Recently, transformer [43] using self-attention mechanism is introduced into the field of computer vision.
Inspired by Vision Transformer (ViT) [13] and Segmenter [40], class tokens/embeddings have aroused the interest of many researchers [29, 10, 9, 56]. Generally, class
embeddings are randomly initialized and passed into the
decoder to interact with feature maps, then it would be used
to get final segmentation masks [10, 9]. However, the class
embeddings here are defined implicit and meaningless initially, which means that much spatial prior knowledge is
ignored and lost.

821

