This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SIRA-PCR: Sim-to-Real Adaptation for 3D Point Cloud Registration
Suyi Chen1,4 * Hao Xu2 * Ru Li3

Guanghui Liu1† Chi-Wing Fu2

Shuaicheng Liu1,4†

1

2

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Harbin Institute of Technology
Megvii Technology

Abstract
Point cloud registration is essential for many applications. However, existing real datasets require extremely
tedious and costly annotations, yet may not provide accurate camera poses. For the synthetic datasets, they are
mainly object- level, so the trained models may not generalize well to real scenes. We design SIRA- PCR, a new
approach to 3D point cloud registration. First, we build
a synthetic scene- level 3D registration dataset, specifically
designed with physically- based and random strategies to
arrange diverse objects. Second, we account for variations in different sensing mechanisms and layout placements, then formulate a sim- to- real adaptation framework
with an adaptive re- sample module to simulate patterns in
real point clouds. To our best knowledge, this is the first
work that explores sim- to- real adaptation for point cloud
registration. Extensive experiments show the SOTA performance of SIRA- PCR on widely- used indoor and outdoor datasets. The code and dataset will be released on
https://github.com/Chen- Suyi/SIRA_Pytorch.

1. Introduction
3D point cloud registration is a fundamental task, receiving incredible attention from both the industry and
academia, due to its wide applications in robotics [19, 42,
39], graphics [85], computer vision [14, 27], etc. Given a
partially overlapping point cloud pair, the algorithm is required to predict a 3D rigid transformation to align them.
Recent data-driven deep-learning-based methods have
attained remarkable success in indoor scenarios [6, 12,
13, 29, 80, 79]. To support the training, commonly-used
datasets can be divided into two categories: (i) object
level, e.g., ModelNet40 [70] and ShapeNet [10], and (ii)
indoor-scene level, e.g., 3DMatch [81]. However, the model
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.
2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering; Institute of Medical Intelligence and XR (IMIXR).

Figure 1. We construct the first large-scale scene-level synthetic
dataset for point cloud registration, called FlyingShapes, by inserting objects into simple indoor scenes through physically-based
and random strategies. Then, a generative-based pipeline, named
SIRA, is designed for sim-to-real adaptation. Qualitative results
show the performance improvement of our approach.

trained on the synthetic object-level dataset can hardly generalize to real-world indoor scenarios, since the object data
has strong shape priors while the geometric structures in indoor scenes are much more complex and diverse. Though
directly adopting real-captured datasets can produce satisfying performance, collecting a large amount of data is
highly time-consuming. Also, obtaining accurate groundtruth labels is expensive, since the estimated camera poses
are prone to errors, so human annotations are needed.
A straightforward avenue to overcome such data scarcity
is to utilize simulation data, in which both the data collection and annotation can be done automatically. To leverage
existing synthetic 3D indoor scene-level datasets to form
the training data for point cloud registration, there are multiple options, e.g., SUNCG [60], OpenRooms [40], Structured3D [84], and 3D-FRONT [21]. Specifically, SUNCG
has left an apparent void in the community. OpenRooms
and Structured3D mainly aim to provide photo-realistic

14394

