This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spectrum-guided Multi-granularity Referring Video Object Segmentation
Bo Miao1 , Mohammed Bennamoun1 , Yongsheng Gao2 , Ajmal Mian1
1

The University of Western Australia

Abstract

2

Grifﬁth University

ௗ
(a) Previous: decode-and-segment w/ decoded features ‫ܨ‬௩௟

t-SNE Visualization

Current referring video object segmentation (R-VOS)
techniques extract conditional kernels from encoded (lowresolution) vision-language features to segment the decoded
high-resolution features. We discovered that this causes signiﬁcant feature drift, which the segmentation kernels struggle to perceive during the forward computation. This negatively affects the ability of segmentation kernels. To address
the drift problem, we propose a Spectrum-guided Multigranularity (SgMg) approach, which performs direct segmentation on the encoded features and employs visual details to further optimize the masks. In addition, we propose Spectrum-guided Cross-modal Fusion (SCF) to perform intra-frame global interactions in the spectral domain
for effective multimodal representation. Finally, we extend SgMg to perform multi-object R-VOS, a new paradigm
that enables simultaneous segmentation of multiple referred
objects in a video. This not only makes R-VOS faster,
but also more practical. Extensive experiments show that
SgMg achieves state-of-the-art performance on four video
benchmark datasets, outperforming the nearest competitor
by 2.8% points on Ref-YouTube-VOS. Our extended SgMg
enables multi-object R-VOS, runs about 3× faster while
maintaining satisfactory performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/bo-miao/SgMg.

Decode

‫ܨ‬௩௟
ௗ
‫ܨ‬௩௟

ௗ
‫ܨ‬௩௟

Feature Drift
Upsampling

Fusion
‫ܨ‬௩௟

‫ܯ‬ொ

‫ܭ‬௖

ܳ

a turtle to the bottom left

(b) SgMg (Ours): segment-and-optimize w/ encoded features ‫ܨ‬௩௟

‫ܭ‬௖௣
Fusion
‫ܨ‬௩௟
a turtle to the bottom left

Multi-Granularity
Optimization

ܳ

‫ܯ‬ொ
Conditional Segmentation

ௗ
Fusion: Cross-modal Fusion ‫ܨ‬௩௟ : Encoded Vision-Language Features ‫ܨ‬௩௟
: Decoded Features
Q: Instance Query ‫ܭ‬௖ : Conditional Kernel ‫ܭ‬௖௣ : Conditional Patch Kernel ‫ܯ‬ொ : Predicted Mask

Figure 1. (a) Previous methods [4, 57] apply segmentation kernels Kc [50], extracted from encoded features Fvl , to segment the
d
decoded high-resolution features Fvl
. (b) We use segmentation
kernels Kcp , extracted from encoded features Fvl , to segment the
encoded features Fvl directly, and propose multi-granularity optimization to recover visual details and produce ﬁne-grained masks.

using convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However,
the limited ability of CNNs to capture long-range dependencies and handle free-form features constrains the model
performance. With the advancement of attention mechanisms [52, 43, 15, 16, 58], recent methods achieved signiﬁcant improvement on R-VOS using cross-attention [49, 23,
27] for multimodal understanding and transformers [6, 56]
for spatio-temporal representation. Based on transformers,
conditional kernel [50] is then introduced to separate foreground from semantic features given its high adaptability
to different instances [4, 57]. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a),
these methods attend to encoded vision-language features
Fvl using instance queries Q to predict conditional kernels
Kc , and employ Kc as the segmentation head to segment
d
. Despite the promising performance,
decoded features Fvl

1. Introduction
Referring video object segmentation (R-VOS) aims at
segmenting objects in a video, referred to by linguistic descriptions. R-VOS is an emerging task for multimodal reasoning and promotes a wide range of applications, including
language-guided video editing and human-machine interaction. Different from conventional semi-supervised video
object segmentation [44, 7, 41], where the mask annotation
for the ﬁrst frame is provided for reference, R-VOS is more
challenging due to the need for cross-modal understanding
between vision and free-form language expressions.
Early R-VOS techniques [2, 21, 61] perform feature encoding, cross-modal interaction, and language grounding
920

