This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Latent Space of Stochastic Diffusion Models for
Zero-Shot Image Editing and Guidance
Chen Henry Wu, Fernando De la Torre
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{chenwu2,ftorre}@cs.cmu.edu
(3) Plug-and-play guidance

(1) Unpaired image-to-image translation

asses
eyegl
cat DDPM

face DDPM

&

&

dog DDPM

CLIP

old

(3) Zero-shot image editing
Car

➙ Convertible car

➙

➙

Horse
Elephant

➙

Boy
with
Christmas hat

One apple
Two apples

text-to-image DDPM

Female

➙ Male

Statues
Elephants

➙

Figure 1: We define a new latent space for stochastic diffusion probabilistic models. This latent space allows us to perform:
(1) Unpaired image-to-image translation with two diffusion models pre-trained independently (e.g., cat and dog). In this
case, we can transfer the texture characteristics from an image of a cat to the model of a dog in an unsupervised fashion. (2)
zero-shot image editing with a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model. In this case, we can edit images with text prompts.
(3) Plug-and-play guidance of a pre-trained diffusion model with off-the-shelf image understanding models such as CLIP. In
this case, we are able to sub-sample a generative model of faces guided by attributes like “eyeglasses” or “old”.

Abstract
Diffusion models generate images by iterative denoising.
Recent work has shown that by making the denoising process deterministic, one can encode real images into latent
codes of the same size, which can be used for image editing. This paper explores the possibility of defining a latent
space even when the denoising process remains stochastic.
Recall that, in stochastic diffusion models, Gaussian noises
are added in each denoising step, and we can concatenate
all the noises to form a latent code. This results in a latent

space of much higher dimensionality than the original image.
We demonstrate that this latent space of stochastic diffusion
models can be used in the same way as that of deterministic diffusion models in two applications. First, we propose
CycleDiffusion, a method for zero-shot and unpaired image
editing using stochastic diffusion models, which improves
the performance over its deterministic counterpart. Second,
we demonstrate unified, plug-and-play guidance in the latent
spaces of deterministic and stochastic diffusion models.1
1 The code is available at humansensinglab/cycle-diffusion.

17378

