This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ClimateNeRF: Extreme Weather Synthesis in Neural Radiance Field

Original

Flood

Snow

View 1

View 2

Novel views

Climate events

Yuan Li1,2∗ Zhi-Hao Lin1∗ David Forsyth1 Jia-Bin Huang3 Shenlong Wang1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Zhejiang University
3
University of Maryland, College Park

Figure 1: Extreme weather synthesis. We fuse NeRF modeling and physical simulation to produce 3D consistent renderings
of scenes with simulated physical effects. We apply our method to climate effect simulation: what will it look like if the
playground floods? or is covered in snow? Note in particular reflections and ripple effects on water; accumulated snow on
horizontal surfaces; trees darkened by wintertime; and consistency of geometry (but not ripples!). Project page

Abstract
Physical simulations produce excellent predictions of
weather effects. Neural radiance fields produce SOTA scene
models. We describe a novel NeRF-editing procedure that
can fuse physical simulations with NeRF models of scenes,
producing realistic movies of physical phenomena in those
scenes. Our application – Climate NeRF – allows people to
visualize what climate change outcomes will do to them.
ClimateNeRF allows us to render realistic weather effects, including smog, snow, and flood. Results can be controlled with physically meaningful variables like water level.
Qualitative and quantitative studies show that our simulated
results are significantly more realistic than those from SOTA
2D image editing and SOTA 3D NeRF stylization.
* Both authors contributed equally to this research.

1. Introduction
This paper describes a novel procedure that fuses graphic
simulations with NeRF models [50, 51] of scenes to produce realistic movies of physical phenomena in those scenes.
We apply our method to produce compelling simulations
of possible extreme weather outcomes – what would the
playground look like after a minor flood? a major flood? a
blizzard?
Our application is aimed at an important problem. Cumulative small changes are hard to reason about, and most
people find it difficult to visualize what climate change outcomes will do to them [9, 23, 26, 37]. Steps to slow CO2
emissions (say, reducing fossil fuel use) or to moderate outcomes (say, building flood control measures) come with
immediate costs and distant benefits. It is hard to support
such steps if one can’t visualize their effects.
Traditional graphic simulations can produce realistic

3227

