This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leaping Into Memories: Space-Time Deep Feature Synthesis
Alexandros Stergiou
Nikos Deligiannis
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium & imec, Belgium
<first>.<last>@vub.be

...
...

...
...
...

...

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed LEAPS model inversion. Given a video input x∗ initialized with noise, we use
a stimulus video v of target class y, to prime video model Φ(·). We iteratively optimize x∗ to synthesize and visually
represent the internal spatiotemporal features of Φ(·). To impose diversity over the synthesized videos, feature statistics
from a domain-specific verifier network S(·) are distilled to regularize x∗ . To preserve the continuity of motions across
frames, x∗ is temporally regularized at each training iteration. Although the illustration visualizes internal representations as
C ×T ×H ×W volumes, they can also be flattened patches CP 3 × T PHW
of P 3 resolution as in Vision Transformers.
3

Abstract
The success of deep learning models has led to their
adaptation and adoption by prominent video understanding
methods. The majority of these approaches encode features
in a joint space-time modality for which the inner workings and learned representations are difficult to visually
interpret. We propose LEArned Preconscious Synthesis
(LEAPS), an architecture-independent method for synthesizing videos from the internal spatiotemporal representations of models. Using a stimulus video and a target class,
we prime a fixed space-time model and iteratively optimize
a video initialized with random noise. Additional regularizers are used to improve the feature diversity of the synthesized videos alongside the cross-frame temporal coherence
of motions. We quantitatively and qualitatively evaluate the
applicability of LEAPS by inverting a range of spatiotemporal convolutional and attention-based architectures trained
on Kinetics-400, which to the best of our knowledge has not
been previously accomplished. 1

1 See alexandrosstergiou/LEAPS for video examples and code.

1. Introduction
Inverting deep networks’ learned internal representations
has been a difficult task to achieve. The adaptation and deployment of CNNs and more recently Transformers, to a
variety of vision tasks has led to significant breakthroughs.
The field of video action recognition has experienced drastic growth in recent years through the convergence of models with increased complexities and capacities [2, 4, 32, 63]
as well as large accuracy improvements [11, 12, 27, 26, 29].
Despite great progress in their applicability, there is still a
large gap in the interpretability of video models. As these
models compositionally encode space and time modalities
of videos over large feature spaces and require a lot of parameters, conceptualizing their internal representations remains challenging. In this paper, we propose a method to
invert learned features of video models associated with specific actions by optimizing a parameterized input to synthesize conceptually and visually coherent representations.
In cognitive science, stages of consciousness include the
conscious, the unconscious, and the preconscious. In contrast to the conscious and unconscious, the preconscious is
11966

