This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Human-Inspired Facial Sketch Synthesis with Dynamic Adaptation
Fei Gao1 , Yifan Zhu2 , Chang Jiang2 , Nannan Wang3∗
1
Hangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University 2 Hangzhou Dianzi University 3 Xidian University
fgao@xidian.edu.cn, 2961695289@qq.com, jc233@hdu.edu.cn, nnwang@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Facial sketch synthesis (FSS) aims to generate a vivid
sketch portrait from a given facial photo. Existing FSS
methods merely rely on 2D representations of facial semantic or appearance. However, professional human artists
usually use outlines or shadings to covey 3D geometry.
Thus facial 3D geometry (e.g. depth map) is extremely important for FSS. Besides, different artists may use diverse
drawing techniques and create multiple styles of sketches;
but the style is globally consistent in a sketch. Inspired
by such observations, in this paper, we propose a novel
Human-Inspired Dynamic Adaptation (HIDA) method. Specially, we propose to dynamically modulate neuron activations based on a joint consideration of both facial 3D
geometry and 2D appearance, as well as globally consistent style control. Besides, we use deformable convolutions
at coarse-scales to align deep features, for generating abstract and distinct outlines. Experiments show that HIDA
can generate high-quality sketches in multiple styles, and
significantly outperforms previous methods, over a large
range of challenging faces. Besides, HIDA allows precise style control of the synthesized sketch, and generalizes well to natural scenes and other artistic styles. Our
code and results have been released online at: https:
//github.com/AiArt-HDU/HIDA.

1. Introduction
Making computers create arts like human beings, is a
longstanding and challenging topic, in the artificial intelligence (AI) area [2]. To this end, researchers have made
great efforts and proposed numerous methods, such as neural style transfer (NST) [17] and image-to-image translation
(I2IT) [18, 46]. These methods mainly tackle cluttered image styles, such as oil paintings [17]. In this paper, we are
interested in creating artistic sketches from facial photos,
which is referred to as face sketch synthesis (FSS) [34].
For now, there has been significant progress in FSS

Style1

Style2

Style3
Input Photo

Depth

Sketh (by Artist)

Ours(Style1)

Ours(Style2)

Ours(Style3)

Figure 1: Illustration of facial photos, depth maps, multistyle facial sketches drawn by human artists [8], and the
corresponding results synthesized by our method.
Input Photo

Depth

inspired by the excellent success of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [18]. Specially, researchers
have proposed various techniques, including embedding
image prior [43], semi-supervised learning [5], selfattention/transformer based methods [11, 47, 9], hierarchical GANs [28, 40, 8], composition assistance [37], and semantic adaptive normalization [21], to boost the quality of
synthesized sketches. However, all these methods merely
use 2D appearance or semantic representations of the input
photo. They may fail to handle serious variations in appearance, such as the pose, lighting, expression, and skin color.
To tackle this challenge, we propose a novel method, inspired by how human artists draw a sketch. We observe that
facial 3D geometry plays a significant role in human artists’
drawing process. Besides, a professional human artist considers comprehensive information, including facial 3D geometry, 2D appearance, and the artistic style, to execute a
sketch portrait. We summarize the drawing methodologies
of human artists [22] into the following four folds:
• Local 3D geometry conveyor: First, artists typically
use abstract and deformable outlines to characterize
major geometry, and use different shading methodologies, e.g. hatching, blending, and stippling, to convey
local 3D structures [3].

* Corresponding Author

7237

Ours(Style1)

