This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IDiff-Face: Synthetic-based Face Recognition through Fizzy
Identity-Conditioned Diffusion Models

1

Fadi Boutros1 , Jonas Henry Grebe1 , Arjan Kuijper1,2 , Naser Damer1,2
Fraunhofer Institute for Computer Graphics Research IGD, Darmstadt, Germany
2
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
Email: fadi.boutros@igd.fraunhofer.de

Abstract
The availability of large-scale authentic face databases
has been crucial to the significant advances made in face
recognition research over the past decade. However, legal
and ethical concerns led to the recent retraction of many of
these databases by their creators, raising questions about
the continuity of future face recognition research without
one of its key resources. Synthetic datasets have emerged as
a promising alternative to privacy-sensitive authentic data
for face recognition development. However, recent synthetic
datasets that are used to train face recognition models suffer either from limitations in intra-class diversity or crossclass (identity) discrimination, leading to less optimal accuracies, far away from the accuracies achieved by models trained on authentic data. This paper targets this issue
by proposing IDiff-Face, a novel approach based on conditional latent diffusion models for synthetic identity generation with realistic identity variations for face recognition training. Through extensive evaluations, our proposed
synthetic-based face recognition approach pushed the limits of state-of-the-art performances, achieving, for example,
98.00% accuracy on the Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW)
benchmark, far ahead from the recent synthetic-based face
recognition solutions with 95.40% and bridging the gap to
authentic-based face recognition with 99.82% accuracy* .

1. Introduction
Face Recognition (FR) is one of the most widely used
biometric technologies due to the high accuracies achieved
by the recent FRs [31, 56, 4] with a wide range of applications such as logical access control to portable devices
[42, 9]. This ubiquitous adoption has been fuelled by the
application of deep learning to FR and the rapid research
advances in this direction, mainly on novel margin-penalty
based softmax losses [14, 4] and deep network architectures
* https://github.com/fdbtrs/idiff-face

[24, 9]. However, this rapid progress has only been possible due to the public availability of large-scale FR training
databases [11, 23]. Such databases contain millions of images, and they are typically collected from the internet without proper user consent, which raises concerns about the legal and ethical use of these databases for FR development.
Since, for example, the European Union (EU) adopted
the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [18] in
2018, more justified criticism of the associated privacy
risks has been raised against the usage of public biometric datasets that were collected without proper consent. The
GDPR explicitly grants individuals the ”right to be forgotten” and enforces stricter requirements on the collection,
distribution, and usage of face databases, making it extremely hard, or even infeasible, to maintain such regulations. Thus, many of them [11, 3, 23] that are widely used
to train FRs were retracted by their creators to avoid legal
complications, which raises the question about continuity of
FR research since the availability of one of its key resources
became questionable.
As an effort to address these legal and ethical concerns,
synthetic data has recently emerged as a promising alternative to authentic databases for FR training [43, 6, 7, 10, 2, 5].
This is also the trend for FR subsystems, such as morphing and spoof attack detection [13, 19] and face images
quality assessment [1]. This research direction is driven by
the progress on Deep Generative Models (DGMs), a model
designed to learn the probability distribution of a certain
dataset, enabling the generation of completely new synthetic samples. This process can be conditioned on specific
attributes such as age, facial expression, and a defined set
of visual appearances, e.g. the lighting condition and head
pose [15, 52, 54, 21]. Most of the DGM approaches for
generating synthetic faces are based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [22, 15, 49, 33, 6]. A number of
recent works [37, 7, 43] utilized GANs [15, 29] to generate synthetic data for FR training. The reported results by
SOTA synthetic-based FR showed significant degradation
in the verification accuracies in comparison to FR trained

19650

