This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised 3D Perception with 2D Vision-Language Distillation
for Autonomous Driving
Mahyar Najibi∗ Jingwei Ji∗ Yin Zhou† Charles R. Qi
Scott Ettinger Dragomir Anguelov
Waymo LLC

Xinchen Yan

Abstract
Closed-set 3D perception models trained on only a predefined set of object categories can be inadequate for safety
critical applications such as autonomous driving where new
object types can be encountered after deployment. In this
paper, we present a multi-modal auto labeling pipeline capable of generating amodal 3D bounding boxes and tracklets for training models on open-set categories without 3D
human labels. Our pipeline exploits motion cues inherent in
point cloud sequences in combination with the freely available 2D image-text pairs to identify and track all traffic participants. Compared to the recent studies in this domain,
which can only provide class-agnostic auto labels limited
to moving objects, our method can handle both static and
moving objects in the unsupervised manner and is able to
output open-vocabulary semantic labels thanks to the proposed vision-language knowledge distillation. Experiments
on the Waymo Open Dataset show that our approach outperforms the prior work by significant margins on various
unsupervised 3D perception tasks.

1. Introduction
In autonomous driving, most existing 3D detection models [62, 22, 42] have been developed with the prior assumption that all possible categories of interest should be known
and annotated during training. While significant progress
has been made in this supervised closed-set setting, these
methods still struggle to fully address the safety concerns
that arise in high-stakes applications. Specifically, in the
dynamic real-world environment, it is unacceptable for autonomous vehicles to fail to handle a category that is not
present in the training data. To address this safety concern,
a recent development by Najibi et al. [35] proposed an unsupervised auto labeling pipeline that uses motion cues from
point cloud sequences to localize 3D objects. However, by
design, this method does not localize static objects which
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

“bulldozer”

“stop sign”

“USPS truck”
Figure 1. An illustration of three interesting urban scene examples
of open-vocabulary perception. Left: our method can faithfully detect objects based on user-provided text queries during inference,
without the need for 3D human supervision. Red points are points
matched with the text queries. Right: camera images for readers’
reference. Note that the inference process solely relies on LiDAR
points and does not require camera images.

constitute a significant portion of traffic participants. Moreover, it only models the problem in a class-agnostic way
and fails to provide semantic labels for scene understanding. This is suboptimal as semantic information is essential for downstream tasks such as motion planning, where
category-specific safety protocols are deliberately added to
navigate through various traffic participants.
Recently, models trained with large-scale image-text
datasets have demonstrated robust flexibility and generalization capabilities for open-vocabulary image-based classification [38, 19, 33], detection [20, 12, 24, 59] and semantic
segmentation [23, 11] tasks. Yet, open-vocabulary recognition in the 3D domain [9, 15, 40] is in its early stages. In
the context of autonomous driving it is even more underexplored. In this work, we fill this gap by leveraging a pre-

8602

