This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Plausible Uncertainties for Human Pose Regression
Lennart Bramlage1
Michelle Karg2
Cristóbal Curio1
1
Cognitive Systems Group, Reutlingen University, Germany
2
Continental AG
{lennart.bramlage, cristobal.curio}@reutlingen-university.de

1. Introduction
As more and more deep learning-based machine vision systems are increasingly utilized in safety-critical realworld applications, the need for principled safeguards be-

Blur / Noise

Human pose estimation (HPE) is integral to scene understanding in numerous safety-critical domains involving
human-machine interaction, such as autonomous driving or
semi-automated work environments. Avoiding costly mistakes is synonymous with anticipating failure in model predictions, which necessitates meta-judgments on the accuracy of the applied models. Here, we propose a straightforward human pose regression framework to examine
the behavior of two established methods for simultaneous aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty estimation: maximum a-posteriori (MAP) estimation with Monte-Carlo variational inference and deep evidential regression (DER).
First, we evaluate both approaches on the quality of their
predicted variances and whether these truly capture the expected model error. The initial assessment indicates that
both methods exhibit the overconfidence issue common in
deep probabilistic models. This observation motivates our
implementation of an additional recalibration step to extract reliable confidence intervals. We then take a closer
look at deep evidential regression, which, to our knowledge,
is applied comprehensively for the first time to the HPE
problem. Experimental results indicate that DER behaves
as expected in challenging and adverse conditions commonly occurring in HPE and that the predicted uncertainties match their purported aleatoric and epistemic sources.
Notably, DER achieves smooth uncertainty estimates without the need for a costly sampling step, making it an attractive candidate for uncertainty estimation on resourcelimited platforms.

Occlusions

Abstract

Domain shift

michelle.karg@continental.com

Distribution Parameters

,⃗ )
, , ), ( ⃗, , , )

MAP: ( , 2), (
DER: ( ,

Captured
Epistemic
Uncertainty

Captured
Aleatoric
Uncertainty

Input

Probabilistic
Pose-Network

Predictions

Figure 1. We employ two methods of uncertainty quantification to
identify the aleatoric and epistemic components of the expected
error in human pose estimation, anticipating large aleatoric uncertainty in occluded and blurred joints and increased epistemic
uncertainty in novel domains.

comes impossible to ignore. Human pose estimation (HPE)
is an application that allows autonomous systems to anticipate peoples’ intentions and movements and avoid consequential mistakes. Every model is flawed, and decisionmaking under uncertainty presupposes robust uncertainty
estimation. A vast catalogue of methods attempts to meet
this requirement and augment point-wise model predictions
with measures of uncertainty and confidence. However,
while drawing on rigorous foundations, strong theoretical
assumptions generally need to be relaxed to meet the realities of deployment. For example, ”irreducible” aleatoric uncertainty, in many real-world applications, reduces to conditional variance. Despite such concessions, established uncertainty estimation and disentanglement methods may harbor exceptional potential, provided they behave as expected
in any given domain. Here, we investigate whether two es-

15133

