This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spacetime Surface Regularization for Neural Dynamic Scene Reconstruction
Jaesung Choe1,2 Christopher Choy1 Jaesik Park3 In So Kweon2 Anima Anandkumar1,4
1

NVIDIA

2

KAIST

3

Seoul National University

4

Caltech

Abstract
We propose an algorithm, 4DRegSDF, for the spacetime
surface regularization to improve the fidelity of neural rendering and reconstruction in dynamic scenes. The key idea
is to impose local rigidity on the deformable Signed Distance Function (SDF) for temporal coherency. Our approach works by (1) sampling points on the deformed surface by taking gradient steps toward the steepest direction along SDF, (2) extracting differential surface geometry, such as tangent plane or curvature, at each sample,
and (3) adjusting the local rigidity at different timestamps.
This enables our dynamic surface regularization to align
4D spacetime geometry via 3D canonical space more accurately. Experiments demonstrate that our 4DRegSDF
achieves state-of-the-art performance in both reconstruction and rendering quality over synthetic and real-world
datasets. https://4dregsdf.github.io/

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 4D dynamic scenes from natural videos
is one of the fundamental problems of vision tasks that are
widely used in various fields, such as robotics, autonomous
driving, virtual reality, and many more [6, 8, 14, 24, 32].
It requires an understanding of not just the geometry of
scenes but also the texture, illumination, material properties, and refraction for photo-realistic rendering. However, because of the difficulty in reconstructing static 3D
geometry alone, learning the dynamics jointly has been a
challenge that most conventional methods decomposed the
task into multiple stages of geometry reconstruction, motion representation, texture mapping, and illumination estimation [6, 15, 33, 49, 68]. Such sequential pipelines that
first reconstruct geometry and learn motion separately are
not robust to many failure modes of each stage, resulting in
inaccurate reconstruction, which is one of the major bottlenecks for photo-realistic and geometry-oriented spacetime
scene understanding.
Work done during the internship at NVIDIA.

Rendered color

Rendered normal

Spacetime NeRF

Rendered color

Rendered normal

4DRegSDF (ours)

Figure 1. We present an implicit surface regularization method that
fully utilizes the properties of SDF for robust shape reconstruction
and novel-view rendering in dynamic scenes.

The recent advances in neural implicit representations,
however, made accurate 3D reconstruction with differentiable volumetric rendering possible [40,41,46,50]. Mildenhall et al. [41] use sinusoidal encoding on the position as
an input to multi-layered perceptrons (MLPs) to learn appearance and geometry of the target static scene. Specifically for photo-realistic rendering, neural radiance fields [4,
41, 54, 61, 63, 71, 79] mostly use density and color as the
main output. However, the density representation can result
in artifacts such as floaters and blurry boundaries since the
density representation has high degrees of freedom [67,70].
For accurate 3D reconstruction, the Signed Distance Function (SDF) started to gain traction for its high fidelity 3D
surface reconstruction [26, 47, 70, 76, 81]. One of the key
component for SDF learning is the Eikonol loss [25] which
regularizes the SDF to have valid gradient. This acts as a
strong regularization not just on the surface but on the entirety of the empty space.
However, the 4D surface reconstruction from monocular RGB videos – which we reconstruct a dynamic scene –
is still a highly ill-posed problem where we have to recon-

17871

