This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Frequency Representation Enhancement with Privilege
Information for Video Super-Resolution
Fei Li ∗
China Agricultural University

Linfeng Zhang ∗
Tsinghua University

Zikun Liu
Samsung Research China

leefly072@126.com

zhanglinfeng1997@outlook.com

zikun.liu@samsung.com

Juan Lei
Samsung Research China

Zhenbo Li 
China Agricultural University

juan.lei@samsung.com

lizb@cau.edu.cn

Abstract
CNN’s limited receptive ﬁeld restricts its ability to
capture long-range spatial-temporal dependencies, leading to unsatisfactory performance in video super-resolution
(VSR). To tackle this challenge, this paper presents a
novel multi-frequency representation enhancement module
(MFE) that performs spatial-temporal information aggregation in the frequency domain. Speciﬁcally, MFE mainly
includes a spatial-frequency representation enhancement
branch which captures the long-range dependency in the
spatial dimension, and an energy frequency representation
enhancement branch to obtain the inter-channel feature relationship. Moreover, a novel model training method named
privilege training is proposed to encode the privilege information from high-resolution videos to facilitate model training. With these two methods, we introduce a new VSR model
named MFPI, which outperforms state-of-the-art methods
by a large margin while maintaining good efﬁciency on various datasets, including REDS4, Vimeo, Vid4, and UDM10.

1. Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR), which restores highresolution (HR) video frames from their highly related but
unaligned low-resolution (LR) video frames, is well-desired
in various real-world applications [11, 2]. Compared with
single image super-resolution (SISR), VSR is much more
challenging as it aggregates information from multiple related but misaligned frames in the input video. Hence, an
ideal VSR model is expected to leverage the spatial information from single images but also integrate the temporal
* The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally. This work is done during
the internship of F. Li in Samsung.  Z. Li is the corresponding author.

12814

Figure 1: VSR performance comparison on UDM10 [65]
in terms of PSNR (dB), runtime (ms), and parameters (M).
MFPI outperforms SOTA methods with high efﬁciency.

semantic features from multiple frames [45, 50, 18, 3].
CNN-based models have become the standard choice
for VSR due to their simplicity and efﬁciency. While recent advances in CNN-based VSR, such as residual learning [2, 73], dense connections[59], hierarchical structures
[20], and multi-scale frameworks [63, 34, 48], have shown
impressive performance, some potential problems still exist. Firstly, CNN’s limited receptive ﬁeld hinders it from
modeling long-range spatial dependencies, making it unable to capture complex semantic information. Secondly,
convolutional ﬁlters have ﬁxed scales and weights, limiting their performance on large motions and adaptability
to diverse inputs. In comparison, with the advantages of
self-attention layers, ViTs are effective in processing inputs
with long-term spatial dependencies. However, the stack

