This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tem-adapter: Adapting Image-Text Pretraining for Video Question Answer
Guangyi Chen1,2 *, Xiao Liu5 *, Guangrun Wang4 , Kun Zhang1,2 , Philip H.S. Torr4 ,
Xiao-Ping Zhang3,6 , Yansong Tang3†
1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
3
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
4
University of Oxford, UK
5
Eindhoven University of Technology, NL
6
Toronto Metropolitan University, Canada

VideoQA

Input Image

Input Video Frames

CLIP

Temporal Gap

Input Question-Answer Pair
Question: What would be considered a high potential traffic hazard?
A: Narrow roads. B: Not obeying the traffic rules and regulations.
C: Speeding vehicles. D: The view of driver is blocked by others .

Semantic Gap

Input Text

Contrastive
Learning

…

$500 fine for
running a red light!

Figure 1: Illustration of the domain gaps between the pre-trained CLIP and the downstream VideoQA. CLIP is trained to align
visual and textual domains, while VideoQA requires understanding the temporal dynamics and complex semantics of videos.

Abstract
Video-language pre-trained models have shown remarkable success in guiding video question-answering (VideoQA)
tasks. However, due to the length of video sequences, training large-scale video-based models incurs considerably
higher costs than training image-based ones. This motivates us to leverage the knowledge from image-based pretraining, despite the obvious gaps between image and video
domains. To bridge these gaps, in this paper, we propose
Tem-Adapter, which enables the learning of temporal dynamics and complex semantics by a visual Temporal Aligner
and a textual Semantic Aligner. Unlike conventional pretrained knowledge adaptation methods that only concentrate
on the downstream task objective, the Temporal Aligner introduces an extra language-guided autoregressive task aimed
at facilitating the learning of temporal dependencies, with
the objective of predicting future states based on historical
clues and language guidance that describes event progression. Besides, to reduce the semantic gap and adapt the
textual representation for better event description, we introduce a Semantic Aligner that first designs a template to fuse

question and answer pairs as event descriptions and then
learns a Transformer decoder with the whole video sequence
as guidance for refinement. We evaluate Tem-Adapter
and different pre-train transferring methods on two VideoQA
benchmarks, and the significant performance improvement
demonstrates the effectiveness of our method. 1

1. Introduction
Video Question Answering (VideoQA) is a task that aims
to answer natural language questions based on the information available in observed videos. It has attracted considerable attention recently due to its promise to develop
interactive AI systems capable of communicating with the
dynamic visual environment using natural language. Despite
significant advancements in recent years, VideoQA remains
a challenging problem that requires models to comprehensively understand and dynamically align the semantics of
both the visual world and natural language.
1 Our code can be found at: https://github.com/XLiu443/Tem-adapter
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

13945

