This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Synchronize Feature Extracting and Matching: A Single Branch Framework for
3D Object Tracking

1

Teli Ma1,2 *, Mengmeng Wang2∗ , Jimin Xiao3 , Huifeng Wu4 , Yong Liu2†
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Guangzhou 2 Zhejiang University
3
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University 4 Hangzhou Dianzi University
tma184@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
jimin.xiao@xjtlu.edu.cn

mengmengwang@zju.edu.cn

whf@hdu.edu.cn

yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Siamese network has been a de facto benchmark
framework for 3D LiDAR object tracking with a sharedparametric encoder extracting features from template and
search region, respectively. This paradigm relies heavily on an additional matching network to model the crosscorrelation/similarity of the template and search region. In
this paper, we forsake the conventional Siamese paradigm
and propose a novel single-branch framework, SyncTrack,
synchronizing the feature extracting and matching to avoid
forwarding encoder twice for template and search region as
well as introducing extra parameters of matching network.
The synchronization mechanism is based on the dynamic
affinity of the Transformer, and an in-depth analysis of the
relevance is provided theoretically. Moreover, based on
the synchronization, we introduce a novel Attentive PointsSampling strategy into the Transformer layers (APST), replacing the random/Farthest Points Sampling (FPS) method
with sampling under the supervision of attentive relations
between the template and search region. It implies connecting point-wise sampling with the feature learning, beneficial to aggregating more distinctive and geometric features
for tracking with sparse points. Extensive experiments on
two benchmark datasets (KITTI and NuScenes) show that
SyncTrack achieves state-of-the-art performance in realtime tracking.

1. Introduction
With recent advances in autonomous driving, 3D vision
tasks based on LiDAR are becoming increasingly popular
in the visual community. Among these tasks, 3D LiDAR
single object tracking (SOT) aims to track a specific target
object in a 3D video with the knowledge of 3D bounding
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

Template

Share
Search
Region

(a) Siamese
Network

Template Feature
Extraction
Feature
Matching

Pred

Template Feature
Extraction

(b) M2Track
Previous
Frame

Search
Region

Feature
Extraction
& Motion
State
Modeling

Coarse
Pred

Motion
State
Modeling
& Feature
Extraction

Refined
Pred

(c) Ours
Template

Search
Region

Synchronized
Feature
Extracting &
Matching

Pred

Figure 1. The comparison of (a) Siamese network based trackers,
(b) previous single-branch, two-stage framework M2Track [51]
with (c) our SyncTrack, which is a single-branch and single-stage
framework.

box in the initial frame. This task meets numerous challenges, such as LiDAR point cloud sparsity, occlusions, and
fast motions.
Most existing methods [32, 50, 19, 12, 33, 52, 20, 9, 39]
of 3D SOT mainly adopt a Siamese-like backbone and incorporate an additional matching network to cope with the
tracking challenges as shown in Fig. 1(a). Trackers based
on the Siamese-like backbone separate feature extraction
of template and search region, forwarding the two kinds of
features with shared model parameters, respectively. Subsequently, an extra matching network is introduced to fuse

9953

