This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoNeRD: NeRF-like Representations for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Junkai Xu1,2* Liang Peng1,2,* Haoran Chen1,2,* Hao Li2
†
Wei Qian2 Ke Li4 Wenxiao Wang3 Deng Cai1,2
1
State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University 2 FABU Inc.
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University 4 Fullong Inc
{xujunkai, pengliang, haorancheng}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
In the field of monocular 3D detection, it is common
practice to utilize scene geometric clues to enhance the detector’s performance. However, many existing works adopt
these clues explicitly such as estimating a depth map and
back-projecting it into 3D space. This explicit methodology
induces sparsity in 3D representations due to the increased
dimensionality from 2D to 3D, and leads to substantial information loss, especially for distant and occluded objects.
To alleviate this issue, we propose MonoNeRD, a novel detection framework that can infer dense 3D geometry and
occupancy. Specifically, we model scenes with Signed Distance Functions (SDF), facilitating the production of dense
3D representations. We treat these representations as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) and then employ volume rendering to recover RGB images and depth maps. To the
best of our knowledge, this work is the first to introduce
volume rendering for M3D, and demonstrates the potential of implicit reconstruction for image-based 3D perception. Extensive experiments conducted on the KITTI-3D
benchmark and Waymo Open Dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of MonoNeRD. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/cskkxjk/MonoNeRD.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D detection (M3D) is an active research
topic in the computer vision community due to its convenience, low cost and wide range of applications, including autonomous driving, robotic navigation and more. The
key point of the task is to establish reasonable correspondences between 2D images and 3D space. Some works
leverage geometrical priors to extract 3D information, such
as object poses via 2D-3D constraints. These constraints
usually require additional keypoint annotations [10, 21] or
* Work performed during an internship at FABU Inc.
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Different intermediate 3D representations. Previous depth-based methods generate 3D representations by backprojecting estimated depth maps to 3D space, whereas our method
predicts implicit 3D representations, and obtains depth estimates
through volume rendering.

CAD models [5, 34]. Other works convert estimated depth
maps into 3D point cloud representations (Pseudo-LiDAR)
[32, 55, 60]. Depth estimates are also used to combine with
image features [58, 33] or generate meaningful bird’s-eyeview (BEV) representations [45, 47, 48, 51], then produce
3D object detection results. These methods have made remarkable progress in M3D.
Unfortunately, current 3D representations transformed
by explicit depths have some limitations. First, the lifted
features obtained from depth estimates or pseudo-LiDAR
exhibit an uneven distribution throughout the 3D space.
Specifically, they have high density in close range, but the
density decreases as the distance increases. (See top part
of Figure 1). Second, the final detection performance heavily depends on the accuracy of the depth estimation, which
remains challenging to improve. Thus such representations

6814

