This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MULLER: Multilayer Laplacian Resizer for Vision
Zhengzhong Tu, Peyman Milanfar, Hossein Talebi
Google Research
zhengzhongtu@google.com

Image resizing operation is a fundamental preprocessing module in modern computer vision. Throughout the
deep learning revolution, researchers have overlooked
the potential of alternative resizing methods beyond the
commonly used resizers that are readily available, such as
nearest-neighbors, bilinear, and bicubic. The key question
of our interest is whether the front-end resizer affects the
performance of deep vision models? In this paper, we
present an extremely lightweight multilayer Laplacian
resizer with only a handful of trainable parameters, dubbed
MULLER resizer. MULLER has a bandpass nature in that
it learns to boost details in certain frequency subbands
that benefit the downstream recognition models. We show
that MULLER can be easily plugged into various training
pipelines, and it effectively boosts the performance of
the underlying vision task with little to no extra cost.
Specifically, we select a state-of-the-art vision Transformer,
MaxViT [50], as the baseline, and show that, if trained
with MULLER, MaxViT gains up to 0.6% top-1 accuracy, and meanwhile enjoys 36% inference cost saving
to achieve similar top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1k, as
compared to the standard training scheme. Notably,
MULLER’s performance also scales with model size and
training data size such as ImageNet-21k and JFT, and it
is widely applicable to multiple vision tasks, including
image classification, object detection and segmentation, as
well as image quality assessment. The code is available
at
https://github.com/google-research/
google-research/tree/master/muller.

1. Introduction
Most computer vision problems such as image classification, object detection, video recognition, and image/video
generation have seen groundbreaking advancement by deep
neural networks-based models that are trained on webscale, human-curated datasets [11, 12, 15, 15, 24, 33, 35, 40,
41, 46, 53, 58]. In any of the underlining training infrastructures like Tensorflow [1] and PyTorch [30], image resizing

86.0

ImageNet Top-1 Acc [%]

Abstract

85.0
84.0

MaxViT standard training @224x224
MaxViT Training w/ MULLER @512 224

40

60
80
100 120 140 160
Inference Latency (ms/img on GPU V100)
Learned
Resizer
Jointly
trained

Backbone
(Classification,
Detection, etc)

Predictions

Default resizer

MULLER resizer

MaxViT-B
Top-1 pred: otter (28.61%)

MULLER+MaxViT-B
Top-1 pred: sea lion (34.57%)

✘

✔

Figure 1. Top: our proposed learned resizer can push forward a strong vision Transformer MaxViT [50] by up to
0.6% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K with no extra inference cost. Results for other backbones are shown in
Sec. 4.2. Bottom: demonstratation of the learned resizer with detail-boosted input image, the classification accuracy
of the examplar image has improved.
is an essential preprocessing step which enables efficient
gradient-based training of networks with millions of trainable parameters. Moreover, the factor of image size can
sometimes significantly impact the performance of various
tasks, particularly those requiring high-resolution prediction. Although neural architectures have been revolutionized by CNNs and Transformers, surprisingly limited attention has been paid to the role of image resizing operations.
Resizing or rescaling refers to the process of changing the resolution of an image, while largely preserving its
content for human or machine perception. There are several major reasons for using resizing: (1) The mini-batch
gradient-based training scheme requires the same image
resolution in a batch, (2) Resizing can help to reduce computational complexity, making it easier and faster to train

6877

