This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Luminance-aware Color Transform for Multiple Exposure Correction
Jong-Hyeon Baek1†

DaeHyun Kim1† Su-Min Choi2 Hyo-jun Lee1 Hanul Kim3
1
Chungnam National University 2 42dot Inc.
3
Seoul National University of Science and Technology

Yeong Jun Koh1∗

whdgusdl97@gmail.com, seven776484@gmail, sumin.choi@42dot.ai,
gywns6287@gmail.com, hukim@seoultech.ac.kr, yjkoh@cnu.ac.kr

Abstract
Images captured with irregular exposures inevitably
present unsatisfactory visual effects, such as distorted hue
and color tone. However, most recent studies mainly focus on underexposure correction, which limits their applicability to real-world scenarios where exposure levels
vary. Furthermore, some works to tackle multiple exposure rely on the encoder-decoder architecture, resulting
in losses of details in input images during down-sampling
and up-sampling processes. With this regard, a novel correction algorithm for multiple exposure, called luminanceaware color transform (LACT), is proposed in this study.
First, we reason the relative exposure condition between
images to obtain luminance features based on a luminance
comparison module. Next, we encode the set of transformation functions from the luminance features, which enable complex color transformations for both overexposure
and underexposure images. Finally, we project the transformed representation onto RGB color space to produce
exposure correction results. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed LACT yields new state-of-the-arts
on two multiple exposure datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/whdgusdl48/LACT.

1. Introduction
Exposure is a crucial component in image formation. So,
images captured with improper exposures usually have unsatisfactory visual effects, such as distorted hue and brightness. Figure 1 shows examples of images captured with
overexposure and underexposure, which can cause overly
bright or darkened regions, leading to significant degradation of image quality. Many methods [3, 21, 1, 22, 8, 23,
41, 20] have been proposed to correct exposure-related issues. However, most of them have focused on correcting
∗ Corresponding author
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

either overexposure or underexposure, limiting their applicability to real-world scenarios with various exposure levels. Some studies [2, 14, 35, 15] have attempted to address
both overexposure and underexposure cases, leveraging the
U-Net [31] like architecture. While these methods have
shown improved performance, they still suffer from limitations such as the down-sampling and up-sampling processes
in their approaches, resulting in the loss of image details.
The transformation function-based approach has gained
much attention in image enhancement [10, 20, 19, 39]. This
approach estimates transformation functions for color channels and performs color transformation based on the predicted functions. These methods are free from the downsampling and up-sampling processes, thereby preserving
the image details. However, they are still vulnerable to multiple exposures, since they do not exploit exposure information explicitly. Also, as shown in Figure 1, a single transformation function may not be sufficient to address both overexposed or underexposed images, particularly those containing saturated regions.
In this work, we present a novel approach, named
luminance-aware color transform (LACT), to tackle the
problem of multiple exposure correction. The proposed
method leverages two key insights - the critical role of luminance for correcting images with multiple exposure levels,
and the need to overcome the limitation of single intensity
transformation function. To this end, the proposed method
extracts luminance features, which encode exposure levels
in input images, by exploiting the luminance order relationship between two randomly sampled input images. The
luminance features are used in the luminance-aware color
transform to estimate the sets of transformation functions
from the local structure, enabling complex color transform
for both overexposure and underexposure images. Then, the
proposed method generates a multi-channel representation
for exposure correction using the set of transformation functions. Finally, a post-processing module projects this multichannel representation onto the RGB color space to produce
correction results. Extensive experiments on ME [2] and

6156

