This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DR-Tune: Improving Fine-tuning of Pretrained Visual Models
by Distribution Regularization with Semantic Calibration

1

Nan Zhou1,2 Jiaxin Chen2 Di Huang1,2,3 *
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou, China
{zhounan0431,jiaxinchen,dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
The visual models pretrained on large-scale benchmarks
encode general knowledge and prove effective in building
more powerful representations for downstream tasks. Most
existing approaches follow the fine-tuning paradigm, either
by initializing or regularizing the downstream model based
on the pretrained one. The former fails to retain the knowledge in the successive fine-tuning phase, thereby prone to be
over-fitting, and the latter imposes strong constraints to the
weights or feature maps of the downstream model without
considering semantic drift, often incurring insufficient optimization. To deal with these issues, we propose a novel
fine-tuning framework, namely distribution regularization
with semantic calibration (DR-Tune). It employs distribution regularization by enforcing the downstream task head
to decrease its classification error on the pretrained feature distribution, which prevents it from over-fitting while
enabling sufficient training of downstream encoders. Furthermore, to alleviate the interference by semantic drift,
we develop the semantic calibration (SC) module to align
the global shape and class centers of the pretrained and
downstream feature distributions. Extensive experiments
on widely used image classification datasets show that DRTune consistently improves the performance when combing
with various backbones under different pretraining strategies. Code is available at: https://github.com/
weeknan/DR-Tune.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, it has become a prevailing paradigm to pretrain deep models for common use on large-scale datasets
and fine-tune them in multiple diverse downstream tasks
in the community of computer vision [20, 7]. Due to the
* Corresponding author.

Pretrained Encoder

Regularization

Downstream Encoder

Task Specific Head

ℒ𝑑𝑑

ℒ𝑑𝑑

[ 𝑧𝑧 𝑑𝑑 ]

𝑧𝑧 𝑝𝑝

Frozen

Trained

(a)

[ 𝑧𝑧 𝑑𝑑 ]

𝑧𝑧 𝑝𝑝

Frozen

Trained

(b)

[ 𝑧𝑧 𝑝𝑝

ℒ𝑑𝑑

Frozen

𝑧𝑧 𝑑𝑑 ]

Trained

(c)

Figure 1. Comparison of distinct regularization-based approaches.
(a) (or (b)) performs regularization by reducing the ad-hoc discrepancy between the weights (or the intermediate feature maps) of the
downstream encoder and the pretrained one. In contrast, DR-Tune
(c) performs regularization on the task-specific head by minimizing the classification error with the pretrained feature distribution.

data and semantic relevance between pretraining and downstream tasks, the pretrained model implicitly encodes useful
prior knowledge, and compared with the ones by training
from scratch, it substantially promotes the accuracy of the
downstream task and accelerates its training convergence in
a variety of applications [21, 45], e.g. image classification,
object detection, and semantic segmentation. In particular,
when labeled data are quite limited in the downstream task,
the issue of over-fitting can be effectively alleviated by using the pretrained model as a training prior.
To facilitate training downstream models with the pretrained ones, many efforts have recently been made. One
of the typical ways is to directly take the pretrained model
for initialization and fine-tune [24, 58] its weights by elaborately designing task-specific learning objectives [10, 35,
17, 65, 64]. Nevertheless, these methods neglect retaining

1547

