This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeLiRa: Self-Supervised Depth, Light, and Radiance Fields
Vitor Guizilini1

Igor Vasiljevic1
Jiading Fang2
Rares Ambrus1
3
Vincent Sitzmann
Adrien Gaidon1

Sergey Zakharov1

1
Toyota Research Institute (TRI), Los Altos, CA
Toyota Technological Institute of Chicago (TTIC), Chicago, IL
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA

2

Figure 1: DeLiRa augments volumetric view synthesis with the multi-view photometric objective, as a regularizer to
improve novel view and depth synthesis in the limited viewpoint setting. We use this implicit representation to jointly learn
depth, light, and radiance fields from a shared latent space in a synergistic way.

Abstract
Differentiable volumetric rendering is a powerful
paradigm for 3D reconstruction and novel view synthesis.
However, standard volume rendering approaches struggle
with degenerate geometries in the case of limited viewpoint
diversity, a common scenario in robotics applications. In
this work, we propose to use the multi-view photometric objective from the self-supervised depth estimation literature
as a geometric regularizer for volumetric rendering, significantly improving novel view synthesis without requiring
additional information. Building upon this insight, we explore the explicit modeling of scene geometry using a generalist Transformer, jointly learning a radiance field as well
as depth and light fields with a set of shared latent codes.
We demonstrate that sharing geometric information across
tasks is mutually beneficial, leading to improvements over
single-task learning without an increase in network complexity. Our DeLiRa architecture achieves state-of-the-art
results on the ScanNet benchmark, enabling high quality
volumetric rendering as well as real-time novel view and
depth synthesis in the limited viewpoint diversity setting.
Our project page is https://sites.google.com/view/tri-delira.

1. Introduction
Inferring 3D geometry from 2D images is a cornerstone
capability in computer vision and computer graphics. In
recent years, the state of the art has significantly advanced

due to the development of neural fields [47], which parameterize continuous functions in 3D space using neural networks, and differentiable rendering [40, 23, 36], which enables learning these functions directly from images. However, recovering 3D geometry from 2D information is an illposed problem: there is an inherent ambiguity of shape and
radiance (i.e. the shape-radiance ambiguity [54]). These
representations thus require a large number of diverse camera viewpoints in order to converge to the correct geometry. Alternatively, methods that explicitly leverage geometric priors at training time, via the self-supervised multi-view
photometric objective, have achieved great success for tasks
such as depth [6, 9, 45, 8], ego-motion [38, 37], camera geometry [41, 4, 7], optical flow [10], and scene flow [10, 14].
In this work, we combine these two paradigms and introduce the multi-view photometric loss as a complement
to the view synthesis objective. Specifically, we use depth
inferred via volumetric rendering to warp images, with the
photometric consistency between synthesized and original
images serving as a self-supervisory regularizer to scene
structure. We show through experiments that this explicit
regularization facilitates the recovery of accurate geometry
in the case of low viewpoint diversity, without requiring additional data. Because the multi-view photometric objective
is unable to model view-dependent effects (since it assumes
a Lambertian scene), we propose an attenuation schedule
that gradually removes it from the optimization, and show
that our learned scene geometry is stable, leading to further
improvements in view and depth synthesis.

17935

