This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event Camera Data Pre-training

1

BDSI, ANU

Yan Yang1 ∗ Liyuan Pan2 † ∗
2
BITSZ & School of CSAT, BIT

Yan.Yang@anu.edu.au

liyuan.pan@bit.edu.cn

65

This paper proposes a pre-trained neural network for
handling event camera data. Our model is a self-supervised
learning framework, and uses paired event camera data
and natural RGB images for training. Our method contains three modules connected in a sequence: i) a family
of event data augmentations, generating meaningful event
images for self-supervised training; ii) a conditional masking strategy to sample informative event patches from event
images, encouraging our model to capture the spatial layout of a scene and accelerating training; iii) a contrastive
learning approach, enforcing the similarity of embeddings
between matching event images, and between paired event
and RGB images. An embedding projection loss is proposed
to avoid the model collapse when enforcing the event image
embedding similarities. A probability distribution alignment loss is proposed to encourage the event image to be
consistent with its paired RGB image in the feature space.
Transfer learning performance on downstream tasks shows
the superiority of our method over state-of-the-art methods. For example, we achieve top-1 accuracy at 64.83%
on the N-ImageNet dataset. Our code is available at https:
// github.com/ Yan98/ Event-Camera-Data-Pre-training.

1. Introduction
An event camera asynchronously captures the time, location, and polarity of pixel-wise changes in brightness as a
sequence of events. Event cameras are widely used in many
applications, e.g., recognition [22], detection [30, 27], segmentation [3], optical flow estimation [43], and SLAM [40].
Compared with conventional RGB cameras which record
all pixel intensities at a fixed frame rate, event cameras enjoy a high dynamic range and temporal resolution, and are
robust to lighting changes and motion blur [22, 36, 25].
This paper studies the problem of event camera data pretraining. Our model is pre-trained in a self-supervised man-

N-ImageNet Acc@1 (%)

Abstract

† Corresponding author. ∗ Equal contribution.

Liu Liu3
3
Cyberverse Dept., Huawei

60

55

liuliu33@huawei.com

Ours
ViT-B/16 (20)
ViT-S/16 (20)
ResNet50 (16)
SimCLR (20)
MAE (22)

MoCo-v2 (20)
50

BeiT (22)

MoCo-v3 (21)

Self-supervised
Supervised

45
25

50

75

100

Params (M)

Figure 1: Comparison of our methods and state-of-the-art methods on N-ImageNet dataset [22]. The Blue cycles and red squares
separately denote the self-supervised and supervised pre-training
methods. We show top-1 accuracy (%), i. e., acc@1, with respect
to the number of model parameters (M). We include the publication year of each method in the brackets beside the method names.

ner, only using paired event data and RGB images for training. One can simply transfer our pre-trained model for diverse downstream tasks.
In self-supervised learning (SSL), significant progress
has been made in pre-training with RGB images [19, 2, 10].
However, it is non-trivial to replicate the success on event
camera data, as there is a domain gap between RGB images
and event data. An RGB image records all pixel intensities
of a scene and is spatially dense, while the event data only
records scene changes and is spatially sparse.
For network training in the SSL framework, image augmentations (e.g., Gaussian Blur, ColorJitter, RandomResizedCrop) are one of the most important parts. The sparse
event camera data can be commonly represented as an event
image [22]. One may directly and wrongly perform these
augmentations on event images, e.g., blurring a binary event
image (0/1 valued pixels) generates a meaningless event image. In contrast, we study how to perform event data augmentations before converting to an event image.
We formulate our learning problem as a contrastive
learning task. Taking event images as inputs, one may directly perform a random masking strategy to sample a fixed

10699

