This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRF-MS: Neural Radiance Fields with Multi-Sequence
Peihao Li1*

Shaohui Wang1 Chen Yang3 Bingbing Liu2 Weichao Qiu2† Haoqian Wang1,4†
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Shenzhen Institute of Future Media Technology

Training Sequences

Sequence Fusion

a) GT

b) Static

c) Transient

d) Composition

Transient Decomposition

Figure 1: NeRF-MS trains neural radiance fields from multiple sequences captured by different sensors and at different times,
achieving better scene reconstruction by implicit modeling appearance styles from multi-sequence and separating transient
contents from static scenes, such as the rider.

1. Introduction
Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) achieve impressive performance in novel view synthesis when trained on only single sequence data. However, leveraging multiple sequences
captured by different cameras at different times is essential
for better reconstruction performance. Multi-sequence data
takes two main challenges: appearance variation due to different lighting conditions and non-static objects like pedestrians. To address these issues, we propose NeRF-MS, a
novel approach to training NeRF with multi-sequence data.
Specifically, we utilize a triplet loss to regularize the distribution of per-image appearance code, which leads to better
high-frequency texture and consistent appearance, such as
specular reflections. Then, we explicitly model non-static
objects to reduce floaters. Extensive results demonstrate
that NeRF-MS not only outperforms state-of-the-art view
synthesis methods on outdoor and synthetic scenes, but also
achieves 3D consistent rendering and robust appearance
controlling. Project page: https://nerf-ms.github.io/.
* Work done during an internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
† Co-corresponding Author.

Neural radiance field [20] demonstrates great success
for novel view synthesis when given a photo collection. It
works best when photos are from a single sequence, which
means they are captured by the same camera at the same
time. Multiple sequences are collections of photos captured
by different cameras at different times as shown in Fig 1.
Using multiple sequences is important for creating a better 3D reconstruction of a scene. By combining images
captured from different cameras and at different times, we
can fill in the gaps and improve the quality of poorly reconstructed regions. Furthermore, we can use videos captured
at different seasons or times to show the changes or variations in the scene over time. Additionally, videos captured
by different visitors and cameras at the same event can provide different perspectives or angles of the scene.
Multi-sequence data raise challenges for existing methods. The first is appearance variance. Sequences are captured under different conditions, e.g. sensor, lighting, and
weather. Assigning a per-image appearance code [19, 5, 33]
can handle extreme appearance changes. However, this
gives the model too big flexibility, so the learned appearance
code will overfit image content and camera pose, which

18591

