This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIPascene: Scene Sketching with Different Types and Levels of Abstraction
Yael Vinker
Tel Aviv University

Yuval Alaluf
Tel Aviv University

Daniel Cohen-Or
Tel Aviv University

Ariel Shamir
Reichman University

yaelvi116@gmail.com

yuvalalaluf@gmail.com

cohenor@gmail.com

arik@runi.ac.il

precise

Fidelity

loose

sparse

Simplicity

detailed

Various Scenes, Types, and Levels of Abstraction

Figure 1. Our method converts a scene image into a sketch with different types and levels of abstraction by disentangling abstraction into
two axes of control: fidelity and simplicity. The sketches on the left were selected from a complete matrix generated by our method (an
example is shown on the right), encompassing a broad range of possible sketch abstractions for a given image. Our sketches are generated
in vector form, which can be easily used by designers for further editing.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a method for converting a given
scene image into a sketch using different types and multiple levels of abstraction. We distinguish between two
types of abstraction. The first considers the fidelity of the
sketch, varying its representation from a more precise portrayal of the input to a looser depiction. The second is
defined by the visual simplicity of the sketch, moving from
a detailed depiction to a sparse sketch. Using an explicit
disentanglement into two abstraction axes — and multiple levels for each one — provides users additional control over selecting the desired sketch based on their personal goals and preferences. To form a sketch at a given
level of fidelity and simplification, we train two MLP networks. The first network learns the desired placement of
strokes, while the second network learns to gradually remove strokes from the sketch without harming its recognizability and semantics. Our approach is able to generate
sketches of complex scenes including those with complex
backgrounds (e.g. natural and urban settings) and subjects
(e.g. animals and people) while depicting gradual abstractions of the input scene in terms of fidelity and simplicity.
https://clipascene.github.io/CLIPascene/

1. Introduction
Several studies have demonstrated that abstract, minimal representations are not only visually pleasing but also
helpful in conveying an idea more effectively by emphasizing the essence of the subject [13, 3]. In this paper, we
concentrate on converting photographs of natural scenes to
sketches as a prominent minimal representation.
Converting a photograph to a sketch involves abstraction,
which requires the ability to understand, analyze, and interpret the complexity of the visual scene. A scene consists
of multiple objects of varying complexity, as well as relationships between the foreground and background (see Figure 2). Therefore, when sketching a scene, the artist has
many options regarding how to express the various components and the relations between them (see Figure 3).
In a similar manner, computational sketching methods
must deal with scene complexity and consider a variety of
abstraction levels. Our work focuses on the challenging task
of scene sketching while doing so using different types and
multiple levels of abstraction. Only a few previous works attempted to produce sketches with multiple levels of abstraction. However, these works focus specifically on the task of
object sketching [34, 25] or portrait sketching [1], and often simply use the number of strokes to define the level of

4146

