This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Latent-OFER: Detect, Mask, and Reconstruct with Latent Vectors for Occluded
Facial Expression Recognition
Isack Lee, Eungi Lee, Seok Bong Yoo*
Department of Artificial Intelligence Convergence, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Korea
{sackda24, 181061, sbyoo}@jnu.ac.kr

Abstract
Most research on facial expression recognition (FER) is
conducted in highly controlled environments, but its performance is often unacceptable when applied to real-world situations. This is because when unexpected objects occlude
the face, the FER network faces difficulties extracting facial features and accurately predicting facial expressions.
Therefore, occluded FER (OFER) is a challenging problem.
Previous studies on occlusion-aware FER have typically required fully annotated facial images for training. However,
collecting facial images with various occlusions and expression annotations is time-consuming and expensive. LatentOFER, the proposed method, can detect occlusions, restore
occluded parts of the face as if they were unoccluded, and
recognize them, improving FER accuracy. This approach
involves three steps: First, the vision transformer (ViT)based occlusion patch detector masks the occluded position
by training only latent vectors from the unoccluded patches
using the support vector data description algorithm. Second, the hybrid reconstruction network generates the masking position as a complete image using the ViT and convolutional neural network (CNN). Last, the expression-relevant
latent vector extractor retrieves and uses expression-related
information from all latent vectors by applying a CNNbased class activation map. This mechanism has a significant advantage in preventing performance degradation
from occlusion by unseen objects. The experimental results
on several databases demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over state-of-the-art methods. This code is
available at https://github.com/leeisack/Latent-OFER.

1. Introduction
Facial expression recognition (FER) has undergone remarkable advancements in recent years and is now widely
used across various industries. However, the ability of FER
models in the presence of occlusion remains a challenge.
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Facial expression recognition (FER) performance on
RAF-DB according to the occluded proportions.

Figure 1 illustrates the accuracy of the previous state-of-theart model for FER [58] for various occlusion proportions. In
this study, we evaluated the robustness of the typical model
in recognizing facial expressions using two types of occlusions: random sampling occlusion and grad occlusion. Random sampling occlusion divides the entire image into 196
patches and randomly masks them according to the proportion. Grad occlusion processes an image with an intentionally occluded area that affects FER using gradient-weighted
class activation mapping (Grad-CAM) [46]. This study reveals a more substantial decrease in performance with the
second type of occlusion, particularly when the occluded
area is crucial for accurate FER. This finding has been objectively measured using Grad-CAM [46].
Previous studies on FER [1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 13, 14, 15, 21, 23,
29, 31, 38, 43, 44, 49, 50, 54, 57, 60, 62, 63, 68, 69, 70] have
not given adequate attention to the influence of occlusions.
However, addressing this challenge is crucial for enhancing
the practical applications of FER in real-world scenarios.
Although research on occluded FER (OFER) is relatively
scarce, its importance is increasingly recognized [66].
Currently, several approaches address OFER. The
occlusion-robust feature extraction approach [9, 53] aims
to identify an occlusion-insensitive and discriminative representation, but it is challenging because the types and locations of occlusion are often unknown. The sub region anal-

1536

