This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Collaborative Propagation on Multiple Instance Graphs
for 3D Instance Segmentation with Single-point Supervision
Shichao Dong1,2 Ruibo Li1,2 Jiacheng Wei2 Fayao Liu3 Guosheng Lin1,2 *
1
S-lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
{scdong, gslin}@ntu.edu.sg

{ruibo001, jiacheng002}@e.ntu.edu.sg

fayaoliu@gmail.com

Abstract
Instance segmentation on 3D point clouds has been attracting increasing attention due to its wide applications,
especially in scene understanding areas. However, most existing methods operate on fully annotated data while manually preparing ground-truth labels at point-level is very
cumbersome and labor-intensive. To address this issue,
we propose a novel weakly supervised method RWSeg that
only requires labeling one object with one point. With these
sparse weak labels, we introduce a unified framework with
two branches to propagate semantic and instance information respectively to unknown regions using self-attention
and a cross-graph random walk method. Specifically, we
propose a Cross-graph Competing Random Walks (CRW)
algorithm that encourages competition among different instance graphs to resolve ambiguities in closely placed objects, improving instance assignment accuracy. RWSeg generates high-quality instance-level pseudo labels. Experimental results on ScanNet-v2 and S3DIS datasets show
that our approach achieves comparable performance with
fully-supervised methods and outperforms previous weaklysupervised methods by a substantial margin.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of 3D sensing technology,
point cloud based scene understanding has become a popular research topic in recent years. Instance segmentation is
one of the most fundamental tasks in this field and has many
applications in robotics, autonomous driving, AR/VR, etc.
Given a 3D point cloud depicting a scene, this task requires
predicting not only a semantic category but also an instance
id to differentiate objects at point level. Many deep learning methods have been developed for this task, showing
promising results. However, most of these methods operate
* Corresponding author: G.Lin (e-mail:gslin@ntu.edu.sg)

Figure 1. Comparisons of our approach RWSeg with two recent
weakly supervised 3D instance segmentation methods and the
fully-supervised baseline on two datasets. Our method achieves
better results than other weakly supervised methods with the same
amount of weak annotations.

on point-wise fully annotated data to supervise the network
training.
Manually creating data annotations at point level is very
cumbersome and labor-intensive. Although some tools have
been adopted to assist, the average time used to annotate one
scene is about 22.3 minutes on ScanNet-v2 dataset [10]. To
alleviate this issue, several types of weak annotations have
been proposed, such as scene-level annotation, subcloudlevel annotation [47], 2D image based annotation and 3D
bounding box annotation [1, 8]. However, not all weak label types are easy to obtain in practice. In this work, we
adopt the annotation method used in SegGroup [40] and
“One Thing One Click” [33], which only requires annotating a single point for each object. As shown in Figure
2, this results in very sparse initial annotations, with less
than 0.02% of total points requiring labeling. According to
[40, 33], this annotation method takes less than two minutes
per scene, significantly reducing the need for human effort.
Tao et al. [40] and Tang et al. [39] have investigated the
”One-thing-one-click” approach to address the challenge of
weakly supervised 3D instance segmentation. These techniques construct graphs on top of the over-segmentation

16665

