This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text2Room: Extracting Textured 3D Meshes from 2D Text-to-Image Models
Lukas Höllein1∗ Ang Cao2∗ Andrew Owens2 Justin Johnson2 Matthias Nießner1
1
Technical University of Munich 2 University of Michigan

…

…
Iterative Generation

"a living room with lots of bookshelves, couches, and small tables"
(a) 3D Mesh Generation from Text

(b) Rendered Image + Mesh

Figure 1. Textured 3D mesh generation from text prompts. We generate textured 3D meshes from a given text prompt using 2D
text-to-image models. (a) The scene is iteratively created from different viewpoints (marked in blue). (b) Our generated mesh contains
compelling textures and geometry. We remove the ceiling in the top-down views for better visualization of the scene layout.

1. Introduction
Abstract
We present Text2Room1 , a method for generating roomscale textured 3D meshes from a given text prompt as input.
To this end, we leverage pre-trained 2D text-to-image models to synthesize a sequence of images from different poses.
In order to lift these outputs into a consistent 3D scene representation, we combine monocular depth estimation with
a text-conditioned inpainting model. The core idea of our
approach is a tailored viewpoint selection such that the content of each image can be fused into a seamless, textured 3D
mesh. More specifically, we propose a continuous alignment strategy that iteratively fuses scene frames with the
existing geometry to create a seamless mesh. Unlike existing works that focus on generating single objects [56, 41] or
zoom-out trajectories [18] from text, our method generates
complete 3D scenes with multiple objects and explicit 3D
geometry. We evaluate our approach using qualitative and
quantitative metrics, demonstrating it as the first method to
generate room-scale 3D geometry with compelling textures
from only text as input.

∗ joint first authorship
1 https://lukashoel.github.io/text-to-room

Mesh representations of 3D scenes are a crucial component for many applications, from AR/VR asset creation
to computer graphics, yet creating these 3D assets remains
a painstaking process that requires considerable expertise.
In the 2D domain, recent works have successfully created high-quality images from text using generative models, such as diffusion models [65, 58, 67]. These methods
significantly reduce the barriers to creating images that contain a user’s desired content, effectively helping towards the
democratization of content creation. An emerging line of
work has sought to apply similar methods to create 3D models from text [9, 56, 29, 41, 38], yet existing approaches
come with a number of significant limitations and lack the
generality of 2D text-to-image models.
One of the core challenges of generating 3D models is
coping with the lack of available 3D training data, as 3D
datasets are vastly smaller than those available in many
other applications, such as 2D image synthesis. For example, methods that directly use 3D supervision, such as
Chen et al. [9], are often limited to datasets of simple
shapes, such as ShapeNet [8]. To address these data limitations, recent methods [56, 29, 41, 38, 88] lift the expressive power of 2D text-to-image models into 3D by formulating 3D generation as an iterative optimization problem
in the image domain. This allows them to generate 3D ob-

7909

