This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation with Decoupled One-Pass Network
Cong Han1 * Yujie Zhong1 * Dengjie Li1 Kai Han2† Lin Ma1†
1
Meituan Inc. 2 The University of Hong Kong
hancong0911@163.com

jaszhong@hotmail.com

Abstract
Recently, the open-vocabulary semantic segmentation
problem has attracted increasing attention and the best performing methods are based on two-stream networks: one
stream for proposal mask generation and the other for
segment classification using a pre-trained visual-language
model. However, existing two-stream methods require passing a great number of (up to a hundred) image crops into
the visual-language model, which is highly inefficient. To
address the problem, we propose a network that only needs
a single pass through the visual-language model for each
input image. Specifically, we first propose a novel network
adaptation approach, termed patch severance, to restrict
the harmful interference between the patch embeddings in
the pre-trained visual encoder. We then propose classification anchor learning to encourage the network to spatially
focus on more discriminative features for classification. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method
achieves outstanding performance, surpassing state-of-theart methods while being 4 to 7 times faster at inference.
Code: https://github.com/CongHan0808/DeOP.git

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a critical computer vision task
that entails grouping image pixels into semantically significant regions and predicting their class labels. Previously, semantic segmentation networks have concentrated on a predefined set of semantic classes based on the dataset. Recently, more attention has been devoted to open-vocabulary
(also known as zero-shot) semantic segmentation, thanks to
the rise of large-scale pre-trained visual-language models
(VLMs) like CLIP [32] and ALIGN [19].
OpenSeg [15] was among the first methods for the openvocabulary semantic segmentation task, which proposes to
adopt class-agnostic masks for possible semantic regions
and then classify them using text embeddings extracted
from a pre-trained VLM (ALIGN [19] in its case). It is ef* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

kaihanx@hku.hk

Segment classification

Segment classification

Segment classification

Mask-based pooling

Class embeddings ensemble

Mask-based pooling

Feature
map

𝑁 masks

Feature
map 𝑨

𝑵 masks

Visual
Encoder

Visual
encoder

Image

Image

Decoupled: ❌ One-pass: ✅

(a)

Feature
map 𝑩

𝑁 masks

Feature
map

CLIP
visual
encoder

Visual
encoder

CLIP
visual
encoder

…
Mask & crop 𝑵 times

Decouple: ✅

One pass: ❌

(b)

Image
Decoupled: ✅ One-pass: ✅

(c)

Figure 1: Comparisons between three macro-architectures
for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation: (a) coupled
network, e.g. OpenSeg [15]; (b) decoupled multi-pass network, e.g. SimBaseline [38]; (c) decoupled one-pass network (our baseline). The decoupled structure can maintain
the generality of the pre-trained VLM, while the one-pass
mechanism brings high computational efficiency.
ficient since it only requires passing the image through the
visual encoder once for segmentation. However, the single
shared visual encoder that is updated during training
inevitably breaks the original visual-language alignment
of the pre-trained VLM. Therefore, it requires training on
numerous semantic concepts to ensure its zero-shot capability. For instance, training on Localized Narratives [31]
is necessary. We refer to OpenSeg as the coupled one-pass
method. Another line of work, including ZegFormer [10],
SimBaseline [38] and OVSeg [26], decouples the two subtasks and designs a two-stream architecture. On this note,
the class-agnostic mask proposal stream and the mask classification stream use two separate backbones, preserving
the generality of the VLM’s visual encoder. However,
the downside of such approaches is their high computational overhead since image crops obtained by proposal
masks are fed to the visual encoder individually. We refer to methods like these as decoupled multi-pass methods.
In this work, we attempt to answer a question: can we
develop a framework that can maintain the zero-shot abil-

1086

