This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

In-Style: Bridging Text and Uncurated Videos with Style Transfer
for Text-Video Retrieval
Nina Shvetsova*1,2,3
1

Anna Kukleva∗2

Bernt Schiele2

2

Hilde Kuehne1,3,4

3

Goethe University Frankfurt, Max-Planck-Institute for Informatics, University of Bonn, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{nshvetso,akukleva}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
curated videos

Abstract

curated text

Full Supervision
target paired data

Large-scale noisy web image-text datasets have been
proven to be efficient for learning robust vision-language
models. However, to transfer them to the task of video retrieval, models still need to be fine-tuned on hand-curated
paired text-video data to adapt to the diverse styles of video
descriptions. To address this problem without the need
for hand-annotated pairs, we propose a new setting, textvideo retrieval with uncurated & unpaired data, that uses
only text queries together with uncurated web videos during
training without any paired text-video data. To this end, we
propose an approach, In-Style, that learns the style of the
text queries and transfers it to uncurated web videos. Moreover, to improve generalization, we show that one model
can be trained with multiple text styles. To this end, we
introduce a multi-style contrastive training procedure, that
improves the generalizability over several datasets simultaneously. We evaluate our model on retrieval performance
over multiple datasets to demonstrate the advantages of our
style transfer framework on the new task of uncurated & unpaired text-video retrieval and improve state-of-the-art performance on zero-shot text-video retrieval. 1

1. Introduction
Vision-language retrieval refers to the task of retrieving
an image or a video from a large data pool given a textual
description of the content. Especially the field of text-image
retrieval has seen remarkable progress, mainly spurred by
the combination of image and text models trained on largescale web collections [47, 31] of image-text pairs. While
advances in video retrieval also rely on pre-trained imagelanguage models, which serve for better task transfer, most
systems still require a fine-tuning on downstream data. This
requires hand-annotated text-video pairs, namely a trimmed
segment of a larger video that is precisely described by the
* Equal contribution.
1 github.com/ninatu/in style

a brown rat goes into someone’s
hand then onto a cage.

a woman cooking food with a
metal pan on top of a stove

a chipmunk is eating

a dog is barking

Uncurated & Unpaired
Supervision
NO paired data NO relevant videos

text queries

a brown rat goes
into someone’s hand
then onto a cage.
a woman cooking
a chipmunk is eating
food with a metal pan
a dog is barking
on top of a stove

add cinnamon bay
leaves green
cardamoms black
cardamoms green
chillies and sauté

web uncurated videos

Figure 1: Training data for supervised and uncurated & unpaired settings for text-video retrieval. Left: standard supervised text-video retrieval, aligned and paired data is given for each
target setting of the same distribution as target test set; Right: our
uncurated & unpaired text-video retrieval setting. No paired data
is available during training, only text queries, whereas to support
training, we use uncurated web videos.

corresponding text pair, for the training and testing of each
target downstream dataset. Collecting such aligned pairs of
text and videos can be time and cost intensive, and particularly gathering videos that comply with national regulations
and copyright can be a challenge. Also, in case of relying on
free web content, some videos can become unavailable over
time while the respective curated annotations stay available
for download but do not have matching videos.
To address this problem, we propose a new setup, textvideo retrieval with uncurated & unpaired data, assuming the availability of text queries only and without related
videos during training (Figure 1). The setting is motivated
by the fact that it can be considered easier to collect or generate text data, e.g. by producing topic-specific text queries,
rather than providing a video to match a specific context.
To allow the training of a text-video retrieval system based
on the given text, we assume to have access to an uncurated
video collection as the only source of available videos.
As different domains and datasets contain diverse styles
of textual descriptions of videos, we propose a novel
method, In-Style, to transfer the caption style of given text
queries to uncurated web videos, which can be from a deviating distribution compared to the given text queries. To

21981

