This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decomposition-Based Variational Network for Multi-Contrast MRI
Super-Resolution and Reconstruction
Pengcheng Lei1 Faming Fang1,2 * Guixu Zhang1 Tieyong Zeng3
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
2
KLATASDS-MOE 3 Department of Mathematics, Chinese University of Hong Kong
1

pengchenglei1995@163.com

{fmfang,gxzhang}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

zeng@math.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Multi-contrast MRI super-resolution (SR) and reconstruction methods aim to explore complementary information from the reference image to help the reconstruction of
the target image. Existing deep learning-based methods
usually manually design fusion rules to aggregate the multicontrast images, fail to model their correlations accurately
and lack certain interpretations. Against these issues, we
propose a multi-contrast variational network (MC-VarNet)
to explicitly model the relationship of multi-contrast images. Our model is constructed based on an intuitive motivation that multi-contrast images have consistent (edges
and structures) and inconsistent (contrast) information. We
thus build a model to reconstruct the target image and decompose the reference image as a common component and
a unique component. In the feature interaction phase, only
the common component is transferred to the target image.
We solve the variational model and unfold the iterative solutions into a deep network. Hence, the proposed method
combines the good interpretability of model-based methods
with the powerful representation ability of deep learningbased methods. Experimental results on the multi-contrast
MRI reconstruction and SR demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed model. Especially, since we explicitly model
the multi-contrast images, our model is more robust to the
reference images with noises and large inconsistent structures. The code is available at https://github.com/lpcccccv/MC-VarNet.

1. Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a noninvasive
and non-ionizing medical imaging technique, which has
been widely used in medical diagnosis, clinical analysis,
and staging of disease [27]. However, MRI scanning is
always time-consuming due to physics and physiological
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. The visualization of the multi-contrast images, i.e. T2
and PD, on IXI dataset. They have their unique contrast information (as shown in (e)), and they also share some common structure
information (as shown in (f)).

constraints. The scanning time of each patient usually takes
more than ten minutes, which will affect the efficiency of
diagnosis and cause discomfort to patients [8]. To accelerate the acquisition of MRI, it is common to acquire the
undersampled k-space measurements and then use the postprocessing algorithms (e.g. super-resolution (SR) and reconstruction) to restore its fully-sampled one.
The purpose of the MRI reconstruction is to eliminate
aliasing artifacts caused by k-space undersampling and the
MRI SR aims to restore the missing high-frequency details
from the low-resolution (LR) ones. In recent years, numerous MRI SR [44, 31, 42] and reconstruction [34, 29, 45, 23]
methods have been emerged. However, they only use
single-contrast MR images and fail to utilize the information from other modalities. In fact, radiologists tend to acquire images of bodies with different contrasts (e.g. T1weighted and T2-weighted) to comprehensively evaluate
patients’ conditions. Besides, since the sampling time of
different contrasts is quite different, it is promising to utilize
an HR (or fully-sampled) reference image with a shorter acquisition time to reconstruct the image with a longer scanning time [14]. We call them multi-contrast reconstruction

21296

