This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Pseudo-Relations for Cross-domain Semantic Segmentation
Dong Zhao, Shuang WangB , Qi Zang, Dou Quan, Xiutiao Ye, Rui Yang, Licheng Jiao
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Shaanxi, China
zhaodong01@stu.xidian.edu.cn; shwang@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Reliable

Domain adaptive semantic segmentation aims to adapt a
model trained on labeled source domain to unlabeled target domain. Self-training shows competitive potential in
this field. Existing methods along this stream mainly focus
on selecting reliable predictions on target data as pseudolabels for category learning, while ignoring the useful relations between pixels for relation learning. In this paper,
we propose a pseudo-relation learning framework, Relation
Teacher (RTea), which can exploitable pixel relations to efficiently use unreliable pixels and learn generalized representations. In this framework, we build reasonable pseudorelations on local grids and fuse them with low-level relations in the image space, which are motivated by the reliable local relations prior and available low-level relations
prior. Then, we design a pseudo-relation learning strategy and optimize the class probability to meet the relation
consistency by finding the optimal sub-graph division. In
this way, the model’s certainty and consistency of prediction are enhanced on the target domain, and the crossdomain inadaptation is further eliminated. Extensive experiments on three datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method. The code will be available at
https://github.com/DZhaoXd/RTea.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a challenging problem of assigning each pixel a class label in an image. Driven by deep
neural networks, significant progress has been made in this
field. Despite these efforts, a segmentation model trained
with a specific domain does not generalize well to other domains. It is known to be caused by the domain gap between
the training (source) and testing (target) domains [13]. To
This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China
under Grant No. 2021ZD0110400, the National Natural Science Foundation of China(No.62271377, No.62201407), the Key Research and Development Program of Shannxi (No.2021ZDLGY01-06, No.2022ZDLGY0112), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2022M722496),
the Foreign Scholars in University Research and Teaching Program’s 111
Project (B07048).

Pseudo-label
choice

Category Knowledge

A. Previous self-training methods
Reliable
① Category and Relation Knowledge

Unreliable

B. Our method

② Relation Knowledge

Figure 1: Overview of our motivation. In A, previous
self-training methods select reliable pseudo-labels for category learning. In B, our method reasonably utilizes reliable
pseudo-labels and unreliable ones for relation learning.
solve this problem, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
is proposed to improve the segmentation model’s adaptability to the target domain.
Domain alignment is one of the mainstream UDA semantic segmentation methods, aiming to align the distribution of source and target domains in input [30, 60, 25, 4],
feature [53, 32, 19, 22, 35, 65, 50, 56], or output spaces
[48, 33, 49]. Works along this line achieve positive adaptation benefits but the lack of specific target domain knowledge leads to slight improvement [39, 68, 66].
To this end, self-training methods [27, 10, 1, 69, 64, 67]
are proposed to mine target-specific knowledge. These
methods use the pseudo-labels generated by the pre-adapted
model to further train the model on the target domain.
Consequently, the quality of pseudo-labels for training directly determines the performance of self-training. Following this key point, reliability measure-based and uncertainty estimation-based self-training methods are proposed
[71, 27, 69, 10, 1, 64, 52]. These methods reduce the noise
interference of pseudo-labels for category learning, bring-

19191

