This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Mesh-Aware Radiance Fields
Yi-Ling Qiao∗

Alexander Gao∗ Yiran Xu Yue Feng Jia-Bin Huang
University of Maryland College Park

Ming C. Lin

https://mesh-aware-rf.github.io
Radiance
Radiance
Fields
Fields

(‫ݔ‬,𝑦,‫ݕ‬,𝑧,‫ݖ‬,𝜃,ߠ,𝜙)
߶)
(𝑥,
MLP
MLP

(ܴ‫)ߪܤܩ‬
(𝑅𝐺𝐵𝜎)

Textured
Textured
Meshes
Meshes

(a)
(a)Inputs
Inputs

(b)(b)
Hybrid
rendering:
inside
thethe
mirror
room
Hybrid
rendering:
inside
mirror
room

(c) (b)
Hybrid
rendering:
outside
the the
mirror
roomroom
Hybrid
rendering:
outside
mirror

Figure 1: Mesh-aware rendering of radiance fields. We place a cubic mesh with reflective textures and other synthetic mesh
objects in the MipNeRF-360 Garden [5] scene. Our mesh-aware rendering explicitly computes the rays bouncing inside the
mirror room, creating an ‘infinite mirror room’ visual effect.

Abstract
Embedding polygonal mesh assets within photorealistic
Neural Radience Fields (NeRF) volumes, such that they can
be rendered and their dynamics simulated in a physically
consistent manner with the NeRF, is under-explored from
the system perspective of integrating NeRF into the traditional graphics pipeline. This paper designs a two-way coupling between mesh and NeRF during rendering and simulation. We first review the light transport equations for both
mesh and NeRF, then distill them into an efficient algorithm
for updating radiance and throughput along a cast ray with
an arbitrary number of bounces. To resolve the discrepancy between the linear color space that the path tracer
assumes and the sRGB color space that standard NeRF
uses, we train NeRF with High Dynamic Range (HDR) images. We also present a strategy to estimate light sources
and cast shadows on the NeRF. Finally, we consider how
the hybrid surface-volumetric formulation can be efficiently
integrated with a high-performance physics simulator that
supports cloth, rigid and soft bodies. The full rendering
and simulation system can be run on a GPU at interactive
rates. We show that a hybrid system approach outperforms
alternatives in visual realism for mesh insertion, because it
allows realistic light transport from volumetric NeRF me-

dia onto surfaces, which affects the appearance of reflective/refractive surfaces and illumination of diffuse surfaces
informed by the dynamic scene.

1. Introduction
Creating high-quality 3D environments suitable for photorealistic rendering entails labor-intensive manual work
carried out by skilled 3D artists. Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [46] provide a convenient way to capture a volumetric representation of a complex, real-world scene, paving
the way for high-quality novel view synthesis and interactive photorealistic rendering [49]. These qualities make
NeRF exceptionally adept at modeling background environments. On the other hand, existing methods for physicallybased simulation and rendering of complex material and
lighting effects are primarily based on surface mesh representations. Integrating neural field representations with
well-established traditional graphics pipelines opens up
many possibilities in VR/AR, interactive gaming, virtual
tourism, education, training, and computer animation.
Volume rendering [56] has demonstrated its capability
to produce visually captivating results for participating media [53]. However, integrating NN-based NeRF into this
*Equal contribution

385

