This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TransFace: Calibrating Transformer Training for Face Recognition from a
Data-Centric Perspective
Jun Dan *1 , Yang Liu *2 , Haoyu Xie2 , Jiankang Deng3 ,
Haoran Xie4 , Xuansong Xie2 , Baigui Sun †2
1
Zhejiang University 2 Alibaba DAMO Academy 3 Imperial College London 4 Tsinghua University
danjun@zju.edu.cn,j.deng16@imperial.ac.uk,xiehr20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{ly261666, xiehaoyu.xhy,xingtong.xxs, baigui.sbg}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have demonstrated powerful representation ability in various visual tasks thanks to
their intrinsic data-hungry nature. However, we unexpectedly find that ViTs perform vulnerably when applied to face
recognition (FR) scenarios with extremely large datasets.
We investigate the reasons for this phenomenon and discover that the existing data augmentation approach and
hard sample mining strategy are incompatible with ViTsbased FR backbone due to the lack of tailored consideration
on preserving face structural information and leveraging
each local token information. To remedy these problems,
this paper proposes a superior FR model called TransFace,
which employs a patch-level data augmentation strategy
named DPAP and a hard sample mining strategy named
EHSM. Specially, DPAP randomly perturbs the amplitude
information of dominant patches to expand sample diversity, which effectively alleviates the overfitting problem in
ViTs. EHSM utilizes the information entropy in the local tokens to dynamically adjust the importance weight
of easy and hard samples during training, leading to a
more stable prediction. Experiments on several benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our TransFace. Code
and models are available at https://github.com/
DanJun6737/TransFace.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) [23, 32] have achieved remarkable success in the
computer vision community, thanks to the availability of
large-scale datasets. Recently, the introduction of Vision
Transformers (ViTs) [12] has caught the attention of the
* Equal Contribution, † Corresponding Author .

computer vision community due to their powerful representation abilities. Unlike CNN models, ViTs lack some
convolution-like inductive biases, such as translation equivariance and locality, leading to challenges in the convergence of the ViTs backbone. To remedy this problem, pioneering works [61, 12, 4, 82] point out the rationale behind this derives from its data-hungry nature, indicating
that a superior ViTs representation would be supported by
large-scale training data. By taking advantage of their intrinsic data-hungry property, ViTs are commonly used to
serve as an alternative backbone on several visual tasks
[44, 12, 61, 58, 15, 17].
However, when considering an extremely data-adequate
scenario to satisfy ViTs’ data-hungry property, namely Face
Recognition (FR), we unexpectedly discover that the performance of ViTs is almost equal to that of CNNs [80]. To
explore why ViTs perform vulnerably in the FR realm, we
investigate the training process of ViTs. From a data-centric
perspective, we discover that the instance-level data augmentation approach and hard sample mining strategy are
incompatible for ViTs-based FR backbone due to the lack
of tailored consideration on preserving face structural information and leveraging each local token information (illustrated in Fig. 1). To handle these drawbacks, we make
two following efforts: (i) Identify why and how to devise
a patch-level data augmentation strategy on the ViTs-based
FR backbone. (ii) Unveil why and how to mine representative token information.
Patch-level Data Augmentation Strategy. Due to the lack
of inductive biases, ViT-based models are hard to train and
prone to overfitting [61, 12, 4]. To alleviate the overfitting
phenomenon, existing works [61, 82, 70] attempt several
data augmentation strategies, such as Random Erasing [81],
Mixup [76], CutMix [75], RandAugment [7] and their variants [4, 19, 61, 38], to construct diverse training samples.
However, these instance-level data augmentation strategies
are not suitable for the FR task, because they will inevitably

20642

