This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-Guided Reconstruction of Everyday Hand-Object Interaction Clips
Yufei Ye

Poorvi Hebbar
Abhinav Gupta
Carnegie Mellon University

Shubham Tulsiani

{yufeiy2, phebbar, gabhinav, shubhtuls}@andrew.cmu.edu
https://judyye.github.io/diffhoi

Figure 1. Given a video clip depicting a hand-object interaction, we infer the underlying 3D shape of both the hand and the object. Top:
sampled input frames; Middle: reconstruction visualized in the image frame; Bottom: reconstruction from a novel view. Please see the
website for reconstruction videos.

Abstract
We tackle the task of reconstructing hand-object interactions from short video clips. Given an input video, our approach casts 3D inference as a per-video optimization and
recovers a neural 3D representation of the object shape,
as well as the time-varying motion and hand articulation.
While the input video naturally provides some multi-view
cues to guide 3D inference, these are insufficient on their
own due to occlusions and limited viewpoint variations.
To obtain accurate 3D, we augment the multi-view signals with generic data-driven priors to guide reconstruction. Specifically, we learn a diffusion network to model the
conditional distribution of (geometric) renderings of objects
conditioned on hand configuration and category label, and
leverage it as a prior to guide the novel-view renderings
of the reconstructed scene. We empirically evaluate our
approach on egocentric videos across 6 object categories,
and observe significant improvements over prior singleview and multi-view methods. Finally, we demonstrate our
system’s ability to reconstruct arbitrary clips from YouTube,
showing both 1st and 3rd person interactions.

1. Introduction
Our hands allow us to affect the world around us. From
pouring the morning coffee to clearing the dinner table, we
continually use our hands to interact with surrounding objects. In this work, we pursue the task of understanding such
everyday interactions in 3D. Specifically, given a short clip
of a human interacting with a rigid object, our approach
can infer the shape of the underlying object as well as its
(time-varying) relative transformation w.r.t. an articulated
hand (see Fig. 1 for sample results).
This task of recovering 3D representations of handobject interactions (HOI) has received growing interest.
While initial approaches [4, 16, 22, 40, 69] framed it as 6DoF pose task estimation for known 3D objects/templates,
subsequent methods have tackled the reconstruction of apriori unknown objects [24, 33, 83]. Although single-view 3D
reconstruction approaches can leverage data-driven techniques to reconstruct HOI images [24, 83, 90], these approaches cannot obtain precise reconstructions given the
fundamentally limited nature of the single-view input. On
the other hand, current video-based HOI reconstruction
methods primarily exploit multi-view cues and rely on
purely geometry-driven optimization for reconstruction. As

19717

