This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reconstructing Interacting Hands with Interaction Prior from Monocular
Images
Binghui Zuo1 Zimeng Zhao1 Wenqian Sun1
1

Southeast University, China

2

Wei Xie1 Zhou Xue2

Yangang Wang1 *

Pico IDL, ByteDance, Beijing

Abstract
Reconstructing interacting hands from monocular images is indispensable in AR/VR applications. Most existing solutions rely on the accurate localization of each
skeleton joint. However, these methods tend to be unreliable due to the severe occlusion and confusing similarity among adjacent hand parts. This also defies human
perception because humans can quickly imitate an interaction pattern without localizing all joints. Our key idea
is to first construct a two-hand interaction prior and recast the interaction reconstruction task as the conditional
sampling from the prior. To expand more interaction states,
a large-scale multimodal dataset with physical plausibility
is proposed. Then a VAE is trained to further condense
these interaction patterns as latent codes in a prior distribution. When looking for image cues that contribute to interaction prior sampling, we propose the interaction adjacency heatmap (IAH). Compared with a joint-wise heatmap
for localization, IAH assigns denser visible features to
those invisible joints. Compared with an all-in-one visible heatmap, it provides more fine-grained local interaction information in each interaction region. Finally, the
correlations between the extracted features and corresponding interaction codes are linked by the ViT module. Comprehensive evaluations on benchmark datasets have verified the effectiveness of this framework. The code and
dataset are publicly available at https://github.
com/binghui-z/InterPrior_pytorch.

1. Introduction
Reconstruction of interacting hands is significant for enhancing the behavioral realism of digital avatars in com* Corresponding author. E-mail: yangangwang@seu.edu.cn. All the
authors from Southeast University are affiliated with the Key Laboratory of
Measurement and Control of Complex Systems of Engineering, Ministry
of Education, Nanjing, China. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62076061), in part by
the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20220127).

Figure 1. Illustration of reconstructing interacting hands from
monocular images by our framework. Left: Using a ViT-based
fusion network, we map the extracted features from inputs to the
learned latent space. Right: We sample reasonable reconstructions
from the pre-built interaction prior.

munication, thinking and working. With the advent of the
RGB dataset [43] recording two-hand interactions, numerous attempts have been implemented to reconstruct interacting hands from monocular RGB images. Inspired by
the existing single-hand frameworks [23, 69, 7], pioneer
works [64, 12] localize and identify all two-hand joints
as the interacting clues. Unfortunately, this process can
be seriously misguided by the regional occlusion and local similarity between hands. Subsequent improvements include optimizing re-projection errors [51], localizing mesh
vertices from coarse to fine [34], and querying all-in-one
visible heatmap [27, 16]. Nevertheless, they still rely on
more accurate joint 2D estimators, more diverse marker-less
training data, or more computational complexity.
To overcome this hurdle, our key idea is to first construct a comprehensive interaction prior with multimodal datasets and then sample this pre-built prior according to the interaction cues extracted from a monocular image. It is noted that existing frameworks are al-

9054

