This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Source-free Domain Adaptive Human Pose Estimation
Qucheng Peng, Ce Zheng, Chen Chen
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
{qucheng.peng,ce.zheng}@ucf.edu, chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Human Pose Estimation (HPE) is widely used in various
fields, including motion analysis, healthcare, and virtual reality. However, the great expenses of labeled real-world
datasets present a significant challenge for HPE. To overcome this, one approach is to train HPE models on synthetic
datasets and then perform domain adaptation (DA) on realworld data. Unfortunately, existing DA methods for HPE
neglect data privacy and security by using both source and
target data in the adaptation process.
To this end, we propose a new task, named sourcefree domain adaptive HPE, which aims to address the
challenges of cross-domain learning of HPE without access to source data during the adaptation process. We
further propose a novel framework that consists of three
models: source model, intermediate model, and target model, which explores the task from both sourceprotect and target-relevant perspectives. The sourceprotect module preserves source information more effectively while resisting noise, and the target-relevant module
reduces the sparsity of spatial representations by building
a novel spatial probability space, and pose-specific contrastive learning and information maximization are proposed on the basis of this space. Comprehensive experiments on several domain adaptive HPE benchmarks show
that the proposed method outperforms existing approaches
by a considerable margin. The codes are available at
https://github.com/davidpengucf/SFDAHPE.

1. Introduction
The accuracy of 2D human pose estimation (HPE) from
monocular images has been significantly improved through
the use of deep neural networks. However, obtaining sufficient labeled data for training such models is a laborious and time-consuming task, particularly for real-world
datasets that require diverse appearances and poses with
ground truth annotations. In contrast, the development of
computer graphics and game engines has facilitated the generation of annotated synthetic datasets that can generate a

virtually unlimited number of labeled samples. Nevertheless, models trained on synthetic data may not perform well
on real-world data due to the domain gap or differences in
data distribution. To address this challenge, domain adaptation (DA) is essential to enable synthetic data-trained models to generalize to real-world data.
Recently, source-free domain adaptation has gained significant attention due to its practicality in real-world scenarios, where using labeled source data during the adaptation
is expensive or not feasible due to data privacy and security concerns. However, existing source-free domain adaptation methods in classification tasks may not be directly
applicable to more complex tasks, such as 2D human pose
estimation (HPE). This is because HPE requires estimating
the spatial locations of different body joints, instead of just
the object’s category as classification does, making it more
challenging to adapt from source to target domains. Therefore, there is a pressing need to develop effective sourcefree domain adaptation techniques specifically tailored to
HPE tasks. This motivates us to propose a new task named
source-free domain adaptive HPE in this paper.
The task of source-free domain adaptive HPE presents
challenges from both the source-free DA and pose estimation perspectives. Specifically, in traditional DA tasks,
source data can participate in the adaptation process, allowing for a focus on reducing domain shifts between source
and target. However, in source-free DA, only the pretrained
source model can be used during adaptation, leading to
catastrophic forgetting of the source domain. Directly applying the source pretrained model can also introduce noise
due to domain shifts. Therefore, balancing the absorption
of the source model’s knowledge with the resistance of the
source model’s noise is critical. Current methods tend to
adopt a progressive replacement strategy to alleviate the
runoff of source information. For example, [21, 22] use the
previous model to supervise ongoing adaptation, thereby
evoking the source-related memory, while [32, 6] use the
exponential moving average (EMA) strategy to slow down
the forgetting of the source. Although these methods alleviate the negative impact of noise successfully, they modify the overall parameters of the pretrained source model

4826

