This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tracking Everything Everywhere All at Once
Qianqian Wang1,2 Yen-Yu Chang1 Ruojin Cai1 Zhengqi Li2
Bharath Hariharan1 Aleksander Holynski2,3 Noah Snavely1,2
1

Cornell University

2

Google Research

3

UC Berkeley

Figure 1: We present a new method for estimating full-length motion trajectories for every pixel in every frame of a video, as illustrated by
the motion paths shown above. For clarity, we only show sparse trajectories for foreground objects, though our method computes motion for
all pixels. Our method yields accurate, coherent long-range motion even for fast-moving objects, and robustly tracks through occlusions as
shown in the dog and swing examples. For context, in the second row we depict the moving object at different moments in time.

Abstract
We present a new test-time optimization method for estimating dense and long-range motion from a video sequence.
Prior optical flow or particle video tracking algorithms typically operate within limited temporal windows, struggling to
track through occlusions and maintain global consistency of
estimated motion trajectories. We propose a complete and
globally consistent motion representation, dubbed OmniMotion, that allows for accurate, full-length motion estimation
of every pixel in a video. OmniMotion represents a video
using a quasi-3D canonical volume and performs pixel-wise
tracking via bijections between local and canonical space.
This representation allows us to ensure global consistency,
track through occlusions, and model any combination of
camera and object motion. Extensive evaluations on the
TAP-Vid benchmark and real-world footage show that our
approach outperforms prior state-of-the-art methods by a
large margin both quantitatively and qualitatively. See our
project page for more results: omnimotion.github.io.

1. Introduction
Motion estimation methods have traditionally followed
one of two dominant approaches: sparse feature tracking
and dense optical flow [53]. While each type of method
has proven effective for their respective applications, neither
representation fully models the motion of a video: pairwise
optical flow fails to capture motion trajectories over long
temporal windows, and sparse tracking does not model the
motion of all pixels.
A number of approaches have sought to close this gap,
i.e., to estimate both dense and long-range pixel trajectories
in a video. These range from methods that simply chain
together two-frame optical flow fields, to more recent approaches that directly predict per-pixel trajectories across
multiple frames [22]. Still, these methods all use limited
context when estimating motion, disregarding information
that is either temporally or spatially distant. This locality can
result in accumulated errors over long trajectories and spatiotemporal inconsistencies in the motion estimates. Even when
prior methods do consider long-range context [53], they op-

19795

