This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Diversity in Zero-Shot GAN Adaptation with Semantic Variations
Seogkyu Jeon1 * Bei Liu2
1

Pilhyeon Lee1

Yonsei University

2

Kibeom Hong1,3

Microsoft Research Asia

Jianlong Fu2
3

Hyeran Byun1†

SwatchOn

jone9312@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Training deep generative models usually requires a large
amount of data. To alleviate the data collection cost, the
task of zero-shot GAN adaptation aims to reuse well-trained
generators to synthesize images of an unseen target domain
without any further training samples. Due to the data absence, the textual description of the target domain and the
vision-language models, e.g., CLIP, are utilized to effectively guide the generator. However, with only a single representative text feature instead of real images, the synthesized images gradually lose diversity as the model is optimized, which is also known as mode collapse. To tackle the
problem, we propose a novel method to find semantic variations of the target text in the CLIP space. Specifically, we explore diverse semantic variations based on the informative
text feature of the target domain while regularizing the uncontrolled deviation of the semantic information. With the
obtained variations, we design a novel directional moment
loss that matches the first and second moments of image and
text direction distributions. Moreover, we introduce elastic weight consolidation and a relation consistency loss to
effectively preserve valuable content information from the
source domain, e.g., appearances. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed methods
in ensuring sample diversity in various scenarios of zeroshot GAN adaptation. We also conduct ablation studies to
validate the effect of each proposed component. Notably,
our model achieves a new state-of-the-art on zero-shot GAN
adaptation in terms of both diversity and quality.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep generative models, especially generative adversarial networks (GANs) [9], have shown dramatic advancements by successfully mimicking the real distribution of images [3, 13, 6]. However, as diagnosed in the
literature [47, 25], building powerful generative models re* Work done during his internship at Microsoft Research Asia
† Corresponding author

quires a huge number of visual samples as well as expensive
training costs. This essentially restricts the applicability of
the models to domains where it is prohibitively expensive
or even infeasible to collect sufficient data, such as medical
images or artworks of specific artists. To alleviate the limitation, researchers give their attention to the task of GAN
adaptation, which aims to reuse the representation power of
well-trained generators for synthesizing images of a target
domain. To this end, existing works manage to transfer the
generation capability of pre-trained GANs to unseen target
domains by exploiting a tiny dataset [40] with only a few visual samples (i.e., few-shot) [39, 22, 23, 28, 34, 29], or even
no data at all (i.e., zero-shot) [8]. This paper focuses on the
zero-shot setting, where a generative model pre-trained on a
source dataset is supposed to be adapted to an unseen target
domain that contains no visual samples for training.
In order to perform adaptation with no accessibility
to data of the target domain, the previous work hinges
on the powerful vision-language model, i.e., CLIP [32],
which learns the shared latent space between vision and text
modalities. Specifically, StyleGAN-NADA [8] embeds two
textual prompts respectively describing the source and target domains into the CLIP space and derives the difference
vector between them. Considering the difference vector to
be the guiding direction, the generated images gradually
step toward the target domain. Eventually, the generator
is able to synthesize visually plausible images of the target
domain even without seeing any samples of the domain.
However, the adapted model with only a single guiding
direction suffers from mode collapse. That is, the generated
target samples share the same characteristics without distinction. For instance, the generated faces under the “Phototo-Pixar” scenario have exactly the same attributes, e.g.,
emotional expression, slightly opened mouth, dark hair (figure 1 (a) center). In another example, the results under
the “Dog-to-Cat” scenario exhibit nearly identical cat faces
with few differences (figure 1 (b) center). These problems
come from the one-to-one mechanism of the CLIP text encoder; given a single guiding direction, the adapted generator is unable to handle the diversity of the target domain. Intuitively, the target textual prompt provides the most general

7258

