This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NCHO: Unsupervised Learning for
Neural 3D Composition of Humans and Objects
Taeksoo Kim1
Shunsuke Saito2
Hanbyul Joo1
1
2
Seoul National University
Meta Reality Labs
taeksu98@snu.ac.kr

shunsuke.saito16@gmail.com

hbjoo@snu.ac.kr

Figure 1. From raw 3D scans of the “source human” in casual clothing with additional outwear or objects (left), our method automatically
decomposes objects from the source human and builds a compositional generative model that enables 3D avatar creations of novel human
identities with variety of outwear and objects (right) in an unsupervised manner.

Abstract
Deep generative models have been recently extended
to synthesizing 3D digital humans. However, previous approaches treat clothed humans as a single chunk of geometry
without considering the compositionality of clothing and
accessories. As a result, individual items cannot be naturally
composed into novel identities, leading to limited expressiveness and controllability of generative 3D avatars. While
several methods attempt to address this by leveraging synthetic data, the interaction between humans and objects
is not authentic due to the domain gap, and manual asset
creation is difficult to scale for a wide variety of objects.
In this work, we present a novel framework for learning
a compositional generative model of humans and objects
(backpacks, coats, scarves, and more) from real-world 3D
scans. Our compositional model is interaction-aware, meaning the spatial relationship between humans and objects, and
the mutual shape change by physical contact is fully incorporated. The key challenge is that, since humans and objects

are in contact, their 3D scans are merged into a single piece.
To decompose them without manual annotations, we propose
to leverage two sets of 3D scans of a single person with and
without objects. Our approach learns to decompose objects
and naturally compose them back into a generative human
model in an unsupervised manner. Despite our simple setup
requiring only the capture of a single subject with objects,
our experiments demonstrate the strong generalization of
our model by enabling the natural composition of objects
to diverse identities in various poses and the composition
of multiple objects, which is unseen in training data. The
project page is available at https://taeksuu.github.io/ncho.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling of 3D humans from real-world data
has shown promise to represent and synthesize diverse human shapes, poses, and motions. Especially, the ability to
create realistic humans with diverse clothing and accessories

14817

