This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SkeletonMAE: Graph-based Masked Autoencoder for Skeleton Sequence
Pre-training

1

Hong Yan1 * Yang Liu1 * † Yushen Wei1 Zhen Li2 Guanbin Li1 Liang Lin1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
{yanh36,weiysh8}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {liuy856,liguanbin}@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
lizhen@cuhk.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract

2D poses

Skeleton sequence representation learning has shown
great advantages for action recognition due to its promising ability to model human joints and topology. However,
the current methods usually require sufﬁcient labeled data
for training computationally expensive models. Moreover,
these methods ignore how to utilize the ﬁne-grained dependencies among different skeleton joints to pre-train an
efﬁcient skeleton sequence learning model that can generalize well across different datasets. In this paper, we
propose an efﬁcient skeleton sequence learning framework,
named Skeleton Sequence Learning (SSL). To comprehensively capture the human pose and obtain discriminative
skeleton sequence representation, we build an asymmetric graph-based encoder-decoder pre-training architecture
named SkeletonMAE, which embeds skeleton joint sequence
into graph convolutional network and reconstructs the
masked skeleton joints and edges based on the prior human
topology knowledge. Then, the pre-trained SkeletonMAE
encoder is integrated with the Spatial-Temporal Representation Learning (STRL) module to build the SSL framework. Extensive experimental results show that our SSL
generalizes well across different datasets and outperforms
the state-of-the-art self-supervised skeleton-based methods
on FineGym, Diving48, NTU 60 and NTU 120 datasets.
Moreover, we obtain comparable performance to some fully
supervised methods. The code is avaliable at https:
//github.com/HongYan1123/SkeletonMAE.

Reconstructed
Masked Skeleton
Mask arm joints
Skeleton
MAE

Salto backward
tucked

Randomly mask
MAE

濇
濁
濅
濈

Salto backward
tucked
with 1 twist

Adjacent edge

(a)
Joint

濇

Mask arm joints
Skeleton
MAE
Randomly mask

MAE
濇
濁
(b)
Masked adjacent edge

(c)
Masked joint

Figure 1: Traditional MAE usually uses random masking strategy to reconstruct skeleton, which tends to ignore
action-sensitive skeleton regions. Differently, our proposed
SkeletonMAE reconstructs the masked skeleton joints and
edges based on the prior human topology knowledge, to obtain a comprehensive perception of the action.
computer interaction, intelligent surveillance security, virtual reality, etc. In terms of visual perception [24], even
without appearance information, humans can identify action categories by only observing the motion of joints. Unlike RGB videos [3, 14, 13], the skeleton sequences only
contain the coordinate information of the key joints of the
human body [84], which is high-level, light-weighted, and
robust against complex backgrounds and various conditions
including viewpoint, scale, and movement speed [11, 69].
Additionally, with the development of human pose estimation algorithms [8, 1, 85], the localization method of human
joints (i.e., key points) has made great progress and it is
feasible to obtain accurate skeleton sequences. At present,
the existing 2D pose estimation method is more accurate
and more robust than the 3D pose estimation methods [11].
In Figure 1 (a), we visualize 2D poses estimated with HRNet [67] for two action classes on FineGym dataset [59]. It

1. Introduction
Human action recognition has attracted increasing attention in video understanding [83, 7, 45, 60, 39], due to its
wide applications [2, 14, 61, 51, 52, 86, 44] in human* Both authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

5606

