This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Global Knowledge Calibration for Fast Open-Vocabulary Segmentation
Kunyang Han1,2 ∗ , Yong Liu3 ∗ , Jun Hao Liew4 , Henghui Ding5 , Jiajun Liu4
Yitong Wang4 , Yansong Tang3 , Yujiu Yang3 , Jiashi Feng4 , Yao Zhao1,2 , Yunchao Wei1,2
1

2

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
3
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
4
ByteDance 5 Nanyang Technological University

Abstract

* Equal contribution. Work done during internships at ByteDance.

Corresponding author.

mIoU on seen categories (COCO)

55

Recent advancements in pre-trained vision-language
models, such as CLIP, have enabled the segmentation of arbitrary concepts solely from textual inputs, a process commonly referred to as open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVS). However, existing OVS techniques confront a
fundamental challenge: the trained classifier tends to overfit on the base classes observed during training, resulting in
suboptimal generalization performance to unseen classes.
To mitigate this issue, recent studies have proposed the use
of an additional frozen pre-trained CLIP for classification.
Nonetheless, this approach incurs heavy computational
overheads as the CLIP vision encoder must be repeatedly
forward-passed for each mask, rendering it impractical for
real-world applications. To address this challenge, our objective is to develop a fast OVS model that can perform comparably or better without the extra computational burden of
the CLIP image encoder during inference. To this end, we
propose a core idea of preserving the generalizable representation when fine-tuning on known classes. Specifically,
we introduce a text diversification strategy that generates
a set of synonyms for each training category, which prevents the learned representation from collapsing onto specific known category names. Additionally, we employ a textguided knowledge distillation method to preserve the generalizable knowledge of CLIP. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed model achieves robust generalization performance across various datasets. Furthermore,
we perform a preliminary exploration of open-vocabulary
video segmentation and present a benchmark that can facilitate future open-vocabulary research in the video domain.

50

Ours
w/ frozen CLIP
w/o frozen CLIP

Ours

45
40

w/ frozen CLIP

35 w/o frozen CLIP
30
35

38

41

44

mIoU on unseen categories (PC-59)

47

Figure 1. Performance vs. computational cost. The radius of the
circle represents the FLOPs during inference. To avoid overfitting
to the seen categories, some methods [14, 44] introduce an extra
frozen CLIP during inference. However, such a strategy leads to
heavy computation overhead (red •). In comparison, our method
generalizes well on both seen and unseen categories with much
smaller computational cost (blue •).

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to group pixels that belong
to the same categories. Despite achieving high performance
in recent years [30, 11, 38, 42, 4, 19, 16, 36, 48, 49], existing
semantic segmentation approaches often rely on predefined
sets of training categories and thus cannot recognize categories that were not present during training. This limitation
greatly restricts their practical applicability. In contrast, humans possess the ability to recognize novel categories in
an open-vocabulary manner, i.e., identifying objects using
arbitrary text from an unbounded vocabulary. This ability
has inspired the development of open-vocabulary segmentation methods [14, 44, 47, 21, 18, 41, 25]. Unlike traditional closed-set segmentation, open-vocabulary segmentation can segment arbitrary categories given only text inputs,

797

