This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Optimizing the Placement of Roadside LiDARs for Autonomous Driving
Wentao Jiang1,2,4 Hao Xiang3 Xinyu Cai2 Runsheng Xu3
Jiaqi Ma3 Yikang Li2 * Gim Hee Lee4 Si Liu1 *
1
Beihang University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 UCLA 4 NUS

(a) Bird’s eye view of a simulated scene

(b) Random roadside LiDAR placement (c) Optimized roadside LiDAR placement

Figure 1: An example of roadside LiDAR placement optimization. (a) is a simulated scene in CARLA, where red circles
indicate potential LiDAR deployment locations. We perform a random selection as well as our proposed method to select 3
locations for LiDAR setup, as shown in (b) and (c). The green and red bounding boxes denote the ground truth vehicles and
the detected vehicles using the detection model, respectively. It can be observed that by optimizing the placement, the red
box overlaps more with the green box, indicating an improvement in the detection performance.

Abstract
Multi-agent cooperative perception is an increasingly
popular topic in the field of autonomous driving, where
roadside LiDARs play an essential role. However, how to
optimize the placement of roadside LiDARs is a crucial
but often overlooked problem. This paper proposes an approach to optimize the placement of roadside LiDARs by selecting optimized positions within the scene for better perception performance. To efficiently obtain the best combination of locations, a greedy algorithm based on perceptual
gain is proposed, which selects the location that can maximize the perceptual gain sequentially. We define perceptual
gain as the increased perceptual capability when a new LiDAR is placed. To obtain the perception capability, we propose a perception predictor that learns to evaluate LiDAR
placement using only a single point cloud frame. A dataset
named Roadside-Opt is created using the CARLA simulator to facilitate research on the roadside LiDAR placement
problem. Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

* Equal corresponding author

1. Introduction
Accurate perception of the driving environment is critical for autonomous driving, and recent advancements in
deep learning have significantly improved the robustness of
single-vehicle perception algorithms in tasks such as object
detection [19, 29, 10, 1, 26, 34, 39]. Compared to singlevehicle perception, utilizing both vehicle and infrastructure
sensors for collaborative perception brings significant advantages, such as a global perspective beyond the current
horizon and coverage of blind spots. Current progress in
multi-agent communication has enabled such collaboration
by sharing the visual data with other agents [36, 2, 25, 33].
Among the collaboration, the LiDAR sensors play a critical role as they can provide reliable geometry information
and be directly transferred to real-world coordinate systems
from any agent’s perspective[6].
To optimize the LiDAR perception performance, the
placement of LiDAR sensors is critical [14]. However, current research mainly focuses on the placement of LiDAR
sensors on vehicles and neglects the placement problem for
roadside LiDAR [14, 23]. As Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X)
applications continue to develop, it becomes increasingly
important to determine the optimal placement for roadside

18381

