This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EdaDet: Open-Vocabulary Object Detection Using Early Dense Alignment
Cheng Shi, Sibei Yang†
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
{shicheng2022,yangsb}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Project page: https://chengshiest.github.io/edadet

Abstract

(a) Quantitative Results

More Resources Only VLMs

36.9

Vision-language models such as CLIP have boosted the
performance of open-vocabulary object detection, where
the detector is trained on base categories but required to
detect novel categories. Existing methods leverage CLIP’s
strong zero-shot recognition ability to align object-level embeddings with textual embeddings of categories. However,
we observe that using CLIP for object-level alignment results in overfitting to base categories, i.e., novel categories
most similar to base categories have particularly poor performance as they are recognized as similar base categories.
In this paper, we first identify that the loss of critical finegrained local image semantics hinders existing methods
from attaining strong base-to-novel generalization. Then,
we propose Early Dense Alignment (EDA) to bridge the gap
between generalizable local semantics and object-level prediction. In EDA, we use object-level supervision to learn
the dense-level rather than object-level alignment to maintain the local fine-grained semantics. Extensive experiments demonstrate our superior performance to competing
approaches under the same strict setting and without using
external training resources, i.e., improving the +8.4% novel
box AP50 on COCO and +3.9% rare mask AP on LVIS.

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary object detection aims to localize and
recognize objects of both base categories and novel categories when only the training labels on base categories are
available. Beyond focusing on object detection on a closed
set of categories [20, 3, 39, 30, 43], open-vocabulary detection requires generalizing well from base to all novel categories without annotations for each novel category.
One straightforward idea is to generate pseudo-proposals
relevant to novel categories and train detectors with base
and novel categories (see Figure 1b), adopted by [54, 28,
14, 38, 2]. They usually first extract concepts relevant to
novel categories and then generate proposals of novel con† Corresponding author

COCO
CLIP-RPN
LVIS
CLIP-RPN

(b)

27.8

26.6

21.1

19.3

17.8

OC-ovd PromptDet Detic
External Training Resource

“cattle”
“castle”

Label
From

VLM

Learn
From

DTer

28.0

27.6

23.7
18.6

16.1

VilD

“a herd of cattle
walking before a castle”
Pseudo Novel
Proposals

37.8

40.2†

F-VLM

Ours

DTer

Detector with
Base Data

VLM

Pretrained
VL Model

(c)

DTer

Learn
From

VLM

Figure 1: Different approaches to building an open-vocabulary
detector: (a) their performance comparison. † : with self-training.
(b) generate pseudo “novel” proposals from extra training resources and VLMs, or (c) generalize from VLMs

cepts from extra training resources. Among them, some
works [54, 14, 38] follow the weak open-vocabulary setting [48], where the class names of novel categories directly corresponding to novel concepts are available in the
training phase. Alternatively, some works [50, 28] extract
novel concepts from captions or image-text pairs. Although
these approaches have improved the performance of detecting novel categories, the need for additional training resources that heavily overlap with or are relevant to novel
categories would limit them to practical applications.
Recently, contrastive pre-training of vision-language
models (VLMs) like CLIP [34] and ALIGN [22] have
shown strong open-vocabulary image recognition ability.
Some open-vocabulary detection works [16, 13, 50, 26, 47]
explore utilizing VLMs to learn transferable object representations. Figure 2b shows a high-level abstraction of
these open-vocabulary detection frameworks. Although
they plug well-designed methods to close the gap between
visual representation learning for objects and images, they

15724

