This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Novel Category Discovery Over Domains
with Soft Contrastive Learning and All in One Classifier
Zelin Zang∗

Lei Shang∗

Senqiao Yang∗

Westlake University

Alibaba Group

Westlake University

zangzelin@westlake.edu.cn

sl172005@alibaba-inc.com

yangsenqiao.ai@gmail.com

Fei Wang, Baigui Sun, Xuansong Xie

Stan Z. Li†

Alibaba Group

Westlake University

{steven.wf}{baigui.sbg}{xingtong.xxs}@alibaba-inc.com

Stan.ZQ.Li@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has proven to
be highly effective in transferring knowledge from a labelrich source domain to a label-scarce target domain. However, the presence of additional novel categories in the
target domain has led to the development of open-set domain adaptation (ODA) and universal domain adaptation
(UNDA). Existing ODA and UNDA methods treat all novel
categories as a single, unified unknown class and attempt
to detect it during training. However, we found that domain
variance can lead to more significant view-noise in unsupervised data augmentation, which affects the effectiveness
of contrastive learning (CL) and causes the model to be
overconfident in novel category discovery. To address these
issues, a framework named Soft-contrastive All-in-one Network (SAN) is proposed for ODA and UNDA tasks. SAN
includes a novel data-augmentation-based soft contrastive
learning (SCL) loss to fine-tune the backbone for feature
transfer and a more human-intuitive classifier to improve
new class discovery capability. The SCL loss weakens the
adverse effects of the data augmentation view-noise problem which is amplified in domain transfer tasks. The All-inOne (AIO) classifier overcomes the overconfidence problem
of current mainstream closed-set and open-set classifiers.
Visualization and ablation experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed innovations. Furthermore, extensive experiment results on ODA and UNDA show that
SAN outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods.

The ∗ indicates equal contribution, † indicates corresponding author.
Zelin Zang, Senqiao Yang and Stan Z. Li are at AI Lab, Research Center
for Industries of the Future, Westlake University.

1. Introduction
In practical applications of classifiers, it is important to
discover novel category that do not exist in the training
data. Domain adaptation (DA) is a technique that transfers knowledge from label-rich training domains to new domains [1]. It has the potential to address new categories of
discovery by investigating the generalization of deep models to new domains. Traditional unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [14] assumes that the source domain and the
target domain completely share the sets of categories, i.e.,
closed-set DA. However, this assumption does not often
hold in practice. There are several possible situations, such
as the target domain containing types absent in the source
(unknown categories), i.e., open-set DA (ODA) [3, 28],
the source domain including classes absent in the target
(source-private categories), i.e., partial DA (PDA) [4], or a
mixture of ODA and PDA, called open-partial DA (OPDA).
Although many approaches have been tailored to a specific setting, we cannot know the category shift in advance,
which is an actual difficulty. To account for the uncertainty
about the category shift, the task of universal domain adaptation (UNDA) is proposed [38, 26]. The assumption is that
the label distributions of labeled and unlabeled data can differ, but we do not know the difference in advance. UNDA is
a uniform and practical setting for novel category discovery
since estimating the label distributions of unlabeled data is
very hard in real applications.
The two main objectives of ODA and UNDA tasks are
feature transfer and novel category discovery. However,
the current methods have limitations in achieving both objectives, which hinders further improvement of these tasks.
Specific problems are depicted in Fig. 1.
The view-noise problem in data augmentation affects
the feature transfer. Recently, data-augmentation-based
contrastive learning (CL) has been used for unsupervised
11858

