This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionLM: Multi-Agent Motion Forecasting as Language Modeling
Ari Seff

Brian Cera Dian Chen⇤ Mason Ng Aurick Zhou Nigamaa Nayakanti
Khaled S. Refaat Rami Al-Rfou Benjamin Sapp
Waymo

Vocabulary

Abstract

1. Introduction
Modern sequence models often employ a next-token prediction objective that incorporates minimal domain-specific
assumptions. For example, autoregressive language models [3, 10] are pre-trained to maximize the probability of
the next observed subword conditioned on the previous text;
there is no predefined notion of parsing or syntax built in.
This approach has found success in continuous domains as
well, such as audio [2] and image generation [49]. Leveraging the flexibility of arbitrary categorical distributions, the
above works represent continuous data with a set of discrete
⇤ Work done during an internship at Waymo.

Contact: {aseff, bensapp}@waymo.com

…

…

Reliable forecasting of the future behavior of road agents
is a critical component to safe planning in autonomous vehicles. Here, we represent continuous trajectories as sequences of discrete motion tokens and cast multi-agent motion prediction as a language modeling task over this domain. Our model, MotionLM, provides several advantages:
First, it does not require anchors or explicit latent variable
optimization to learn multimodal distributions. Instead, we
leverage a single standard language modeling objective,
maximizing the average log probability over sequence tokens. Second, our approach bypasses post-hoc interaction
heuristics where individual agent trajectory generation is
conducted prior to interactive scoring. Instead, MotionLM
produces joint distributions over interactive agent futures in
a single autoregressive decoding process. In addition, the
model’s sequential factorization enables temporally causal
conditional rollouts. The proposed approach establishes
new state-of-the-art performance for multi-agent motion
prediction on the Waymo Open Motion Dataset, ranking 1st
on the interactive challenge leaderboard.

...

Motion token sequence:
t=1

t=2

t=T

Figure 1. Our model autoregressively generates sequences of discrete motion tokens for a set of agents to produce consistent interactive trajectory forecasts.

tokens, reminiscent of language model vocabularies.
In driving scenarios, road users may be likened to participants in a constant dialogue, continuously exchanging a
dynamic series of actions and reactions mirroring the fluidity and complexity of communication. Navigating this
rich web of interactions requires the ability to anticipate the
likely maneuvers and responses of the involved actors. Just
as today’s language models can capture sophisticated distributions over conversations, can we leverage similar sequence models to forecast the behavior of road agents?
A common simplification to modeling the full future
world state has been to decompose the joint distribution of
agent behavior into independent per-agent marginal distributions. Although there has been much progress on this
task [8, 47, 12, 25, 31, 5, 6, 21], marginal predictions are
insufficient as inputs to a planning system; they do not represent the future dependencies between the actions of different agents, leading to inconsistent scene-level forecasting.
Of the existing joint prediction approaches, some apply

8579

