This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Nerfbusters: Removing Ghostly Artifacts from Casually Captured NeRFs
Frederik Warburg∗
Ethan Weber∗
Matthew Tancik
Aleksander Holynski
Angjoo Kanazawa
University of California, Berkeley

Figure 1: Nerfbusters. Rendering NeRFs at novel views far away from training views can result in artifacts, such as floaters or bad
geometry. These artifacts are prevalent in in-the-wild captures (a) but are rarely seen in NeRF benchmarks, because evaluation views are
often selected from the same camera path as the training views. We propose a new dataset of in-the-wild captures and a more realistic
evaluation procedure (b), where each scene is captured by two paths: one for training and one for evaluation. We also propose Nerfbusters,
a 3D diffusion-based method that improves scene geometry and reduces floaters (c), significantly improving upon existing regularizers in
this more realistic evaluation setting.

Abstract
Casually captured Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) suffer from artifacts such as floaters or flawed geometry when
rendered outside the input camera trajectory. Existing evaluation protocols often do not capture these effects, since
they usually only assess image quality at every 8th frame of
the training capture. To aid in the development and evaluation of new methods in novel-view synthesis, we propose
a new dataset and evaluation procedure, where two camera
trajectories are recorded of the scene: one used for training, and the other for evaluation. In this more challenging
in-the-wild setting, we find that existing hand-crafted regularizers do not remove floaters nor improve scene geometry.
Thus, we propose a 3D diffusion-based method that leverages local 3D priors and a novel density-based score distillation sampling loss to discourage artifacts during NeRF
optimization. We show that this data-driven prior removes
floaters and improves scene geometry for casual captures.

1. Introduction
Casual captures of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [20]
are usually of lower quality than most captures shown in
NeRF papers. When a typical user (e.g., a hobbyist) captures a NeRFs, the ultimate objective is often to render a
fly-through path from a considerably different set of viewpoints than the originally captured images. This large viewpoint change between training and rendering views usually reveals floater artifacts and bad geometry, as shown
in Fig. 1a. One way to resolve these artifacts is to teach
or otherwise encourage users to more extensively capture
a scene, as is commonly done in apps such as Polycam1
and Luma2 , which will direct users to make three circles at
three different elevations looking inward at the object of interest. However, these capture processes can be tedious, and
1 https://poly.cam/
2 https://lumalabs.ai/

*Denotes equal contribution

18120

