This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Positional Characteristics of Dual-Pixel Data for Camera Autofocus
Myungsub Choi
Hana Lee
Hyong-euk Lee
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT)
{ms00.choi, hana.hn.lee, hyongeuk.lee}@samsung.com

Abstract
In digital photography, autofocus is a key feature that
aids high-quality image capture, and modern approaches
use the phase patterns arising from dual-pixel sensors as
important focus cues. However, dual-pixel data is prone to
multiple error sources in its image capturing process, including lens shading or distortions due to the inherent optical characteristics of the lens. We observe that, while these
degradations are hard to model using prior knowledge, they
are correlated with the spatial position of the pixels within
the image sensor area, and we propose a learning-based
autofocus model with positional encodings (PE) to capture
these patterns. Specifically, we introduce RoI-PE, which encodes the spatial position of our focusing region-of-interest
(RoI) on the imaging plane. Learning with RoI-PE allows
the model to be more robust to spatially-correlated degradations. In addition, we also propose to encode the current
focal position of lens as lens-PE, which allows us to significantly reduce the computational complexity of the autofocus model. Experimental results clearly demonstrate the
effectiveness of using the proposed position encodings for
automatic focusing based on dual-pixel data.

1. Introduction
Automatically focusing to the region of interest is a fundamental problem in digital photography. When an object
of interest is not in focus, the captured image will contain
defocus blur, which significantly degrades perceptual image quality. Furthermore, an autofocus module usually appears early in the image signal processing (ISP) pipeline of
a camera, making this type of blur propagate errors that are
difficult to remove.
Existing works on autofocus (AF) mainly fall into two
categories: contrast detection autofocus (CDAF) or phase
detection autofocus (PDAF). CDAF approach first defines
a sharpness metric of an image region of interest (RoI) and
then moves the lens back and forth to achieve maximum
sharpness. Since CDAF methods require a large number of
observations and physical lens movements while searching,

they are notoriously slow and power-consuming. Such limitations in contrast-based AF algorithms led to an innovative
image sensor design, i.e. phase pixels (dual/quad-pixels),
which provides an important cue for focus estimation.
PDAF approach determines that a region is in-focus by
comparing the disparity between the left and right dualpixel image. Since the amount of defocus is correlated with
the disparity, many methods pre-calibrate the relationship
between disparity and focus distance to make the prediction of the lens position in a single shot. However, these
pre-calibrated predictions can be error-prone due to many
physical / optical constraints, such as lens shading, geometrical distortions due to optical refraction of the camera lens,
or extra variations when combined with optical zoom. Note
that PDAF can be formulated as an extremely narrow (subpixel level) baseline stereo problem, and it is well known
that depth estimation is error-prone with a narrow baseline [14, 26]. Moreover, recent smartphone cameras use
smaller pixels compared to DSLRs, which makes them even
more sensitive to signal noise and distortions. Individually
modeling all error sources is impractical, and we propose a
learning-based approach to tackle these problems.
In this paper, we present a novel framework for autofocus that better leverages the dual-pixel data. We focus
on two aspects: 1) improving AF accuracy by handling
spatially-varying distortions and 2) improving efficiency to
be practically applicable even on low-end smartphones.
First, we speculate that the phase statistic of the dualpixel data is different w.r.t. its spatial position relative to the
full image sensor plane that receives light. Our motivation is
illustrated in Fig. 1, where we observe that the same object
located at the same depth can have different disparities w.r.t.
the coordinates projected on the imaging plane. We also calculate the absolute disparity of our full training dataset by
moving the lens from index 0∼49 for the patches that have
the same ground truth depth (with focal index 10). Ideally,
the calculated disparity values should be the same regardless of the relative position in the image sensor plane1 , but
1 The ideal setting assumes a thin-lens approximation. To be precise, the
disparity values of different position in the imaging plane can be different
due to the field curvature of the thick (real-world) lens, meaning that the

13158

