This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Order-Prompted Tag Sequence Generation for Video Tagging
Zongyang Ma1,2,4* , Ziqi Zhang1* , Yuxin Chen1,2,4* , Zhongang Qi2 , Yingmin Luo2 , Zekun Li6 ,
Chunfeng Yuan1 , Bing Li1† , Xiaohu Qie3 , Ying Shan2 , Weiming Hu1,4,5
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 ARC Lab, 3 Tencent PCG
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology 6 CNCERT/CC
{mazongyang2020,chenyuxin2019}@ia.ac.cn, {ziqi.zhang,cfyuan,bli,wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{zhongangqi,yingminluo,tigerqie,yingsshan}@tencent.com, lzk@cert.org.cn

Abstract
Video Tagging intends to infer multiple tags spanning
relevant content for a given video. Typically, video tags
are freely defined and uploaded by a variety of users, so
they have two characteristics: abundant in quantity and
Sportsfor the existing multidisordered intra-video. It is difficult
label classification and generation methods to adapt directly to this task. This paper proposes a novel generative model, Order-Prompted Tag Sequence Generation
(OP-TSG), according to the(a)above
characteristics. It reVideo Label
gards video tagging as a tag sequence generation problem
➢ little tips for life
guided by sample-dependent ➢
orderearrings
prompts. These prompts
homemade
practical to
gadgets
are semantically aligned with ➢
tags
and enable
decouple
➢ storage coup
tag generation order, making the model focus on modeling
(b) Video Tag
the tag dependencies. Moreover, the word-based generation
strategy enables the model to generate novel tags. To verify
there is girl in pink holding a
the effectiveness and generalization
theit proposed method,
rat andof
caring
a Chinese video tagging benchmark CREATE-tagging, and
an English image tagging benchmark
Pexel-tagging are es(c) Video Caption
tablished. Extensive results show that OP-TSG is significantly superior to other Diversity
methods, especially the results on
rare tags improve by 3.3% and 3% over SOTA methods on
CREATE-tagging and Pexel-tagging, and novel tags generated on CREATE-tagging exhibit a tag gain of 7.04%.

1. Introduction
Video tags are a series of discrete descriptive text in a
free form, usually freely defined and uploaded by video
platform users, to represent the specific content of the video.
Short video platforms have a large number of videos with no
tags or low-quality tags. Exploring automatic video tagging
technology can effectively serve practical industrial requirements such as video recommendation, retrieval, and content
review, and significantly reduce labor costs.
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Cooking

Sports

(a) Video Categories (Labels)

Abundant in quantity
• Little tips for life

• Behind wedding photos

• Earrings

• Portrait photography

• Homemade gadgets

• Wedding photography

• Storage coup

• Sweet

(b) Video Tags

Disordered intra-video
there is a girl is talking
about a mouse.

a person making stuff
out of clay.

(c) Video Captions

Figure 1. Comparison of video categories, tags, and captions.
Video tags are more abundant in quantity than categories and are
intra-video disordered compared to video captions.

Video tags have the nature of being abundant in quantity
and disordered intra-video compared with video categories
(labels)1 and video captions, respectively, as shown in Figure 1. Compared to the fixed number of video categories
strictly defined by experts, the abundance of user-defined
video tags is primarily reflected in the following two aspects: (1) Multiple perspectives for the same video, such as
entities, attributes, scenes, or styles; (2) Distinct granularities for the same content, such as separate words or more
expressive phrases. As a result, large collections of tags can
easily reach tens of thousands or even hundreds of thousands of magnitude in a large-scale scenario, presenting an
extreme long-tail distribution. Compared to video captions
1 Note that video categories and labels are generally represented in the
form of indexes, and the number is fixed and small. This paper does not
distinguish between them.

15681

