This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Complementary Domain Adaptation and Generalization
for Unsupervised Continual Domain Shift Learning

1

Wonguk Cho1 , Jinha Park2 , and Taesup Kim1∗
Graduate School of Data Science, 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Seoul National University
{wongukcho, jhpark410, taesup.kim}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms have found extensive applications in various fields such as image recognition [19, 23],
natural language processing [3, 9], and autonomous driving [5, 10]. Typically, these algorithms learn from a training dataset to build a model that performs a target task on
new data. The assumption underlying these algorithms is
that the training data and the test data are identically and
independently distributed (IID) [18], drawn from the same
distribution that is characterized by an environment or do*Corresponding Author

…

CoDAG
Pseudo Label Generation
(Improve Generalization)

Target
Domain

Target
Domain

Domain
Adaptation

Domain
Generalization

Target
Domain

…

Continual domain shift poses a significant challenge in
real-world applications, particularly in situations where labeled data is not available for new domains. The challenge
of acquiring knowledge in this problem setting is referred
to as unsupervised continual domain shift learning. Existing methods for domain adaptation and generalization have
limitations in addressing this issue, as they focus either on
adapting to a specific domain or generalizing to unseen domains, but not both. In this paper, we propose Complementary Domain Adaptation and Generalization (CoDAG),
a simple yet effective learning framework that combines
domain adaptation and generalization in a complementary
manner to achieve three major goals of unsupervised continual domain shift learning: adapting to a current domain, generalizing to unseen domains, and preventing forgetting of previously seen domains. Our approach is modelagnostic, meaning that it is compatible with any existing domain adaptation and generalization algorithms. We evaluate CoDAG on several benchmark datasets and demonstrate
that our model outperforms state-of-the-art models in all
datasets and evaluation metrics, highlighting its effectiveness and robustness in handling unsupervised continual domain shift learning.

Continual Domain Shift
with Unlabeled Data

Model Initialization
(Improve Adaptation)

Figure 1. Our proposed Complementary Domain Adaptation and
Generalization (CoDAG) framework for unsupervised continual
domain shift learning.

main. However, this IID assumption is often not valid in
real-world scenarios, as the environment in which the model
is applied is more likely to change over time than remain
fixed. This implies that the model will encounter new data
from various domains over time, and its performance may
decline if the data is from a domain that differs significantly
from the one it was trained on.
To address this issue, two main approaches have been
developed: domain generalization and domain adaptation.
Domain generalization [60] is a method to enhance a
model’s ability to generalize to unseen domains by training
the model on labeled data from one or more domains, without assuming any prior knowledge of the test environment
in which the model will be applied. However, collecting
a large volume of labeled data from various domains for a
particular task can be challenging in practice. Single-source
domain generalization techniques [46] have been developed
to address this issue, which rely solely on data from a single
domain. Although more practical, these techniques generally have lower generalization abilities compared to multisource domain generalization techniques.

11442

