This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Chaotic World: A Large and Challenging Benchmark for Human Behavior
Understanding in Chaotic Events
Kian Eng Ong1‡
1

Xun Long Ng1‡ Yanchao Li1‡ Wenjie Ai1‡
Si Yong Yeo1,2 Jun Liu1*

Information Systems Technology and Design, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
2
Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Abstract
Understanding and analyzing human behaviors (actions
and interactions of people), voices, and sounds in chaotic
events is crucial in many applications, e.g., crowd management, emergency response services. Different from human
behaviors in daily life, human behaviors in chaotic events
are generally different in how they behave and influence
others, and hence are often much more complex. However, currently there is lack of a large video dataset for
analyzing human behaviors in chaotic situations. To this
end, we create the first large and challenging multi-modal
dataset, Chaotic World, that simultaneously provides different levels of fine-grained and dense spatio-temporal annotations of sounds, individual actions and group interaction graphs, and even text descriptions for each scene in
each video, thereby enabling a thorough analysis of complicated behaviors in crowds and chaos. Our dataset consists of a total of 299,923 annotated instances for detecting human behaviors for Spatiotemporal Action Localization in chaotic events, 224,275 instances for identifying
interactions between people for Behavior Graph Analysis in chaotic events, 336,390 instances for localizing relevant scenes of interest in long videos for Spatiotemporal Event Grounding, and 378,093 instances for triangulating the source of sound for Event Sound Source Localization. Given the practical complexity and challenges in
chaotic events (e.g., large crowds, serious occlusions, complicated interaction patterns), our dataset shall be able
to facilitate the community to develop, adapt, and evaluate various types of advanced models for analyzing human behaviors in chaotic events. We also design a simple yet effective IntelliCare model with a Dynamic Knowledge Pathfinder module that intelligently learns from multiple tasks and can analyze various aspects of a chaotic scene
in a unified architecture. This method achieves promising
results in experiments. Dataset and code can be found at
https://github.com/sutdcv/Chaotic-World.

1. Introduction
Chaotic situations can occur in many scenarios, often
arising on the onset or aftermath of natural disasters or
‡

Kuangyi Zhao1

Equal contributions. * Corresponding author.

human-caused incidents such as accidents, crowd crush,
crimes, or protests. How people behave, interact, and influence others in chaotic events can be very different from
those in peaceful daily life situations (e.g., [33, 54, 20, 11]),
and are generally much more complex [43]. Also, the number of people in such scenarios can vary from a few individuals to crowd of thousands, and how they interact with
one another is complex, which warrants detailed analysis
of the situation before they evolve to become major public
safety and security concerns, and subsequently resulting in
damages to properties, injuries, or even death [31]. Even
a peaceful or joyous event can suddenly turn chaotic [31]
such as the recent unfortunate Itaewon crowd crush [56].
Ensuring public safety and order has become challenging, and costs the world at least USD$13.6 trillion each
year [15, 16]. The probability of chaotic events occurring is
likely to increase with the increased number of natural disasters due to climate change [66, 63], protests (which have
tripled in the past 15 years) [42] and violence occurrences
[15, 16] etc. Hence, the ability to closely monitor and accurately detect such sudden onset of chaotic situations and
potential accidents; rapidly analyze (especially critical during time-sensitive emergencies) humans, their actions and
interactions with others; intelligently acquire vital information about the chaotic scene; and then swiftly deploy humanitarian aid [68, 1] has become even more important than
ever, and can tremendously minimize casualties and damages [25, 61]. This area of research has also attracted greater
attention over the years [68, 50, 1, 70, 73, 8, 74, 31].
Besides being extremely critical for public safety [5],
understanding and analyzing human behaviors in chaotic
events are also significant in many applications [21, 67,
61, 8] such as the following: Firstly, event organisers,
intelligence services, and emergency services can utilize
the insights to intelligently deploy smart assistant systems,
plan safe evacuation route, manage and control crowds
[67, 61, 8]. Secondly, urban space designers can likewise
design safer and better spaces [8]. Thirdly, psychologists,
criminologists, and social behavioral scientists can learn
about the complex human interactions in chaotic situations,
so as to develop effective strategies to mitigate or handle
chaotic situations or post-chaos trauma [5]. Lastly, content

20213

