This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Neural Embedding Likelihood: Probabilistic Inverse Graphics
for Robust 6D Pose Estimation
Guangyao Zhou*
Google DeepMind
stannis@google.com
Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT
jbt@mit.edu

Nishad Gothoskar*
MIT
nishad@mit.edu

Dan Gutfreund
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
dgutfre@us.ibm.com

Dileep George
Google DeepMind
dileepgeorge@google.com

Abstract
The ability to perceive and understand 3D scenes is crucial for many applications in computer vision and robotics.
Inverse graphics is an appealing approach to 3D scene
understanding that aims to infer the 3D scene structure
from 2D images. In this paper, we introduce probabilistic modeling to the inverse graphics framework to quantify
uncertainty and achieve robustness in 6D pose estimation
tasks. Specifically, we propose 3D Neural Embedding Likelihood (3DNEL) as a unified probabilistic model over RGBD images, and develop efficient inference procedures on 3D
scene descriptions. 3DNEL effectively combines learned
neural embeddings from RGB with depth information to
improve robustness in sim-to-real 6D object pose estimation from RGB-D images. Performance on the YCB-Video
dataset is on par with state-of-the-art yet is much more robust in challenging regimes. In contrast to discriminative
approaches, 3DNEL’s probabilistic generative formulation
jointly models multiple objects in a scene, quantifies uncertainty in a principled way, and handles object pose tracking
under heavy occlusion. Finally, 3DNEL provides a principled framework for incorporating prior knowledge about
the scene and objects, which allows natural extension to additional tasks like camera pose tracking from video.

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding is a fundamental problem in
computer vision and robotics with numerous applications,
* Equal contribution

Lirui Wang
MIT
liruiw@mit.edu

Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla
Google DeepMind
lazarogredilla@google.com
Vikash K. Mansinghka
MIT
vkm@mit.edu

including object recognition [50], robotic manipulation[51],
and navigation[45]. Inverse graphics is an “analysis-bysynthesis” approach to 3D scene understanding that has
found successful applications in a wide variety of tasks [16,
23, 10, 12, 26]. By synthesizing images from possible 3D
descriptions of the scene and selecting the 3D scene description that best agrees with the observed image, inverse
graphics offers an intuitive and appealing way to reason
about the 3D structure of a scene from 2D images. However, challenges such as modeling the gap between rendered
images and real-world observations and efficient inference
have limited the widespread usage of 3D inverse graphics.
In this paper, we focus on 6D pose estimation, an important task in 3D scene understanding using inverse graphics
that aims to infer the rigid SE(3) transformations (position
and orientation) of objects in the camera frame given an
image observation. We emphasize principled probabilistic
modeling as a way to address the central challenges in 3D
inverse graphics, and propose 3D Neural Embedding Likelihood (3DNEL). Instead of naively rendering RGB images,
3DNEL uses learned neural embeddings to predict 2D-3D
correspondences from RGB and combines this with depth
to robustly evaluate the agreement of scene descriptions and
real-world observations. This results in a unified probabilistic model over RGB-D images that jointly models multiple objects in a scene. We additionally develop efficient
inference procedures using 3DNEL, both with stochastic
search for 6D object pose estimation from static RGB-D
images, and with particle filtering for object pose tracking
from video.
We conduct extensive experiments on the popular YCBVideo (YCB-V) dataset [51]. Our results demonstrate that

21625

