This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Skill Transformer: A Monolithic Policy for Mobile Manipulation
Xiaoyu Huang
Georgia Tech

Dhruv Batra
Meta AI (FAIR), Georgia Tech

Abstract
We present Skill Transformer, an approach for solving
long-horizon robotic tasks by combining conditional sequence modeling and skill modularity. Conditioned on egocentric and proprioceptive observations of a robot, Skill
Transformer is trained end-to-end to predict both a highlevel skill (e.g., navigation, picking, placing), and a wholebody low-level action (e.g., base and arm motion), using
a transformer architecture and demonstration trajectories
that solve the full task. It retains the composability and
modularity of the overall task through a skill predictor module while reasoning about low-level actions and avoiding
hand-off errors, common in modular approaches. We test
Skill Transformer on an embodied rearrangement benchmark and find it performs robust task planning and lowlevel control in new scenarios, achieving a 2.5x higher success rate than baselines in hard rearrangement problems.

1. Introduction
A long-standing goal of embodied AI is to build agents
that can seamlessly operate in a home to accomplish tasks
like preparing a meal, tidying up, or loading the dishwasher.
To successfully carry out such tasks, an agent must be able
to perform a wide range of diverse skills, like navigation and
object manipulation, as well as high-level decision-making,
all while operating with limited egocentric inputs. Our particular focus is the problem of embodied object rearrangement [41]. An example in Figure 1 shows that the Fetch mobile manipulator must rearrange a bowl from an initial position to a desired goal position (both circled in orange) in an
unfamiliar environment without access to any pre-existing
maps, 3D models, or precise object locations. Successfully completing this task requires executing both low-level
motor commands for accurate arm and base movements,
as well as high-level decision-making, such as determining
whether a drawer needs to be opened before accessing a
specific object.
Long-horizon tasks like object rearrangement require

Akshara Rai
Meta AI (FAIR)

Andrew Szot
Georgia Tech

many low-level control steps and naturally break down into
distinct phases of skills such as navigation, picking, placing, opening, and closing. Prior works [6, 33, 37] show that
it is possible to end-to-end learn a single policy that can
perform such diverse tasks and behaviors. Such a monolithic policy directly maps observations to low-level actions,
reasoning both about which skill to execute and how to
execute it. However, scaling end-to-end learning to longhorizon, multi-phase tasks with thousands of low-level steps
and egocentric visual observations remains a challenging
research question. Other works decompose the task into
individual skills and then separately sequence them to solve
the full task [40, 16]. While this decomposition makes the
problem tractable, this modularity comes at a cost. Sequencing skills suffers from hand-off errors between skills,
where one skill ends in a situation where the next skill is no
longer feasible. Moreover, it does not address how to learn
the skill sequencing or how to adapt the planned sequence
to unknown disturbances.
We present Skill Transformer, an end-to-end trainable
transformer policy for multi-skill tasks. Skill Transformer
predicts both low-level actions and high-level skills, conditioned on a history of high-dimensional egocentric camera observations. By combining conditional sequence modeling with a skill prediction module, Skill Transformer
can model long sequences of both high and low-level actions without breaking the problem into disconnected submodules. In Figure 1, Skill Transformer learns a policy that
can perform diverse motor skills, as well as high-level reasoning over which motor skills to execute. We train Skill
Transformer autoregressively with trajectories that solve the
full rearrangement task. Skill Transformer is then tested in
unseen settings that require a variable number of high-level
and low-level actions, overcoming unknown perturbations.
Skill Transformer achieves state-of-the-art performance
in rearrangement tasks requiring variable-length high-level
planning and delicate low-level actions, such as rearranging
an object that can be in an open or closed receptacle, in the
Habitat environment [41]. It achieves 1.45x higher success
rates in the full task and up to 2.5x higher in especially challenging situations over modular and end-to-end baselines

10852

