This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tracking by 3D Model Estimation of Unknown Objects in Videos

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is an important task in computer vision. A wide range of challenges [20, 21], benchmarks [22], and methods [34, 33, 49] have been proposed
in recent years. Given an input video and an annotation of
the object in the first frame, tracking methods localize the
object with a 2D segmentation (or a 2D bounding box) in
all following frames. However, they do not attempt to reconstruct the 3D shape and its 6DoF motion and settle for
2D segmentation as a low-level representation of the object
state. On the one hand, this makes those methods general in
terms of prior assumptions on object shape and motion. On
the other hand, the information extracted by the segmentation is limited, e.g. to whole object editing, and does not
support many applications.
In this paper, we propose a generic approach for tracking
that is fundamentally different from what standard trackers
perform [22, 21]. Instead of a mere 2D segmentation, we
estimate the latent object 3D shape, texture, and 6DoF pose
in each video frame to improve 2D tracking. This formula-

Ours

Most model-free visual object tracking methods formulate the tracking task as object location estimation given
by a 2D segmentation or a bounding box in each video
frame. We argue that this representation is limited and instead propose to guide and improve 2D tracking with an explicit object representation, namely the textured 3D shape
and 6DoF pose in each video frame. Our representation
tackles a complex long-term dense correspondence problem
between all 3D points on the object for all video frames, including frames where some points are invisible. To achieve
that, the estimation is driven by re-rendering the input video
frames as well as possible through differentiable rendering,
which has not been used for tracking before. The proposed
optimization minimizes a novel loss function to estimate the
best 3D shape, texture, and 6DoF pose. We improve the
state-of-the-art in 2D segmentation tracking on three different datasets with mostly rigid objects.

vis RGB proj.

Abstract

Input

Denys Rozumnyi1,4
Jiřı́ Matas4
Marc Pollefeys1
Vittorio Ferrari3
Martin R. Oswald1,2
1
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
University of Amsterdam
3
4
Google Research
Czech Technical University in Prague

Sequence
Texture
Figure 1. Improving 2D tracking with explicit 3D modeling.
Starting from initial segmentations given by a tracker [49] (top
row), we jointly optimize all object parameters to re-render the
input video as close as possible. Long-term correspondences are
visualized by colored points and their visibility by colored lines
underneath. In contrast, the standard tracker reports essentially no
motion (just slightly changing 2D segmentation). We use S2DNet
features [8] for reprojection error (middle row) and back-project
RGB values only for visualization (bottom row).

tion of tracking solves a more complex long-term dense correspondence problem between all 3D points on the object,
even of points that are not visible (Fig. 1, colored lines).
This is useful in many applications, e.g. augmented reality, motion interpretation and analysis, point matching, perpixel editing, robotics, object manipulation and grasping.
The core of the approach is to find the object shape, pose,
and texture – the parameters that define the object – whose
reprojection is most consistent with input video frames. The
parameter estimation is driven by re-rendering the input
video via differentiable rendering instead of directly predicting the 2D segmentation in the next frame based on features extracted in the previous frames. This modern differentiable rendering way of thinking was demonstrated to be
successful in various applications, such as 3D reconstruction [28, 3], structure-from-motion [26], reconstruction of
clothed humans [16], and deblurring of motion-blurred objects [39, 40], but never in tracking. To initialize our optimization process, we use segmentations given by a standard 2D tracker. We demonstrate experimentally that the
proposed tracking method improves segmentation accuracy
of this initial tracker.

14086

