This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Virtual Try-On with Pose-Garment Keypoints Guided Inpainting
Zhi Li1,2

Pengfei Wei1

Xiang Yin1

1

2

Bytedance Ltd.

Zejun Ma1

Alex C. Kot2

Nanyang Technological University

{zhi.li.2023, pengfei.wei, yinxiang.stephen, mazejun}@bytedance.com eackot@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Virtual try-on is an important technology supporting online apparel shopping, which provides consumers with a virtual experience to fit garments without physically wearing
them. Recently, the image-based virtual try-on has received
growing research attention. However, the synthetic results
of existing virtual try-on methods usually present distortions in garment shape and lose pattern details. In this paper, we propose a pose-garment keypoints guided inpainting method for the image-based virtual try-on task, which
produces high-fidelity try-on images and well preserves the
shapes and patterns of the garments. In our method, human pose and garment keypoints are extracted from source
images and constructed as graphs to predict the garment
keypoints at the target pose. After which, the predicted keypoints are used as guide information to predict the target
segmentation map and warp the garment image. The tryon image is finally generated with a semantic-conditioned
inpainting scheme using the segmentation map and recomposed person image as conditions. To verify the effectiveness of our proposed method, we conduct extensive experiments on the VITON-HD dataset under both paired and
unpaired experimental settings. The qualitative and quantitative results show that our method significantly outperforms prior methods at different image resolutions. The
codes repository link is https://github.com/lizhi-ntu/KGI.

1. Introduction
Online shopping has exploded rapidly in the past decade
because of its convenience and high cost-effectiveness.
Buying clothes and other daily necessities without leaving
home is gradually becoming a mainstream lifestyle among
the young generation. With the popularity of online apparel
shopping, virtual try-on technology has received growing
interests from fashion brands and online retail platforms in
recent years [14].
Virtual try-on technology aims to improve the online
shopping experience by visualizing the fitting results without requiring consumers to physically wear the garments.

Figure 1. Pose-garment keypoints guided inpainting framework.

According to whether 3D modeling is used, existing virtual
try-on methods are categorized into image-based approach
and 3D model-based approach. Since capturing 3D information requires additional sensory devices and the 3D modeling of person and garments costs more expense, imagebased technology has attracted more attention recently.
Image-based virtual try-on aims to produce high-fidelity
fitting results given person and garment images. The generated try-on image is expected to preserve the appearance
and pose of the given person image but replace the cloth
region with the given garment image. Most existing approaches share the same idea of firstly warping the garment
image for target pose then blending the person image with
warped garment image and target segmentation map. However, a common issue has always existed, that is, inappropriate warping of the garment image or inaccurate estimation of the target segmentation map usually results in the
distortion of the garment shape. For instance, when part of
the cloth is occluded due to the person pose, as shown in
the Ground-Truth in Figure. 2, the warped garment generated by existing methods, e.g., thin-plate spline transformation (TPS) [3, 9], suffers from severer distortion at the
overlapping part, as observed in the upper-side of Figure. 2.
Other distortions may happen at cuff or neckline. Moreover,

22788

