This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fantasia3D: Disentangling Geometry and Appearance for High-quality
Text-to-3D Content Creation
Rui Chen*, Yongwei Chen*, Ningxin Jiao, Kui Jia†
South China University of Technology

Abstract
Automatic 3D content creation has achieved rapid
progress recently due to the availability of pre-trained,
large language models and image diffusion models, forming
the emerging topic of text-to-3D content creation. Existing
text-to-3D methods commonly use implicit scene representations, which couple the geometry and appearance via volume rendering and are suboptimal in terms of recovering
finer geometries and achieving photorealistic rendering;
consequently, they are less effective for generating highquality 3D assets. In this work, we propose a new method
of Fantasia3D for high-quality text-to-3D content creation.
Key to Fantasia3D is the disentangled modeling and learning of geometry and appearance. For geometry learning,
we rely on a hybrid scene representation, and propose to
encode surface normal extracted from the representation as
the input of the image diffusion model. For appearance
modeling, we introduce the spatially varying bidirectional
reflectance distribution function (BRDF) into the text-to-3D
task, and learn the surface material for photorealistic rendering of the generated surface. Our disentangled framework is more compatible with popular graphics engines,
supporting relighting, editing, and physical simulation of
the generated 3D assets. We conduct thorough experiments
that show the advantages of our method over existing ones
under different text-to-3D task settings. Project page and
source codes: https://fantasia3d.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Automatic 3D content creation [43, 18, 33, 44] powered
by large language models has drawn significant attention
recently, due to its convenience to entertaining and gaming
industries, virtual/augmented reality, and robotic applications. The traditional process of creating 3D assets typically
involves multiple, labor-intensive stages, including geome* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

generation

soft body simulation

cloth simulation

material editing

material

geometry

Figure 1. Provided with a textual description of “a highly detailed stone bust of Theodoros Kolokotronis”, our method produces high-quality geometry as well as disentangled materials, and
enables photorealistic rendering.

try modeling, shape baking, UV mapping, material creation,
and texturing, as described in [15], where different software
tools and the expertise of skilled artists are often required.
Imperfections would also accumulate across these stages,
resulting in low-quality 3D assets. It is thus desirable to automate such a process, and ideally to generate high-quality
3D assets that have geometrically fair surfaces, rich materials and textures, and support photorealistic rendering under
arbitrary views.
In this work, we focus on automatic 3D content creation given text prompts encoded by large language models, i.e., the text-to-3D tasks [18, 33]. Text-to-3D is inspired by the tremendous success of text-to-image research
[34, 36, 30, 35]. To enable 3D generation, most existing
methods [33, 23] rely on the implicit scene modeling of
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [25, 4, 27], and learn the
NeRFs by back-propagating the supervision signals from
image diffusion models. However, NeRF modeling is less
effective for surface recovery [43, 46], since it couples the
learning of surface geometry with that of pixel colors via
volume rendering. Consequently, 3D creation based on

22246

