This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Memory-and-Anticipation Transformer for Online Action Understanding
Jiahao Wang1∗ Guo Chen1,2∗ Yifei Huang2 Limin Wang1,2 Tong Lu1B
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract
Most existing forecasting systems are memory-based methods, which attempt to mimic human forecasting ability
by employing various memory mechanisms and have
progressed in temporal modeling for memory dependency.
Nevertheless, an obvious weakness of this paradigm is
that it can only model limited historical dependence and
can not transcend the past. In this paper, we rethink
the temporal dependence of event evolution and propose a novel memory-anticipation-based paradigm to
model an entire temporal structure, including the past,
present, and future. Based on this idea, we present
Memory-and-Anticipation Transformer (MAT), a memoryanticipation-based approach, to address the online action
detection and anticipation tasks. In addition, owing to
the inherent superiority of MAT, it can process online
action detection and anticipation tasks in a unified manner.
The proposed MAT model is tested on four challenging
benchmarks TVSeries, THUMOS’14, HDD, and EPICKitchens-100, for online action detection and anticipation
tasks, and it significantly outperforms all existing methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/Echo0125/
Memory-and-Anticipation-Transformer .

1. Introduction
Online anticipation [32] or detection [10] in computer
vision attempt to perceive future or present states from
a historical perspective. They are the crucial factors of
AI systems that engage with complex real environments
and interact with other agents, e.g. wearable devices [46],
human-robot interaction systems [33], and autonomous vehicles [62].
Human beings frequently imagine future events based
on past experiences. Similarly, anticipating future events
inherently requires modeling past actions or the progression of events to predict what will happen next. To bridge
the gap with human forecasting ability, current systems
* Equal contribution, B Corresponding author (lutong@nju.edu.cn)

𝐻𝐻igℎ𝐽𝐽𝐽𝐽𝐽𝐽𝐽𝐽

Forward influence

(a)
Start position

Start to run

Ready to jump

𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡

Finish HighJump

Backward constraint

𝑡𝑡

(b)
Hold a tomato and knife

Ready to cut

Start to cut

𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝐼𝐼 𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑? 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆? 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶? 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃?

Goal to cut tomato

Memory-based

Memory

Unseen Future

Memory-anticipation-based
(ours)

Memory

Unseen Future

(c)

Figure 1: Examples for the forward influence of memory and
backward constraint of anticipation. (a) An athlete prepares to
start, starts to run, and then jumps to form the result of completing
a high jump; (b) The goals of a camera wearer for cutting a tomato
dictate the sequence of actions he will perform: hold the knife, get
ready to cut, etc.; (c) Compared with the memory-based method,
the memory-anticipation-based method is able to establish circular
dependencies between memory and future.

strive to mimic this cognitive ability by employing different memory mechanisms [58, 26, 7, 67, 44, 17]. Previous
research [14, 44] demonstrated that modeling long temporal
context is crucial for accurate anticipation. LSTR [58] further decomposes the memory encoder into long and shortterm stages for online action detection and anticipation, allowing for the extraction of more representative memory
features. Similarly, research efforts such as [67, 7, 27] have
also illustrated improvements based on this principle.
However, despite various memory-based approaches,
memory is not the only driver of present or future action.
The synchronization between shot transitions and the evolution of actor behavior appears to cohere with the beliefs
and wills of the event weavers, be they actors or camerawearers. In (a) and (b) of Fig 1, we use the examples
of high jumping and cooking to show the forward influence of memory and backward constraint of anticipation.

13824

