This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cyclic Test-Time Adaptation on Monocular Video
for 3D Human Mesh Reconstruction
Hyeongjin Nam1,3
Daniel Sungho Jung2,3
Yeonguk Oh1,3
Kyoung Mu Lee1,2,3
1
2
Dept. of ECE&ASRI, IPAI, Seoul National University, Korea
3
SNU-LG AI Research Center
{namhjsnu28,dqj5182,namepllet,kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Despite recent advances in 3D human mesh reconstruction, domain gap between training and test data is still a
major challenge. Several prior works tackle the domain
gap problem via test-time adaptation that fine-tunes a network relying on 2D evidence (e.g., 2D human keypoints)
from test images. However, the high reliance on 2D evidence during adaptation causes two major issues. First, 2D
evidence induces depth ambiguity, preventing the learning
of accurate 3D human geometry. Second, 2D evidence is
noisy or partially non-existent during test time, and such
imperfect 2D evidence leads to erroneous adaptation. To
overcome the above issues, we introduce CycleAdapt, which
cyclically adapts two networks: a human mesh reconstruction network (HMRNet) and a human motion denoising network (MDNet), given a test video. In our framework, to
alleviate high reliance on 2D evidence, we fully supervise
HMRNet with generated 3D supervision targets by MDNet.
Our cyclic adaptation scheme progressively elaborates the
3D supervision targets, which compensate for imperfect 2D
evidence. As a result, our CycleAdapt achieves state-of-theart performance compared to previous test-time adaptation
methods. The codes are available in here.

HMRNet Adaptation

HMR
Net
Supervision
Noisy human meshes

Image sequence

MDNet Adaptation

MD
Net
Noisy
human meshes
Detach

Self-supervision

Denoised
human meshes

For HMRNet adaptation

For MDNet adaptation

(a) Overview of CycleAdapt

Cycle
#1

Cycle
#2

..
.
Final
results

1. Introduction
3D human mesh reconstruction (HMR) has gained popularity in many applications, such as AR/VR gaming, fitness
tracking, and virtual try-on. Despite recent advances, one
of the major bottlenecks is the prohibitive cost of collecting 3D training data on in-the-wild images, which are taken
in our daily environments. Due to the challenge, most of
HMR methods are commonly trained on Motion Capture
(MoCap) [10, 29] datasets. While such datasets provide accurate 3D annotations obtained from sophisticated capturing devices, they contain limited human poses with less diverse image appearances compared to in-the-wild datasets.

(b) Denoised results of MDNet as the cycle repeats

Figure 1. (a) We propose CycleAdapt that iteratively adapts the
human mesh reconstruction network (HMRNet) and the human
motion denoising network (MDNet) in a cyclic fashion. (b) As the
cycle repeats, MDNet produces progressively accurate 3D human
meshes as reliable 3D supervision targets for HMRNet, which in
turn results in improved outputs of HMRNet.

Accordingly, a domain gap arises in which performance in
the test environment severely drops. In this work, we tackle
the challenging domain gap problem via a test-time adap-

14829

