This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

All in Tokens: Unifying Output Space of Visual Tasks via Soft Token
Jia Ning1,4 *, Chen Li2,4 *, Zheng Zhang4 ,* Chunyu Wang4 ,
Zigang Geng3,4 , Qi Dai4 , Kun He1 , Han Hu4
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
University of Science and Technology of China 4 Microsoft Research Asia
{ninja, brooklet60}@hust.edu.cn,
edward82@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
{zhez,chnuwa,t-ziganggeng,qid,hanhu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We introduce AiT, a unified output representation for various vision tasks, which is a crucial step towards generalpurpose vision task solvers. Despite the challenges posed
by the high-dimensional and task-specific outputs, we showcase the potential of using discrete representation (VQVAE) to model the dense outputs of many computer vision tasks as a sequence of discrete tokens. This is inspired by the established ability of VQ-VAE to conserve
the structures spanning multiple pixels using few discrete
codes. To that end, we present a modified shallower architecture for VQ-VAE that improves efficiency while keeping prediction accuracy. Our approach also incorporates
uncertainty into the decoding process by using a soft fusion of the codebook entries, providing a more stable
training process, which notably improved prediction accuracy. Our evaluation of AiT on depth estimation and instance segmentation tasks, with both continuous and discrete labels, demonstrates its superiority compared to other
unified models. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/SwinTransformer/AiT.

1. Introduction
A central goal of AI is to develop a unified model capable
of handling many tasks. Recent developments in large-scale
language models such as GPT-3 [5] have shown remarkable
success as general-purpose solvers for language tasks. It inspires to examine the feasibility of creating universal models for various computer vision tasks.
Current research is approaching the goal from a diverse
* Equal contribution.

range of perspectives. Perceiver [18] and Perceiver-IO [17]
propose to use exactly the same Transformer architecture to
handle different modalities such as natural language, computer vision and StarCraft II. However, it allocates a query
for each output and ignores their dependency, making it unable to model interdependent outputs such as the coordinates of a box. Some works attempt to address multiple
visual tasks but they are still limited to only a few. For example, Flamingo [1] handles only tasks with language as
output; CLIP [31] and its follow-ups [48, 49, 53] tackle
only retrieval and image classification tasks; Chen et al. [8]
deal with tasks that have describable and sequential outputs.
Pix2SeqV2 [8] tries to unify different vision tasks using tokens. But the tokens need to be designed manually for each
task. For example, they use polygon to represent the instance segmentation, which can not be applied to other tasks
such as depth estimation.
In this paper, we aim to develop a comprehensive solution to various vision tasks. To achieve this, we first identify a key challenge in the field - while the NLP tasks typically have similar inputs and outputs represented by language tokens, the outputs of vision tasks are highly diverse.
For example, object detection produces labels and coordinates, semantic segmentation generates discrete label maps
and depth estimation results in value-rich images. We tackle
this hindrance by unifying the output spaces of various visual tasks through a general tokenizer which is implemented
using VQ-VAE [36]. It transforms the task output into a set
of tokens by the encoder, which are then reconstituted into
the original output by the decoder. The task solver for each
vision task is realized using an auto-regressive encoderdecoder model. The model takes in images as inputs and
outputs a sequence of tokens in a causal manner, which is
then converted back into the original task-specific output

19900

