This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Action Segmentation via Contextually Reﬁned Temporal Keypoints
Borui Jiang, Yang Jin, Zhentao Tan, Yadong Mu*
Peking University, Beijing, China
jiangbr@pku.edu.cn, {jiny, tanzhentao}@stu.pku.edu.cn, myd@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Video action segmentation involves categorizing each
frame or short snippet of an untrimmed video into predeﬁned action categories. Despite notable advancements in
recent years, a considerable number of current approaches
still rely on frame-wise segmentation that tends to render
fragmentary results. To address it, we present an innovative approach for video action segmentation, centered
around contextually reﬁned temporal keypoints. Initially,
our method identiﬁes a set of sparse, over-complete temporal keypoints through non-local visual cues, with each
keypoint representing a potential action segment candidate. Subsequent enhancements to these initial keypoints
are achieved through iterative reﬁning and re-assembling
operations. Driven by the notion that optimal temporal keypoints should collectively resemble the true ground-truth
structurally, we introduce a module that conducts graph
matching between the keypoint-derived graph and the reference graph constructed from accurate annotations. This
module effectively learns structural features used to further reﬁne the initial keypoints. Moreover, a set of predeﬁned rules is applied to re-assemble all temporal keypoints. The unﬁltered temporal keypoints, resulting from
these operations, are harnessed to generate the ﬁnal action segments. We extensively evaluate our method across
three video benchmarks: 50salads, GTEA, and Breakfast.
Our proposed approach consistently demonstrates substantial improvements over existing methods, establishing its superiority in video action segmentation. It achieves F 1@50
scores (one of the key performance metrics for this task) of
79.5%, 83.4%, and 60.5%, respectively, v.s. previous stateof-the-art 78.5%, 79.8% and 57.4%.

1. Introduction
Understanding human actions from visual sensors has
been regarded as a long-standing crucial task in a variety
of real-world applications, such as surveillance video anal* Corresponding author

video

…

…

…

take

…

scoop

open

Ground truth
boundary-misalign

over-segmentation

via densely
classification
take

open

scoop

Keypoints
Generation
Refinement via graph relations

GCNs

Rule-based re-Assembling
via RTK

Figure 1: Comparison of frame-wise classiﬁcation methods and keypoints based segmentation methods. The
untrimmed video clip of making peanut butter bread contains three actions. Speciﬁcally, the colors indicate different
categories of actions, while the white indicates background
and grey is for boundary point. Frame-wise classiﬁcation
methods are prone to over-segmentation and boundary misalignment, while keypoints based method effectively alleviates these problems by reﬁning keypoints using contextual
information.
ysis [4, 10, 11, 55], human-robot interaction [11, 43], autonomous driving, sports Analysis [50], etc. In the past
few years, researchers have made great efforts on segmenting human actions in a frame-wise classiﬁcation manner.
Speciﬁcally, each frame of the video is densely labeled as a
pre-deﬁned human action category, based on the complete
video stream, which is shown in Figure 1. However, existing methods [1,22,48,51] under this manner are still suffering from several mis-classiﬁcation problems, such as oversegmentation or boundary-misalignment. We illustrate the
above problems in two aspects:
Frame-wise classiﬁcation does not globally consider the
semantics of each temporal action segment. For the frame-

13836

