This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Delta Denoising Score
Amir Hertz1,2
1

Kfir Aberman1

Google Research

Abstract
This paper introduces Delta Denoising Score (DDS) a
novel diffusion-based scoring technique which optimizes a
parametric model for the task of image editing. Unlike the
existing Score Distillation Sampling (SDS), which queries
the generative model with a single image-text pair, DDS
utilizes an additional fixed query of a reference image-text
pair to generate delta scores that represent the difference
between the outputs of the two queries. By estimating noisy
gradient directions introduced by SDS using the source image and its text description, DDS provides cleaner gradient directions that modify the edited portions of the image
while leaving others unchanged, thereby yielding a distilled
edit of the source image. The analysis presented in this paper supports the power of the new score for image-to-image
translation. We further show that the new score can be used
to train an effective zero-shot image translation model. The
experimental results show that the proposed loss term outperforms existing methods in terms of stability and quality,
highlighting its potential for real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Large-scale language-vision models have revolutionizing the way images and visual content, in general, can be
generated and edited. Recently, we are witnessing a surge in
the development of text-to-image generative models, which
utilize textual input to condition the generation of images. A
promising avenue in this field is Score Distillation Sampling
(SDS) [24] – a sampling mechanism that utilizes probability
density distillation to optimize a parametric image generator using a 2D diffusion model as a prior.
The effectiveness of the SDS stems from rich generative prior of the diffusion model it samples from. This is in
contrast to the direct use of a language-vision model, like
CLIP, which was trained using contrastive loss [25]. The
prior of large generative diffusion models, like Stable Diffusion [27], DALLE-2 [26] and Imagen [31] is particularly
rich and expressive and has been demonstrated to be highly

2

Daniel Cohen-Or1,2

Tel Aviv University

Score Distillation Sampling

zt

z

“A turtle ﬂying a kite
at sunset.”

ϵϕ

Denoising model

Optimized

Noised image

t∼U (0,1)
ϵ∼N (0,I)

∇θ LSDS

Delta Denoising Score

ẑt

ẑ

Predicted noise

“A turtle ﬂying a kite.”

ϵ̂ϕ

Denoising model

Reference image

Noised image

t∼U (0,1)
ϵ∼N (0,I)

z

zt

Reference noise

“A turtle ﬂying a kite
at sunset.”

ϵϕ

∇θ LDDS

Denoising model

Optimized

Noised image

Predicted noise

Figure 1: Delta Denoising Score (DDS) vs. Score Distillation Sampling (SDS). Top: SDS allows optimizing a given
image by querying the denoising model guided by a text
prompt. However, it results in a blurred image away from
the edited elements. Bottom: DDS, queries an additional
reference branch aligned with its text-prompt, and generates delta scores that represent the difference between the
outputs of the two queries. DDS provides cleaner gradient
directions that modify the edited portions of the optimized
image, while leaving the others unchanged.

effective in generating visually stunning assets across various domains, including images, 3D models and more.
Despite its usefulness, one of the primary issues associated with SDS is its tendency to converge towards specific
modes, which often leads to the production of blurry outputs that only capture the elements explicitly described in

2328

