This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Video Deraining with An Event Camera
Jin Wang

Wenming Weng
Yueyi Zhang*
Zhiwei Xiong
University of Science and Technology of China

{jin01wang, wmweng}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyuey, zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn
https://github.com/booker-max/Unsupervised-Deraining-with-Event-Camera

Abstract
Background Layer

Current unsupervised video deraining methods are inefficient in modeling the intricate spatio-temporal properties of rain, which leads to unsatisfactory results. In this
paper, we propose a novel approach by integrating a bioinspired event camera into the unsupervised video deraining pipeline, which enables us to capture high temporal resolution information and model complex rain characteristics. Specifically, we first design an end-to-end learningbased network consisting of two modules, the asymmetric
separation module and the cross-modal fusion module. The
two modules are responsible for segregating the features of
the rain-background layer, and for positive enhancement
and negative suppression from a cross-modal perspective,
respectively. Second, to regularize the network training,
we elaborately design a cross-modal contrastive learning
method that leverages the complementary information from
event cameras, exploring the mutual exclusion and similarity of rain-background layers in different domains. This encourages the deraining network to focus on the distinctive
characteristics of each layer and learn a more discriminative representation. Moreover, we construct the first realworld dataset comprising rainy videos and events using a
hybrid imaging system. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superior performance of our method on both synthetic
and real-world datasets.

Rainy Image

Rain Layer

Frame
Camera
Push
Push

Pull

Push

Event
Camera

Background Layer

Rainy Event

Rain Layer

Figure 1: Our proposed cross-modal contrastive learning
method includes intra-modal and inter-modal contrastive
learning. In intra-modal contrastive learning, we aim to establish the mutually exclusive relationship between the rain
and background layers by pushing them far away in both
the event and frame domains. In inter-modal contrastive
learning, we pull together the rain layer shared in two domains. Moreover, we push the rain layer in the frame domain and background layer in the event domain for suppressing the negative information such as the moving edges
as shown in Fig. 3(f).

1. Introduction
Rain is the most common bad weather which introduces
the serious degradation in captured videos and images. It
not only causes the poor visual quality but also seriously
deteriorates the performance of some outdoor vision tasks
that assume clean video as input, e.g., object tracking [15],
object detection [12], person re-identification (Re-ID) [43]
and segmentation [26]. Thus, it is of great importance to
develop an effective video rain removal algorithm to restore
* Corresponding author

the high-quality rain-free videos. Recently, many methods
[42, 36, 35, 41] are proposed for rain removal and achieved
significant successes in synthetic datasets. Unfortunately,
most of these methods are supervised, which heavily rely
on paired rain-clean data. The large domain gap between
the synthetic and real rain makes them perform poorly in
real-world rainy scenes.
To address this issue, the semi-supervised deraining
methods [40, 8] are proposed. They commonly employed

10831

