This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Box-based Refinement for Weakly Supervised and Unsupervised Localization
Tasks
Eyal Gomel
Tel Aviv University

Tal Shaharbany
Tel Aviv University

Lior Wolf
Tel Aviv University

eyalgomel12@gmail.com

shaharabany@mail.tau.ac.il

wolf@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract
It has been established that training a box-based detector network can enhance the localization performance
of weakly supervised and unsupervised methods. Moreover, we extend this understanding by demonstrating that
these detectors can be utilized to improve the original network, paving the way for further advancements. To accomplish this, we train the detectors on top of the network output instead of the image data and apply suitable loss backpropagation. Our findings reveal a significant improvement in phrase grounding for the “what is
where by looking” task, as well as various methods of
unsupervised object discovery. Our code is available at
https://github.com/eyalgomel/box-based-refinement.

1. Introduction
In the task of unsupervised object discovery, one uses
clustering methods to find a subset of the image in which
the patches are highly similar, while being different from
patches in other image locations. The similarity is computed using the embedding provided, e.g., by a transformer
f that was trained using a self-supervised loss. The grouping in the embedding space does not guarantee that a single
continuous image region will be selected, and often one region out of many is selected, based on some heuristic.
It has been repeatedly shown [47, 58, 5] that by training
a detection network, such as faster R-CNN[39], one can improve the object discovery metrics. This subsequent detector has two favorable properties over the primary discovery
method: it is bounded to a box shape and shares knowledge
across the various samples.
In this work, we show that such a detector can also be
used to improve the underlying self-supervised similarity.
This is done by training a detector network h not on top
of the image features, as was done previously, but on the
output map of network f . Once the detector network h is
trained, we freeze it and use the same loss that was used to

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. Examples of refining localization networks. The top row
depicts an example of unsupervised object discovery. (a) the input image (b) the normalized cut eigenvector using the original
DINO [9] network f , as extracted with the TokenCut[58] method.
(c) the same eigenvector using the refined DINO network f h our
method produces. The bottom row contains phrase grounding results (d) the original input corresponding to the phrase “two football teams”, (e) the localization map using the image-text network
g of [42], and (f) the localization map using the refined g h .

train the detector network to refine the underlying representation of f .
At this point, the detector network serves as a way to link
a recovered set of detection boxes to an underlying feature
map of f . Without it, deriving a loss would be extremely
challenging, since the process used for extracting the detection box from f is typically non-differentiable.
The outcome of this process is a refined network f h , obtained by fine-tuning f using network h. The finetuned network produces a representation that leads to a spatially coherent grouping of regions, as demonstrated in Fig. 1(a-c).
A similar process is used for the phrase grounding problem. In this case, given a textual phrase, a network g is
trained to mark a matching image region. Supervision is

16044

