This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CheckerPose: Progressive Dense Keypoint Localization for Object Pose
Estimation with Graph Neural Network
Ruyi Lian

Haibin Ling

Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-2424, USA
{rulian,hling}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract

Dense 3D Keypoints

2D Projections

Binary Code Representation
bx = 11…, by = 10…

1. Introduction
Object pose estimation from RGB images aims to estimate the rotation and translation of a given rigid object
relative to the camera. It is crucial in various applications
including robot grasping and manipulation [75, 61, 62], autonomous driving [36, 69, 29], augmented reality [37, 58],
etc. Most existing methods [48, 59, 38, 18, 43, 72, 40, 33,

(1, 1)

(11, 10)
GNN

…

Estimating the 6-DoF pose of a rigid object from a
single RGB image is a crucial yet challenging task. Recent studies have shown the great potential of dense
correspondence-based solutions, yet improvements are still
needed to reach practical deployment. In this paper, we
propose a novel pose estimation algorithm named CheckerPose, which improves on three main aspects. Firstly,
CheckerPose densely samples 3D keypoints from the surface of the 3D object and finds their 2D correspondences
progressively in the 2D image. Compared to previous solutions that conduct dense sampling in the image space,
our strategy enables the correspondence searching in a
2D grid (i.e., pixel coordinate). Secondly, for our 3Dto-2D correspondence, we design a compact binary code
representation for 2D image locations. This representation not only allows for progressive correspondence refinement but also converts the correspondence regression to
a more efficient classification problem. Thirdly, we adopt
a graph neural network to explicitly model the interactions among the sampled 3D keypoints, further boosting
the reliability and accuracy of the correspondences. Together, these novel components make CheckerPose a strong
pose estimation algorithm. When evaluated on the popular Linemod, Linemod-O, and YCB-V object pose estimation benchmarks, CheckerPose clearly boosts the accuracy of correspondence-based methods and achieves stateof-the-art performances. Code is available at https:
//github.com/RuyiLian/CheckerPose.

Figure 1: Illustration of CheckerPose. We evenly sample dense keypoints from the object surface, and predict the
2D locations in the input image. We design a binary code
representation to progressively localize each keypoint in the
iteratively refined 2D grids. To improve the localization, we
also use graph neural networks to explicitly model the interactions between 3D keypoints. Note: we plot 8 keypoints
for better visualization, while use 512 keypoints in practice.

53] first estimate an intermediate geometric representation,
i.e., the correspondences between 3D object keypoints and
2D image locations, and then recover the object pose using the Perspective-n-Point (PnP) algorithm. Theoretically,
for a rigid object, four pairs of 3D-2D correspondences can
determine a unique pose [47, 10, 44]. In practice, however, sparse correspondences easily degrade due to occlusion, background clutter, lighting variation, etc.
Increasing the number of 3D-2D correspondences is
a feasible solution to enhance robustness, especially
when combined with outlier removal mechanisms such as
RANSAC. Recent methods [72, 40, 33, 15, 17, 66, 8]
densely sample 2D image pixels and predict their 3D object coordinates. While these dense predictions improve
the robustness of pose estimation, they have several drawbacks. Firstly, the predictions consider only visible pixels
and ignore global relations between visible and occluded
keypoints, making them unstable when the object is under
severe occlusions. Secondly, estimating the corresponding

14022

