This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Two Birds, One Stone: A Unified Framework for Joint Learning of
Image and Video Style Transfers
Bohai Gu1,3
Heng Fan2
Libo Zhang1,3†
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas, Denton TX, USA
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
1

Abstract
Current arbitrary style transfer models are limited to either image or video domains. In order to achieve satisfying
image and video style transfers, two different models are inevitably required with separate training processes on image
and video domains, respectively. In this paper, we show that
this can be precluded by introducing UniST, a Unified Style
Transfer framework for both images and videos. At the core
of UniST is a domain interaction transformer (DIT ), which
first explores context information within the specific domain
and then interacts contextualized domain information for
joint learning. In particular, DIT enables exploration of
temporal information from videos for the image style transfer task and meanwhile allows rich appearance texture from
images for video style transfer, thus leading to mutual benefits. Considering heavy computation of traditional multihead self-attention, we present a simple yet effective axial
multi-head self-attention (AMSA) for DIT , which improves
computational efficiency while maintains style transfer performance. To verify the effectiveness of UniST, we conduct
extensive experiments on both image and video style transfer tasks and show that UniST performs favorably against
state-of-the-art approaches on both tasks. Code is available
at https://github.com/NevSNev/UniST.

1. Introduction
Artistic image style transfer [13] aims at migrating a desirable style pattern from an inference image to the origin
image while preserving the original content structures. Although CNNs based methods have been well studied in this
field [16, 21, 22, 29], they fail to capture the long-range interaction between the style and content domains, which may
result in suboptimal results.
† Corresponding author: Libo Zhang (libo@iscas.ac.cn).

Figure 1: Comparison between single domain (image or
video) style transfer and our joint style transfer.
Recently, owing to the ability to model long-range dependencies, Transformers [31] have shown excellent performance in a wide range of tasks including style transfer.
For example, Stytr2 [9] introduces a pure transformer network to deal with image style transfer. However, pixel-level
self-attention brings additional computational complexity,
resulting in lower efficiency.
Unlike image style transfer, video style transfer brings
in new challenges of preserving temporal consistency between stylized video frames. To achieve style transfer on
the video domain, a feasible solution is to adapt existing
image-based style transfer methods (e.g. [21, 25]) by retraining them with modification in architecture and/or loss
functions. Despite simplicity, this domain adaption requires
another repetitive and tedious training process, resulting in
resource waste to some extent. Some other methods (e.g.
[7, 38]) directly adopt the same model from video to image,
but the results are somewhat visually flawed.
To solve the above issues, we present a Unified Style

23545

