This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-modal Latent Space Alignment for Image to Avatar Translation
Manuel Ladron de Guevara
Carnegie Mellon University

Jose Echevarria
Adobe Research

Yijun Li
Adobe Research

rldg.manuel@gmail.com

echevarr@adobe.com

yijli@adobe.com

Yannick Hold-Geoffroy
Adobe Research

Cameron Smith
Adobe Research

Daichi Ito
Adobe Research

holdgeof@adobe.com

casmith@adobe.com

dito@adobe.com

Abstract
We present a novel method for automatic vectorized
avatar generation from a single portrait image. Most existing approaches that create avatars rely on image-to-image
translation methods, which present some limitations when
applied to 3D rendering, animation, or video. Instead, we
leverage modality-specific autoencoders trained on largescale unpaired portraits and parametric avatars, and then
learn a mapping between both modalities via an alignment module trained on a significantly smaller amount of
data. The resulting cross-modal latent space preserves facial identity, producing more visually appealing and higher
fidelity avatars than previous methods, as supported by our
quantitative and qualitative evaluations. Moreover, our
method’s virtue of being resolution-independent makes it
highly versatile and applicable in a wide range of settings.

1. Introduction
An avatar can be defined as a digital representation or
virtual character by which people represent themselves and
other beings in a virtual platform or community [4]. Such a
representation has been ubiquitous in our daily life, from
personal use on social media to marketing strategies by
companies [23]. Given an image and a style, the task is
to generate a new representation that successfully conveys a
given style and content while preserving the person’s identity as much as possible.
Nowadays, avatars are typically created in two ways.
First, it can be created by skilled artists. To streamline
the avatar creation, many artists use predefined facial presets from a library and combine them part by part to obtain
the final avatar (e.g., the “manual” results from [33]). This
scheme is commonly used for messaging and video games
avatars. However, it can be a tedious process that frequently

Figure 1. Examples images from a test set (a), parametric avatars
generated by our method (b).

alters the subject’s identity due to the limited predefined
assets. In contrast, automatic image generation has been

520

