This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Realistic Images from In-the-wild Sounds
Taegyeong Lee
Jeonghun Kang
Hyeonyu Kim
Taehwan Kim
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST
{taegyeonglee, jhkang, khy0501, taehwankim}@unist.ac.kr

Figure 1: Generated images from in-the-wild sounds. We propose an novel approach to generate realistic images from wild sounds.
Our model is capable of representing wild sounds as images without large paired datasets of sound and image.

Abstract
Representing wild sounds as images is an important but
challenging task due to the lack of paired datasets between
sound and images and the signiﬁcant differences in the
characteristics of these two modalities. Previous studies
have focused on generating images from sound in limited
categories or music. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to generate images from in-the-wild sounds. First,
we convert sound into text using audio captioning. Second, we propose audio attention and sentence attention to
represent the rich characteristics of sound and visualize
the sound. Lastly, we propose a direct sound optimization with CLIPscore and AudioCLIP and generate images
with a diffusion-based model. In experiments, it shows that
our model is able to generate high quality images from wild
sounds and outperforms baselines in both quantitative and
qualitative evaluations on wild audio datasets.

1. Introduction
Sound is one of the most important senses for humans,
along with vision. Its dynamic and time-changing characteristics make it a more rich and complex modality than
text or image [21]. Therefore, generating corresponding

images given sounds has many applications such as background picture generation used in movies and visualization
[45] and explanation of sound to help people with hearing
impairment [3]. However, because of differences in modalities and the lack of paired datasets between sound and image, representing wild sounds as images is a challenging
task. For these reasons, previous studies [12, 20, 22, 37, 42]
have generated images within limited sound categories or
through music. But generating images in limited sound categories has limitations in representing the wild sounds. It is
difﬁcult to represent the complex sounds of multi-domain.
Music is composed of elements such as melody and rhythm
and contains rich information [15], but it is fundamentally
different from wild sounds that encompass diverse environments and multi-domains. In addition, the quality of images
generated from sound by previous studies [12, 37, 42, 43] is
signiﬁcantly inferior compared to that of text-guided image
generation models [29, 32, 33].
To solve these problems, we propose a novel approach
that uses a pre-trained Audio Captioning Transformer
(ACT) [23] and a diffusion-based model called Stable Diffusion [32]. Unlike previous studies [12, 21, 42] that attempted to generate images from sound by mapping it into
limited categories such as dogs or humans, we describe
sounds in greater detail by converting them into audio captions by using the ACT [23] model. Then, we generate im-

7160

