This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

K ECOR: Kernel Coding Rate Maximization for Active 3D Object Detection
Yadan Luo† Zhuoxiao Chen† Zhen Fang‡ Zheng Zhang♯ Mahsa Baktashmotlagh† Zi Huang†
†

The University of Queensland

‡

University of Technology Sydney

♯

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen

{y.luo, zhuoxiao.chen, m.baktashmotlagh, helen.huang }@uq.edu.au,
zhen.fang@uts.edu.au, darrenzz219@gmail.com

Abstract
Achieving a reliable LiDAR-based object detector in autonomous driving is paramount, but its success hinges on
obtaining large amounts of precise 3D annotations. Active learning (AL) seeks to mitigate the annotation burden
through algorithms that use fewer labels and can attain
performance comparable to fully supervised learning. Although AL has shown promise, current approaches prioritize the selection of unlabeled point clouds with high uncertainty and/or diversity, leading to the selection of more instances for labeling and reduced computational efficiency.
In this paper, we resort to a novel kernel coding rate maximization (K ECOR) strategy which aims to identify the most
informative point clouds to acquire labels through the lens
of information theory. Greedy search is applied to seek
desired point clouds that can maximize the minimal number of bits required to encode the latent features. To determine the uniqueness and informativeness of the selected
samples from the model perspective, we construct a proxy
network of the 3D detector head and compute the outer
product of Jacobians from all proxy layers to form the empirical neural tangent kernel (NTK) matrix. To accommodate both one-stage (i.e., S ECOND) and two-stage detectors
(i.e., P V- RCNN), we further incorporate the classification
entropy maximization and well trade-off between detection
performance and the total number of bounding boxes selected for annotation. Extensive experiments conducted on
two 3D benchmarks and a 2D detection dataset evidence the
superiority and versatility of the proposed approach. Our
results show that approximately 44% box-level annotation
costs and 26% computational time are reduced compared to
the state-of-the-art AL method, without compromising detection performance. Source code: https://github.
com/Luoyadan/KECOR-active-3Ddet.

1. Introduction
Being a crucial component in the realm of scene understanding, LiDAR-based 3D object detection [35, 59, 60, 64]
identifies and accurately localizes objects in a 3D scene

with the oriented bounding boxes and semantic labels. This
technology has facilitated a wide range of applications in
environmental perceptions, including robotics, autonomous
driving, and augmented reality. With the recent advancements in 3D detection models [14, 25, 54], highly accurate
recognition of objects can be achieved through point cloud
projection [65], point feature extraction [35, 58, 60, 67, 68]
or voxelization [13, 59, 64]. However, achieving such performance often comes at the expense of requiring a large
volume of labeled point cloud data, which can be costly and
time-consuming.
To mitigate the labeling costs and optimize the value of
annotations, active learning (AL) [38, 50] has emerged as
a promising solution. Active learning involves iteratively
selecting the most beneficial samples for label acquisition
from a large pool of unlabeled data until the labeling budget
is exhausted. This selection process is guided by the selection criteria based on sample uncertainty [30, 37, 49, 51]
and/or diversity [16, 22, 56, 66]. Both measures are used
to assess the informativeness of the unlabeled samples.
Aleatoric uncertainty-driven approaches search for samples
that the model is least confident of by using metrics like
maximum entropy [63] or estimated model changes [45,69].
On the other hand, epistemic uncertainty based methods attempt to find the most representative samples to avoid sample redundancy by using greedy coreset algorithms [56] or
clustering based approaches [5].
While active learning has proven to be effective in reducing labeling costs for recognition tasks, its application in
LiDAR-based object detection has been limited [18,31,55].
This is largely due to its high computational costs and involvement of both detection and regression tasks, which
pose significant challenges to the design of the selection
criteria. A very recent work C RB [42] manually designed
three heuristics that allow the acquisition of labels by hierarchically filtering out concise, representative, and geometrically balanced unlabelled point clouds. While effective,
it remains unclear how to characterize the sample informativeness for both classification and regression tasks with one
unified measurement.

18279

