This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Re-mine, Learn and Reason: Exploring the Cross-modal Semantic Correlations
for Language-guided HOI detection
Yichao Cao
Southeast University

Qingfei Tang
Nanjing Enbo Tech.

Feng Yang
Southeast University

caoyichao@seu.edu.cn

qingfeitang@gmail.com

yangfeng@seu.edu.cn

Xiu Su*
University of Sydney

Shan You
SenseTime

Xiaobo Lu
Southeast University

xisu5992@uni.sydney.edu.au

youshan@sensetime.com

xblu@seu.edu.cn

Chang Xu
University of Sydney
c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection is a challenging computer vision task that requires visual models to address the complex interactive relationship between humans
and objects and predict <human, action, object> triplets.
Despite the challenges posed by the numerous interaction
combinations, they also offer opportunities for multi-modal
learning of visual texts. In this paper, we present a systematic
and unified framework (RmLR) that enhances HOI detection by incorporating structured text knowledge. Firstly, we
qualitatively and quantitatively analyze the loss of interaction information in the two-stage HOI detector and propose
a re-mining strategy to generate more comprehensive visual representation. Secondly, we design more fine-grained
sentence- and word-level alignment and knowledge transfer
strategies to effectively address the many-to-many matching
problem between multiple interactions and multiple texts.
These strategies alleviate the matching confusion problem
that arises when multiple interactions occur simultaneously,
thereby improving the effectiveness of the alignment process.
Finally, HOI reasoning by visual features augmented with
textual knowledge substantially improves the understanding
of interactions. Experimental results illustrate the effectiveness of our approach, where state-of-the-art performance is
achieved on public benchmarks.

* Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection [16, 6] is an
emerging field of research that builds upon object detection
and requires more advanced high-level visual understanding.
A high-performing HOI detector should not only accurately
localize all interacting Human-Object pairs but also recognize their specific interactions, typically represented as an
HOI triplet in the format of <human, action, object> [67].
Previous approaches for achieving HOI detection can be
divided into two pipelines: those that treat object detection
and interaction recognition as separate stages [62, 6, 13, 14,
33, 20], and those that aim to handle both simultaneously
[15, 26, 66, 35, 7]. Although both paradigms have made
significant progress, the task remains challenging due to the
vast variety of human-object interaction combinations in the
real world [58, 59]. For example, the HICO-DET dataset
[6] contains 600 human-object interaction combinations. A
common approach is to optimize the model by mapping these
various triplet labels into a discrete one-hot labels. However,
this method oversimplifies the intricacy of the HOI task and
can be cumbersome for model optimization.
In recent years, multi-modal learning has gained significant attention in the vision-and-language learning domain,
where it has achieved state-of-the-art performance on various tasks [25, 3, 4, 30, 1, 23]. By integrating information
from multiple modalities, such as images [49, 47, 50, 48]
and text [64], multi-modal learning can provide a more comprehensive understanding of entities or events. In the field
of HOI, several recent studies [65, 21, 34, 56, 58, 59] have
applied image-and-text models to improve interaction detection performance. For example, HOI-VP [65] used a set of

23492

