This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ASAG: Building Strong One-Decoder-Layer Sparse Detectors
via Adaptive Sparse Anchor Generation
Shenghao Fu1,3,4 , Junkai Yan1,4 , Yipeng Gao1,4 , Xiaohua Xie1,3,4∗ , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3,4 *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China, 2 Pengcheng Lab, China,
3
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China,
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China

{fushh7, yanjk3, gaoyp23}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xiexiaoh6@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Recent sparse detectors with multiple, e.g. six, decoder
layers achieve promising performance but much inference
time due to complex heads. Previous works have explored
using dense priors as initialization and built one-decoderlayer detectors. Although they gain remarkable acceleration, their performance still lags behind their six-decoderlayer counterparts by a large margin. In this work, we aim
to bridge this performance gap while retaining fast speed.
We find that the architecture discrepancy between dense
and sparse detectors leads to feature conflict, hampering the performance of one-decoder-layer detectors. Thus
we propose Adaptive Sparse Anchor Generator (ASAG)
which predicts dynamic anchors on patches rather than
grids in a sparse way so that it alleviates the feature conflict problem. For each image, ASAG dynamically selects
which feature maps and which locations to predict, forming a fully adaptive way to generate image-specific anchors.
Further, a simple and effective Query Weighting method
eases the training instability from adaptiveness. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms denseinitialized ones and achieves a better speed-accuracy tradeoff. The code is available at https://github.com/
iSEE-Laboratory/ASAG.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental and challenging computer vision task. Different from traditional CNN-based
dense object detectors [27, 10, 20, 21, 32, 40] using slidingwindow paradigm, query-based sparse detectors [2, 43, 31,
9] use hundreds of object queries to search through the
whole image, each representing an object or background.
They get rid of some traditional hand-crafted components
* denotes the corresponding authors.

AdaMixer (6-Layer)
ASAG-A (Ours) (1-Layer)

Sparse RCNN (6-Layer)
F-QRCNN (1-Layer)
ASAG-S (Ours) (1-Layer)
Deformable DETR (6-Layer)
ASAG-D (Ours) (1-Layer)

Figure 1: Comparing one-decoder-layer detectors with sixdecoder-layer counterparts on FPS and AP with various decoder types. ASAGs achieve a better speed-accuracy tradeoff. Best viewed in color.

and procedures, e.g., anchors and Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS), which greatly simplifies the detection pipeline
and makes the detector fully end-to-end trainable. With the
help of powerful transformer encoder-decoder architecture,
sparse detectors show promising performance.
However, sparse detectors cost more inference time
since they need n decoder layers (typically n = 6) to progressively refine bounding boxes, leading to a more complex head. Inference with only one decoder layer achieves a
much faster speed, such as AdaMixer [9] (43 V.S. 22 FPS)
and Sparse RCNN [31] (43 V.S. 25 FPS). The more complex the decoder is, the larger the FPS gap is. Unfortunately,
simply discarding the extra decoder layers results in a significant performance drop.
Recently, several methods [36, 41] have attempted to
bridge the performance gap between one- and six-decoderlayer detectors. Efficient DETR [36] finds that imageagnostic box and content queries should be blamed for a
severe drop in performance when using one decoder layer.

6328

