This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sigmoid Loss for Language Image Pre-Training
Xiaohua Zhai Basil Mustafa Alexander Kolesnikov Lucas Beyer
Google DeepMind, Zürich, Switzerland
{xzhai, basilm, akolesnikov, lbeyer}@google.com

Abstract
We propose a simple pairwise sigmoid loss for imagetext pre-training. Unlike standard contrastive learning with
softmax normalization, the sigmoid loss operates solely on
image-text pairs and does not require a global view of the
pairwise similarities for normalization. The sigmoid loss simultaneously allows further scaling up the batch size, while
also performing better at smaller batch sizes. With only four
TPUv4 chips, we can train a Base CLIP model at 4 k batch
size and a Large LiT model at 20 k batch size, the latter
achieves 84.5% ImageNet zero-shot accuracy in two days.
This disentanglement of the batch size from the loss further
allows us to study the impact of examples vs pairs and negative to positive ratio. Finally, we push the batch size to
the extreme, up to one million, and ﬁnd that the beneﬁts
of growing batch size quickly diminish, with a more reasonable batch size of 32 k being sufﬁcient. We hope our research motivates further explorations in improving the quality and efﬁciency of language-image pre-training.

Table 1: SigLiT and SigLIP results. Sigmoid loss is memory efﬁcient, allows larger batch sizes (BS) that unlocks
language image pre-training with a small number of chips.
SigLiT model with a frozen public L/16 checkpoint [39],
trained on the LiT image-text dataset [55] using four TPUv4 chips for one day, achieves 79.7% 0-shot accuracy on
ImageNet. The same setup with a g/14 checkpoint [54]
leads to 84.5% accuracy, trained for two days. With a public
unlocked B/16 image checkpoint [39], trained on the WebLI dataset [13], SigLIP achieves 71.0% 0-shot accuracy
using 16 TPU-v4 chips for three days. The last two rows
show results with randomly initialized models.
Image Text

BS

#TPUv4 Days

INet-0

SigLiT
SigLiT

B/8
g/14

L∗
L

32 k
20 k

4
4

1
2

79.7
84.5

SigLIP
SigLIP
SigLIP

B/16
B/16
B/16

B
B
B

16 k
32 k
32 k

16
32
32

3
2
5

71.0
72.1
73.4

∗ We use a variant of the L model with 12 layers.

1. Introduction
Contrastive pre-training using weak supervision from
image-text pairs found on the web is becoming the go-to
method for obtaining generic computer vision backbones,
slowly replacing pre-training on large labelled multi-class
datasets. The high-level idea is to simultaneously learn
an aligned representation space for images and texts using
paired data. Seminal works CLIP [34] and ALIGN [23] established the viability of this approach at a large scale, and
following their success, many large image-text datasets became available privately [55, 13, 21, 45] and publicly [37,
6, 15, 7, 38].
The standard recipe to pre-train such models leverages
the image-text contrastive objective. It aligns the image and
text embeddings for matching (positive) image-text pairs
while making sure that unrelated (negative) image-text pairs
 equal contribution

are dissimilar in the embedding space. This is achieved via a
batch-level softmax-based contrastive loss, applied twice to
normalize the pairwise similarity scores across all images,
then all texts. A naive implementation of the softmax is
numerically unstable; it is usually stabilized by subtracting
the maximum input value before applying the softmax [18],
which requires another pass over the full batch.
In this paper, we propose a simpler alternative: the sigmoid loss. It does not require any operation across the full
batch and hence greatly simpliﬁes the distributed loss implementation and boosts efﬁciency. Additionally, it conceptually decouples the batch size from the deﬁnition of
the task. We compare the proposed sigmoid loss with the
standard softmax loss across multiple setups. In particular, we investigate sigmoid-based loss with two prominent approaches for image-text learning: CLIP [34] and
LiT [55], which we call sigmoid language image pre-

11975

