This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedPerfix: Towards Partial Model Personalization of Vision Transformers in
Federated Learning
Guangyu Sun1 , Matias Mendieta1 , Jun Luo2 , Shandong Wu3 , Chen Chen1
1

Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, USA
2
Intelligent Systems Program, University of Pittsburgh, USA
3
Department of Radiology, Biomedical Informatics,
and Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
{guangyu.sun, matias.mendieta}@ucf.edu; jul117@pitt.edu;
wus3@upmc.edu; chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Personalized Federated Learning (PFL) represents a
promising solution for decentralized learning in heterogeneous data environments. Partial model personalization
has been proposed to improve the efficiency of PFL by selectively updating local model parameters instead of aggregating all of them. However, previous work on partial model personalization has mainly focused on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), leaving a gap in understanding how it can be applied to other popular models such as Vision Transformers (ViTs). In this work, we
investigate where and how to partially personalize a ViT
model. Specifically, we empirically evaluate the sensitivity to data distribution of each type of layer. Based
on the insights that the self-attention layer and the classification head are the most sensitive parts of a ViT, we
propose a novel approach called FedPerfix, which leverages plugins to transfer information from the aggregated
model to the local client as a personalization. Finally, we
evaluate the proposed approach on CIFAR-100, OrganAMNIST, and Office-Home datasets and demonstrate its effectiveness in improving the model’s performance compared
to several advanced PFL methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/imguangyu/FedPerfix

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [25] has emerged as a promising method for training machine learning models on decentralized data without requiring direct data sharing. However, data heterogeneity among participating clients can
present a significant challenge. Due to the various circumstances of the clients, the data across the clients can

be non-independent and non-identically distributed (nonIID). Therefore, achieving satisfactory performance using
a one-model-fits-all approach is difficult, and personalized
models are often needed to achieve the best results. This
has inspired the study of Personalized Federated Learning
(PFL), where the focus is shifted from the performance of
the global model on the server to the local models on the
clients.
In the context of personalized federated learning, previous literature has explored two main approaches: full model
personalization [9, 6, 23] and partial model personalization [31, 27, 18, 5, 1]. Full model personalization involves
maintaining a separate local model for each client and updating it based on a joint objective, while partial model personalization aims to personalize only a subset of the model
parameters. A convergence analysis [31] suggests that partial model personalization can achieve most of the benefits
of full model personalization with fewer shared parameters,
offering advantages in terms of computation, communication, and privacy to enable the deployment of larger models
on the clients.
However, recent literature shows that where and how to
perform partial model personalization has a high correlation
to the model architectures and the tasks [31], which requires
further study when applied to a new architecture. Despite
the multitude of approaches proposed in the literature, the
majority of methods have only been evaluated on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). Meanwhile, Vision Transformers (ViTs) [8] have demonstrated superior performance
compared to CNNs in several tasks, such as image classification [37] and object detection [42, 3], making them an
attractive option for personalized federated learning. However, to the best of our knowledge, the application of ViT in
the federated learning community has received limited at-

4988

