This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SSB: Simple but Strong Baseline for Boosting Performance of
Open-Set Semi-Supervised Learning
Yue Fan

Anna Kukleva

Dengxin Dai

Bernt Schiele

{yfan, akukleva, ddai, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
Saarland Informatics Campus
Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods effectively
leverage unlabeled data to improve model generalization.
However, SSL models often underperform in open-set scenarios, where unlabeled data contain outliers from novel
categories that do not appear in the labeled set. In this
paper, we study the challenging and realistic open-set SSL
setting, where the goal is to both correctly classify inliers and to detect outliers. Intuitively, the inlier classiﬁer should be trained on inlier data only. However, we
ﬁnd that inlier classiﬁcation performance can be largely
improved by incorporating high-conﬁdence pseudo-labeled
data, regardless of whether they are inliers or outliers. Also,
we propose to utilize non-linear transformations to separate the features used for inlier classiﬁcation and outlier
detection in the multi-task learning framework, preventing
adverse effects between them. Additionally, we introduce
pseudo-negative mining, which further boosts outlier detection performance. The three ingredients lead to what we
call Simple but Strong Baseline (SSB) for open-set SSL. In
experiments, SSB greatly improves both inlier classiﬁcation
and outlier detection performance, outperforming existing
methods by a large margin. Our code will be released at
https://github.com/YUE-FAN/SSB.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has achieved great success in improving model performance by leveraging unlabeled data [26, 25, 42, 29, 4, 3, 41, 45, 11, 50, 44].
However, standard SSL assumes that the unlabeled samples
come from the same set of categories as the labeled samples,
which makes them struggle in open-set settings [33], where
unlabeled data contain out-of-distribution (OOD) samples
from novel classes that do not appear in the labeled set (see
Fig. 1). In this paper, we study this more realistic setting
called open-set semi-supervised learning, where the goal is

TRAIN

FDW

Inliers
GRJ

ELNH

Seen outliers

Unseen outliers

Labeled
Data

Unlabeled
Data

TEST

Figure 1: Open-set semi-supervised learning considers a realistic and challenging setting, where unlabeled data contains samples from novel classes (seen outliers) that do not
appear in the labeled data. At test time, the model should
correctly classify inliers, while identifying outliers seen
during the training and, most importantly, unseen outliers
that do not appear in the training set. We measure test accuracy for the inlier classiﬁcation performance and AUROC
for the outlier detection performance. Our method (SSB)
achieves superior performance in both tasks.
to learn both a good closed-set classiﬁer to classify inliers
and to detect outliers as shown in Fig. 1.
Recent works on open-set SSL [20, 7, 38, 48, 14, 16,
17, 21] have achieved strong performance [43, 28, 19, 1]
through a multi-task learning framework, which consists of
an inlier classiﬁer, an outlier detector, and a shared feature encoder, as shown in Figure 2. The outlier detector
is trained to ﬁlter out OOD data from the unlabeled data so
that the classiﬁer is only trained on inliers. However, this
framework has two major drawbacks. First, detector-based
ﬁltering often removes many inliers along with OOD data,
leading to suboptimal classiﬁcation performance due to the
low utilization ratio of unlabeled data. Second, the inlier

16068

