This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EMQ: Evolving Training-free Proxies for Automated Mixed Precision
Quantization
Peijie Dong1†

Lujun Li2† Zimian Wei1 Xin Niu1 * Zhiliang Tian1 Hengyue Pan1
National University of Defense Technology, 2 HKUST

1
1

{dongpeijie, weizimian16, niuxin, tianzhiliang, hengyuepan}@nudt.edu.cn, 2 lilujunai@gmail.com

Abstract
Mixed-Precision Quantization (MQ) can achieve a competitive accuracy-complexity trade-off for models. Conventional training-based search methods require timeconsuming candidate training to search optimized per-layer
bit-width configurations in MQ. Recently, some trainingfree approaches have presented various MQ proxies and
significantly improve search efficiency. However, the correlation between these proxies and quantization accuracy
is poorly understood. To address the gap, we first build the
MQ-Bench-101, which involves different bit configurations
and quantization results. Then, we observe that the existing training-free proxies perform weak correlations on the
MQ-Bench-101. To efficiently seek superior proxies, we develop an automatic search of proxies framework for MQ via
evolving algorithms. In particular, we devise an elaborate
search space involving the existing proxies and perform an
evolution search to discover the best correlated MQ proxy.
We proposed a diversity-prompting selection strategy and
compatibility screening protocol to avoid premature convergence and improve search efficiency. In this way, our
Evolving proxies for Mixed-precision Quantization (EMQ)
framework allows the auto-generation of proxies without
heavy tuning and expert knowledge. Extensive experiments
on ImageNet with various ResNet and MobileNet families
demonstrate that our EMQ obtains superior performance
than state-of-the-art mixed-precision methods at a significantly reduced cost. The code will be released.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated outstanding performance on various vision tasks [20, 25].
However, their deployment on edge devices is challenging due to high memory consumption and computation cost
[14]. Quantization techniques [19, 6, 8] have emerged as
a promising solution to address this challenge by perform* Corresponding author, † equal contribution.

Figure 1. Illustration of the search space for EMQ. Our proposed search space encompasses the handcrafted proxies in mixedprecision quantization, whose input sources are activation(A), gradient (G), weight(W), Hessian(H), as well as their combinations
(e.g., G × W ). The proposed search space highlights the extensive
range of possible combinations, emphasizing the significant effort
required to discover new MQ proxies.

ing computation and storing tensors at lower bit-widths than
floating point precision, and thus speed up inference and reduce the memory footprint.
Mixed-precision quantization (MQ) [40, 18, 10, 12, 8,
13] is a technique that assigns different bit-widths to the
layers of a neural network to achieve a better accuracycomplexity trade-off and allows for the full exploitation of
the redundancy and representative capacity of each layer.
MQ methods can be categorized into training-based and
training-free approaches. Training-based methods for MQ
present it as a combinatorial search problem and adopt timeconsuming Reinforcement Learning (RL) [40], Evolution
Algorithm (EA) [41], one-shot [16], or gradient-based [42]
methods to find the optimal bit-precision setting. However, these methods can be computationally intensive and
require several GPU days on ImageNet [40, 3], limiting
their applicability in scenarios with limited computing resources or high real-time requirements. Recently, trainingfree approaches [35, 28, 36, 8, 7, 21] have emerged for
mixed-precision quantization, which starkly reduces the
heavy computation burden. These approaches aim to reduce the computational burden by building alternative proxies to rank candidate bit-width configurations. For example, QE [35] uses the entropy value of features to automat-

17076

