This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Model as Representation Learner
Xingyi Yang
Xinchao Wang*
National University of Singapore
xyang@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) have recently
demonstrated impressive results on various generative
tasks. Despite its promises, the learned representations
of pre-trained DPMs, however, have not been fully understood. In this paper, we conduct an in-depth investigation
of the representation power of DPMs, and propose a novel
knowledge transfer method that leverages the knowledge
acquired by generative DPMs for recognition tasks. Our
study begins by examining the feature space of DPMs, revealing that DPMs are inherently denoising autoencoders
that balance the representation learning with regularizing
model capacity. To this end, we introduce a novel knowledge transfer paradigm named RepFusion. Our paradigm
extracts representations at different time steps from off-theshelf DPMs and dynamically employs them as supervision
for student networks, in which the optimal time is determined through reinforcement learning. We evaluate our approach on several image classification, semantic segmentation, and landmark detection benchmarks, and demonstrate that it outperforms state-of-the-art methods. Our
results uncover the potential of DPMs as a powerful tool
for representation learning and provide insights into the
usefulness of generative models beyond sample generation. The code is available at https://github.com/
Adamdad/Repfusion.

1. Introduction
In the ever-evolving landscape of machine learning, generative models have emerged as a captivating approach to
tackle the intricacies of data distributions. Among these
marvels, Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) stand tall,
boasting a remarkable prowess in producing realistic and diverse samples. Powered by the elegent design of diffusion,
these models elegantly transform a humble noise into target data distribution, unfurling a breathtaking array of variations and unyielding fidelity in their artistic creations.
* Corresponding Author.

Denoising
Autoencoder

Equivalence

Meaningful
Representations

Matching at
multiple scales

Diffusion
Probabilistic
Models

Representation
Learning

DPM
Teachers

Score Matching

Knowledge

Non-generative
Student

ep
est
Tim

Figure 1. Illustration of our core idea on establishing a link between representation learning and diffusion models. Building
upon this connection, we propose to utiliz the knowledge acquired
from pre-trained DPMs. This knowledge is selectively distilled
into a student network, empowering it to carry out recognition
tasks with enhanced proficiency.

Although the generative ability of DPMs has been extensively studied, their potential for representation learning
has not been fully explored. Recent research has demonstrated that the diffusion models already have a semantic latent space[32], and could be extended to tasks like controllable image generation [51], representation learning [1, 46]
and image segmentation [5, 76], albeit through complicated
model modifications. Nevertheless, the usefulness of the
learned feature space of DPMs remain unclear. In this work,
we intend to close the gap between generative DPM and its
capability in representation learning by answering the following question: Can the representation learned by DPMs
be effectively reused for recognition tasks?
We answer this question by first analyzing the inherent
relationship between the diffusion model and the standard
auto-encoder, as shown in Figure 1. Conceptually, DPMs
are designed to predict noise from perturbed input distributions. Essentially, DPMs can be viewed as denoising autoencoders (DAEs) [68, 67] with varying denoising scales.
DAEs have been well-established as a powerful technique
for self-supervised learning, which captures the underlying

18938

