This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Going Denser with Open-Vocabulary Part Segmentation
Peize Sun1 Shoufa Chen1 Chenchen Zhu2 Fanyi Xiao2 Ping Luo1,4 Saining Xie3 Zhicheng Yan2
1

The University of Hong Kong

2

Meta AI

3

New York University

4

Shanghai AI Laboratory

https://github.com/facebookresearch/VLPart

Figure 1. Examples of open-vocabulary part segmentation. Beyond open-vocabulary object detection, we propose that the detector
should be able to predict both objects and their parts. This open-world fine-grained recognition ability is in demand for an intelligent vision
system but is only realized in a limited number of categories [9, 29, 67] up to now. In this paper, we move forward to going denser with
open-vocabulary part segmentation: Left figure shows segmenting dog and its parts in different granularities. Right figure demonstrates
more visualization results.

Abstract
Object detection has been expanded from a limited number of categories to open vocabulary. Moving forward, a
complete intelligent vision system requires understanding
more fine-grained object descriptions, object parts. In this
paper, we propose a detector with the ability to predict both
open-vocabulary objects and their part segmentation. This
ability comes from two designs. First, we train the detector
on the joint of part-level, object-level and image-level data
to build the multi-granularity alignment between language
and image. Second, we parse the novel object into its parts
by its dense semantic correspondence with the base object.
These two designs enable the detector to largely benefit
from various data sources and foundation models. In openvocabulary part segmentation experiments, our method outperforms the baseline by 3.3∼7.3 mAP in cross-dataset generalization on PartImageNet, and improves the baseline by
7.3 novel AP50 in cross-category generalization on Pascal
Part. Finally, we train a detector that generalizes to a wide
range of part segmentation datasets while achieving better
performance than dataset-specific training.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in open-vocabulary object detection [37,42,47,58,78,85,92,95] have made surprising development in enlarging the number of object categories from a
pre-determined set by training datasets [17,26,49,71] to any
object in the open world. This is a crucial step for the vision
system to make effect in the real world. Towards the next
step, for a deeper understanding to object structure, mobility, functionality, and practical applications such as behavior analysis [61,68,82], robotics manipulation [5,19,60,88],
image-editing [45, 70], only object-level perception is not
sufficient, while the fine-grained recognition ability of part
segmentation [9, 29, 67, 83] is necessary.
Since a part is the fine-grained version of an object, an
intuitive idea is to directly apply existing open-vocabulary
object detection methods [42, 47, 92, 95] to solve the part
detection/segmentation task. However, as shown in Table 1,
they do not show good generalization on part-level recognition. Although conceptually similar to open-vocabulary
object detection, localizing and classifying the fine-grained
object parts are essentially more challenging. This moti-

15453

