This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IntrinsicNeRF: Learning Intrinsic Neural Radiance Fields for Editable Novel
View Synthesis
Weicai Ye1 * Shuo Chen1 * Chong Bao1 Hujun Bao1
Guofeng Zhang1†
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Marc Pollefeys2,3
2

ETH Zurich

Zhaopeng Cui1
3

Microsoft

https://zju3dv.github.io/intrinsic_nerf

Posed Multi-View Images

Reflectance

Shading

Recoloring

Residual

IntrinsicNeRF

Illumination Variation

Novel View Synthesis

Applications

Figure 1: Intrinsic Neural Radiance Fields (IntrinsicNeRF). Given multi-view posed images of static scenes, IntrinsicNeRF can factorize them into the multi-view consistent components: reflectance, shading, and residual layers. The decomposition can support online applications such as scene recoloring, illumination variation, and editable novel view synthesis.

Abstract
Existing inverse rendering combined with neural rendering methods can only perform editable novel view synthesis on object-specific scenes, while we present intrinsic
neural radiance fields, dubbed IntrinsicNeRF, which introduce intrinsic decomposition into the NeRF-based neural
rendering method and can extend its application to roomscale scenes. Since intrinsic decomposition is a fundamentally under-constrained inverse problem, we propose
a novel distance-aware point sampling and adaptive reflectance iterative clustering optimization method, which
enables IntrinsicNeRF with traditional intrinsic decomposition constraints to be trained in an unsupervised manner,
resulting in multi-view consistent intrinsic decomposition
results. To cope with the problem that different adjacent
instances of similar reflectance in a scene are incorrectly
clustered together, we further propose a hierarchical clustering method with coarse-to-fine optimization to obtain a
fast hierarchical indexing representation. It supports compelling real-time augmented applications such as recoloring and illumination variation. Extensive experiments and
editing samples on both object-specific/room-scale scenes
∗ indicates equal contribution.
†

indicates corresponding author.

and synthetic/real-word data demonstrate that we can obtain consistent intrinsic decomposition results and highfidelity novel view synthesis even for challenging sequences.

1. Introduction
Recently neural rendering techniques have gained increasing attention and demonstrated tremendous performance in novel view synthesis, ranging from small objects [37, 41, 46, 63] to large outdoor scenes [41, 60], but
they struggle to perform further intuitive editing like realistic scene recoloring, relighting, etc, for the scenes are usually represented as neural fields implicitly and required to
be decomposed into the editable properties explicitly.
Several works have proposed to fulfill this goal by introducing inverse rendering into neural rendering [74, 76, 77],
where the scene is decomposed into geometry, reflectance,
and illumination. However, since inverse rendering is fundamentally ambiguous and highly ill-posed, these NeRFbased inverse rendering works [74, 77] introduce many
prior assumptions preventing the modeling of mutual occlusion, inter-reflection, and indirect light propagation of
different objects in the scene. An accurate 3D surface recovery is also required as a prerequisite. All these factors
limit their applications to object-specific scenarios.

339

