This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Template Inversion Attack against Face Recognition Systems
using 3D Face Reconstruction
Hatef Otroshi Shahreza1,2 and Sébastien Marcel1,3
1
Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland
2
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland
3
Université de Lausanne (UNIL), Lausanne, Switzerland

Frontal Reconst.

Original

{hatef.otroshi,sebastien.marcel}@idiap.ch

0.674

0.705

0.679

0.663

0.733

0.782

3D Reconst.

0.706

Figure 1: Sample face images from the FFHQ dataset (first row) as well as their corresponding 3D (third row) and frontal 2D
reconstruction (second row) from facial templates in the whitebox template inversion attack against ArcFace. Values show
the cosine similarity between the templates of the original and frontal reconstructed face images.

Abstract
Face recognition systems are increasingly being used in
different applications. In such systems, some features (also
known as embeddings or templates) are extracted from each
face image. Then, the extracted templates are stored in the
system’s database during the enrollment stage and are later
used for recognition. In this paper, we focus on template
inversion attacks against face recognition systems and introduce a novel method (dubbed GaFaR) to reconstruct 3D
face from facial templates. To this end, we use a geometryaware generator network based on generative neural radiance fields (GNeRF), and learn a mapping from facial
templates to the intermediate latent space of the generator network. We train our network with a semi-supervised
learning approach using real and synthetic images simul-

taneously. For the real training data, we use a Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) based framework to learn the
distribution of the latent space. For the synthetic training
data, where we have the true latent code, we directly train
in the latent space of the generator network. In addition,
during the inference stage, we also propose optimization
on the camera parameters to generate face images to improve the success attack rate (up to 17.14% in our experiments). We evaluate the performance of our method in
the whitebox and blackbox attacks against state-of-the-art
face recognition models on the LFW and MOBIO datasets.
To our knowledge, this paper is the first work on 3D face
reconstruction from facial templates. The project page is
available at: https://www.idiap.ch/paper/gafar

19662

