This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Object Recognition: A New Benchmark towards
Object Concept Learning
Yong-Lu Li, Yue Xu, Xinyu Xu, Xiaohan Mao, Yuan Yao, Siqi Liu, Cewu Lu*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yonglu li, silicxuyue, xuxinyu2000, mxh1999, yaoyuan2000, magi-yunan, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Category？

Category

Causal
Relations
Attribute

Attribute？

Affordance

Affordance？

Cat

Mug √

Green
Digital
White √ Ceramic √
Cute √ Painted √

Hold √ Inspect √
Eat
Pet
Drink with√ Feed

Figure 1: For embodied agents, understanding daily objects requires the ability to perceive not only category but also
attribute and affordance. In OCL, we try to reveal object concept learning in both three levels and explore their profound
causal relations.

Abstract
Understanding objects is a central building block of AI,
especially for embodied AI. Even though object recognition excels with deep learning, current machines struggle to
learn higher-level knowledge, e.g., what attributes an object
has, and what we can do with it. Here, we propose a challenging Object Concept Learning (OCL) task to push the
envelope of object understanding. It requires machines to
reason out affordances and simultaneously give the reason:
what attributes make an object possess these affordances.
To support OCL, we build a densely annotated knowledge
base including extensive annotations for three levels of object concept (category, attribute, affordance), and the clear
causal relations of three levels. By analyzing the causal
structure of OCL, we present a baseline, Object Concept
Reasoning Network (OCRN). It leverages concept instantiation and causal intervention to infer the three levels. In
experiments, OCRN effectively infers the object knowledge
while following the causalities well. Our data and code are
available at https://mvig-rhos.com/ocl.

1. Introduction
Object understanding is essential for intelligent robots.
Recently, benefiting from deep learning and large-scale
* Corresponding author.

datasets [10, 36], category recognition [30, 55] has made
tremendous progress. But to close the gap between human
and machine perception, machines need to pursue deeper
understanding, e.g., recognizing higher-level attributes [27]
and affordances [16], which may help it establish object
concept [41] when interacting with contexts.
Category apple is a symbol indicating its referent
(real apples). In line with symbol grounding [22], machines should learn knowledge beyond category to approach concept understanding. According to cognition
studies [58, 41], attribute depicting objects from the physical/visual side plays an important role in object understanding. Thus, many works [32, 68, 13] studied to ground objects with attributes, e.g., a hammer consists of a long
handle and a heavy head. Moreover, attributes can depict
object states [27]. An elegant characteristic of attributes is
cross-category: objects of the same category can have various states (big or fresh apple), whilst various objects
can have the same state (sliced orange or apple). If
the category is the first level of object concept, the attribute
can be seen as the second level closer to the physical fact.
However, recognizing attributes is still far away from
concept understanding. Given a hammer, we should know
it can be held to hit nails, i.e., requiring machines to
infer affordance [16] indicating what actions humans can
perform with objects. Thus, we refer to affordance as
the third level, which is closely related to common sense
and causal inference [16]. Though affordance has been

20029

