This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Point Fields
Sergey Prokudin1 Qianli Ma1,2 Maxime Raafat1 Julien Valentin3 Siyu Tang1
1
ETH Zürich 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 3 Microsoft
1

firstname.lastname@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed significant progress in the
field of neural surface reconstruction. While extensive focus
was put on volumetric and implicit approaches, a number of
works have shown that explicit graphics primitives, such as
point clouds, can significantly reduce computational complexity without sacrificing the reconstructed surface quality.
However, less emphasis has been put on modeling dynamic
surfaces with point primitives. In this work, we present a dynamic point field model that combines the representational
benefits of explicit point-based graphics with implicit deformation networks to allow efficient modeling of non-rigid
3D surfaces. Using explicit surface primitives also allows
us to easily incorporate well-established constraints such
as isometric-as-possible regularization. While learning this
deformation model is prone to local optima when trained in
a fully unsupervised manner, we propose to also leverage
semantic information, such as keypoint correspondence, to
guide the deformation learning. We demonstrate how this
approach can be used for creating an expressive animatable human avatar from a collection of 3D scans. Here,
previous methods mostly rely on variants of the linear blend
skinning paradigm, which fundamentally limits the expressivity of such models when dealing with complex cloth appearances, such as long skirts. We show the advantages
of our dynamic point field framework in terms of its representational power, learning efficiency, and robustness to
out-of-distribution novel poses. The code for the project is
publicly available 1 .

1. Introduction
Neural surface reconstruction and rendering have been
subject to giant leaps in the last couple of years [81]. While
original works have suffered from the representational limitations stemming from using a single global neural network
to represent a surface as implicit signed distance [4, 52, 73]
or occupancy field [43], recent models pushed the level of
1 sergeyprokudin.github.io/dpf

Figure 1. Dynamic point field. We propose to model dynamic
surfaces with a point-based model, where the motion of a point
(t)
pi over time is represented by an implicit deformation field gθ .
Working directly with points rather than SDFs allows us to easily incorporate various well-known deformation constraints, e.g.
as-isometric-as-possible [23]. We showcase the usefulness of this
approach for creating animatable avatars in complex clothing.

reconstruction quality by introducing auxiliary data structures such as octrees [80] or hashmaps [46]. While providing high level of accuracy, these lines of work rely on
the ability to perform large amounts of queries to the underlying multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to reconstruct the
surface.
In the field of volumetric neural rendering, this restriction has motivated development of compact and computationally attractive models that can train quickly and render at interactive rates [6, 11, 36, 67, 91]. Among them,
point-based methods for neural rendering [1, 26, 66, 68, 86,
87, 93] proved to be scalable alternatives to purely implicit
or volumetric approaches. In the context of differentiable
neural surface modeling, points have also been explored for
static scenes [57, 90] and dynamic human modeling [42].
This work aims to achieve three goals. First, we showcase the advantage of a point-based surface representation
compared to the most recent implicit models [46]. We
do this by carefully analyzing the behavior of the existing
frameworks when representing complex 3D meshes with

7964

