This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tubelet-Contrastive Self-Supervision for Video-Efficient Generalization
Fida Mohammad Thoker, Hazel Doughty, Cees G. M. Snoek
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
We propose a self-supervised method for learning
motion-focused video representations. Existing approaches
minimize distances between temporally augmented videos,
which maintain high spatial similarity. We instead propose
to learn similarities between videos with identical local motion dynamics but an otherwise different appearance. We do
so by adding synthetic motion trajectories to videos which
we refer to as tubelets. By simulating different tubelet motions and applying transformations, such as scaling and rotation, we introduce motion patterns beyond what is present
in the pretraining data. This allows us to learn a video representation that is remarkably data efficient: our approach
maintains performance when using only 25% of the pretraining videos. Experiments on 10 diverse downstream settings demonstrate our competitive performance and generalizability to new domains and fine-grained actions. Code
is available at https://github.com/fmthoker/tubelet-contrast.

1. Introduction
This paper aims to learn self-supervised video representations, useful for distinguishing actions. In a community
effort to reduce the manual, expensive, and hard-to-scale
annotations needed for many downstream deployment settings, the topic has witnessed tremendous progress in recent years [18, 31, 62, 79], particularly through contrastive
learning [15,56,58,60]. Contrastive approaches learn representations through instance discrimination [55], by increasing feature similarity between spatially and temporally augmented clips from the same video. Despite temporal differences, such positive video pairs often maintain high spatial
similarity (see Figure 1), allowing the contrastive task to be
solved by coarse-grained features without explicitly capturing local motion dynamics. This limits the generalizability
of the learned video representations, as shown in our prior
work [70]. Furthermore, prior approaches are constrained
by the amount and types of motions present in the pretraining data. This makes them data-hungry, as video data has
high redundancy with periods of little to no motion. In this
work, we address the need for data-efficient and generalizable self-supervised video representations by proposing a
contrastive method to learn local motion dynamics.

Figure 1: Tubelet-Contrastive Positive Pairs (bottom)
only share the spatiotemporal motion dynamics inside the
simulated tubelets, while temporal contrastive pairs (top)
suffer from a high spatial bias. Contrasting tubelets results
in a data-efficient and generalizable video representation.
We take inspiration from action detection, where tubelets
are used to represent the motions of people and objects in
videos through bounding box sequences e.g., [29, 32, 42].
Typically, many tubelet proposals are generated for a video,
which are processed to find the best prediction. Rather than
finding tubelets in video data, we simulate them. In particular, we sample an image patch and ‘paste’ it with a randomized motion onto two different video clips as a shared
tubelet (see Figure 1). These two clips form a positive pair
for contrastive learning where the model has to rely on the
spatiotemporal dynamics of the tubelet to learn the similarity. With such a formulation, we can simulate a large variety
of motion patterns that are not present in the original videos.
This allows our model to be data-efficient while improving
generalization to new domains and fine-grained actions.
We make four contributions. First, we explicitly learn
from local motion dynamics in the form of synthetic
tubelets and design a simple but effective tubelet-contrastive

13812

