This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Meta-Learning with Longitudinally Generalized Regularization for
One-Shot Brain Tissue Segmentation Across the Human Lifespan
Yongheng Sun1 , Fan Wang2( ) , Jun Shu1 , Haifeng Wang1 , Li Wang3( ) , Deyu Meng1 , Chunfeng Lian1( )
1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
2
The Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of Education,
School of Life Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
3
UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, United States
chunfeng.lian@xjtu.edu.cn, li wang@med.unc.edu, fan.wang@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Brain tissue segmentation is essential for neuroscience
and clinical studies. However, segmentation on longitudinal
data is challenging due to dynamic brain changes across
the lifespan. Previous researches mainly focus on selfsupervision with regularizations and will lose longitudinal
generalization when fine-tuning on a specific age group. In
this paper, we propose a dual meta-learning paradigm to
learn longitudinally consistent representations and persist
when fine-tuning. Specifically, we learn a plug-and-play
feature extractor to extract longitudinal-consistent anatomical representations by meta-feature learning and a wellinitialized task head for fine-tuning by meta-initialization
learning. Besides, two class-aware regularizations are proposed to encourage longitudinal consistency. Experimental results on the iSeg2019 and ADNI datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Our code is available at https://github.com/ladderlab-xjtu/
DuMeta.

1. Introduction
Accurate brain tissue segmentation is essential in diverse
neuroscience and clinical studies, e.g., population analyses
of brain cortical architectures and individualized diagnosis
of brain diseases. Due to spatiotemporally dynamic changes
in brain structures and functions across the human lifespan,
brain magnetic resonance images (MRIs) present longitudinally heterogenous appearances, leading to varying segmentation difficulties at different periods [37]. Infancy and
the elderly are two particularly challenging times for tissue
segmentation, as a result of (atypical) developmental and
degenerative processes. For example, as shown in Fig. 1 (a),
the brains of infants before six month old have inverse contrasts between gray matter (GM) and white matter (WM)

(a) Brain MRI of infants from iSeg2019

(b) Brain MRI of the edlerly from ADNI
Figure 1. (a) Brain morphology and tissue contrast of 6-monthold infants from the iSeg2019 dataset. (b) Aging and Alzheimer
processes of the elderly from the ADNI dataset.

compared with following periods, and the isointense phase
around six-month-old exhibits extremely low inter-tissue
contrast. In contrast, the brains of the elderly and patients
with Alzheimer’s disease have enlarged cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) and atrophied GM, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). These
challenges significantly hamper the generalization and longitudinal consistency of existing learning-based methods
for automatic brain tissue segmentation [25, 39, 18, 9], especially considering that labeled training samples for specific time points could be very limited in practice.
To address the above challenges, some methods in the literature [32, 29] designed contrastive self-supervised learning (SSL) strategies to learn longitudinally consistent representations, which are then fine-tuned on a specific age
group for downstream tasks like tissue segmentation. Such
SSL methods commonly have three technical limitations
from the application perspective. That is, they usually re-

21118

