This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Nonlinear Latent Transformation for Conditional Face Editing
Zhizhong Huang1
Siteng Ma1
Junping Zhang1
Hongming Shan2,3∗
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
2
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-inspired Intelligence and MOE Frontiers Center
for Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
3
Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-inspired Technology, Shanghai 200031, China
{zzhuang19, stma21, jpzhang, hmshan}@fudan.edu.cn
Input

Projected

50-69 ys

+/- Age

10- ys

30-39 ys

Hair

70+ ys

Wavy/Black

10-19 ys
10- ys
30-39 ys
70+ ys
Wavy/Blond
Figure 1. Sample results produced by our AdaTrans. By projecting the images into the latent space of StyleGAN, AdaTrans can achieve
disentangled face editing even when the age gap is extreme large, and manipulate multiple attributes at the same time.

Abstract
Recent works for face editing usually manipulate the latent space of StyleGAN via the linear semantic directions.
However, they usually suffer from the entanglement of facial
attributes, need to tune the optimal editing strength, and
are limited to binary attributes with strong supervision signals. This paper proposes a novel adaptive nonlinear latent
transformation for disentangled and conditional face editing, termed AdaTrans. Specifically, our AdaTrans divides
the manipulation process into several finer steps; i.e., the
direction and size at each step are conditioned on both the
facial attributes and the latent codes. In this way, AdaTrans
describes an adaptive nonlinear transformation trajectory
to manipulate the faces into target attributes while keeping
other attributes unchanged. Then, AdaTrans leverages a
predefined density model to constrain the learned trajectory in the distribution of latent codes by maximizing the
∗ Corresponding author

likelihood of transformed latent code. Moreover, we also
propose a disentangled learning strategy under a mutual information framework to eliminate the entanglement among
attributes, which can further relax the need for labeled data.
Consequently, AdaTrans enables a controllable face editing with the advantages of disentanglement, flexibility with
non-binary attributes, and high fidelity. Extensive experimental results on various facial attributes demonstrate the
qualitative and quantitative effectiveness of the proposed
AdaTrans over existing state-of-the-art methods, especially
in the most challenging scenarios with a large age gap
and few labeled examples. The source code is available
at https://github.com/Hzzone/AdaTrans.

1. Introduction
Face editing aims to render the faces to the target facial attributes such as aging or smiling with high fidelity
while keeping other facial attributes unchanged, which has

21022

