This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LDP-F EAT: Image Features with Local Differential Privacy
Francesco Pittaluga

Bingbing Zhuang

francescopittaluga@nec-labs.com

bzhuang@nec-labs.com

NEC Labs America

Abstract
Modern computer vision services often require users to
share raw feature descriptors with an untrusted server. This
presents an inherent privacy risk, as raw descriptors may be
used to recover the source images from which they were extracted. To address this issue, researchers [11] recently proposed privatizing image features by embedding them within
an affine subspace containing the original feature as well
as adversarial feature samples. In this paper, we propose
two novel inversion attacks to show that it is possible to
(approximately) recover the original image features from
these embeddings, allowing us to recover privacy-critical
image content. In light of such successes and the lack of
theoretical privacy guarantees afforded by existing visual
privacy methods, we further propose the first method to privatize image features via local differential privacy, which,
unlike prior approaches, provides a guaranteed bound for
privacy leakage regardless of the strength of the attacks. In
addition, our method yields strong performance in visual localization as a downstream task while enjoying the privacy
guarantee.

1. Introduction
The extraction and matching of image keypoints with
descriptors is an essential building block for many vision problems, such as 3D reconstruction [2], image retrieval [28] and recognition [39]. Thus, modern computer vision services often require the users to share feature
descriptors and/or raw images to a centralized server for
downstream tasks, such as visual localization [37]. However, recent works [30, 36] show that high-quality images
may be recovered from the keypoint descriptors [30] or their
spatial information [36], raising serious concerns regarding
the potential leakage of private information via inversion attacks.
This in turn inspires great interest in researching feature
obfuscation with a view to concealing the privacy critical
information in the image, mainly by perturbing either the
feature descriptors or their locations. One of the recent

Figure 1. Our novel privacy attacks and LDP-based privacy
method. Top row: image reconstruction attacks against adversarial affine subspace embeddings [11] and our LDP-F EAT when
they have comparable performance in the downstream utility task.
Bottom row: overviews of the adversarial affine subspace embeddings algorithm [11] and our LDP-F EAT algorithm

works [11] represents a feature descriptor point as an affine
subspace passing through the original point, as well as a
number of other adversarial descriptors randomly sampled
from a database of descriptors, as shown in Fig. 1. These
adversarial descriptors serve as confounders to conceal the
raw descriptor. Another line of research [37, 38, 15, 35]
aims to conceal the location of 2D or 3D keypoints by lifting the point to a line passing through that point, which prevents a direct attack of the sort in [30, 36].
Despite their success, these works are primarily evaluated on the basis of empirical performance of a chosen
attacker, without rigorous understanding of the attackerindependent, intrinsic privacy property. This causes hindrance for a method to claim privacy protection safely since
there is no theoretical guarantee to assure practical applications. For instance, [7] re-investigates the privacy claim
in [37] and designs a stronger attack to reveal that a significant amount of scene geometry information in fact still
exists in the lifted line clouds, which can be leveraged to recover sensitive image content. In this paper, we focus on the

17580

