This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ContactGen: Generative Contact Modeling for Grasp Generation
Shaowei Liu1† Yang Zhou2 Jimei Yang2 Saurabh Gupta1∗ Shenlong Wang1∗
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Adobe Research
https://stevenlsw.github.io/contactgen/

Grasp Synthesis

ContactGen Generation
Model-based
Contact
Solver

Sampling

ContactGen
Generation

…
Model-based
Contact
Solver

Sampling

Input Object

Contact Map Hand Part Direction
Figure 1: We introduce novel, concise and comprehensive contact representation for hand-object interaction (indicated by the dashed box).
We demonstrate the process of generating contact representations from a given input object (on the left) and inferring the underlying grasp
from the contact representation via model-based optimization (on the right).

Abstract
This paper presents a novel object-centric contact representation ContactGen for hand-object interaction. The
ContactGen comprises 3 components: a contact map indicates the contact location, a part map represents the contact
hand part, and a direction map tells the contact direction
within each part. Given an input object, we propose a conditional generative model to predict ContactGen and adopt
model-based optimization to predict diverse and geometrically feasible grasps. Experimental results demonstrate
our method can generate high-fidelity and diverse human
grasps for various objects.

1. Introduction
Modeling hand-object interaction [2, 9, 14, 21, 30, 37, 45,
57,67] has gained substantial importance across various do† Work started at an internship at Adobe Research.
* Equal advising, alphabetic order

mains in animation, games, and augmented and virtual reality [23, 26, 62, 64]. For instance, given an object, one would
like to create a computational model to reason about the different ways a human hand can interact with it, e.g., how to
grasp the object using a single hand. To ensure realism and
authenticity in these interactions, a precise understanding
of contacts is crucial [5–7]. A thorough contact modeling
should account for factors such as which regions of the object are likely to make contact, which parts of the hand will
touch the object, the strength of the contact force, and the
direction of the contact, among others. In contrast, the lack
of thorough and precise modeling can result in unnatural
and unrealistic interactions, such as insufficient contact or
excessive penetration.
Previous approaches often rely on a contact map [17, 25,
27, 44, 56] applied to object point clouds, where values are
bounded within the [0, 1] range to indicate the status of point
contacts. Nevertheless, simply modeling contact maps does
not fully capture the details of contact. Specifically, even
with the contact map, ambiguities remain regarding which

20609

