This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IOMatch: Simplifying Open-Set Semi-Supervised Learning
with Joint Inliers and Outliers Utilization
Zekun Li1 Lei Qi2 Yinghuan Shi1, * Yang Gao1
1
Nanjing University 2 Southeast University

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) aims to leverage massive unlabeled data when labels are expensive to obtain.
Unfortunately, in many real-world applications, the collected unlabeled data will inevitably contain unseen-class
outliers not belonging to any of the labeled classes. To
deal with the challenging open-set SSL task, the mainstream
methods tend to first detect outliers and then filter them
out. However, we observe a surprising fact that such approach could result in more severe performance degradation when labels are extremely scarce, as the unreliable
outlier detector may wrongly exclude a considerable portion of valuable inliers. To tackle with this issue, we introduce a novel open-set SSL framework, IOMatch, which
can jointly utilize inliers and outliers, even when it is difficult to distinguish exactly between them. Specifically, we
propose to employ a multi-binary classifier in combination
with the standard closed-set classifier for producing unified open-set classification targets, which regard all outliers as a single new class. By adopting these targets as
open-set pseudo-labels, we optimize an open-set classifier
with all unlabeled samples including both inliers and outliers. Extensive experiments have shown that IOMatch significantly outperforms the baseline methods across different benchmark datasets and different settings despite its remarkable simplicity. Our code and models are available at
https://github.com/nukezil/IOMatch.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) [5] is a classical machine learning paradigm that attempts to improve a model’s
performance by utilizing unlabeled data in addition to insufficient labeled data. With a tiny fraction of labeled data,
* Corresponding author: Yinghuan Shi (syh@nju.edu.cn). Zekun Li,
Yinghuan Shi and Yang Gao are with the State Key Laboratory for Novel
Software Technology and National Institute of Healthcare Data Science,
Nanjing University. Lei Qi is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University. This work is supported by NSFC Program
(62222604, 62206052, 62192783), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Project (2023T160100), Jiangsu Natural Science Foundation Project
(BK20210224), and CCF-Lenovo Bule Ocean Research Fund.

Figure 1. The motivation of our work comes from a surprising fact
in open-set semi-supervised learning tasks: An unreliable outlier
detector can be more harmful than outliers themselves, because
it will wrongly exclude valuable inliers from subsequent training.
For this issue, we consider a unified paradigm for utilizing openset unlabeled data, even when it is difficult to distinguish exactly
between inliers and outliers, and thus we propose IOMatch.

advanced deep SSL methods can achieve the performance
of fully supervised methods in some cases, such as image
classification [21] and semantic segmentation [26].
Most existing SSL methods rely on the fundamental assumption that labeled and unlabeled data share the same
class space. However, it is usually difficult, even impossible, to collect such a unlabeled data set in many real-world
applications since we can not manually examine the massive unlabeled data. Therefore, a more challenging scenario
arises, where unseen-class outliers not belonging to any of
the labeled classes exist in the unlabeled data. Such setting
is called Open-Set Semi-Supervised Learning (OSSL) [28].
The negative effects of unseen-class outliers have been
observed in a pioneer work [17]. As the research of SSL
has grown rapidly in recent years, we extensively evaluate
more advanced SSL methods. Some of the key results are
shown in Figure 1, in which we plot the performance under standard and open-set SSL as the dash lines and charts,
respectively. Taking the classical method, FixMatch [21],
as an example, we can observe that adding extra outliers
does hurt the classification accuracy compared to the standard SSL setting with no outlier, because it is impossible
to obtain correct seen-class pseudo-labels for these outliers.
An intuitive approach to handle outliers is to detect and remove them, as OpenMatch [18] does. In particular, it combines FixMatch with an outlier detector. The detector is
first pre-trained and then used to retain only inliers for Fix-

15870

