This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Viewing Graph Solvability in Practice
Federica Arrigoni

Tomas Pajdla

Andrea Fusiello

Politecnico di Milano (Italy)

CIIRC - CTU in Prague (Czechia)

University of Udine (Italy)

federica.arrigoni@polimi.it

pajdla@cvut.cz

andrea.fusiello@uniud.it

Abstract
We present an advance in understanding the projective
Structure-from-Motion, focusing in particular on the viewing graph: such a graph has cameras as nodes and fundamental matrices as edges. We propose a practical method
for testing finite solvability, i.e., whether a viewing graph induces a finite number of camera configurations. Our formulation uses a significantly smaller number of equations (up
to 400ˆ) with respect to previous work. As a result, this is
the only method in the literature that can be applied to large
viewing graphs coming from real datasets, comprising up to
300K edges. In addition, we develop the first algorithm for
identifying maximal finite-solvable components.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-Motion [13] has been widely explored
for its various applications in Computer Vision, with most
research focusing on developing robust 3D scene reconstruction algorithms. In this respect, one compelling problem is establishing if a set of fundamental matrices uniquely
determines a configuration of cameras. Indeed, it is known
that fundamental matrices can be uniquely computed from
the camera matrices [7], but the converse may not be true
when only a subset of all possible fundamental matrices is
available (see Fig. 1). The viewing graph [10] can be analyzed to answer this question. Such a graph has vertices
corresponding to cameras, and an edge is present if and only
if the fundamental matrix between the two cameras exists.
A solvable graph uniquely identifies a configuration of
cameras up to a single transformation (projective or Euclidean, depending on camera knowledge). Conversely, an
unsolvable viewing graph is one for which multiple transformations exist that can be applied to the cameras without
changing the fundamental matrices (or essential matrices in
the calibrated case). The term “multiple” means any number of solutions – finite or infinite – strictly greater than one.
An unsolvable graph is undesirable in practice as it represents an inherently ill-posed problem, hence it is important
to test solvability before running a structure-from-motion

1

P2

Unique

P1
P4
5

P3

2
Fundamental

4 Uncalibrated

2

P5

F12

Cameras

Matrices

3

1

F25

F23

3

F14
F45 4

5

F34

?

Figure 1. While a set of cameras uniquely determines the fundamental matrices, the opposite may not hold. Fundamental matrices
can be conveniently represented as a viewing graph. The knowledge of the cameras is equivalent to a complete graph [10].

method [15, 8]. When a graph turns out to be non-solvable,
the challenge is to identify its largest solvable component,
but this is (at least) as difficult as testing.
Related Work. Previous studies have demonstrated that,
in the calibrated case, solvable graphs are those that are parallel rigid [12, 1]. Effective methods for extracting maximal rigid components are available for non-solvable graphs
[9, 18]. Hence the calibrated case is considered solved.
The uncalibrated case, instead, is less explored and still
offers open issues. Early works focused on manually analyzing small graphs [10] or providing sufficient conditions
for solvability [14, 16]. Trager et al. [17] showed that – in
principle – any viewing graph can be classified into solvable or not solvable via a system of polynomial equations,
although this is computationally expensive. Arrigoni et
al. [2, 3] proposed a novel set of polynomial equations based
on cycle consistency, which decided the solvability of minimal graphs up to 90 nodes and non-minimal (dense) graphs
with 9 nodes: this sets the state of the art in the uncalibrated
case in terms of solvable problem size, but it is still far from
the size of typical real datasets (see Tab. 3). Larger graphs
have not been processed in [3]: actually, solving polynomial equations requires Gröbner basis computation, whose
worst-case complexity is doubly exponential in the number
of variables [5]. In addition, the task of computing maximal
solvable components has never been addressed so far.
The authors of [17] also introduced the concept of finite
solvability, a viewing graph that determines a finite num-

8147

