This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RbA: Segmenting Unknown Regions Rejected by All
Nazir Nayal1
Mısra Yavuz1
João F. Henriques2
Fatma Güney1
1
KUIS AI Center and Department of Computer Engineering, Koç University 2 University of Oxford
{nnayal17, myavuz21, fguney}@ku.edu.tr, joao@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Standard semantic segmentation models owe their success
to curated datasets with a fixed set of semantic categories,
without contemplating the possibility of identifying unknown
objects from novel categories. Existing methods in outlier
detection suffer from a lack of smoothness and objectness
in their predictions, due to limitations of the per-pixel classification paradigm. Furthermore, additional training for
detecting outliers harms the performance of known classes.
In this paper, we explore another paradigm with region-level
classification to better segment unknown objects. We show
that the object queries in mask classification tend to behave
like one vs. all classifiers. Based on this finding, we propose
a novel outlier scoring function called RbA by defining the
event of being an outlier as being rejected by all known
classes. Our extensive experiments show that mask classification improves the performance of the existing outlier
detection methods, and the best results are achieved with
the proposed RbA. We also propose an objective to optimize
RbA using minimal outlier supervision. Further fine-tuning
with outliers improves the unknown performance, and unlike
previous methods, it does not degrade the inlier performance.
Project page: https://kuis-ai.github.io/RbA

1. Introduction
We address the problem of semantic segmentation of unknown categories. Detecting novel objects, for example, in
front of a self-driving vehicle, is crucial for safety yet very
challenging. The distribution of potential objects on the road
has a long tail of unknowns such as wild animals, vehicle
debris, litter, etc., manifesting in small quantities on the existing datasets [73, 7, 18]. The diversity of unknowns in terms
of appearance, size, and location adds to the difficulty. In
addition to the challenges of data, deep learning has evolved
around the closed-set assumption. Most existing models for
category prediction owe their success to curated datasets
with a fixed set of semantic categories. These models fail in
the open-set case by over-confidently assigning the labels of
known classes to unknowns [33, 58].

PEBAL

DenseHybrid

RbA (Ours)

Figure 1: Preserving objectness and eliminating noise.
While state-of-the-art methods PEBAL [65] and DenseHybrid [25] suffer from a lack of smoothness and objectness
with high false positive rates, our method RbA clearly segments the unknown objects and reduces false positives by
eliminating uncertainty at semantic boundaries and in ambiguous background regions.

The existing approaches to segmenting unknowns can be
divided into two depending on whether they use supervision for unknown objects or not. In either case, the model
has access to known classes during training, i.e. inlier or
in-distribution, and the goal is to identify the pixels belonging to an unknown class, i.e. anomalous, outlier, or out-ofdistribution (OoD). Earlier approaches resort to an ensemble
of models [41] or Monte Carlo dropout [23] which require
multiple forward passes, therefore costly in practice. More
recent approaches use the maximum class probability [35]
predicted by the model as a measure of its confidence. However, this approach requires the probability predictions to
be calibrated, which is not guaranteed [64, 58, 26, 54, 39].
In the supervised case, the model can utilize outlier data to
learn a discriminative representation, however, outlier data is
limited. Typically, another dataset from a different domain
is used for this purpose [12], or outlier objects are artificially
added to driving images [25, 65].
The existing methods in outlier detection suffer from a
lack of smoothness and objectness in the OoD predictions
as shown in Fig. 1. This is mainly due to the limitations

711

