This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCANet: Scene Complexity Aware Network for Weakly-Supervised Video
Moment Retrieval
Sunjae Yoon
Gwanhyeong Koo
Dahyun Kim
Chang D. Yoo
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{sunjae.yoon,kookie,dahyun.kim,cd yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Video moment retrieval aims to localize moments in
video corresponding to a given language query. To avoid
the expensive cost of annotating the temporal moments,
weakly-supervised VMR (wsVMR) systems have been studied. For such systems, generating a number of proposals as
moment candidates and then selecting the most appropriate
proposal has been a popular approach. These proposals are
assumed to contain many distinguishable scenes in a video
as candidates. However, existing proposals of wsVMR systems do not respect the varying numbers of scenes in each
video, where the proposals are heuristically determined irrespective of the video. We argue that the retrieval system
should be able to counter the complexities caused by varying numbers of scenes in each video. To this end, we present
a novel concept of a retrieval system referred to as Scene
Complexity Aware Network (SCANet), which measures the
‘scene complexity’ of multiple scenes in each video and generates adaptive proposals responding to variable complexities of scenes in each video. Experimental results on three
retrieval benchmarks (i.e. Charades-STA, ActivityNet, TVR)
achieve state-of-the-art performances and demonstrate the
effectiveness of incorporating the scene complexity.

1. Introduction
Video search has the core building block of recently
growing video streaming services (e.g. YouTube, Netﬂix).
To enhance the capability of video search, video moment
retrieval (VMR) aims to localize the start and end time
of the moment pertinent to a given language query in an
untrimmed video. The success of the VMR provides us with
accurate video contextual information in less time and effort. Until recently, these remarkable search performances
have been dependent on the size and quality of labeled
training datasets. However, these datasets cost a laborintensive annotating process (i.e. Annotators should ﬁnd the
start-end time of moments corresponding to query descrip13576

tions), and sometimes the annotated moments are ambiguous. To cope with this problem, many weakly-supervised
VMR (wsVMR) methods [21, 5, 42, 44] have been proposed by only utilizing the video-query pairs, which are less
laborious to annotate.
To perform the weak supervision using video-query
pairs, if one query is paired (i.e. annotated) with multiple
videos, we can identify the common scene among these
videos and determine the alignment between the query and
the scene. To implement this, all videos are divided into
multiple segments, and the retrieval system maximizes the
similarity scores between each query and paired segments
while suppressing the scores between the query and unpaired segments in other videos. During the inference, the
system selects a segment with the highest score as a moment prediction for a given query. For the wsVMR systems
to accurately classify the best segment in a video, numerous video-language joint representation learning methods
[16, 24, 44, 32] have been proposed.
Recently, researchers also have another focus on a study
of how to generate video segments to capture many scenes
in a video [20, 44]. These segments are referred to as ‘candidate moment proposals’, which is crucial, as they directly
affect the retrieval performances by regulating the proposal
quantities. Unfortunately, as supervision is not available in
generating proposals, wsVMR systems [43, 44] use a ﬁxed
number of proposals for all input videos under heuristic optimization of a speciﬁc dataset, which is not reasonable to
deal with varying numbers of scenes in a video. While some
methods [20, 10] consider varying numbers of proposals for
each video, they still rely on spurious correlations, such as
generating proposals proportionally to the video length or
using sliding window. Therefore, the current proposal generation method could not accurately respond to the diverse
number of scenes in each video. We refer to this situation
as a ‘scene-proposal mismatch’. For instance, in Figure
1(a), the systems produce an unnecessarily large number
of proposals by referring to the long length of the video,
but the video only contains a single scene (i.e. scene of sitting still in a chair throughout the video), which should be

