This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Taming Contrast Maximization for Learning
Sequential, Low-latency, Event-based Optical Flow
Federico Paredes-Vallés1,2

Kirk Y. W. Scheper2

Christope De Wagter1

Guido C. H. E. de Croon1

1

2

Micro Air Vehicle Laboratory, Delft University of Technology
Stuttgart Laboratory 1, Sony Semiconductor Solutions Europe, Sony Europe B.V.

Figure 1: Our pipeline estimates event-based optical flow by sequentially processing small partitions of the event stream with a recurrent
model. We propose a novel self-supervised learning framework (left) based on a multi-timescale contrast maximization formulation that is
able to exploit the high temporal resolution of event cameras via iterative warping to produce accurate optical flow predictions (right).

Abstract
Event cameras have recently gained significant traction
since they open up new avenues for low-latency and lowpower solutions to complex computer vision problems. To
unlock these solutions, it is necessary to develop algorithms
that can leverage the unique nature of event data. However,
the current state-of-the-art is still highly influenced by the
frame-based literature, and usually fails to deliver on these
promises. In this work, we take this into consideration and
propose a novel self-supervised learning pipeline for the sequential estimation of event-based optical flow that allows
for the scaling of the models to high inference frequencies.
At its core, we have a continuously-running stateful neural model that is trained using a novel formulation of contrast maximization that makes it robust to nonlinearities and
varying statistics in the input events. Results across multiple datasets confirm the effectiveness of our method, which
establishes a new state of the art in terms of accuracy for
approaches trained or optimized without ground truth.

1. Introduction
Event cameras capture per-pixel log-brightness changes
at microsecond resolution [13]. This operating principle results in a sparse and asynchronous visual signal that, under
constant illumination, directly encodes information about
the apparent motion (i.e., optical flow) of contrast in the image space. These cameras offer several advantages, such as
low latency and robustness to motion blur [13], and hence
hold the potential of a high-bandwidth estimation of this
optical flow information. However, the event-based nature of the generated visual signal poses a paradigm shift
in the processing pipeline, and traditional, frame-based algorithms become suboptimal and often incompatible. Despite this, the majority of learning-based methods that have
been proposed so far for event-based optical flow estimation
are still highly influenced by frame-based approaches. This
influence is normally reflected in two key aspects of their
The project’s code and additional material can be found at https://
mavlab.tudelft.nl/taming event flow/.

9695

