This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fast Globally Optimal Surface Normal from an Afﬁne Correspondence
Levente Hajder, Lajos Lóczi
Geometric Computer Vision Group
Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary

Daniel Barath
Computer Vision and Geometry Group
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

{hajder,lloczi}@inf.elte.hu

dbarath@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We present a new solver for estimating a surface normal
from a single afﬁne correspondence in two calibrated views.
The proposed approach provides a new globally optimal
solution for this over-determined problem and proves that
it reduces to a linear system that can be solved extremely
efﬁciently. This allows for performing signiﬁcantly faster
than other recent methods, solving the same problem and
obtaining the same globally optimal solution. We demonstrate on 15k image pairs from standard benchmarks that
the proposed approach leads to the same results as other optimal algorithms while being, on average, ﬁve times faster
than the fastest alternative. Besides its theoretical value,
we demonstrate that such an approach has clear beneﬁts,
e.g., in image-based visual localization, due to not requiring a dense point cloud to recover the surface normal. We
show on the Cambridge Landmarks dataset that leveraging
the proposed surface normal estimation further improves
localization accuracy. Matlab and C++ implementations
are also published in the supplementary material.

Figure 1. Geometric conﬁguration: oriented 3D point P ∈ E3
with normal n ∈ E3 projected to image Π1 as p1 ∈ E2 and to
Π2 as p2 ∈ E2 . The local patch centered at points p1 and p2 are
related by the local afﬁne transformation A ∈ R2×2 .

1. Introduction

require fewer data points than their point-based counterparts [64]. Moreover, normals can also be leveraged in the
numerical reﬁnement of the reconstructed oriented 3D point
cloud [27]. In this paper, we focus on a practical problem,
i.e., estimating the normal at corresponding features in two
images in a solely photometric manner. This can provide a
lightweight approach of obtaining surface normals without
requiring a dense point cloud to be known. Next, we will
discuss ways of obtaining oriented points.

Acquiring oriented point clouds is a fundamental problem both in computer vision and in robotics with a number
of important real-world applications beneﬁting from the extra information it provides. Such applications include 3D
reconstruction [1, 8, 31, 62, 72, 65, 56] and simultaneous
localization and mapping [19, 23, 50], where the 3D point
orientations provide useful information about the underlying structure. Image-based visual localization approaches
[43, 53, 60, 61] can also beneﬁt from known surface normals [68]. The widely used Poisson reconstruction [37, 38]
is based on both the point coordinates and their orientations.
The visual odometry [51, 52] of an autonomous vehicle can
also beneﬁt from understanding surface orientation to, e.g.,
segment ground or facades. Also, having an oriented point
cloud greatly simpliﬁes geometric model and multi-model
estimation [32, 4, 5] due to allowing to design solvers that

Normals from Point Clouds. After applying state-of-theart sparse (e.g., COLMAP [63]) or dense [36, 16] reconstruction pipelines, the resulting point cloud can be straightforwardly equipped with point orientations. In this case,
typically, the normals are ﬁtted per-point, applying the
widely used Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [35] to
estimate tangent planes or higher-order surfaces [14, 33]
from the local neighborhood centered at the current point.
This procedure, while being frequently used, has two major drawbacks. First, the setting of the neighborhood size
greatly affects the accuracy and is often unclear without
having a metric reconstruction. Instead, using the k-nearestneighbors [17] algorithm to ﬁnd local neighborhoods is a
viable solution, but the estimation becomes largely affected
by the sparsity of the point cloud. Second, ﬁtting local surfaces, independently, to the neighborhood of each 3D point

3390

