This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Generate Semantic Layouts
for Higher Text-Image Correspondence in Text-to-Image Synthesis
Minho Park∗ , Jooyeol Yun∗ , Seunghwan Choi, Jaegul Choo
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Daejeon, Korea
{m.park, blizzard072, shadow2496, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Existing text-to-image generation approaches have set
high standards for photorealism and text-image correspondence, largely beneﬁting from web-scale text-image
datasets, which can include up to 5 billion pairs. However, text-to-image generation models trained on domainspeciﬁc datasets, such as urban scenes, medical images,
and faces, still suffer from low text-image correspondence due to the lack of text-image pairs. Additionally,
collecting billions of text-image pairs for a speciﬁc domain can be time-consuming and costly. Thus, ensuring high text-image correspondence without relying on
web-scale text-image datasets remains a challenging task.
In this paper, we present a novel approach for enhancing text-image correspondence by leveraging available semantic layouts. Speciﬁcally, we propose a Gaussiancategorical diffusion process that simultaneously generates both images and corresponding layout pairs. Our
experiments reveal that we can guide text-to-image generation models to be aware of the semantics of different
image regions, by training the model to generate semantic labels for each pixel. We demonstrate that our approach achieves higher text-image correspondence compared to existing text-to-image generation approaches in
the Multi-Modal CelebA-HQ and the Cityscapes dataset,
where text-image pairs are scarce. Codes are available at
https://pmh9960.github.io/research/GCDP.

Figure 1. Recall of facial attributes speciﬁed in the text descriptions. Text-to-image generation approaches trained on a subset of
the Multi-Modal CelebA-HQ [17, 22] often fail to reﬂect text conditions. Facial attributes are classiﬁed with a pretrained attribute
classiﬁer [30].

ing for a generative model to learn what part of the image
corresponds to which words in the text.
Overcome this hurdle, recent text-to-image generation
approaches [28, 29, 31, 32] leverage web-scale text-image
datasets [29, 33] containing up to 5 billion text-image pairs.
With access to such data, generative models can fully learn
the correspondence between input texts and output images
and synthesize photorealistic images while properly reﬂecting text descriptions.
However, the cost of such large-scale training remains a
major obstacle, often requiring weeks of training even with
hundreds of GPUs, which limits participation in the subject
to only a few researchers. Moreover, when generating images in a speciﬁc domain, such as faces or urban scenes, collecting billions of text-image pairs can be challenging due
to the difﬁculties in collecting images. Even with a generalpurpose pretrained model, ﬁnetuning on datasets with large
domain gaps (e.g., urban scenes or medical images) leads to
poor image quality and low text-image correspondence. Recent text-to-image models trained on speciﬁc domains often
fail to reﬂect text conditions in the absence of web-scale
text-image pairs. To examine the issue in data-scarce scenarios, we evaluate text-to-image generation models trained
on a subset of the Multi-Modal CelebA-HQ [17,22] dataset.
As shown in Figure 1, existing models struggle to generate certain attributes speciﬁed in the given text conditions.
Thus, ensuring high text-image correspondence remains a

1. Introduction
Text-to-image generation aims to materialize text descriptions into images, where the main challenge comes
from ensuring high image quality and correspondence between input text and output images. While texts convey
intuitive semantic depictions of images, they often lack detailed spatial descriptions. For example, text descriptions
such as “A woman is wearing earrings.” do not describe
where the earrings are located within the image. Thus, when
a small number of text-image pairs are given, it is challeng1 * indicates equal contribution.

7591

