This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantify: Simplifying the Control of 3D Morphable Models using CLIP
Omer Gralnik

Guy Gafni

Ariel Shamir

Reichman University

Technical University of Munich

Reichman University

Figure 1: Semantify offers a method to create and edit a 3D parametric model using semantically meaningful descriptors.
Semantify is based on a self-supervised method that utilizes the semantic power of CLIP language-vision model to build a
mapping between semantic descriptors to 3DMM model coefficients. This can be used in an interactive application defining
a slider for each descriptor (a), or to fit a model to an image in a zero shot manner by feeding the image into CLIP and
obtaining a vector of semantic scores that can be mapped to shape parameters (b).

Abstract
We present Semantify: a self-supervised method that utilizes the semantic power of CLIP language-vision foundation model [32] to simplify the control of 3D morphable
models. Given a parametric model, training data is created by randomly sampling the model’s parameters, creating various shapes and rendering them. The similarity between the output images and a set of word descriptors is
calculated in CLIP’s latent space. Our key idea is first to
choose a small set of semantically meaningful and disentangled descriptors that characterize the 3DMM, and then
learn a non-linear mapping from scores across this set to
the parametric coefficients of the given 3DMM. The nonlinear mapping is defined by training a neural network without a human-in-the-loop. We present results on numerous
3DMMs: body shape models, face shape and expression
models, as well as animal shapes. We demonstrate how our
method defines a simple slider interface for intuitive modeling, and show how the mapping can be used to instantly fit
a 3D parametric body shape to in-the-wild images. See our
project page at https://omergral.github.io/Semantify/

1. Introduction
3D modeling techniques have evolved tremendously
over the last few years. Such techniques are used in countless industries including the burgeoning AR/VR industry,
fashion design, game development, film, and many others.
However, designing a high-quality 3D model is not a simple task for most people and might require a well-trained
3D artist. Even when using more recent parametric morphable models (3DMM) [24, 31, 45, 3, 42] it is still hard
for humans to understand how to choose the correct set of
parameters, e.g. to achieve a specific human body shape or
facial expression. It is also difficult to find what are the
limits of the given parametric model in terms of coverage
and expressiveness. The reason is that in most cases, the
provided set of parameters is not interpretable, as they are
commonly calculated using automatic optimization mechanisms followed by dimensionality reduction using PCA.
Thus, they carry no clear semantic meaning.
To simplify the use of 3DMMs and allow for natural
interactive human modeling, a key research question is –
how to insert semantics into 3DMM control? Previous approaches [34] relied mostly on human intelligence and la-

14554

