This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning by Sorting: Self-supervised Learning
with Group Ordering Constraints
Nina Shvetsova1,2,3
1

Felix Petersen4

Anna Kukleva2

2

3

Bernt Schiele2

Hilde Kuehne1,3,5

4

Goethe University Frankfurt, Max-Planck-Institute for Informatics, University of Bonn, Stanford University, 5 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{shvetsov@uni-frankfurt.de, mail@felix-petersen.de}

*URXS2UGHULQJ&RQVWUDLQWV *UR&R /RVV

Abstract
Contrastive learning has become an important tool in
learning representations from unlabeled data mainly relying on the idea of minimizing distance between positive data
pairs, e.g., views from the same images, and maximizing
distance between negative data pairs, e.g., views from different images. This paper proposes a new variation of the
contrastive learning objective, Group Ordering Constraints
(GroCo), that leverages the idea of sorting the distances
of positive and negative pairs and computing the respective loss based on how many positive pairs have a larger
distance than the negative pairs, and thus are not ordered
correctly. To this end, the GroCo loss is based on differentiable sorting networks, which enable training with sorting
supervision by matching a differentiable permutation matrix, which is produced by sorting a given set of scores, to a
respective ground truth permutation matrix. Applying this
idea to groupwise pre-ordered inputs of multiple positive
and negative pairs allows introducing the GroCo loss with
implicit emphasis on strong positives and negatives, leading
to better optimization of the local neighborhood. We evaluate the proposed formulation on various self-supervised
learning benchmarks and show that it not only leads to improved results compared to vanilla contrastive learning but
also shows competitive performance to comparable methods in linear probing and outperforms current methods in
k-NN performance. 1

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning has become a topic of growing interest over the last years as it allows models to learn
representations from large-scale data without the need for
human annotation. Many approaches rely on the idea
of contrastive learning and were able not only to narrow the gap to the supervised learning performance in vision [23, 14, 60, 30, 3, 63], but also to train state-of-the-art
vision-language [52, 56] and multimodal models [40]. All
1 https://github.com/ninatu/learning_by_sorting

DOOSRVGLVWDQFHVDOOQHJGLVWDQFHV

8SGDWH

2UGHULQJ'LVWDQFH

2UGHULQJ'LVWDQFH
6ZDS

&RQWUDVWLYH/RVV

8SGDWH

'LVWDQFH

'LVWDQFH

Figure 1. The idea of the proposed group ordering constraints loss
compared to pairwise contrastive losses: GroCo arranges positive
and negative data points so that the largest distance to positives
must be smaller than the smallest distance to negative points. To
this end, the loss implicitly minimizes the amount of necessary
swap operation to achieve the ordering constraint. Thus, it focuses
on overlapping positives and negatives compared to standard contrastive losses that minimize resp. maximize all pairwise distances.

of these methods rely on the concept of the pairwise contrastive loss, which is based on the idea that a so-called
positive pair, e.g., an image serving as an anchor and an
augmentation of the same image, should be closer to each
other in an embedding space than a so-called negative pair,
e.g., a pair made up of an anchor image and a different image, should be far away from each other. However, it has
been noted that the idea of a pairwise contrastive loss also
has some limitations, such as the alignment of the embedding space based on individual pairs. Several attempts have
been made to address this issue, e.g., combining the contrastive idea with concepts based on local neighborhoods,
such as clustering (SwAV [11]), or minimizing distances between multiple positive pairs for the same instance together
(Whitening [24]). Another limitation of the contrastive loss
is that is that the embedding space is optimized with respect to all negatives, i.e., even negatives that are far away

16453

