This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CuNeRF: Cube-Based Neural Radiance Field for Zero-Shot Medical Image
Arbitrary-Scale Super Resolution
Zixuan Chen1
Lingxiao Yang1,2,3
Jian-Huang Lai1,2,3
Xiaohua Xie1,2,3 *
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, Guangzhou, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
1

chenzx3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, lingxiao.yang717@gmail.com, {stsljh, xiexiaoh6}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
(a) Medical volume

scale

4
3.6

3

2.3

2
1.4

1

(c) Free-viewpoint slice synthesis
(d) Arbitrary-scale super resolution
(b) Volumetric representation
Figure 1. CuNeRF is the first zero-shot Medical Image Arbitrary-Scale Super Resolution framework. After training on an LR medical
volume (a) itself, CuNeRF can build the corresponding continuous volumetric representation (b), which is able to achieve (c) Freeviewpoint slice synthesis: yielding novel-view medical slices from the arbitrary viewpoints, and (d) Arbitrary-scale super-resolution:
upsampling medical images at arbitrary scales in a continuous domain. Project page is available at NarcissusEx.github.io/CuNeRF.

Abstract
Medical image arbitrary-scale super-resolution (MIASSR) has recently gained widespread attention, aiming
to supersample medical volumes at arbitrary scales via a
single model. However, existing MIASSR methods face
two major limitations: (i) reliance on high-resolution (HR)
volumes and (ii) limited generalization ability, which restricts their applications in various scenarios. To overcome these limitations, we propose Cube-based Neural Radiance Field (CuNeRF), a zero-shot MIASSR framework
that is able to yield medical images at arbitrary scales
and free viewpoints in a continuous domain. Unlike existing MISR methods that only fit the mapping between lowresolution (LR) and HR volumes, CuNeRF focuses on building a continuous volumetric representation from each LR
volume without the knowledge of the corresponding HR
one. This is achieved by the proposed differentiable modules: cube-based sampling, isotropic volume rendering, and
cube-based hierarchical rendering. Through extensive ex* Corresponding author.

periments on magnetic resource imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) modalities, we demonstrate that
CuNeRF can synthesize high-quality SR medical images,
which outperforms state-of-the-art MISR methods, achieving better visual verisimilitude and fewer objectionable artifacts. Compared to existing MISR methods, our CuNeRF
is more applicable in practice.

1. Introduction
Medical imaging techniques such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are critical tools in assisting clinical diagnosis. However, the acquisition of high-quality medical slices is a resource-intensive
process, which requires subjects to be exposed to considerable ionizing radiations for a long time, increasing the lifetime risk of cancer [21]. To reduce the burden on subjects,
a feasible approach is to reconstruct high-resolution (HR)
medical volumes from low-resolution (LR) ones.
To tackle medical image super-resolution (MISR) challenges, early studies employed optimization methods [12,

21185

