This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tangent Model Composition for Ensembling and Continual Fine-tuning
Tian Yu Liu
University of California, Los Angeles

Stefano Soatto
University of California, Los Angeles

tianyu@cs.ucla.edu

soatto@ucla.edu

Abstract
Tangent Model Composition (TMC) is a method to combine component models independently fine-tuned around
a pre-trained point. Component models are tangent vectors to the pre-trained model that can be added, scaled,
or subtracted to support incremental learning, ensembling,
or unlearning. Component models are composed at inference time via scalar combination, reducing the cost of ensembling to that of a single model. TMC improves accuracy by 4.2% compared to ensembling non-linearly finetuned models at a 2.5× to 10× reduction of inference cost,
growing linearly with the number of component models.
Each component model can be forgotten at zero cost, with
no residual effect on the resulting inference. When used
for continual fine-tuning, TMC is not constrained by sequential bias and can be executed in parallel on federated
data. TMC outperforms recently published continual finetuning methods almost uniformly on each setting – taskincremental, class-incremental, and data-incremental – on
a total of 13 experiments across 3 benchmark datasets, despite not using any replay buffer. TMC is designed for composing models that are local to a pre-trained embedding,
but could be extended to more general settings. The code
is available at: https://github.com/tianyu139/
tangent-model-composition

1. Introduction
Compositionality has long been considered central to
cognition [5], possibly a reflection of compositionality in
neural activity [50]. After decades of unsuccessful attempts
to design compositional representations, deep neural networks trained on language data are beginning to exhibit
emergent compositionality at scale, by capturing the compositional structure of the data. These models are now being used for visual inference, which has rekindled interest
in the study of compositionality of visual representations.
But beyond the data, any compositional structure that may
be latent in the model is not directly accessible: One cannot
simply “compose” weights or inner activations and expect

meaningful outcomes. The computational architecture of
Transformers [52] has been leveraged extensively to co-opt
the compositional structure of data through prompts or tokens [29, 55], but still the activations of trained models do
not appear to be meaningfully composable. Compositionality of neural activity would allow one to combine activations from different models to capture novel concepts, or
incorporate knowledge from different data without having
to re-train or fine-tune the core models. This would enable
open-universe classification and, more generally, combinatorial expansion of the hypothesis space. Continual learning
could be performed simply by composing models trained on
different data.
In this paper, we explore the simplest form of compositionality, that is linear combination. We leverage recent
results on the linearization of deep neural networks around
a pre-trained point, that can be trained by solving a convex optimization problem and yet perform on-par with nonlinear fine-tuning [1]. This suggests that the tangent space
at pre-trained models may be used to linearly compose neural activations, or equivalently compose different models
trained or fine-tuned on different datasets and/or for different tasks.
We show that different models obtained from the linearization around a pre-trained point can be composed,
combined, rescaled, and forgotten (“unlearning”), simply
by scalar combinations. This fact can be used to perform
ensembling at the inference cost of a single model (Sec. 3).
It can also be used for continual fine-tuning, with each component model trained independently and in parallel, if necessary on federated data that can therefore be easily forgotten if needed.
Linear combination is not viable for general concept
composition nor arbitrary multi-task learning. In Sec. 5, we
discuss limitations of our approach, which can only meaningfully compose models that are “local” to a pre-trained
embedding. If there are models trained on tasks that are far
in representation space, or even antagonistic, they are likely
to live on different tangent planes, making linear combination inappropriate. One such example, described in the
appendix, concerns models trained on real images (Ima-

18676

