This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Online Continual Learning on Hierarchical Label Expansion
Byung Hyun Lee1,∗ , Okchul Jung1,∗ , Jonghyun Choi3,† and Se Young Chun1,2,†
1
Dept. of ECE, 2 INMC & IPAI, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea,
3
Yonsei University, Republic of Korea
{ldlqudgus756,luckyjung96}@snu.ac.kr jc@yonsei.ac.kr sychun@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) enables models to adapt to
new tasks and environments without forgetting previously
learned knowledge. While current CL setups have ignored
the relationship between labels in the past task and the
new task with or without small task overlaps, real-world
scenarios often involve hierarchical relationships between
old and new tasks, posing another challenge for traditional
CL approaches. To address this challenge, we propose a
novel multi-level hierarchical class incremental task configuration with an online learning constraint, called hierarchical label expansion (HLE). Our configuration allows
a network to first learn coarse-grained classes, with data
labels continually expanding to more fine-grained classes
in various hierarchy depths. To tackle this new setup, we
propose a rehearsal-based method that utilizes hierarchyaware pseudo-labeling to incorporate hierarchical class information. Additionally, we propose a simple yet effective
memory management and sampling strategy that selectively
adopts samples of newly encountered classes. Our experiments demonstrate that our proposed method can effectively
use hierarchy on our HLE setup to improve classification
accuracy across all levels of hierarchies, regardless of depth
and class imbalance ratio, outperforming prior state-of-theart works by significant margins while also outperforming
them on the conventional disjoint, blurry and i-Blurry CL
setups.

1. Introduction
In real-world continual learning scenarios, new knowledge often augments existing understanding, typically following a hierarchical path from general to specific classes.
This hierarchical structure is not an anomaly, but rather an
inherent part of many disciplines. The schema theory [9; 43]
in cognitive psychology and the conceptual clustering theory [28] in machine learning both emphasize hierarchical
∗ Equal contribution, † Corresponding authors.

organization of knowledge. The COBWEB algorithm [20],
a prominent machine learning method, uses hierarchical
clustering for grouping related instances into meaningful
categories. Hierarchical organization is also observed in biology’s taxonomy theory [8], classifying organisms based
on shared traits, and in chemistry [27], where elements are
arranged hierarchically according to their atomic properties. However, despite the prevalence of hierarchical relationships in these areas, many previous continual learning
works [3; 5; 6; 31] do not fully incorporate these relationships. This may be an area that needs more attention, as
hierarchical relationships could play a role in knowledge
evolution in incremental learning.
Here we introduce a novel CL setup called Hierarchical Label Expansion (HLE), designed to account for hierarchical class relationships in task-free online CL. In HLE,
class learning is incremental, with fine-grained classes derived from prior coarse-grained ones, effectively mirroring
real-world knowledge accumulation. As our proposed approach is designed for online continual learning, where data
is seen only once in the data stream, each task’s data is disjoint. We assess our models’ performance using any-time
inference [31] and evaluate classification accuracy for all
levels of hierarchy. This demonstrates the potential of our
approach to complement existing CL methods and enhance
their evaluation. HLE encompasses both single and multiple hierarchy depths, as well as balanced and imbalanced
class data scenarios. To tackle the CL on HLE, we propose a
new CL method that utilizes pseudo-labeling based memory
management (PL) and flexible memory sampling (FMS).
This method effectively exploits hierarchy information between class labels in the dataset, resembling how knowledge is accumulated in real-world scenarios. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach outperforms stateof-the-art methods by substantial margins in HLE, while remaining superior in performance on existing CL setups including disjoint, blurry [5] and i-Blurry [31].
We summarize our contributions as follows:
1. We propose new online class-incremental, hierarchyaware, task-free CL setups called HLE, designed to

11761

