This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Multiplane Neural Radiance for 3D-Aware Image Generation
Amandeep Kumar1
Ankan Kumar Bhunia1 Sanath Narayan2 Hisham Cholakkal1
Rao Muhammad Anwer1,3 Salman Khan1 Ming-Hsuan Yang4,5,6 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,7
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI 2 Technology Innovation Institute 3 Aalto University
4
University of California, Merced 5 Yonsei University 6 Google Research 7 Linköping University

Abstract
We present a method to efficiently generate 3D-aware
high-resolution images that are view-consistent across multiple target views. The proposed multiplane neural radiance model, named GMNR, consists of a novel α-guided
view-dependent representation (α-VdR) module for learning view-dependent information. The α-VdR module, faciliated by an α-guided pixel sampling technique, computes
the view-dependent representation efficiently by learning
viewing direction and position coefficients. Moreover, we
propose a view-consistency loss to enforce photometric
similarity across multiple views. The GMNR model can
generate 3D-aware high-resolution images that are viewconsistent across multiple camera poses, while maintaining
the computational efficiency in terms of both training and
inference time. Experiments on three datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed modules, leading to favorable results in terms of both generation quality and inference time, compared to existing approaches. Our GMNR
model generates 3D-aware images of 1024 × 1024 pixels with 17.6 FPS on a single V100. Code : https:
//github.com/VIROBO-15/GMNR

1. Introduction
The advances in generative adversarial networks (GANs)
[21] have resulted in significant progress in the task of highresolution photorealistic 2D image generation [27, 28, 30].
The problem of generating 3D-aware images that render an
object in different target views has received increasing interest in the recent years. Learning such 3D-aware image generation is challenging due to the absence of 3D geometry
supervision or multi-view inputs during training. Furthermore, the synthesized 3D-aware images are desired to be of
high-resolution, generated at extrapolated views (i.e., large
non-frontal views) and consistent across camera views.
In the absence of 3D supervision, existing 3D-aware imamandeep.kumar@mbzuai.ac.ae

age generation approaches [8, 13] typically rely on learning the 3D geometric constraints by using either implicit
[47, 42, 23, 43] or explicit [35, 51] 3D-aware inductive biases and a rendering engine. While implicit representations,
e.g., neural radiance fields [40] (NeRF), possess the merits
of better handling complex scenes along with memory efficiency, their slow querying and sampling generally negatively affects the training duration, inference time as well as
the 3D-aware generation of high-resolution images. On the
other hand, explicit representations, e.g., voxel grid [48],
are typically fast but have large memory footprint leading to scaling issues at higher resolutions. These issues
are recently addressed [65] by utilizing multiplane images
(MPI) as an explicit representation to transfer the knowledge learned by a 2D GAN to 3D-awareness. In this way,
existing 2D GANs, e.g., StyleGAN [28], can be extended
to obtain the alpha maps conditioned on the plane’s depth,
followed by conditioning the discriminator on a target pose
for training the image synthesis model.
While the aforementioned scheme of avoiding a volumetric rendering of pixels enables efficient training and inference, it may lead to inaccurate rendering of object shapes
at extrapolated views due to fewer multiplanes during training. Moreover, inconsistent artifacts across different views
can occur since such a scheme optimizes the warping from
canonical pose to a single target pose. A straightforward
way to overcome this issue is to increase the resolution in
the disparity space, i.e., more planes. This can likely help
in reducing these artifacts resulting in improved rendering
at extrapolated viewing angles. However, this will result in
significantly increasing the training time as well as memory
overhead. In this work, we show how to collectively address the above issues without any significant degradation
of training and inference speed.
Contributions: We propose an efficient approach named
Generative Multiplane Neural Radiance (GMNR), that
learns to synthesize 3D-aware and view-consistent highresolution images across difference camera poses. To this
end, we introduce a novel α-guided view-dependent representation module (α-VdR) that enables the generator to bet-

7388

