This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scene-Aware Feature Matching
Xiaoyong Lu, Yaping Yan, Tong Wei, Songlin Du*
Southeast University, Nanjing, China
{luxiaoyong, yan, weit, sdu}@seu.edu.cn

group-level
correspondence

Abstract
Current feature matching methods focus on point-level
matching, pursuing better representation learning of individual features, but lacking further understanding of the
scene. This results in signiﬁcant performance degradation
when handling challenging scenes such as scenes with large
viewpoint and illumination changes. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel model named SAM, which applies
attentional grouping to guide Scene-Aware feature Matching. SAM handles multi-level features, i.e., image tokens
and group tokens, with attention layers, and groups the image tokens with the proposed token grouping module. Our
model can be trained by ground-truth matches only and produce reasonable grouping results. With the sense-aware
grouping guidance, SAM is not only more accurate and robust but also more interpretable than conventional feature
matching models. Sufﬁcient experiments on various applications, including homography estimation, pose estimation,
and image matching, demonstrate that our model achieves
state-of-the-art performance.

guiding
point-level
correspondence

Figure 1. An illustration of the grouping (top) and matching (bottom) result of our proposed method. Points in corresponding regions in the two images are correctly assigned to the same group,
and the grouping information provides scene-aware guidance for
point-level feature matching.

descriptors are employed as features of the image. Then the
feature matching algorithm is applied to ﬁnd the correct correspondence in two sets of extracted features. Finally, the
outlier ﬁltering algorithm is applied to identify and reject
outlier matches based on the obtained matches.
The current dominant approaches for image matching
are learning-based descriptors with attention-based feature
matching models. Learning-based descriptors extract local
features with better representation capabilities by convolutional neural networks (CNN). Attention-based networks
can enhance local features by perceiving global information and modeling contextual relationships between local
features. While the above feature matching pipeline is the
dominant method, the model performance still degrades signiﬁcantly when dealing with extreme cases, such as scenes
with large viewpoint changes and illumination changes. Because current methods only ﬁnd correspondences at the low
level, i.e., point-level textures, and do not incorporate sceneaware information, such as grouping information, semantic
information, etc. Therefore, intra- and inter-image grouping
is introduced to SAM to guide point-level attention-based
matching.
In this work, we take point-level descriptors as image

1. Introduction
Feature matching, which refers to ﬁnding the correct correspondence between two sets of features, is a fundamental problem for many computer vision tasks, such as object
recognition [17], structure from motion (SFM) [28], and
simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [9]. But
with illumination changes, viewpoint changes, motion blur
and occlusion, it is challenging to ﬁnd invariance and obtain
robust matches from two images.
The classic image matching pipeline generally consists
of four parts: (1) feature detection (2) feature description
(3) feature matching (4) outlier ﬁltering. For feature detection, keypoints that have distinguishable features to facilitate matching are detected. For feature description, descriptors are extracted based on keypoints and their neighborhoods. The keypoint positions and the corresponding
* Corresponding author.

3704

