This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified Continual Learning Framework with General
Parameter-Efficient Tuning
Qiankun Gao1 Chen Zhao†2 Yifan Sun3 Teng Xi3 Gang Zhang3 Bernard Ghanem2 Jian Zhang†1
1

Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
gqk@stu.pku.edu.cn

2

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)

chen.zhao@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
The “pre-training → downstream adaptation” presents
both new opportunities and challenges for Continual Learning (CL). Although the recent state-of-the-art in CL is
achieved through Parameter-Efficient-Tuning (PET) adaptation paradigm, only prompt has been explored, limiting its
application to Transformers only. In this paper, we position
prompting as one instantiation of PET, and propose a unified CL framework with general PET, dubbed as LearningAccumulation-Ensemble (LAE). PET, e.g., using Adapter,
LoRA, or Prefix, can adapt a pre-trained model to downstream tasks with fewer parameters and resources. Given
a PET method, our LAE framework incorporates it for CL
with three novel designs. 1) Learning: the pre-trained
model adapts to the new task by tuning an online PET module, along with our adaptation speed calibration to align
different PET modules, 2) Accumulation: the task-specific
knowledge learned by the online PET module is accumulated into an offline PET module through momentum update, 3) Ensemble: During inference, we respectively construct two experts with online/offline PET modules (which
are favored by the novel/historical tasks) for prediction ensemble. We show that LAE is compatible with a battery of
PET methods and gains strong CL capability. For example, LAE with Adaptor PET surpasses the prior state-ofthe-art by 1.3% and 3.6% in last-incremental accuracy on
CIFAR100 and ImageNet-R datasets, respectively. Code is
available at https://github.com/gqk/LAE.

1. Introduction
Continual Learning (CL) of new knowledge is an essential ability for AI models in the constantly changing world.
However, neural networks often suffer from catastrophic
forgetting [9, 39], in which previously learned knowledge is
† Corresponding authors.

This work was supported by Shenzhen General Research Project under Grant JCYJ20220531093215035, KAUST Office of Sponsored Research (OSR) under Award No. OSR-CRG2021-4648, and the SDAIAKAUST Center of Excellence in Data Science and Artificial Intelligence.

3

Baidu Inc.

zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn

Query

Task N

4

1
2

5

Selection
K

Prediction

3

Approaches based on Prompt Pool: Prompt Learning + Prompt Selection

1. Learning
Task N

Online PET Module
(Prompt/Adapter/LoRA)

3. Ensemble

Prediction

2. Accumuation

Offline PET Module
Learnable

(historical knowledge)

Our LAE: A unified framework
that explores general PET methods

Figure 1: The pipeline of our LAE framework vs.
prompt-pool approaches. Above: Prompt-pool approaches, which query prompts from a pool of learnable prompts. Below: Proposed LAE, where an online
Parameter-Efficient Tuning (PET) module attached to the
pre-trained model to adapt a new task quickly, and an offline
PET module accumulates the learned knowledge slowly.
During inference, we use the ensemble of the predictions of
the online and offline PET modules as the final prediction.
forgotten when the model incorporates novel information.
Although many works have been devoted to reducing forgetting, such as dynamic networks [41, 50, 26, 18], regularization [28, 20, 52, 1], and memory replay [38, 15, 6, 30, 2],
their performance still falls short of practical requirements.
Recently, pre-training and downstream adaptation techniques have opened up new opportunities and challenges for
CL. Basically, these techniques [4, 36, 12, 11, 48] pre-train
a deep model on large-scale data and then adapt the pretrained model to novel tasks. We observe that downstream
adaptation and CL are important for each other. On the one
hand, in realistic AI systems, pre-trained models sometimes
needs to be adapted to multiple downstream tasks sequentially, yielding the need of CL. On the other hand, recent efforts [47, 46, 45] show that the “pre-training → downstream
adaptation” techniques can boost CL performance.
Specifically, L2P [47], DualPrompt [46], and ESN [45]
all use a popular adaptation technique named ParameterEfficient-Tuning (PET). Generally, PET adapts pre-trained
models to downstream tasks with much fewer learnable parameters, as well as fewer resources. Though these approaches have advanced the state-of-the-art in CL, they still
have some limitations. 1) They are all constrained to a spe1
11483

