This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dataset Quantization
Daquan Zhou 1 * Kai Wang2 * Jianyang Gu2 * Xiangyu Peng2 Dongze Lian2
Yifan Zhang2 Yang You2† Jiashi Feng1†
1
Bytedance Inc. 2 National University of Singapore
daquan.zhou@u.nus.edu

kai.wang@comp.nus.edu.sg

youy@comp.nus.edu.sg

gu jianyang@zju.edu.cn

jshfeng@bytedance.com

Code: https://github.com/magic-research/Dataset_Quantization

Abstract
State-of-the-art deep neural networks are trained with
large amounts (millions or even billions) of data. The expensive computation and memory costs make it difficult to
train them on limited hardware resources, especially for
recent popular large language models (LLM) and computer vision models (CV). Recent popular dataset distillation methods are thus developed, aiming to reduce the
number of training samples via synthesizing small-scale
datasets via gradient matching. However, as the gradient
calculation is coupled with the specific network architecture, the synthesized dataset is biased and performs poorly
when used for training unseen architectures. To address
these limitations, we present dataset quantization (DQ), a
new framework to compress large-scale datasets into small
subsets which can be used for training any neural network
architectures. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DQ
is able to generate condensed small datasets for training
unseen network architectures with state-of-the-art compression ratios for lossless model training. To the best of our
knowledge, DQ is the first method that can successfully distill large-scale datasets such as ImageNet-1k with a stateof-the-art compression ratio. Notably, with 60% data from
ImageNet and 20% data from Alpaca’s instruction tuning
data, the models can be trained with negligible or no performance drop for both vision tasks (including classification, semantic segmentation, and object detection) as well
as language tasks (including instruction tuning tasks such
as BBH and DROP).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown superior performance
in a wide range of fields such as computer vision [22, 21,
* Equal first author.
† Corresponding author.

95.6

40%

69.5

40%
39.2

95.4

39.2

20%

42.6

20%

32.9

98%

26.3

98%

41.6

80%

42.6

69.4

39.8
33.0

27.6

Figure 1: Lossless dataset compression with Dataset
Quantization (DQ) framework. On both vision and language tasks. In the plot, we use ResNet18 as backbone for
all tasks and LLaMA-7B for all language tasks with instruction fine-tuning.

15] and natural language processing [14, 3]. Their performance depends heavily on the amount of training data.
For example, recent state-of-the-art models [32, 55, 12, 59]
on ImageNet-1K takes three billion data for pre-training.
This is hardly affordable for researchers with limited computational resources. However, are all the data in the large
dataset beneficial or necessary to the training? Is it possible to remove some redundant samples without degrading the training performance? What is the performance of
the pretrained models with less data on downstream tasks?
In this paper, we conduct extensive experiments and conduct detailed explorations on those questions. To address
the first question, several Dataset Distillation (DD) algorithms [62, 60, 30, 61, 53, 4, 16, 52, 35] are proposed recently to reduce the training dataset size by synthesizing a
new set of data that is significantly smaller than the original one. With the new synthesized dataset, the training cost
is reduced significantly, while yielding comparable results
with the models trained on the original datasets.

17205

