This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MODA: Mapping-Once Audio-driven Portrait Animation with Dual Attentions
Yunfei Liu1
Lijian Lin1
Fei Yu2
Changyin Zhou2
Yu Li1∗
1
2
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
Vistring Inc.
https://tinyurl.com/iccv23-moda

Mapping Once

Subject #2

Dual attention

Specific:
•

Lip Sync

Multimodal:
•

Head

•

Eye blinking

•

Shoulder

Multimodal results

Subject #1

Cross subjects

Audio
stream

Inputs

Figure 1: We propose a mapping-once system with dual-attention for multimodal and high-fidelity portrait video animation.

Abstract
Audio-driven portrait animation aims to synthesize portrait videos that are conditioned by given audio. Animating
high-fidelity and multimodal video portraits has a variety
of applications. Previous methods have attempted to capture different motion modes and generate high-fidelity portrait videos by training different models or sampling signals
from given videos. However, lacking correlation learning
between lip-sync and other movements (e.g., head pose/eye
blinking) usually leads to unnatural results. In this paper,
we propose a unified system for multi-person, diverse, and
high-fidelity talking portrait generation. Our method contains three stages, i.e., 1) Mapping-Once network with Dual
Attentions (MODA) generates talking representation from
given audio. In MODA, we design a dual-attention module
to encode accurate mouth movements and diverse modalities. 2) Facial composer network generates dense and
detailed face landmarks, and 3) temporal-guided renderer
syntheses stable videos. Extensive evaluations demonstrate
that the proposed system produces more natural and realistic video portraits compared to previous methods.
* Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Given an input audio, talking portrait animation is to synthesize video frames of a person whose poses and expressions are synchronized with the audio signal [2, 3, 4, 18].
This audio-driven portrait video generation task has gained
increasing attention recently and has a wide range of applications in digital avatars, gaming, telepresence, virtual
reality (VR), video production etc. Conventional portrait
video generation consumes intensive labor and time during
setting up the background, make-up, lighting, shooting, and
editing. Moreover, a re-shot is always required when there
exists new textual content. In contrast, audio-driven talking
video generation is more convenient and attractive which
only requires a new audio clip to render a new video.
Previous methods [7, 29, 52] try to learn the correspondence between audio and frames. However, these methods usually ignore the head pose as it is hard to separate head posture from facial movement. Many 3D face
reconstruction algorithm-based and GAN-based [8] methods estimate intermediate representations, such as 3D face
shapes [6, 50], 2D landmarks [22, 54], or face expression
parameters [49], to assist the generation process. However,
such sparse representations usually lost facial details, leading to over-smooth [44]. Recently, the neural radiance field
1
23020

