This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-Shot Dataset Distillation via Translative Pre-Training
Songhua Liu Xinchao Wang*
National University of Singapore
songhua.liu@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Given an original dataset T , Dataset distillation
(DD) [41, 51, 35, 18, 47, 20, 22] aims at a much smaller
* Corresponding Author.

𝒮

Match
Match
Match

Update
(b)

(a)
𝒯
Distillation
Space

1. Introduction

Random
Network
Random
Network
Random
Network

Dataset distillation aims at a small synthetic dataset to
mimic the training performance on neural networks of a
given large dataset. Existing approaches heavily rely on an
iterative optimization to update synthetic data and multiple
forward-backward passes over thousands of neural network
spaces, which introduce significant overhead for computation and are inconvenient in scenarios requiring high efficiency. In this paper, we focus on few-shot dataset distillation, where a distilled dataset is synthesized with only a few
or even a single network. To this end, we introduce the notion of distillation space, such that synthetic data optimized
only in this specific space can achieve the effect of those
optimized through numerous neural networks, with dramatically accelerated training and reduced computational cost.
To learn such a distillation space, we first formulate the
problem as a quad-level optimization framework and propose a bi-level algorithm. Nevertheless, the algorithm in its
original form has a large memory footprint in practice due
to the back-propagation through an unrolled computational
graph. We then convert the problem of learning the distillation space to a first-order one based on image translation.
Specifically, the synthetic images are optimized in an arbitrary but fixed neural space and then translated to those in
the targeted distillation space. We pre-train the translator
on some large datasets like ImageNet so that it requires only
a limited number of adaptation steps on the target dataset.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that the translator after pre-training and a limited number of adaptation steps
achieves comparable distillation performance with state of
the arts, with ∼ 15× acceleration. It also exerts satisfactory generalization performance across different datasets,
storage budgets, and numbers of classes.

𝒯

...

Abstract

𝒮

Match

Update
(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) Existing DD methods heavily rely on forwardbackward processes through enormous neural networks. (b) More
neural networks used in dataset distillation would result in more
floating point operations (FLOPs) and higher latency. (c) We introduce the notation of distillation space for few-shot dataset distillation in this paper and aim to learn a neural network such that
distilled data only optimized in this specific space can approximate the performance by multiple networks. (d) Given only a few
or even a single network, our method achieves comparable performance with state-of-the-art baselines requiring enormous networks. Results in this figure are concerning models trained with
1 image per class distilled from CIFAR100 dataset. OS denotes
one-shot DD using only one network, FS denotes few-shot DD
with a limited number of adaptation steps, and DS denotes using
down-sampled parameterization, i.e., storing down-sampled distilled images with the same storage budget.

synthetic dataset S, such that the training effect of S on
neural networks can match that of T . Such techniques have
received considerable attention to alleviate the heavy burden on storage, transmission, and training of deep learning
models brought by large-scale datasets. Recent advances on
DD have revealed that models trained with only a few synthetic samples, even 1 image per class in some cases, can
retain most of the performance of those trained with real
data [49, 50, 2, 28, 29, 40, 13, 52, 23, 21]. Thus, it becomes
a research area receiving increasing attention from the aca-

18654

