This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PARF: Primitive-Aware Radiance Fusion for Indoor Scene Novel View Synthesis
Haiyang Ying1 , Baowei Jiang1 , Jinzhi Zhang1 , Di Xu2 , Tao Yu1†, Qionghai Dai1 , Lu Fang1†

NeRF-SLAM

Radiance Field

PARF (Ours)

Primitive Field Radiance Field

1

2

Tsinghua University,

Huawei Cloud

Test PSNR (dB)

Primitive
List

0.3s

0.8s

2.0s

3.0s

6.0s

(a) Incremental Radiance Field Reconstruction Performance Comparison

Time (s)

(b) Converge Speed Evaluation

Figure 1: Performance comparison with the state-of-the-art radiance field reconstruction methods on Replica dataset. With
the proposed hybrid representation and primitive-aware fusion framework, our method PARF enjoys significantly faster
convergence and high-quality rendering for indoor scene novel view synthesis. In (a) the incremental reconstruction setting,
we assume a SLAM system with the tracking speed of 10fps.

Abstract
This paper proposes a method for fast scene radiance
field reconstruction with strong novel view synthesis performance and convenient scene editing functionality. The key
idea is to fully utilize semantic parsing and primitive extraction for constraining and accelerating the radiance field reconstruction process. To fulfill this goal, a primitive-aware
hybrid rendering strategy was proposed to enjoy the best of
both volumetric and primitive rendering. We further contribute a reconstruction pipeline conducts primitive parsing
and radiance field learning iteratively for each input frame
which successfully fuses semantic, primitive, and radiance
information into a single framework. Extensive evaluations
demonstrate the fast reconstruction ability, high rendering
quality, and convenient editing functionality of our method.

1. Introduction
Indoor scene 3D reconstruction and novel view synthesis
(NVS) is a long-lasting classical topic in the field of computer vision for decades, which is widely used in virtual
† The corresponding authors are Lu Fang (fanglu@tsinghua.edu.cn,
http://www.luvision.net/) and Tao Yu (ytrock@tsinghua.edu.cn).

reality, robot perception, and visualization. Classic indoor
scene reconstruction methods [22, 23] focus on geometric
registration and fusion [23] based on feature matching, bundle adjustment [6], and multi-view stereo [37] algorithms.
However, these methods rely on discrete point clouds or
voxels for scene representation, which results in high memory overhead and limited ability to describe scene details,
making it challenging to achieve realistic NVS effects.
The emergence of implicit continuous representations
based on neural networks has revolutionized 3D vision
tasks. NeRF [18] represents the density and color fields of
the scene using an implicit representation. Coupled with
volume rendering techniques [19, 8, 13], NeRF achieves a
simple but effective pipeline for end-to-end radiance field
reconstruction. NeRF not only enables realistic novel view
synthesis, but also facilitates 3D structure, material, and appearance recovery. However, NeRF-based methods tend
to fit a diffused density field to the ground truth geometry surface for achieving view-dependent volume rendering
effects, which may not be suitable for view extrapolation
due to the lack of a sharp geometry constraint. Although
incorporating depth information can constrain the learning of implicit geometry field, generating accurate samples for view extrapolation and achieving faster convergence remains challenging as NeRF requires relatively re-

17706

