This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Computational 3D Imaging with Position Sensors
Jeremy Klotz
Columbia University

Mohit Gupta
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Underlying many structured light systems, especially
those based on laser scanning, is a simple vision task:
tracking a light spot. To accomplish this, scanners use conventional CMOS sensors to capture, transmit, and process
millions of pixel measurements. This approach, while capable of achieving high-fidelity 3D scans, is wasteful in terms
of (often scarce) sensing and computational resources. We
present a structured light system based on position sensing diodes (PSDs), an unconventional sensing modality that
directly measures the centroid of the spatial distribution
of incident light, thus enabling high-resolution 3D laser
scanning with a minimal amount of sensor data. We develop theory and computational algorithms for PSD-based
structured light under a variety of light transport effects.
We demonstrate the benefits of the proposed techniques using a hardware prototype on several real-world scenes, including optically-challenging objects with long-range interreflections and scattering.

1. Computational Position Sensors
Traditional photodetectors measure the intensity of light
incident on them. To measure the spatial intensity distribution of a scene (i.e. an image), a pixelated array of detectors such as a CMOS sensor is used, which requires sophisticated readout mechanisms and invariably results in large
bandwidth, compute, and memory requirements. There are
several downstream vision applications that do not require
the entire image, instead relying on some aggregate statistics (e.g. histograms [13, 5]) of the intensity distribution.
For such applications, it is often desirable to create compact, memory- and compute-efficient summary statistics of
the images. This raises a natural question: Why capture
high-resolution images, only to compress it later? Can we
design imaging modalities that directly capture compact and
accurate statistics of the scene’s intensity distribution?
We consider position sensing diodes (PSDs), a sensing
modality that can directly characterize the spatial distribution of incident light. A PSD, in addition to measuring the
amount of incident flux, also computes the centroid of the

Scene

Shape w/o global suppression Shape after global suppression

Figure 1: Structured light 3D scanning using a position
sensing diode. Computational position sensors can enable
high-speed, high-resolution 3D imaging at low power and
compute budgets. However, global illumination effects such
as interreflections in a V-groove significantly bias the measurements, as seen in the poor surface reconstruction in the
middle. We propose methods that are robust to such effects,
enabling the high-fidelity reconstruction on the right.

image formed on it. While the centroid is a rather coarse
description of the spatial intensity distribution, there are numerous applications where this is sufficient. For example,
consider a 3D scanning system where a laser spot scans an
object. In conventional scanning, the camera captures an
image for each spot location, often resulting in prohibitively
large amounts of data. In an ideal scenario, where the image consists of a single illuminated spot, the centroid measured by the PSD tracks the light spot location on the sensor,
which can be used to establish projector-camera correspondences and obtain 3D scans via triangulation at high-speeds,
while maintaining low power and compute budgets.
Position sensing and global illumination. Most realworld scenes often have global illumination effects such as
interreflections and subsurface scattering. As a result, even
a single laser beam can create an intensity image consisting
of a large number of illuminated spots. This would bias the
centroid from the “direct” location of the laser spot, which
in turn will distort the estimated 3D shape resulting in large,
systematic errors. An example with a V-groove is shown in
Fig. 1. Such effects could limit the scope of this otherwise
powerful technology.
This paper proposes a technique for 3D scanning with
PSDs that is robust to global illumination. Our primary
contribution is a computational imaging design that reduces

8125

