This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geometric Viewpoint Learning with
Hyper-Rays and Harmonics Encoding
Zhixiang Min Juan Carlos Dibene Enrique Dunn
Stevens Institute of Technology

Abstract
Viewpoint is a fundamental modality that carries the interaction between observers and their environment. This
paper proposes the first deep-learning framework for the
viewpoint modality. The challenge in formulating learning
frameworks for viewpoints resides in a suitable multimodal
representation that links across the camera viewing space
and 3D environment. Traditional approaches reduce the
problem to image analysis instances, making them computationally expensive and not adequately modelling the intrinsic geometry and environmental context of 6DoF viewpoints. We improve these issues in two ways. 1) We propose a generalized viewpoint representation forgoing the
analysis of photometric pixels in favor of encoded viewing
ray embeddings attained from point cloud learning frameworks. 2) We propose a novel SE(3)-bijective 6D viewing
ray, hyper-ray, that addresses the DoF deficiency problem
of using 5DoF viewing rays representing 6DoF viewpoints.
We demonstrate our approach has both efficiency and accuracy superiority over existing methods in novel real-world
environments.

1. Introduction
Viewpoints play a critical role in a broad range of tasks in
computer vision [15, 12, 33, 35], graphics [28, 10], robotics
[29, 23, 34, 32] and HCI [20, 2]. Whether given as input or
required as output, viewpoints embody complex dependencies among capture dynamics/constraints, observer preferences and task-specific goals. To enable AI systems to understand and characterize these complex dependencies in a
data-driven manner, we propose a novel encoding scheme
and learning framework for the viewpoint modality, similar
to how images being encoded with CNNs. This is a first step
towards research and application focusing on, for example
cross-modal learning of text-and-view (i.e. find/describe
views with texts), text-based robot navigation or behavior
recognition from camera movements.
Viewpoint instances play the role of a geometric link between the environment and captured contents, with viewing

Learning 6DoF
Viewpoint Pattern

Generalize to Novel Environments

*Heatmap represents likelihood for placing viewpoints

Figure 1: Viewpoint Learning. Examples showing our
method learns to replicate 6DoF viewpoint capture patterns
in novel environments.

rays conveying info on both capture-time camera pose and
scene content observability. However, existing approaches
[12, 15] focused on (rendered) viewpoint image analysis are
handicapped in two important ways: First, the inherently
local scope of individual photometric pixels obfuscates the
geometric and environmental contexts that are crucial cues
to characterize the viewpoint. Second, sampling the viewing space through image rendering is computationally demanding. Addressing both of these shortcomings requires
novel data representations and compute frameworks.
Photometric pixels, which convey the signal carried by
viewing rays, are widely used in existing viewpoint representations. However, the geometry of viewing rays (i.e. origin, length and direction) is usually ignored, even though
such parameters govern the mapping from scene content to
the observer. Importantly, viewing ray geometry uniquely
describes the capture-time camera pose and observed scene
geometry of a given viewpoint. Hence, we represent viewpoints as a collection of viewing rays, which are in turn
encoded in terms of both their geometry and their carried
signal. To encode viewing rays, we tightly couple the
ray encoding process with point cloud learning frameworks

22520

