This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V-FUSE: Volumetric Depth Map Fusion with Long-Range Constraints
Nathaniel Burgdorfer
Philippos Mordohai
Stevens Institute of Technology

Abstract
We introduce a learning-based depth map fusion framework that accepts a set of depth and confidence maps generated by a Multi-View Stereo (MVS) algorithm as input
and improves them. This is accomplished by integrating volumetric visibility constraints that encode long-range
surface relationships across different views into an endto-end trainable architecture. We also introduce a depth
search window estimation sub-network trained jointly with
the larger fusion sub-network to reduce the depth hypothesis search space along each ray. Our method learns
to model depth consensus and violations of visibility constraints directly from the data; effectively removing the necessity of fine-tuning fusion parameters. Extensive experiments on MVS datasets show substantial improvements
in the accuracy of the output fused depth and confidence
maps. Our code is available at https://github.com/
nburgdorfer/V-FUSE

1. Introduction
Much like other areas of computer vision, Multi-View
Stereo (MVS) has benefited from the advent of deep learning. Progress has been driven by the creation of end-to-end
systems, unifying all aspects of the MVS pipeline, and by
replacing heuristics in the components of the pipeline with
optimized network modules. An aspect of MVS that requires further investigation is depth map fusion, which is
still implemented as a sequence of heuristic operations.
Considering that the top performing MVS systems in
terms of geometric accuracy1 use depth map collections
as the representation, depth map fusion can be a crucial
step for obtaining the final 3D reconstruction of the scene.
As has been shown by conventional fusion research [23],
fusing depth maps, guided by geometric constraints, improves the precision of correct depth estimates by blending them with supporting estimates for the same part of the
surface, detects and removes outliers, and reduces redun1 NeRF [26] has inspired a vastly expanding class of algorithms that
produce superior results in view synthesis, but not in 3D reconstruction.
We consider NeRF a separate line of work from MVS.

Figure 1. Point cloud reconstructions from DTU [1] and Tanks &
Temples [19] datasets using depth maps from NP-CVP-MVSNet
[40] and UCSNet [3] as input to V-FUSE.

dancy in the final 3D model. Current deep MVS approaches
[3, 11, 21, 25, 42, 40, 41], however, bypass depth map fusion and proceed directly to filtering fusion, which includes
various heuristic post-processing steps to obtain a global
point cloud by filtering the point cloud reconstructed from
the set of depth maps. This approach has been successful;
however, without depth map fusion, not all geometric information from the scene is utilized. Our motivation in this
work is to build an end-to-end fusion network that can generate much more accurate depth and confidence maps.
Filtering fusion that operates on local 3D neighborhoods
is unable to leverage relationships among distant surface
primitives, such as a surface being occluded from a faraway
object. Similarly, convolution networks have a limited receptive fields and can only reason about local interactions.
We present V-FUSE, an approach that allows a 3D convolutional network to benefit from such geometric information,
in a differentiable manner, controlled by learnable hyperparameters.
V-FUSE considers three types of constraints, inspired by
the work of Merrell et al. [23]: support among consistent
depth estimates across multiple views, occlusions and freespace violations that provide evidence against depth estimates contradicting surfaces estimated in different depth
maps. Free-space violations provide the added benefit of

3449

