This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IntentQA: Context-aware Video Intent Reasoning
Jiapeng Li1,2 , Ping Wei1 , Wenjuan Han3 , Lifeng Fan2
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI), Beijing, China
3
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
lijiapeng@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, pingwei@xjtu.edu.cn, wjhan@bjtu.edu.cn, lifengfan@bigai.ai

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel task IntentQA, a special
VideoQA task focusing on video intent reasoning, which has
become increasingly important for AI with its advantages
in equipping AI agents with the capability of reasoning beyond mere recognition in daily tasks. We also contribute
a large-scale VideoQA dataset for this task. We propose a
Context-aware Video Intent Reasoning model (CaVIR) consisting of i) Video Query Language (VQL) for better crossmodal representation of the situational context, ii) Contrastive Learning module for utilizing the contrastive context, and iii) Commonsense Reasoning module for incorporating the commonsense context. Comprehensive experiments on this challenging task demonstrate the effectiveness
of each model component, the superiority of our full model
over other baselines, and the generalizability of our model
to a new VideoQA task. The dataset and codes are opensourced at: https://github.com/JoseponLee/IntentQA.git.

1. Introduction
Among the recent flourishing studies on cross-modal
vision-language understanding, video question answering
(VideoQA) is one of the most prominent to support interactive AI with the ability to understand and communicate dynamic visual scenarios via natural languages [75]. Despite
its popularity, VideoQA is still quite challenging, because
it demands the models to comprehensively understand the
videos to correctly answer questions, which include not
only factual but also inferential ones. The former (factoid
VideoQA) directly asks about the visual facts (e.g., humans,
objects, actions, etc.), while the latter (inference VideoQA)
requires logical reasoning of latent variables (e.g., the spatial, temporal and causal relationships among entities, mental states, etc.) beyond observed visual facts [75]. The

Commonsense
Context
a dinner table with a
cup of water on it

a sink full of dirty cups

Give me water

Point to a Cup
Same Action

Clean the cup

a shelf displaying
beautiful cups

Look at the cup

Contrastive
Situational Context

Different Intents

Figure 1: Illustration of challenges brought by varied contexts in video intention reasoning. The same action under
different contexts could mean different underlying intents.
future trend for AI is to study inference VideoQA beyond
factoid VideoQA [75], requiring more reasoning ability beyond mere recognition. In this paper, we propose a new task
called IntentQA, i.e., a special kind of inference VideoQA
that focuses on intent reasoning.
Intent understanding is a key building block of human
intelligence. Humans have a strong inclination to interpret
events as a series of goals driven by intentions [10, 58, 59].
In fact, humans do not encode the entirety of action details
but rather interpret actions in terms of intentions and store
these interpretations for later retrieval [3]. As a fundamental organizing principle that regulates how humans comprehend one another and act in the environment, the concept
of intent has been awarded a central position within social
intelligence and should thus be an essential component of
future AI [76, 17]. However, as far as we know, there is no

11963

