This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Visual Categories Modeling: A Joint Representation Learning and
Density Estimation Framework for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Jinglun Li1

Xinyu Zhou2 Pinxue Guo1 Yixuan Sun1 Yiwen Huang2
Weifeng Ge2† Wenqiang Zhang1,2†
1
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
jingli960423@gmail.com, zhouxinyu20@fudan.edu.cn,
{pxguo21, 21210860014, 21210240056}@m.fudan.edu.cn,
weifeng.ge.ic@gmail.com, wqzhang@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Detecting out-of-distribution inputs for visual recognition models has become critical in safe deep learning. This
paper proposes a novel hierarchical visual category modeling scheme to separate out-of-distribution data from indistribution data through joint representation learning and
statistical modeling. We learn a mixture of Gaussian models
for each in-distribution category. There are many Gaussian
mixture models to model different visual categories. With
these Gaussian models, we design an in-distribution score
function by aggregating multiple Mahalanobis-based metrics. We don’t use any auxiliary outlier data as training
samples, which may hurt the generalization ability of outof-distribution detection algorithms. We split the ImageNet1k dataset into ten folds randomly. We use one fold as the
in-distribution dataset and the others as out-of-distribution
datasets to evaluate the proposed method. We also conduct experiments on seven popular benchmarks, including
CIFAR, iNaturalist, SUN, Places, Textures, ImageNet-O,
and OpenImage-O. Extensive experiments indicate that the
proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms
clearly. Meanwhile, we ﬁnd that our visual representation
has a competitive performance when compared with features learned by classical methods. These results demonstrate that the proposed method hasn’t weakened the discriminative ability of visual recognition models and keeps
high efﬁciency in detecting out-of-distribution samples.

1. Introduction
Modern deep neural networks have shown strong generalization ability when training and test data are from the
† indicates corresponding authors.

23425

same distribution [44, 18, 51, 10, 33]. However, encountering unexpected scenarios is inevitable in real-world applications. Thus assuring that training and test data share
the same distribution becomes problematic. In applications
like autonomous driving [3, 4] and medical image analysis [55, 14, 43], it is critical for models to identify inputs beyond their recognition capacity – known as out-ofdistribution (OOD) detection. OOD detection algorithms
can enable the system to warn humans promptly in many
safety-related scenarios. Moreover, it has become an important research topic in the research community of safe artiﬁcial intelligence [21, 29, 23, 32, 56].
Many popular OOD detection methods aim to build
probability models to describe training distributions [29, 56,
46, 24, 23]. With these probability models, they built a
score function that can calculate in-distribution scores for
test samples. These in-distribution scores reﬂect whether
these samples fall into a given distribution. Then the test
sample can be evaluated by the score function to decide
whether it is an OOD sample or not. Thus modeling features of in-distribution data become extremely important.
Previous works [29, 16, 5, 12, 38] build a distribution over
the whole training data. Since training images may come
from various visual categories, the decision boundary between In-Distribution (InD) and OOD data becomes extremely complex. To solve this problem, subsequent studies [24, 7, 15, 56] decomposed the whole dataset into several subgroups to simplify the decision boundary. Although
representative algorithms like MOS [24], have gotten impressive performance in identifying OOD samples, they
failed to detect near OOD samples. Because when different
visual categories are grouped together, the OOD decision
boundary will become even more uncertain.
A typical framework for out-of-distribution detection involves two key steps: 1) learning a compact feature rep-

