This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TIFA: Accurate and Interpretable Text-to-Image Faithfulness
Evaluation with Question Answering
Yushi Hu1 Benlin Liu1 Jungo Kasai1 Yizhong Wang1
Mari Ostendorf1 Ranjay Krishna1,2 Noah A. Smith1,2
1
University of Washington 2 Allen Institute for AI
https://tifa-benchmark.github.io/
Abstract
Despite thousands of researchers, engineers, and artists
actively working on improving text-to-image generation models, systems often fail to produce images that accurately
align with the text inputs. We introduce TIFA (Text-to-Image
Faithfulness evaluation with question Answering), an automatic evaluation metric that measures the faithfulness of a
generated image to its text input via visual question answering (VQA). Specifically, given a text input, we automatically
generate several question-answer pairs using a language
model. We calculate image faithfulness by checking whether
existing VQA models can answer these questions using the
generated image. TIFA is a reference-free metric that allows
for fine-grained and interpretable evaluations of generated
images. TIFA also has better correlations with human judgments than existing metrics. Based on this approach, we
introduce TIFA v1.0, a benchmark consisting of 4K diverse
text inputs and 25K questions across 12 categories (object,
counting, etc.). We present a comprehensive evaluation of existing text-to-image models using TIFA v1.0 and highlight the
limitations and challenges of current models. For instance,
we find that current text-to-image models, despite doing well
on color and material, still struggle in counting, spatial
relations, and composing multiple objects. We hope our
benchmark will help carefully measure the research progress
in text-to-image synthesis and provide valuable insights for
further research.1

1. Introduction
While we welcome artistic freedom when we commission art from artists, images produced by deep generative
models [44, 46, 43, 47, 61] should conform closely to our
requests. Despite the advances in generative models, it is
still challenging for models to produce images faithful to
users’ intentions [40, 11, 30, 35, 36]. For example, current
1 Correspondance to <Yushi Hu: yushihu@uw.edu>. All data and a

pip-installable evaluation package are available on the project page.

Stable Diffusion v1.5

Stable Diffusion v2.1

Text Input: A person sitting on a horse in air over gate in grass
with people and trees in background.
GPT-3 generated + verified QAs (pre-generated in TIFA v1.0 benchmark)

Question: what is the animal?
VQA:

Horse

Horse

Question: is there a gate?
VQA:

Answer inferred from text: horse

Answer inferred from text: yes

No

Yes

Question: is the horse in air?
VQA:

No

TIFA

71.4

Answer inferred from text: yes
Yes

...
Accuracy on 14 questions

Fine-Grained

<

100.0

Accurate

Interpretable

v.s. other automatic image-text align metrics
CLIP (image)

CLIPScore

SPICE

CLIP (text)

Caption
sim. (caption, text input)

CLIP: 24.3 SPICE: 22.2

>

CLIP: 21.3 SPICE: 11.8

Figure 1. Illustration of how TIFA works, and comparison with the
widely-used CLIPScore and SPICE metrics. Given the text input,
TIFA uses GPT-3 to generate several question-answer pairs, and
a QA model filters them (3 out of 14 questions for this text input
are shown). TIFA measures whether VQA models can accurately
answer these questions given the generated image. In this example,
TIFA indicates that the image generated by Stable Diffusion v2.1 is
better than that by v1.5, while CLIP and SPICE yield the opposite
result. The text input is from the MSCOCO validation set.

models often fail to compose multiple objects [40, 11, 35],
bind attributes to the wrong objects [11], and struggle in generating visual text [36]. Today, there are efforts to address

20406

