This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transparent Shape from a Single View Polarization Image
Mingqi Shao

Chongkun Xia Zhendong Yang Junnan Huang Xueqian Wang*
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School

{smq21, yangzd21, hjn21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{xiachongkun, wang.xq}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a learning-based method for transparent surface estimation from a single view polarization
image. Existing shape from polarization(SfP) methods have
the difficulty in estimating transparent shape since the inherent transmission interference heavily reduces the reliability of physics-based prior. To address this challenge,
we propose the concept of physics-based prior confidence,
which is inspired by the characteristic that the transmission
component in the polarization image has more noise than
reflection. The confidence is used to determine the contribution of the interfered physics-based prior. Then, we build a
network(TransSfP) with multi-branch architecture to avoid
the destruction of relationships between different hierarchical inputs. To train and test our method, we construct a
dataset for transparent shape from polarization with paired
polarization images and ground-truth normal maps. Extensive experiments and comparisons demonstrate the superior
accuracy of our method. Our cdataset and code are publicly
available at https://github.com/shaomq2187/TransSfP

1. Introduction
Surface normals provide detailed 3D information about
the surface of objects. However, estimating the high-quality
surface normal of transparent objects is still an open challenge. The complex rays interactions in transparent objects
lead to the difficulty of standard 3D sensors in acquiring
accurate surface information[23]. Besides, transparent objects lack texture of their own, adopting instead the texture
of the background, making the regular image-based methods extremely ill-posed and can not produce satisfied estimation[12]. Compared with regular 3D and RGB sensors,
the polarization sensor can acquire information about the
surface normal from the reflected light on transparent surface. In particular, the commercial polarization image sensors[20] that appeared in recent years have made it possible
to capture polarization images at a single shot, making the
* Corresponding author

Polarization degree map Polarization angle map

Estimated normal map

Figure 1. Examples of our estimation. Our method is capable of
estimating the normal map of various transparent surface from a
single view polarization image

acquisition of polarization images as easy as conventional
sensors. Hence, in this paper, we focus on estimating the
surface normals of transparent objects from a single-view
polarization image.
The key barrier to using polarization information to estimate the surface normals of transparent objects is the existence of transmission interference. Fresnel specular reflection model(will be described in Sec.3.2) is commonly used
to solve the possible surface normals, i.e. the physics-based
prior in SfP, from the observed polarization state. However, due to the high transmittance of transparent objects,
the specular reflection energy only accounts for about 4%
of the incident light energy[26]. The interference transmitted from the background is superimposed on the observed
polarization information, leading to the high estimation error of the physics-based SfP methods.
Aiming at the problem that the reliability of the Fresnel specular reflection model is reduced, we find that the
polarization observation of the transmission component has
more noise. This characteristic is helpful to distinguish the
interfered areas and motivates us to propose the concept of
physics-based prior confidence. The confidence indicates
the reliability of the physics-based prior and hence serves
as the weight of physics-based prior and polarization angle loss. The polarization angle loss is designed to force

9277

