This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Nonrigid Object Contact Estimation With Regional Unwrapping Transformer
Wei Xie

Zimeng Zhao

Shiying Li

Binghui Zuo

Yangang Wang*

Southeast University, China

Abstract
Acquiring contact patterns between hands and nonrigid
objects is a common concern in the vision and robotics
community. However, existing learning-based methods focus more on contact with rigid ones from monocular images. When adopting them for nonrigid contact, a major
problem is that the existing contact representation is restricted by the geometry of the object. Consequently, contact neighborhoods are stored in an unordered manner and
contact features are difficult to align with image cues. At
the core of our approach lies a novel hand-object contact
representation called RUPs (Region Unwrapping Profiles),
which unwrap the roughly estimated hand-object surfaces
as multiple high-resolution 2D regional profiles. The region grouping strategy is consistent with the hand kinematic
bone division because they are the primitive initiators for a
composite contact pattern. Based on this representation,
our Regional Unwrapping Transformer (RUFormer) learns
the correlation priors across regions from monocular inputs
and predicts corresponding contact and deformed transformations. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed
framework can robustly estimate the deformed degrees and
deformed transformations, which makes it suitable for both
nonrigid and rigid contact.

1. Introduction
Perceptions of hand-object contact patterns are crucial
to advance human-computer interaction and robotic imitation [44]. The interactive objects in these applications,
from mouse/keyboard to bottle/doll, are mostly nonrigid.
Although impressive progress has been achieved towards
monocular contact estimation between hands and 3D rigid
objects [12, 41, 47, 35] or 2.5D cloth [37, 36, 1], it is still
* Corresponding author. E-mail: yangangwang@seu.edu.cn. All the
authors from Southeast University are affiliated with the Key Laboratory
of Measurement and Control of Complex Systems of Engineering, Ministry of Education, Nanjing, China. This work was supported in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62076061), the
Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20220127).

Figure 1: Contact patterns estimated from monocular
RGB images. Since the deformed degrees of the contact
areas are considered by our framework, both contact with
nonrigid (Row1, Row2, Row3) and rigid objects (Row4)
can be plausibly estimated.
difficult to extend them to 3D nonrigid object. One important reason is that existing methods usually project the contact area of different objects onto their own surface (point
cloud or mesh), which is represented by either unordered
points or unregistered points and edges. As a result, it is
challenging to store contact into a feature-aligned space.
To conquer this obstacle, our key idea is to first represent regional 3D surface where hand-object contact
may occur as regional 2D unwrapping profiles, then predict the nonrigid contact and deformation within/across
regions according to monocular image cues through a
Vision Transformer. Considering that the mutual contact is caused by individual hand regions [17, 41, 47],
our surface grouping is based on the 16 hand kinematic
bones [30, 28, 41, 47] illustrated in Fig. 2(a). Each piece
of object surface shown in Fig. 2(b) is divided into a cer-

9342

