This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-view Self-supervised Disentanglement for General Image Denoising
Hao Chen⇤,1
1

Chenyuan Qu⇤,1

University of Birmingham

2

Yu Zhang2

Chen Chen3

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

3

Jianbo Jiao1

University of Central Florida

Project page: https://chqwer2.github.io/MeD/
Abstract
With its significant performance improvements, the deep
learning paradigm has become a standard tool for modern
image denoisers. While promising performance has been
shown on seen noise distributions, existing approaches often suffer from generalisation to unseen noise types or general and real noise. It is understandable as the model is
designed to learn paired mapping (e.g. from a noisy image
to its clean version). In this paper, we instead propose to
learn to disentangle the noisy image, under the intuitive
assumption that different corrupted versions of the same
clean image share a common latent space. A self-supervised
learning framework is proposed to achieve the goal, without looking at the latent clean image. By taking two different corrupted versions of the same image as input, the proposed Multi-view Self-supervised Disentanglement (MeD)
approach learns to disentangle the latent clean features
from the corruptions and recover the clean image consequently. Extensive experimental analysis on both synthetic
and real noise shows the superiority of the proposed method
over prior self-supervised approaches, especially on unseen
novel noise types. On real noise, the proposed method even
outperforms its supervised counterparts by over 3 dB.

1. Introduction
Image restoration is a critical sub-field of computer vision, exploring the reconstruction of image signals from
corrupted observations. Examples of such ill-posed lowlevel image restoration problems include image denoising
[16, 25, 26, 29, 33, 35, 38], super-resolution [2, 8, 19, 30, 37],
and JPEG artefact removal [7, 12, 31], to name a few. Usually, a mapping function dedicated to the training data distribution is learned between the corrupted and clean images
to address the problem. While many image restoration systems perform well when evaluated over the same corruption
distribution that they have seen, they are often required to be
deployed in settings where the environment is unknown and
⇤ Equal contribution.

(a) Noisy/ Clean

(b) N2C [21], Supervised

(c) LIR [9], Self-supervised

(d) Ours, Self-supervised

Figure 1. Denoising performance on unseen Speckle Noise
with v̂ = 50. The models were trained with Gaussian noise
2 [5, 50]. (a) The noisy and clean images, with ground-truth
clean patches shown below. (b) Noise-to-Clean (N2C) [21] is
trained with clean images. (c) LIR [9] is self-supervised but needs
unpaired clean images as training data. (d) Our approach is fully
self-supervised, training with only the noisy input data.

off the training distribution. These settings, such as medical
imaging, computational lithography, and remote sensing,
require image restoration methods that can handle complex
and unknown corruptions. Moreover, in many real-world
image-denoising tasks, ground truth images are unavailable,
introducing additional challenges.

Public

12281

Public

