This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HumanSD: A Native Skeleton-Guided Diffusion Model
for Human Image Generation
Xuan Ju1,2 * ‡ , Ailing Zeng2∗ , Chenchen Zhao1∗ , Jianan Wang2 , Lei Zhang2 , Qiang Xu1†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 International Digital Economy Academy
{xju22, cczhao, qxu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {zengailing, wangjianan, leizhang}@idea.edu.cn
Cartoon, a woman holds a chain on the sea

Acrobatics, a man doing handstand in the mountains

Sculpture, a statue of two children reading a book

Shadow play, two people dressed orientally dancing

Ink painting, a girl kneels down and picks up flowers Kids drawing, a couple in traditional clothes sitting

Ink painting, a man rides a horse

Garage kit, a figurine girl in a blue dress

Mural, a mosaic depicting a man and woman dancing

Digital art, a fighter jet with people standing around

Kids drawing, a family with children and flowers

Drama, a group of women sitting on chairs in a room

Oil painting, a child holding a basket of fruit

Watercolor, a woman in a blue dress

Cartoon, a girl with orange hair

Ⅰ

Ⅱ

Ⅲ

Ⅳ

Ⅴ
(a) SD

(b) Pose

(c) ControlNet (d) Ours

(a) SD

(b) Pose

(c) ControlNet (d) Ours

(a) SD

(b) Pose

(c) ControlNet (d) Ours

Figure 1: This paper highlights multi-scenario human-centric image generation with precise pose control. Each group of
displayed images includes: (a) a generation by the pre-trained pose-less text-guided stable diffusion (SD) [35], (b) pose
skeleton images as the condition to ControlNet and our proposed HumanSD, (c) a generation by ControlNet [52], and (d)
a generation by HumanSD (ours). ControlNet and HumanSD receive both text and pose conditions. HumanSD shows its
superiorities in terms of (I) challenging poses, (II) accurate painting styles, (III) pose control capability, (IV) multi-person
scenarios, and (V) delicate details. Best viewed with zoom-in.

Abstract
Controllable human image generation (HIG) has numerous real-life applications. State-of-the-art solutions, such
as ControlNet and T2I-Adapter, introduce an additional
learnable branch on top of the frozen pre-trained stable diffusion (SD) model, which can enforce various conditions,
including skeleton guidance of HIG. While such a plugand-play approach is appealing, the inevitable and uncertain conflicts between the original images produced from
the frozen SD branch and the given condition incur significant challenges for the learnable branch, which essentially
conducts image feature editing for condition enforcement.
* Equal contribution. ‡ Work done during an internship at IDEA.
† Corresponding author.

In this work, we propose a native skeleton-guided diffusion model for controllable HIG called HumanSD. Instead of performing image editing with dual-branch diffusion, we fine-tune the original SD model using a novel
heatmap-guided denoising loss. This strategy effectively
and efficiently strengthens the given skeleton condition during model training while mitigating the catastrophic forgetting effects. HumanSD is fine-tuned on the assembly of three large-scale human-centric datasets with textimage-pose information, two of which are established in
this work. Experimental results show that HumanSD outperforms ControlNet in terms of pose control and image
quality, particularly when the given skeleton guidance is
sophisticated. Code and data are available at: https://idearesearch.github.io/HumanSD/.

15988

