This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffCloth: Diffusion Based Garment Synthesis and Manipulation via
Structural Cross-modal Semantic Alignment
Xujie Zhang1 * Binbin Yang2∗ Michael C. Kampffmeyer4
Shiyue Zhang1 Guansong Lu3 Liang Lin2 Hang Xu3

Wenqing Zhang1
Xiaodan Liang1,5†

1

3

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University 2 Sun Yat-Sen University
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 4 UiT The Arctic University of Norway 5 MBZUAI

{zhangxj59,yangbb3,zhangwq76,zhangshy223}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,michael.c.kampffmeyer@uit.no
luguansong@huawei.com,linliang@ieee.org,chromexbjxh@gmail.com,xdliang328@gmail.com

Blue/black dress with long
sleeves and tied waist featuring
all-over floral print, band
collar and front button fastening.

Light multicolour knit jumper
featuring round neck and fittedcuff sleeves.

Dark blue cotton-denim cropped
jeans with straight leg and high
waist featuring belt loops and
front button fastening.

Tight fuchsia turtleneck
wool long-sleeved
sweater.

Tight gray crewneck
wool long-sleeved
sweater.

Tight black zip halfheight neck wool
long-sleeved sweater.

Black denim mid-rise
straight leg trousers.

Black denim mid-rise
bell bottoms trousers.

Black denim mid-rise
wide leg trousers.

(a) Garment Synthesis

(b) Garment Manipulation

Figure 1. Results of our proposed DiffCloth. DiffCloth is able to produce garments with part-level semantics well-aligned to the prompt
and allows for precise manipulation of the generated results by simply modifying the text description.

Abstract
Cross-modal garment synthesis and manipulation will
significantly benefit the way fashion designers generate garments and modify their designs via flexible linguistic interfaces. However, despite the significant progress that has
been made in generic image synthesis using diffusion models, producing garment images with garment part level semantics that are well aligned with input text prompts and
then flexibly manipulating the generated results still remains a problem. Current approaches follow the general
text-to-image paradigm and mine cross-modal relations via
simple cross-attention modules, neglecting the structural
correspondence between visual and textual representations
in the fashion design domain. In this work, we instead introduce DiffCloth, a diffusion-based pipeline for cross-modal
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

garment synthesis and manipulation, which empowers diffusion models with flexible compositionality in the fashion
domain by structurally aligning the cross-modal semantics.
Specifically, we formulate the part-level cross-modal alignment as a bipartite matching problem between the linguistic
Attribute-Phrases (AP) and the visual garment parts which
are obtained via constituency parsing and semantic segmentation, respectively. To mitigate the issue of attribute
confusion, we further propose a semantic-bundled crossattention to preserve the spatial structure similarities between the attention maps of attribute adjectives and part
nouns in each AP. Moreover, DiffCloth allows for manipulation of the generated results by simply replacing APs in
the text prompts. The manipulation-irrelevant regions are
recognized by blended masks obtained from the bundled attention maps of the APs and kept unchanged. Extensive experiments on the CM-Fashion benchmark demonstrate that

23154

