This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-guidance Segmentation Using Zero Segment Labels
Pitchaporn Rewatbowornwongว* Nattanat Chattheeว* Ekapol Chuangsuwanichฬ Supasorn Suwajanakornว
ว

VISTEC, Thailand

ฬ

Chulalongkorn University, Thailand

{pitchaporn.r s18, nattanat.c s23, supasorn.s}@vistec.ac.th

ekapol.c@chula.ac.th

Abstract
The joint visual-language model CLIP has enabled new
and exciting applications, such as open-vocabulary segmentation, which can locate any segment given an arbitrary text query. In our research, we ask whether it is
possible to discover semantic segments without any user
guidance in the form of text queries or predefined classes,
and label them using natural language automatically? We
propose a novel problem zero-guidance segmentation and
the first baseline that leverages two pre-trained generalist models, DINO and CLIP, to solve this problem without any fine-tuning or segmentation dataset. The general
idea is to first segment an image into small over-segments,
encode them into CLIP’s visual-language space, translate
them into text labels, and merge semantically similar segments together. The key challenge, however, is how to
encode a visual segment into a segment-specific embedding that balances global and local context information,
both useful for recognition. Our main contribution is a
novel attention-masking technique that balances the two
contexts by analyzing the attention layers inside CLIP. We
also introduce several metrics for the evaluation of this
new task. With CLIP’s innate knowledge, our method can
precisely locate the Mona Lisa painting among a museum
crowd (Figure 1). More results are available at https:
//zero-guide-seg.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a core computer vision problem that seeks to partition an image into semantic regions.
Traditionally, the semantic classes of interest need to be predefined and are limited in number [22]. Earlier methods
thus cannot generalize beyond the training classes. With recent advances in joint vision-language representation learning, e.g., CLIP [25], newer methods [21, 19, 36] can successfully predict segments corresponding to arbitrary text
queries in a novel task called open-vocabulary segmenta*Equal contribution

Figure 1. Zero-guidance Segmentation segments input images
and generated text labels for all segments without any guidance
or prompting. Our method produces these results using only pretrained networks with no fine-tuning or annotations.

tion. These segmentation methods are guided by a text
query, which describes what already exists in the image and
must be provided by the user. Another meaningful milestone, however, is how we can segment an image without user input or guidance like text queries or predefined
classes, and label such segments automatically using natural language. Our work provides the first baseline for this
novel problem, referred to as zero-guidance segmentation.
Our work is inspired by a recent research direction that
solves segmentation by leveraging CLIP [36, 39]; however, our key distinction is that we require no segmentation
datasets, no text query guidance, and no additional training
or fine-tuning. This problem is challenging partly because
CLIP has been trained with image captions that globally describe the scenes and provide no spatially specific information for learning segmentation. Surprisingly, we show that it
is possible to distill the learned knowledge from two generalist models: a self-supervised visual model, DINO [2], and
a visual-language model, CLIP [25], to solve zero-guidance
segmentation without further training.
The overall idea is to first over-segment an image into
small segment candidates, then translate each segment into

1162

