This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zip-NeRF: Anti-Aliased Grid-Based Neural Radiance Fields
Jonathan T. Barron

(a) Ground Truth

Ben Mildenhall

(b) Our Model

Dor Verbin
Google Research

(c) mip-NeRF 360 [2]

Pratul P. Srinivasan

(d) iNGP [17]

Peter Hedman

(e) mip-NeRF 360 + iNGP

Figure 1: (a) Test-set images from the mip-NeRF 360 dataset [2] with renderings from (b) our model and (c, d, e) three
state-of-the-art baselines. Our model accurately recovers thin structures and finely detailed foliage, while the baselines either
oversmooth or exhibit aliasing in the form of jaggies and missing scene content. PSNR values for each patch are inset.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Field training can be accelerated
through the use of grid-based representations in NeRF’s
learned mapping from spatial coordinates to colors and volumetric density. However, these grid-based approaches lack
an explicit understanding of scale and therefore often introduce aliasing, usually in the form of jaggies or missing
scene content. Anti-aliasing has previously been addressed
by mip-NeRF 360, which reasons about sub-volumes along
a cone rather than points along a ray, but this approach is
not natively compatible with current grid-based techniques.
We show how ideas from rendering and signal processing
can be used to construct a technique that combines mipNeRF 360 and grid-based models such as Instant NGP to
yield error rates that are 8% – 77% lower than either prior
technique, and that trains 24× faster than mip-NeRF 360.
In Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF), a neural network is
trained to model a volumetric representation of a 3D scene

such that novel views of that scene can be rendered via raytracing [15]. NeRF has proven to be an effective tool for
tasks such as view synthesis [13], generative media [19],
robotics [27], and computational photography [14].
The original NeRF model used a multilayer perceptron
(MLP) to parameterize the mapping from spatial coordinates to colors and densities. Though compact and expressive, MLPs are slow to train, and recent work has accelerated training by replacing or augmenting MLPs with voxelgrid-like datastructures [5, 12, 21, 28]. One example is Instant NGP (iNGP), which uses a pyramid of coarse and fine
grids (the finest of which are stored using a hash map) to
construct learned features that are processed by a tiny MLP,
enabling greatly accelerated training [17].
In addition to being slow, the original NeRF model was
also aliased: NeRF reasons about individual points along a
ray, which results in “jaggies” in rendered images and limits NeRFs ability to reason about scale. Mip-NeRF [1] resolved this issue by casting cones instead of rays, and by
featurizing the entire volume within a conical frustum for

19697

