This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C ROSS L OC 3D: Aerial-Ground Cross-Source 3D Place Recognition
Tianrui Guan1 Aswath Muthuselvam1 Montana Hoover1 Xijun Wang 1
Jing Liang 1 Adarsh Jagan Sathyamoorthy 1 Damon Conover 2 Dinesh Manocha1
1

University of Maryland, College Park

2

DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory
Aerial LiDAR Database

Abstract
We present C ROSS L OC 3D, a novel 3D place recognition
method that solves a large-scale point matching problem in
a cross-source setting. Cross-source point cloud data corresponds to point sets captured by depth sensors with different accuracies or from different distances and perspectives. We address the challenges in terms of developing
3D place recognition methods that account for the representation gap between points captured by different sources.
Our method handles cross-source data by utilizing multigrained features and selecting convolution kernel sizes that
correspond to most prominent features. Inspired by the diffusion models, our method uses a novel iterative refinement
process that gradually shifts the embedding spaces from different sources to a single canonical space for better metric
learning. In addition, we present CS-C AMPUS 3D, the first
3D aerial-ground cross-source dataset consisting of point
cloud data from both aerial and ground LiDAR scans. The
point clouds in CS-C AMPUS 3D have representation gaps
and other features like different views, point densities, and
noise patterns. We show that our C ROSS L OC 3D algorithm
can achieve an improvement of 4.74% - 15.37% in terms
of the top 1 average recall on our CS-C AMPUS 3D benchmark and achieves performance comparable to state-of-theart 3D place recognition method on the Oxford RobotCar.
The code and CS-C AMPUS 3D benchmark will be available
at github.com/rayguan97/crossloc3d .

1. Introduction
Place recognition is an important problem in computer vision, with a wide range of applications including
SLAM [21], autonomous driving [6], and robot navigation [25], especially in a GPS-denied region. Given a point
cloud query, the place recognition task will predict an embedding such that the query will be close to the most structurally similar point clouds in the embedding space. The
goal of place recognition is to compress information from a
database with a location tag and find the closest data point
from the database given a query, which is essentially an in-

Ground LiDAR Query

Diﬀerent
Embedding
Space

Shared
Embedding
Space

CrossLoc3D
Match
Mismatch

Figure 1: C ROSS L OC 3D: Our method processes crosssource point clouds into a better, shared embedding, which
achieves a better retrieval outcome in a cross-source setting.
formation retrieval task on a global scale.
In this paper, we deal with the problem of 3D crosssource place recognition, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The goal
of 3D cross-source place recognition in the context of aerial
views and ground views is extremely challenging and not
well-studied in the field [13]. There are two aspects of
cross-source data that result in additional challenges: crossview and data consistency. First, the perspective differences
between aerial and ground datasets would cause partial
overlap of the scans, leading to a lack of point correspondences. Second, there may be no data consistency between
sources, which will cause representation gaps. The challenge of using multiple sources of data is primarily related
to the different nature and fidelity of sensors. It is harder
to match the 3D point clouds from different sources [13]
than it is to perform similar matches between the 2D images captured from the same locations, or even point clouds
captured only by ground or aerial sensors. When different kinds of LiDAR sensors or the same kind of LiDAR at
different distances, capture scans at the same location, the
data is significantly different. 3D cross-source data is point

11335

