This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Do DALL-E and Flamingo Understand Each Other?
Hang Li⇤1,2
Jindong Gu⇤3
1
LMU Munich, Germany

Rajat Koner1
Sahand Sharifzadeh1
Volker Tresp1,2
2
3
Siemens AG, Germany
University of Oxford, UK

Abstract
The field of multimodal research focusing on the comprehension and creation of both images and text has witnessed significant strides. This progress is exemplified by
the emergence of sophisticated models dedicated to image
captioning at scale, such as the notable Flamingo model
and text-to-image generative models, with DALL-E serving
as a prominent example. An interesting question worth exploring in this domain is whether Flamingo and DALL-E
understand each other. To study this question, we propose
a reconstruction task where Flamingo generates a description for a given image and DALL-E uses this description
as input to synthesize a new image. We argue that these
models understand each other if the generated image is
similar to the given image. Specifically, we study the relationship between the quality of the image reconstruction
and that of the text generation. We find that an optimal
description of an image is one that gives rise to a generated image similar to the original one. The finding motivates us to propose a unified framework to finetune the
text-to-image and image-to-text models. Concretely, the reconstruction part forms a regularization loss to guide the
tuning of the models. Extensive experiments on multiple
datasets with different image captioning and image generation models validate our findings and demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed unified framework. As DALL-E
and Flamingo are not publicly available, we use Stable Diffusion and BLIP in the remaining work. Project website:
https://dalleflamingo.github.io.

1. Introduction
Recently, multimodal research that aims to improve machine understanding of images and text has made significant advances [42, 43, 46, 8, 38, 59, 67, 21]. Text-toimage generation models such as DALL-E [44, 43] and
Stable Diffusion (SD) [46] are capable of converting complex textual descriptions [47] from real-world scenarios
into high-fidelity images [43, 24, 40, 44]. Conversely,
image-to-text generation models, e.g., Flamingo [2] and
* Equal contribution. Correspondence to ha.li@campus.lmu.de

Captioning

Text-to-Image
A yellow and black
bird is on tree
branch

SD

A bird perched in a
tree branch next to
leaves

SD

BLIP

Text-to-Image

A tiny kitten is
sitting on
wooden floor
near shoes

Captioning
BLIP

A small kitten
sitting on floor
next to a pair
of shoes

BLIP

A small kitten
sitting on top
of a wooden
floor

SD

Figure 1. Illustration of the communication tasks between SD and
BLIP. Top: SD generates an image for each caption created by
BLIP, where an accurately reconstructed image indicates a more
precise caption. Bottom: The reverse task involves SD generating
image candidates, which are then used by BLIP to produce captions for those images. The best image that represents a text is the
one that leads to the best reconstruction of the original text.

BLIP [35], exhibit the ability to comprehend the intricate semantics present in images and produce coherent descriptions [57, 26, 56, 55, 62, 37, 60]. Despite the closeness of the image captioning and text-to-image generation
tasks, they are often studied in isolation from each other,
i.e., the communication between these models is underexplored [38, 30]. This raises an interesting question: do
image-to-text generation models and text-to-image generation models possess mutual understanding? Concretely, we
investigate this question by letting an image-to-text model,
BLIP, generate a text description for a given image, which
subsequently serves as input to a text-to-image model, SD,
to synthesize a new image1 . We argue that BLIP and SD
understand each other if the generated image is similar to
the source image. Such mutual understanding may enhance their respective abilities to comprehend underlying
concepts, resulting in superior caption generation and image synthesis. Figure 1 illustrates this idea, where the upper
caption is a better representation of the input image than the
1 The initial idea of this work was motivated by Flamingo and DALL-E.
However, their model weights are unavailable at the time of publication.

1999

