This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LAW-Diffusion: Complex Scene Generation by Diffusion with Layouts
Binbin Yang1

Yi Luo1
1

Ziliang Chen2

Sun Yat-Sen University

2

Guangrun Wang3
Jinan University

3

Xiaodan Liang1

Liang lin1 *

University of Oxford

yangbb3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, luoy97@mail3.sysu.edu.cn, c.ziliang@yahoo.com,
{wanggrun, xdliang328}@gmail.com, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract

(a) Stable Diffusion
T steps

A boat with its reflection on
the water and a building

Thanks to the rapid development of diffusion models, unprecedented progress has been witnessed in image synthesis. Prior works mostly rely on pre-trained linguistic models, but a text is often too abstract to properly specify all
the spatial properties of an image, e.g., the layout configuration of a scene, leading to the sub-optimal results of
complex scene generation. In this paper, we achieve accurate complex scene generation by proposing a semantically controllable Layout-AWare diffusion model, termed
LAW-Diffusion. Distinct from the previous Layout-to-Image
generation (L2I) methods that primarily explore categoryaware relationships, LAW-Diffusion introduces a spatial dependency parser to encode the location-aware semantic coherence across objects as a layout embedding and produces
a scene with perceptually harmonious object styles and contextual relations. To be specific, we delicately instantiate
each object’s regional semantics as an object region map
and leverage a location-aware cross-object attention module to capture the spatial dependencies among those disentangled representations. We further propose an adaptive guidance schedule for our layout guidance to mitigate
the trade-off between the regional semantic alignment and
the texture fidelity of generated objects. Moreover, LAWDiffusion allows for instance reconfiguration while maintaining the other regions in a synthesized image by introducing a layout-aware latent grafting mechanism to recompose
its local regional semantics. To better verify the plausibility of generated scenes, we propose a new evaluation metric
for the L2I task, dubbed Scene Relation Score (SRS) to measure how the images preserve the rational and harmonious
relations among contextual objects. Comprehensive experiments on COCO-Stuff and Visual-Genome demonstrate
that our LAW-Diffusion yields the state-of-the-art generative performance, especially with coherent object relations.

* Corresponding author.

behind another one with a
roof surrounded by trees

Linguistic Model

Denosing
Process

and a mountain behind
these buildings.

noise 𝑥!

(b) LAW-Diffusion
T steps

mountain
building
tree

building

water boat

roof

Spatial Dependency
Parser

reflection

Denosing
Process

noise 𝑥!

Figure 1. Illustration of complex scene generation by Stable Diffusion [28] (text-to-image model) and our LAW-Diffusion (layoutto-image model). Stable Diffusion relies on linguistic model and
generates an unsatisfactory scene: the boat on the water is missed
and the generated building and mountain are placed with undesired
spatial relation according to the input description. By contrast,
LAW-Diffusion introduces a spatial dependency parser to encode
the spatial semantic coherence and produces the scene image with
consistent contextual relations adhere to the layout configuration.

1. Introduction
Recently, astounding advances have been achieved in
generative modeling due to the emergence of diffusion models [34, 13, 28, 42, 1, 6]. Despite the stunning generative
performance in simple cases, e.g., single object synthesis,
how to generate a complex scene composed of multiple
visual concepts with their diverse relationships remains a
challenging problem. A straightforward solution is to translate the scene into a text description and then resort to the
state-of-the-art text-to-image (T2I) generative models [28,
6, 7, 31, 26]. However, text-to-image diffusion models, e.g.,
Stable Diffusion and its variants [28, 6, 7, 31, 26] fall short
when it comes to the spatial composition of multiple objects
in a scene. An underlying reason is that properly specifying
all the spatial properties in an abstractive sentence is laborious and less accurate, usually resulting in unsatisfactory
generated results. In addition, the linguistic model used in
T2I model is incapable of accurately capturing the objects’

22669

