This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sequential Texts Driven Cohesive Motions Synthesis with Natural Transitions
Shuai Li1,3 , Sisi Zhuang1 , Wenfeng Song2 ,* Xinyu Zhang2 , Hejia Chen1 , Aimin Hao1
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, P.R. China
2
Computer School, Beijing Information Science and Technology University, P.R. China
3
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, P.R. China
{lishuai, sisizhuang}@buaa.edu.cn, songwenfenga@gmail.com
zhangxinyu1@bistu.edu.cn, {chenhj2000, ham}@buaa.edu.cn

Figure 1: Our method synthesizes semantic human motion with natural transition using free-form sequential texts. The
skeleton motion can be easily transferred to any character. The character used for demonstration is from Mixamo [1].

Abstract
The intelligent synthesis/generation of daily-life motion
sequences is fundamental and urgently needed for many
VR/metaverse-related applications. However, existing approaches commonly focus on monotonic motion generation
(e.g., walking, jumping, etc.) based on single instructionlike text, which is still not intelligent enough and can’t
meet practical demands. To this end, we propose a cohesive human motion sequence synthesis framework based on
free-form sequential texts while ensuring semantic connection and natural transitions between adjacent motions. At
the technical level, we explore the local-to-global semantic features of previous and current texts to extract relevant information. This information is used to guide the
framework in understanding the semantics of the current
moment. Moreover, we propose learnable tokens to adaptively learn the influence range of the previous motions towards natural transitions. These tokens can be trained to
encode the relevant information into well-designed transition loss. To demonstrate the efficacy of our method, we
conduct extensive experiments and comprehensive evaluations on the public dataset as well as a new dataset produced by us. All the experiments confirm that our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in terms of semantic matching, realism, and transition fluency. Our project is
public available. https://druthrie.github.io/
sequential-texts-to-motion/
*Corresponding author

1. Introduction and Motivation
Human motion synthesis is fundamental for numerous application, especially for virtual reality, games, and
metaverse-related applications [10, 19, 5, 3, 36, 15, 22, 20,
24], of which, it is in high demand to accurately control
the digital human motion with natural language. Existing
approaches commonly focus on monotonic motion synthesis/generation based on single instruction-like text description. However, practical applications usually require digital humans to respond to multiple rounds of sustainable interactions, wherein they can continuously generate reasonable responses to the sequential texts. Therefore, given a set
of free-form sequential texts, we aim to synthesize a cohesive human motion sequence. Namely, the animation clips
should be consistent with the ongoing text descriptions, and
the whole motion sequence should have smooth semantic
connection and natural transitions.
At present, sequential texts-driven motion synthesis has
not been well studied, mainly due to lacking long-term
continuous motion datasets with accompanying free-form
text descriptions. Recently, TEACH [6] first attempts to
address this problem by proposing a dataset (we refer to
it as BABEL-TEACH). Each item in the BABEL-TEACH
dataset contains two adjacent text-motion pairs. However,
TEACH [6] builds on the one-time method TEMOS [29],
wherein the limited 5-frame motion is added to encode together. However, it does not consider the potential benefits
of previous text information. In practice, previous texts can
provide extra and more accurate semantic information for

9498

