This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Transform for Generalizable Instance-wise Invariance
Utkarsh Singhal1
1
UC Berkeley

Carlos Esteves 3 Ameesh Makadia3 Stella X. Yu1,2
2
3
University of Michigan
Google Research

Abstract
Computer vision research has long aimed to build systems
that are robust to transformations found in natural data.
Traditionally, this is done using data augmentation or hardcoding invariances into the architecture. However, too much
or too little invariance can hurt, and the correct amount is
unknown a priori and dependent on the instance. Ideally,
the appropriate invariance would be learned from data and
inferred at test-time.
We treat invariance as a prediction problem. Given any
image, we predict a distribution over transformations can
and average over them to make invariant predictions. Combined with a graphical model approach, this distribution
forms a ﬂexible, generalizable, and adaptive form of invariance. Our experiments show that it can be used to align
datasets and discover prototypes, adapt to out-of-distribution
poses, and generalize invariance across classes. When as
data augmentation, our method shows accuracy and robustness gains on CIFAR 10, CIFAR10-LT, and TinyImageNet.

1. Introduction
One of the most impressive abilities of the human visual system is its robustness to geometric transformations.
Objects in the visual world often undergo rotation, translation, etc., producing innumerable variations in appearance.
Nonetheless, we classify them reliably and efﬁciently.
In contrast, modern classiﬁers based on deep learning are
brittle [1]. While these methods have achieved super-human
accuracy on curated datasets such as ImageNet [2], they are
often unreliable in real-world applications [3], leading to
poor generalization and even fatal outcomes in systems relying on computer vision [4]. Due to this, robust classiﬁcation
has long been an aim of computer vision research [1, 5].
Any robust classiﬁer must encode information about the
expected geometric transformations, either explicitly (e.g.,
through augmentations or architecture) or implicitly (e.g.,
invariant features). In the case of humans, this knowledge
generalizes to novel (but similar) categories for one-shot
learning [6]. For unfamiliar categories or poses, we can
learn the invariance over time [7]. Finally, while we quickly
recognize objects in typical poses, we can also adapt to

Figure 1: Our goal is to build ﬂexible, adaptive, and generalizable invariances. Flexible: Different objects require different degrees of invariance, and too much invariance can be
harmful (e.g. in distinguishing between 6 vs. 9). The ideal
invariance is ﬂexible and instance-dependent. Adaptive:
The model should be able to adapt to unexpected (out-ofdistribution) poses. The ﬁgure above shows mental rotation,
where the symbols in unexpected poses are rotated to a familiar pose before being classiﬁed. Generalizable: Given
previous knowledge of objects and their invariances, we
should be able to generalize it to new objects.
novel “out-of-distribution” poses with processes like mental
rotation [8]. These properties help us robustly handle novel
categories and novel poses (Figure 1). This paper asks:
Can we replicate this ﬂexible, generalizable, and adaptive
invariance in artiﬁcial neural networks?
For some transformations (e.g., translation), the invariance can be hard-coded into the architecture. This insight
has led to important approaches like Convolutional Neural
Networks [9, 10]. However, this approach imposes severe
architecture restrictions and thus has limited applicability.
An alternative approach to robustness is data augmentation [12]. Input data is transformed through a predeﬁned set
of transformations, and the neural network learns to perform
the task reliably despite these transformations. Its success
and wide applicability have made it ubiquitous in deep learning. However, data augmentation is unreliable since the

6211

