This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-weather Image Restoration via Domain Translation
Prashant W. Patil1 , Sunil Gupta1 , Santu Rana1 , Svetha Venkatesh1 , and Subrahmanyam Murala2
1
Deakin University, Geelong Warun Ponds Campus, VIC, Australia, 2 Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
prashant.patil@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
Weather degraded conditions such as rain, haze, snow,
etc. may degrade the performance of most computer vision systems. Therefore, effective restoration of multiweather degraded images is an essential prerequisite for
successful functioning of such systems. The current multiweather image restoration approaches utilize a model that
is trained on a combined dataset consisting of individual images for rainy, snowy, and hazy weather degradations. These methods may face challenges when dealing with real-world situations where the images may have
multiple, more intricate weather conditions. To address
this issue, we propose a domain translation-based unified method for multi-weather image restoration. In this
approach, the proposed network learns multiple weather
degradations simultaneously, making it immune for realworld conditions. Specifically, we first propose an instancelevel domain (weather) translation with multi-attentive feature learning approach to get different weather-degraded
variants of the same scenario. Next, the original and
translated images are used as input to the proposed novel
multi-weather restoration network which utilizes a progressive multi-domain deformable alignment (PMDA) with cascaded multi-head attention (CMA). The proposed PMDA facilitates the restoration network to learn weather-invariant
clues effectively. Further, PMDA and respective decoder
features are merged via proposed CMA module for restoration. Extensive experimental results on synthetic and realworld hazy, rainy, and snowy image databases clearly
demonstrate that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art
multi-weather image restoration methods. Code is available at https://github.com/pwp1208/Domain_
Translation_Multi-weather_Restoration.

1. Introduction
Fog, snow, rain, haze or their combintations often degrade the quality of images recorded for computer vision
applications such as surveillance, traffic monitoring, and
autonomous driving. These applications routinely involve
sub-tasks such as optical flow estimation [36], object detec-

Figure 1. Upper-part: Thumbnail of the proposed domain translation based multi-weather image restoration approach. Lower-part:
Sample restoration results: (a) de-hazing, (b) de-raining with veiling effect, and (c) de-snowing with veiling effect.

tion [8], depth estimation [27], etc., which use algorithms
or models expecting clean image as their input. Therefore,
restoration of images degraded by one or many weather
conditions is an important problem.
Although remarkable success has been achieved in
restoration of particular domain such as image de-hazing,
image de-raining, and image de-snowing, multi-weather degraded image restoration is still an open problem. Existing
works handle multiple weather degradations via separate
weather specific encoders [15], or separate training for each
weather [1]. To handle multiple degradations with separate training-based models, typically these weather-specific
models are put in a cascade, e.g., haze removal followed
by rain removal. But, such an approach may produce undesirable results as the erroneous output of any one of the
earlier stages affects the overall result in an unpredictable
manner. Also, in order to select the appropriate restoration model, prior information about the degradation must be
available. To overcome these limitations, researchers intro-

21696

