This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Augmented Box Replay: Overcoming Foreground Shift
for Incremental Object Detection

1

Yuyang Liu1,2,3 Yang Cong4,† Dipam Goswami5 Xialei Liu6 Joost van de Weijer5,7
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 South China University of Technology
5
Computer Vision Center, Barcelona 6 VCIP, CS, Nankai University
7
Department of Computer Science, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
liuyuyang@sia.cn, congyang81@gmail.com {dgoswami,joost}@cvc.uab.es, xialei@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract

Previous Object

Horse

Current Object

1. Introduction
The field of deep learning has witnessed remarkable
progress recently, and state-of-the-art object detection models [5, 19, 23, 50, 51] have been developed that performs exceptionally well on benchmark datasets. However, these
1 Code is available at https://github.com/YuyangSunshine/ABR IOD.git
† The corresponding author is Prof. Yang Cong.

Image
Replay

Task

In incremental learning, replaying stored samples from
previous tasks together with current task samples is one of
the most efficient approaches to address catastrophic forgetting. However, unlike incremental classification, image
replay has not been successfully applied to incremental object detection (IOD). In this paper, we identify the overlooked problem of foreground shift as the main reason for
this. Foreground shift only occurs when replaying images of
previous tasks and refers to the fact that their background
might contain foreground objects of the current task. To
overcome this problem, a novel and efficient Augmented Box
Replay (ABR) method is developed that only stores and replays foreground objects and thereby circumvents the foreground shift problem. In addition, we propose an innovative Attentive RoI Distillation loss that uses spatial attention from region-of-interest (RoI) features to constrain current model to focus on the most important information from
old model. ABR significantly reduces forgetting of previous
classes while maintaining high plasticity in current classes.
Moreover, it considerably reduces the storage requirements
when compared to standard image replay. Comprehensive
experiments on Pascal-VOC and COCO datasets support
the state-of-the-art performance of our model 1 .

Background Shift

Task
Original Image

Person

Horse

Foreground Shift

Horse

Car

Person
Horse
Horse

Augmented
Box Replay

Cat

MixUp

Horse

Mosaic

Figure 1: Background Shift and Foreground Shift for image replay settings. For each task, only the new classes are
annotated while the other objects are considered as background (bkg). Moving from task t − 1 to task t, the definition of the bkg changes, referred to as background shift [8].
When current task samples are trained with exemplars from
previous tasks, another critical problem-Foreground Shift
occurs due to varying annotations of new classes between
new samples (person as foreground) and exemplars (person
as bkg) in the same task. Our augmented box replay method
resolves these problems by mixing previous objects in the
bkg of new images or fusing together for training.
models are typically designed to learn from data in a static
manner, assuming that all object classes are available at
once during training. In real-world scenarios, new object
classes may emerge over time, making it necessary to update the model with new data. The inability to learn incrementally is a significant limitation for object detectors,
particularly in cases of limited data storage capacity or data
privacy concerns [10, 45]. Therefore, developing incremental object detection (IOD) methods has become an essential
and challenging task in real-world applications.

11367

