This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-aware Image Generation using 2D Diffusion Models
Jianfeng Xiang*1,2 Jiaolong Yang2 Binbin Huang∗3 Xin Tong2
1
Tsinghua University 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 ShanghaiTech University
{t-jxiang,jiaoyan,xtong}@microsoft.com

huangbb@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Figure 1: Our diffusion-based 3D-aware image generation trained on ImageNet. The first three rows shows the diverse objects and scenes
generated by our method. The bottom row shows two cases synthesized under a 360◦ camera trajectory. (More results at project page)

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel 3D-aware image generation method that leverages 2D diffusion models. We
formulate the 3D-aware image generation task as multiview 2D image set generation, and further to a sequential
unconditional–conditional multiview image generation process. This allows us to utilize 2D diffusion models to boost
the generative modeling power of the method. Additionally,
we incorporate depth information from monocular depth estimators to construct the training data for the conditional
diffusion model using only still images.
We train our method on a large-scale unstructured 2D
image dataset, i.e., ImageNet, which is not addressed by
previous methods. It produces high-quality images that significantly outperform prior methods. Furthermore, our approach showcases its capability to generate instances with
large view angles, even though the training images are
diverse and unaligned, gathered from “in-the-wild” realworld environments. 1

1. Introduction
Learning to generate 3D contents has become an increasingly prominent task due to its numerous applications such
* Work done when JX and BH were interns at MSR.
1 Project page: https://jeffreyxiang.github.io/ivid/

as VR/AR, movie production, and art design. Recently, significant progress has been made in the field of 3D-aware
image generation, with a variety of approaches being proposed [4, 5, 7, 10, 30, 32, 43, 44, 54]. The goal of 3D-aware
image generation is to train image generation models that
are capable of explicitly controlling 3D camera pose, typically by using only unstructured 2D image collections.
Most existing methods for 3D-aware image generation
rely on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9] and
utilize a Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [25] or its variants
as the 3D scene representation. While promising results
have been demonstrated for object-level generation, extending these methods to large-scale, in-the-wild data that features significantly more complex variations in geometry and
appearance remains a challenge.
Diffusion Models (DMs) [13, 48, 50], on the other hand,
are increasingly gaining recognition for their exceptional
generative modeling performance on billion-scale image
datasets [33, 35, 37]. It has been shown that DMs have
surpassed GANs as the state-of-the-art models for complex
image generation tasks [8, 14, 15, 29]. However, applying
DMs to 3D-aware image generation tasks is not straightforward. Unlike 3D-aware GANs, training DMs for 3D generation necessitates raw 3D assets for its nature of regressionbased learning [24, 27, 28, 45, 56].
To take advantage of the potent capability of DMs and

2383

