Multiple Models Fitting as a Set Coverage Problem
Luca Magri
Computer Science Dept. - University of Verona
Strada Le Grazie, 15 - 37134 Verona, IT

Andrea Fusiello
DPIA - University of Udine
Via delle Scienze, 208, - 33100 Udine, IT

magri.luca.l@gmail.com

name.surname@uniud.it

Abstract
This paper deals with the extraction of multiple models from noisy or outlier-contaminated data. We cast the
multi-model fitting problem in terms of set coverage, deriving a simple and effective method that generalizes Ransac to
multiple models and deals with intersecting structures and
outliers in a straightforward and principled manner, while
avoiding the typical shortcomings of sequential approaches
and those of clustering. The method compares favorably
against the state-of-the-art on simulated and publicly available real data-sets.

1. Introduction
Finding a model (or structure) that fits data corrupted by
noise and outliers is an omnipresent problem in empirical
sciences, including Computer Vision. When multiple instances of the same structure are present in the data, the
problem has a chicken-and-egg pattern: in order to estimate
models one needs to first segment the data, and in order
to segment the data it is necessary to know which model
points belong to. Moreover, the presence of multiple structures strains robust estimation, because, in addition to rogue
points, the outliers to a structure of interest are all the inliers
to the other structures.
Among the wide range of methods proposed in Computer Vision to address the challenge of multiple models
geometric fitting, the analysis of consensus together with its
counterpart, the analysis of preferences, can be recognized
as leitmotifs recurring throughout the extensive literature on
the subject. The consensus set of a model is simply defined
as the set of points that are inliers to that model. Dually, the
preference set of a point is the set of models to which that
point is inlier. Most of the multi-model fitting techniques
proposed in the literature can be ascribed to one of these
two concepts, according to which horn of the chicken-eggdilemma is addressed first.
Consensus-based algorithms put the emphasis on the estimation part and focus on models that describe as many

points as possible. On the other hand, preference approaches concentrate on the segmentation side of the problem, and aim at finding a proper partition of the data, from
which model estimation follows.
Both approaches conceptually work on the consensus/preference matrix P defined as
(
1 if err(xi , θj ) < ǫ
P (i, j) =
(1)
0 otherwise
where xi ∈ X are data points, θj ∈ H tentative structures,
err a suitable error function and ǫ the inlier threshold. The
binary matrix P can be interpreted in several ways. It can be
regarded as the incidence matrix of an hyper-graph where
rows correspond to vertices and columns represent hyperedges; alternatively its rows, identified with preference sets,
can be interpreted as representations of data in high dimensional spaces. In both cases multi-model fitting boils down
to cluster analysis. Changing the perspective, columns of P
can be interpreted as consensus sets, whose cardinality is to
be maximized.
In the remaining of this section we shall track down the
path that, starting from consensus throughout preference
analysis, have been followed in the literature to address the
challenges of multiple structures recovery. For a review of
multi-model fitting from the perspective of the optimization
of a global energy functional the reader is referred to [9].

1.1. Consensus analysis
Consensus analysis stands out as one of the first efforts to
address robust model estimation. The methods belonging to
this category follow a common paradigm. At first the space
Θ of all the feasible structures is approximated as a suitable
finite hypothesis space H in different ways. Then a voting
procedure elects the structures in H that best explain the
data in terms of consensus.
The idea of exploiting consensus is at the core of the celebrated Ransac (Random Sample Consensus) and its variants (see [20] and references therein). A straightforward
generalization to multiple models is Sequential Ransac

3318

