Computational Imaging for VLBI Image Reconstruction
Katherine L. Bouman1
Michael D. Johnson2
Daniel Zoran1
Sheperd S. Doeleman2,3
William T. Freeman1,4
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, CSAIL

2

Harvard, Center for Astrophysics

3

Vincent L. Fish3

MIT Haystack Observatory

4

Google

Abstract
Very long baseline interferometry (VLBI) is a technique
for imaging celestial radio emissions by simultaneously observing a source from telescopes distributed across Earth.
The challenges in reconstructing images from fine angular
resolution VLBI data are immense. The data is extremely
sparse and noisy, thus requiring statistical image models
such as those designed in the computer vision community.
In this paper we present a novel Bayesian approach for
VLBI image reconstruction. While other methods often require careful tuning and parameter selection for different
types of data, our method (CHIRP) produces good results
under different settings such as low SNR or extended emission. The success of our method is demonstrated on realistic synthetic experiments as well as publicly available real
data. We present this problem in a way that is accessible to
members of the community, and provide a dataset website
(vlbiimaging.csail.mit.edu) that facilitates controlled comparisons across algorithms.

1. Introduction
High resolution celestial imaging is essential for
progress in astronomy and physics. For example, imaging the plasma surrounding a black hole’s event horizon at
high resolution could help answer many important questions; most notably, it may substantiate the existence of
black holes [10] as well as verify and test the effects of
general relativity [22]. Recently, there has been an international effort to create an Event Horizon Telescope (EHT)
capable of imaging a black hole’s event horizon for the first
time [12, 13]. The angular resolution necessary for this
observation is at least an order of magnitude smaller than
has been previously used to image radio sources [24]. As
measurements from the EHT become available, robust algorithms able to reconstruct images in this fine angular resolution regime will be necessary.
Although billions of dollars are spent on astronomical
imaging systems to acquire the best images, current reconstruction techniques suffer from unsophisticated priors and

(a) Telescope Locations

(b) Spatial Frequency Coverage

Figure 1. Frequency Coverage: (A) A sample of the telescope locations
in the EHT. By observing a source over the course of a day, we obtain measurements corresponding to elliptical tracks in the source image’s spatial
frequency plane (B). These frequencies, (u, v), are the projected baseline
lengths orthogonal to a telescope pair’s light of sight. Points of the same
color correspond to measurements from the same telescope pair.

a lack of inverse modeling [36], resulting in sub-optimal images. Image processing, restoration, sophisticated inference
algorithms, and the study of non-standard cameras are all
active areas of computer vision. The computer vision community’s extensive work in these areas are invaluable to the
success of these reconstruction methods and can help push
the limits of celestial imaging. [16, 17, 27, 43].
Imaging distant celestial sources with high resolving
power (i.e. fine angular resolution) requires single-dish
telescopes with prohibitively large diameters due to the inverse relationship between angular resolution and telescope
diameter [41]. For example, it is predicted that emission
surrounding the black hole at the center of the Milky Way
subtends ≈ 2.5 × 10−10 radians [15]. Imaging this emission with a 10−10 radian resolution at a 1.3 mm wavelength
would require a telescope with a 13000 km diameter. Although a single telescope this large is unrealizable, by simultaneously collecting data from an array of telescopes
located around the Earth, it is possible to emulate samples
from a single telescope with a diameter equal to the maximum distance between telescopes in the array. Using multiple telescopes in this manner is referred to as very long
baseline interferometry (VLBI) [41]. Refer to Figure 1a.

913

