Monocular Depth Estimation Using Neural Regression Forest
Anirban Roy
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331

Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331

royani@eecs.oregonstate.edu

sinisa@eecs.oregonstate.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a novel deep architecture, called
neural regression forest (NRF), for depth estimation from
a single image. NRF combines random forests and convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Scanning windows extracted from the image represent samples which are passed
down the trees of NRF for predicting their depth. At every
tree node, the sample is filtered with a CNN associated with
that node. Results of the convolutional filtering are passed
to left and right children nodes, i.e., corresponding CNNs,
with a Bernoulli probability, until the leaves, where depth
estimations are made. CNNs at every node are designed
to have fewer parameters than seen in recent work, but
their stacked processing along a path in the tree effectively
amounts to a deeper CNN. NRF allows for parallelizable
training of all “shallow” CNNs, and efficient enforcing of
smoothness in depth estimation results. Our evaluation on
the benchmark Make3D and NYUv2 datasets demonstrates
that NRF outperforms the state of the art, and gracefully
handles gradually decreasing training datasets.

1. Introduction
This paper address one of the basic vision problems, that
of estimating depth from a single monocular image. Our
goal is to predict the continuous depth values of every pixel.
The image may show a natural outdoor scene with continuous depth values ranging from a few to 80 meters, or an
indoor cluttered living space with continuous depths ranging between 0 and 10 meters, as shown in Fig. 1.
This problem is challenging, since there may be many
distinct 3D scenes depicted in the same 2D image. Also,
histograms of depths in typical outdoor and indoor scenes
are “peaky” (Fig. 1). Hence, it is very likely that a training set may under-represent or simply not have examples of
certain depth values, which could appear in test data.
To address these challenges, prior work typically uses
graphical models for enforcing smoothness and taking into
account spatial context in depth estimation [21, 22, 1, 14,

Figure 1. Depth histograms extracted from two benchmark
datasets: Make3D dataset [22] (left), and NYUv2 dataset [18]
(right). Depth values are in meters.

12]. More recent work resorts to convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [6, 15]. CNNs are appealing as they can
efficiently incorporate multiscale contextual cues, in a feedforward manner. However, one of the major bottlenecks of
using CNNs for depth estimation is that their training typically requires big data. As Fig. 1 illustrates, both indoor
and outdoor scenes may not have a sufficient number of examples of certain depth values, which makes the training of
CNNs challenging.
In this paper, we present a novel deep architecture, called
neural regression forest (NRF), for monocular depth estimation. As shown in Fig. 2, NRF combines CNNs with
Regression Forest [5, 3] for predicting depths in the continuous domain via regression. Robustness is achieved by
processing a data sample with an ensemble of binary regression trees, which we call Convolutional Regression Trees
(CRTs). We fuse individual regression results of every CRT
into a final depth estimation.
Our approach scans a window x across every pixel location, and passes x down the CRTs for predicting the depth
of the scanning-window’s center. At every node of CRT,
x is filtered with a CNN associated with that node, and
then passed to left and right children nodes (i.e., CNNs)
with a Bernoulli probability for further convolutional processing, until x reaches leaves of the tree. The probability
that x reaches a particular leaf is equal to the product of all
Bernoulli probabilities along the data’s path from the root to
that leaf. The sample undergoes the same procedure in other
CRTs of NRF. Finally, depth estimations made in every leaf
are weighted with the corresponding path probabilities for
15506

