Mirror Surface Reconstruction under an Uncalibrated Camera
Kai Han1 , Kwan-Yee K. Wong1 , Dirk Schnieders1 , Miaomiao Liu2
1
The University of Hong Kong∗, Hong Kong,
2
NICTA† and CECS, ANU, Canberra
1

{khan, kykwong, sdirk}@cs.hku.hk, 2 miaomiao.liu@nicta.com.au

Abstract
M
X0

This paper addresses the problem of mirror surface reconstruction, and a solution based on observing the reflections of a moving reference plane on the mirror surface is
proposed. Unlike previous approaches which require tedious work to calibrate the camera, our method can recover
both the camera intrinsics and extrinsics together with the
mirror surface from reflections of the reference plane under
at least three unknown distinct poses. Our previous work
has demonstrated that 3D poses of the reference plane can
be registered in a common coordinate system using reflection correspondences established across images. This leads
to a bunch of registered 3D lines formed from the reflection correspondences. Given these lines, we first derive an
analytical solution to recover the camera projection matrix
through estimating the line projection matrix. We then optimize the camera projection matrix by minimizing reprojection errors computed based on a cross-ratio formulation.
The mirror surface is finally reconstructed based on the optimized cross-ratio constraint. Experimental results on both
synthetic and real data are presented, which demonstrate
the feasibility and accuracy of our method.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction of diffuse surfaces has enjoyed
tremendous success. Diffuse surfaces reflect light from a
single incident ray to many rays in all directions, resulting
in a constant appearance regardless of the observer’s viewpoint. Methods for diffuse surface reconstruction can therefore rely on the appearance of the object.
This paper considers mirror surfaces, which exhibit specular reflections and whose appearances are a reflection of
the surrounding environment. Under specular reflection, an
∗ This project is supported by a grant from the Research Grant Council
of the Hong Kong (SAR), China, under the project HKU 718113E.
† NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as represented by the
Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy and
the ARC through the ICT Centre of Excellence program.

X1
X2

m
x0
x2 x1

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) A stationary uncalibrated camera observing
the reflections of a reference plane undergoing an unknown
motion. (b) Surface points can be recovered using the crossratio between a surface point M and its reflection correspondences {X0 , X1 , X2 }.

incoming ray is reflected to a single outgoing ray. This special characteristic leads to different appearances of the mirror surface under different viewpoints, and renders diffuse
surface reconstruction methods useless. Meanwhile, there
exist many objects with a mirror surface in the man-made
environment. The study of mirror surface reconstruction is
therefore an important problem in computer vision.
In this paper, we assume the mirror surface reflect a light
ray only once, and tackle the mirror surface reconstruction
problem by adopting a common approach of introducing
motion to the environment. Unlike previous methods which
require a fully calibrated camera and known motion, we
propose a novel solution based on observing the reflections
of a reference plane undergoing an unknown motion with a
stationary uncalibrated camera (see Fig. 1(a)).
2D correspondences between the image and the reference plane are established by displaying a sweeping line
on the plane (we use a computer screen as the reference
plane in practice). The relative poses of the reference plane
are then estimated [16], and rays piercing the plane under
different poses are determined for each image point on the
mirror surface.
Given the rays and their corresponding image points, we
11772

