Top-push Video-based Person Re-identiﬁcation
Jinjie You†,‡ , Ancong Wu†,‡ , Xiang Li†,‡ , and Wei-Shi Zheng∗†,§,‡
†
Intelligence Science and System Lab, Sun Yat-sen University, China
§
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
‡
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computational Science, China
youjinjie9@gmail.com, wuancong@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
lixiang651@gmail.com, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Most existing person re-identification (re-id) models focus on matching still person images across disjoint camera views. Since only limited information can be exploited
from still images, it is hard (if not impossible) to overcome
the occlusion, pose and camera-view change, and lighting
variation problems. In comparison, video-based re-id methods can utilize extra space-time information, which contains much more rich cues for matching to overcome the
mentioned problems. However, we find that when using
video-based representation, some inter-class difference can
be much more obscure than the one when using still-imagebased representation, because different people could not
only have similar appearance but also have similar motions and actions which are hard to align. To solve this problem, we propose a top-push distance learning model (TDL),
in which we integrate a top-push constrain for matching
video features of persons. The top-push constraint enforces
the optimization on top-rank matching in re-id, so as to
make the matching model more effective towards selecting
more discriminative features to distinguish different persons. Our experiments show that the proposed video-based reid framework outperforms the state-of-the-art video-based
re-id methods.

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (re-id) matches persons across
non-overlapping camera views at different time. Most existing works focus on matching still images represented
by appearance features (e.g. color histograms), because of
computation efﬁciency and limited storage space. Given
a probe image, we match it against a set of gallery images, which may suffer from illumination change, viewpoint difference, complicated background and occlusions.
∗ Corresponding author

Image Frame

Image Frame

Wrong
Matching:
Occlusion in
Matching

Person Video

Person Video

Video: Occlusion alleviated by video cues

Figure 1. Video instances vs. still-image instances of the same person. It is clear that video contains much richer cues for matching.

The signiﬁcant visual ambiguity and appearance variation
make still-image-based person re-id a challenging problem.
Many methods have been developed to either extract invariant features or learn discriminative matching models
[6, 32, 7, 4, 25, 43, 14, 29, 40, 27, 13, 38, 20, 28, 16, 39,
24, 26, 37, 17, 1, 21, 33, 3].
However, the still-image-based person re-id indicates
that the temporal information between images of a person
in each camera view is ignored. Information of a still image
is sometimes not enough for recognizing a person, e.g. the
person being occluded by objects or other persons (see Figure 1 for example). As surveillance information is recorded
by videos and human operators always recognize persons
in videos, it is intuitive to mine more effective information
in video re-id. What more information can we obtain from
videos than still images? Firstly, video is an image sequence
containing space-time information, in which motion information is available. Secondly, appearance cues are more
abundant in a sequence than in a still image, which can facilitate extracting more robust appearance features. Thirdly, occlusion and background inﬂuence can be eliminated to
some extent. In a sequence, background variation and occlusion can be regarded as removable noises, while in still
images they are troubling interferences.
Although more information can be obtained from per-

1345

