A Holistic Approach to Cross-Channel Image Noise Modeling
and its Application to Image Denoising
Seonghyeon Nam*
Yonsei University

Youngbae Hwang*
KETI

Abstract
Modelling and analyzing noise in images is a fundamental task in many computer vision systems. Traditionally, noise has been modelled per color channel assuming that the color channels are independent. Although the
color channels can be considered as mutually independent
in camera RAW images, signals from different color channels get mixed during the imaging process inside the camera due to gamut mapping, tone-mapping, and compression.
We show the influence of the in-camera imaging pipeline on
noise and propose a new noise model in the 3D RGB space
to accounts for the color channel mix-ups. A data-driven
approach for determining the parameters of the new noise
model is introduced as well as its application to image denoising. The experiments show that our noise model represents the noise in regular JPEG images more accurately
compared to the previous models and is advantageous in
image denoising.

1. Introduction
Noise is one of the most fundamental problems in computer vision and image processing. In computer vision literature, many works mention noise as one of the main sources
that explain the error of their systems and emphasize the necessity of establishing robustness against noise. But what
really is image noise and how can we explain it?
Informally, noise explains the uncertainty of the light
measurement in an image. A low noise value would indicate that the observed intensity value is highly likely to be
the ground truth intensity and vice versa. Since many computer vision algorithms rely on accurate light measurement,
it is important to have a noise model that explains the properties of image noise accurately.
What is interesting is that all of the existing image noise
models fall short of explaining what is really happening
to noise in the images that most people (both regular consumers and vision researchers) use today - JPEG images
* Authors contributed equally to this work.

Yasuyuki Matsushita
Osaka University

Seon Joo Kim
Yonsei University

in the sRGB color space. A key assumption used in existing noise models is that the noise is independent between
different color channels. While this channel independency
is valid for linear vision cameras or RAW images, which
are unprocessed sensor-level measurements, the assumption
breaks down as the R,G,B values are heavily mixed during the in-camera image processing [3, 15]. Furthermore,
image compression, typically in JPEG format, significantly
affects the noise characteristics; however, the effect of the
compression noise has not been explicitly considered in the
past1 .
This work attempts to seek deeper understanding about
image noise and to come up with a better explanation about
the noise compared to the previous noise models. Previous
noise models either only fit to a limited number of cases,
or they were only validated with synthetic images created
with their own models. Even in the image denoising works,
the quantitative performance of denoising is evaluated with
synthetic images created with a per channel independent
Gaussian model [5], which does not describe the noise in
real photographs as we will see later in this paper. Therefore, we argue for a new image noise model that better explains the properties of noise in images that most people use
today.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We provide observations and analysis on the effect of
the in-camera imaging process on noise and introduce
a new cross-channel noise model. We develop a colordepenent noise model in the 3D RGB space that can
simultaneously take into account the correlation between the color channels and the JPEG compression
effect.
• We further propose a data-driven approach for automatically determining the noise in the 3D RGB space
from observed color images. Specifically, we use a
simple multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to infer the parameters of the noise model. Note that we use the neu1 Note that our problem is to analyze the effect of compression on the
noise level, which is different from dealing with the blocky JPEG noise or
artifacts[18].

1683

