Joint Training of Cascaded CNN for Face Detection
Hongwei Qin1,2 Junjie Yan3,4 Xiu Li1,2 Xiaolin Hu3
1
Grad. School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University 2 Dept. of Automation, Tsinghua University
3
Dept. of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University 4 SenseTime
{qhw12@mails., li.xiu@sz., xlhu@}tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Cascade has been widely used in face detection, where
classifier with low computation cost can be firstly used to
shrink most of the background while keeping the recall. The
cascade in detection is popularized by seminal Viola-Jones
framework and then widely used in other pipelines, such
as DPM and CNN. However, to our best knowledge, most
of the previous detection methods use cascade in a greedy
manner, where previous stages in cascade are fixed when
training a new stage. So optimizations of different CNNs are
isolated. In this paper, we propose joint training to achieve
end-to-end optimization for CNN cascade. We show that
the back propagation algorithm used in training CNN can
be naturally used in training CNN cascade. We present how
jointly training can be conducted on naive CNN cascade
and more sophisticated region proposal network (RPN) and
fast R-CNN. Experiments on face detection benchmarks verify the advantages of the joint training.

1. Introduction
Face detection plays an important role in face based image analysis and is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision. The performances of various face based applications, from face identification and verification to face
clustering, tagging and retrieval, rely on accurate and efficient face detection. Recent works in face detection focus
on faces in uncontrolled setting, which is challenging due
to the variations in subject level (e.g., a face can have many
different poses), category level (e.g., adult and baby) and
image level (e.g., illumination and cluttered background).
Given a novel image I, the face detector is expected
to return a bounding box configuration B = (bi , ci ){N } ,
where the bi and ci specify the localization and confidence
of a face. The number of detected faces N always vary in
different images. Considering that the bi can possibly appear in any scale and position, the face detection problem
2
, where w and h denote
has a output space of size (w∗h)
2

yanjunjie@outlook.com

width and height respectively. Considering that it can be
(500∗350)2
≈ 1010 for a typical 500 × 350 image, it is actu2
ally impossible to evaluate them all at a acceptable cost. Actually, only a few of them correspond to faces and most of
the configurations in the output space belongs to the background.
The previous face detection research can be seen as a history of more efficiently sampling the output space to a solvable scale and more effectively evaluating per configuration.
One natural idea to achieve this is using cascade, where
classifier with low computation cost can be firstly used to
shrink background while keeping the faces. The pioneering work [27] popularized this, which combined classifiers
in different stages, to allow background regions quickly
discarded while spending more computation on promising
face-like regions. The cascade made efficient detection possible and was widely used in subsequent works. For example, two other detection pipelines DPM [6] and CNN [16]
can both use cascade for acceleration.
Despite the efficiency in testing, the cascade based detectors are always trained greedily. In a typical training procedure, when training a new stage in the cascade, previous
stages are fixed. The relationship of different stages lies
in that each stage is trained with the hard training samples
which pass through previous stages. It makes the greedily trained cascade not end-to-end optimal with respect to
the final detection score. It leads to performance drop when
compared with non-cascade methods. For example, the cascade version of DPM [6] does not as accurate as the original
version [7].
In this paper, we show that in CNN based cascade detection, other than enjoying the advantages in efficiency as
traditional cascade, different stages in the cascade can be
jointly trained to achieve better performance. We show that
the back propagation algorithm used in training CNN can be
naturally used in training CNN cascade. Joint training can
be conducted on naive CNN cascade and more sophisticated
cascade such as region proposal network (RPN) and fast RCNN. We show that the jointly trained cascade CNN as well
as the jointly trained RPN and fast R-CNN can achieve lead-

3456

