Self-Adaptive Matrix Completion for Heart Rate Estimation
from Face Videos under Realistic Conditions
Sergey Tulyakov1 , Xavier Alameda-Pineda1 , Elisa Ricci2,3 , Lijun Yin4 , Jeffrey F. Cohn5,6 , Nicu Sebe1
1

University of Trento, Via Sommarive 9, 38123 Trento, Italy
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Via Sommarive 18, 38123 Trento, Italy
3
University of Perugia, Via Duranti 93, 06123, Perugia, Italy
4
State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, NY 13902, USA
5
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
6
Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
{sergey.tulyakov,xavier.alamedapineda,niculae.sebe}@unitn.it,
2

eliricci@fbk.eu, lijun@cs.binghamton.edu, jeffcohn@pitt.edu

Abstract
Recent studies in computer vision have shown that,
while practically invisible to a human observer, skin color
changes due to blood flow can be captured on face videos
and, surprisingly, be used to estimate the heart rate (HR).
While considerable progress has been made in the last few
years, still many issues remain open. In particular, stateof-the-art approaches are not robust enough to operate in
natural conditions (e.g. in case of spontaneous movements,
facial expressions, or illumination changes). Opposite to
previous approaches that estimate the HR by processing all
the skin pixels inside a fixed region of interest, we introduce a strategy to dynamically select face regions useful for
robust HR estimation. Our approach, inspired by recent advances on matrix completion theory, allows us to predict
the HR while simultaneously discover the best regions of
the face to be used for estimation. Thorough experimental
evaluation conducted on public benchmarks suggests that
the proposed approach significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art HR estimation methods in naturalistic conditions.

1. Introduction
After being shown in [23, 18] that changes invisible to
the naked eye can be used to estimate the heart rate from
a video of human skin, this topic has attracted a lot of attention in the computer vision community. These subtle
changes encompass both color [27] and motion [4] and they
are induced by the internal functioning of the heart. Since
faces appear frequently in videos and due to recent and sig-

Time

Figure 1. Motivation: Given a video sequence, automatic HR estimation from facial features is challenging due to target motion
and facial expressions. Facial features extracted over time in different parts of the face (purple rectangles) show different temporal
dynamics and are subject to noise, as they are heavily affected by
movements and illumination changes. In this paper, we propose a
novel approach to simultaneously estimate the HR signal and select the reliable face regions at each time for robust HR prediction.

nificant improvements in face tracking and alignment methods [3, 21, 13, 14, 29], facial-based remote heart rate estimation has recently become very popular [17, 30, 10, 25].
Classical approaches successfully addressed this problem under laboratory-controlled conditions, i.e. imposing
constraints on the subject’s movements and requiring the
absence of facial expressions and mimics [18, 27, 4]. Therefore, such methods may not be suitable for real world applications, such as monitoring drivers inside a vehicle or people exercising. Long-time analysis constitutes a further limitation of existing works [17, 18, 19]. Indeed, instead of es12396

