Macroscopic Interferometry:
Rethinking Depth Estimation with Frequency-Domain Time-of-Flight

Achuta Kadambi, Jamie Schiel, and Ramesh Raskar
MIT Media Lab
{achoo,schiel,raskar}@mit.edu

Abstract
A form of meter-scale, macroscopic interferometry is
proposed using conventional time-of-flight (ToF) sensors.
Today, ToF sensors use phase-based sampling, where the
phase delay between emitted and received, high-frequency
signals encodes distance. This paper examines an alternative ToF architecture, inspired by micron-scale, microscopic
interferometry, that relies only on frequency sampling: we
refer to our proposed macroscopic technique as FrequencyDomain Time of Flight (FD-ToF). The proposed architecture offers several benefits over existing phase ToF systems,
such as robustness to phase wrapping and implicit resolution of multi-path interference, all while capturing the same
number of subframes. A prototype camera is constructed to
demonstrate macroscopic interferometry at meter scale.

challenging in environments with, for example, multi-path
interference. Phase is also periodic, meaning that it will
wrap beyond a certain distance and create ambiguities in
true object depths. Many workarounds have been proposed,
but phase ToF still remains sensitive to multi-path, wrapping at extreme distances, and low levels of signal-to-noiseratio (SNR).

1.1. Contributions
Inspired by optical coherence tomography (OCT), this
paper recasts depth estimation into a macroscopic architecture, dubbed Frequency-Domain ToF (FD-ToF), avoiding
several limitations with existing ToF cameras:
• Long-range objects that would ordinarily phase-wrap,
can be ranged with no additional processing.
• Multi-path interference can be easily filtered with standard methods, such as Fourier Transformations, without need for increased sampling.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) cameras capture the depth of
objects over a spatial field. The recent emergence of lowcost, full-frame 3D cameras, such as Microsoft’s Kinect,
have facilitated many new applications in diverse areas
of computer vision and graphics. These advances continue to drive demands for faster, more accurate, and more
information-rich 3D systems that can operate outside of
controlled environments.
Time of flight (ToF) cameras contain an active lightsource that strobes coded patterns into a scene. The optical
signal returning to the sensor exhibits a shift in phase corresponding to the propagation distance of the signal, which
allows object depth to be calculated. This pervasive architecture, used in devices such as the Microsoft Kinect and
Google Tango, is referred to as “phase ToF”.
All phase ToF cameras rely on phase-sensing to determine object depths. Accurate estimation of phase becomes

• Ranging is possible in environments with extremely
low SNR.
• Drawing from existing theories in OCT, this paper provides a theoretical bound for multi-path separation.

2. Related Work
The connections between early techniques in interferometry, radar, and ToF imaging are well-known. In the 1990’s,
development of the modern ToF camera was inspired by
the Michelson interferometer (see [26] for a historical
overview). However, ToF range imaging has diverged from
interferometric techniques, with little cross-pollination of
ideas over the last decade. While recent work has linked
ToF cameras with various radar systems [39]. In comparison, this paper aims to connect Frequency-Domain OCT
to a complementary depth sensing architecture, FrequencyDomain ToF.
1893

