Trace Quotient Meets Sparsity: A Method for Learning Low Dimensional Image
Representations
Xian Wei, Hao Shen, Martin Kleinsteuber
Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology
Technische Universität München, Arcisstr. 21, 80333 Munich, Germany
{xian.wei, hao.shen, kleinsteuber}@tum.de

Abstract
This paper presents an algorithm that allows to learn low
dimensional representations of images in an unsupervised
manner. The core idea is to combine two criteria that play
important roles in unsupervised representation learning,
namely sparsity and trace quotient. The former is known
to be a convenient tool to identify underlying factors, and
the latter is known as a disentanglement of underlying discriminative factors. In this work, we develop a generic cost
function for learning jointly a sparsifying dictionary and a
dimensionality reduction transformation. It leads to several counterparts of classic low dimensional representation
methods, such as Principal Component Analysis, Local Linear Embedding, and Laplacian Eigenmap. Our proposed
optimisation algorithm leverages the efficiency of geometric
optimisation on Riemannian manifolds and a closed form
solution to the elastic net problem.

1. Introduction
Finding appropriate low dimensional representations of
data is a long-standing challenging problem in data processing and machine learning. Recent development in representation learning shows that appropriate data representations
are the key to the success of machine learning algorithms,
as different representations can entangle different explanatory information of the data, cf. [4]. The aim of this paper is to construct effective low dimensional representation
learning approaches to disentangle various explanatory or
discriminative information in the data for solving unsupervised learning problems.
Sparse representation (SR) was developed as an instrument to leverage the underlying sparse structure of data. It
has led to a great success in signal reconstruction, denoising
and image super-resolution, cf. [2, 9, 16, 31]. These methods can be considered as data-driven sparse representation
approaches. On the other hand, sparse coefficients can also

be interpreted as features that are suitable for the tasks of
learning, such as face recognition [29], subspace clustering
[11], and image classification [26].
Furthermore, it is also evidential that sparse representation of the data can be further processed by applying other
disentangling instruments, in order to reveal task-related information. For example, the work in [32, 33] incorporates
linear classifiers with sparse representation to jointly learn
a sparsifying dictionary and a classifier. Similarly, adopting
sparse representations in a classical expected risk minimisation formulation leads to the so-called task-driven dictionary learning approaches, specifically for supervised learning tasks, cf. [24]. In the unsupervised learning setting,
directly applying a Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
on sparse representations also results in promising performance in 3D visualisation and clustering, cf. [12]. From a
perspective of representation learning, it is a logical conclusion that sparse representations contain rich distributed information of the data with respect to certain learning tasks,
and it also necessitates application of further learning mechanisms to disentangle the underlying explanatory information.
In this work, we are interested in the problem of unsupervised learning. Among various unsupervised learning techniques, the trace quotient criterion is a simple but powerful
instrument for data discrimination, in particular for Dimensionality Reduction (DR). This generic criterion is shared
by various classic DR methods, such as PCA, Linear Local
Embedding (LLE) [25], Orthogonal Neighbourhood Preserving Projection (ONPP) [22], Locality Preserving Projections (LPP) [17], and Orthogonal LPP (OLPP) [7]. Our
main construction in this work is to apply the trace quotient criterion to further disentangle sparse representations
for unsupervised learning tasks.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 provides
a brief review on both sparse representations and the trace
quotient criterion. In Section 3, we construct a generic cost
function for learning both the sparsifying dictionary and
the orthogonal DR transformation, and develop a geomet4321
5268

