3D Action Recognition from Novel Viewpoints
Hossein Rahmani, and Ajmal Mian
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, The University of Western Australia
hossein@csse.uwa.edu.au, ajmal.mian@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
We propose a human pose representation model that
transfers human poses acquired from different unknown
views to a view-invariant high-level space. The model is
a deep convolutional neural network and requires a large
corpus of multiview training data which is very expensive
to acquire. Therefore, we propose a method to generate this
data by fitting synthetic 3D human models to real motion
capture data and rendering the human poses from numerous viewpoints. While learning the CNN model, we do not
use action labels but only the pose labels after clustering all
training poses into k clusters. The proposed model is able
to generalize to real depth images of unseen poses without
the need for re-training or fine-tuning. Real depth videos
are passed through the model frame-wise to extract viewinvariant features. For spatio-temporal representation, we
propose group sparse Fourier Temporal Pyramid which robustly encodes the action specific most discriminative output features of the proposed human pose model. Experiments on two multiview and three single-view benchmark
datasets show that the proposed method dramatically outperforms existing state-of-the-art in action recognition.

1. Introduction
Video based human action recognition is challenging because significant intra-action variations exist due to changes
in viewpoint, illumination, visual appearance (such as color
and texture of clothing), scale (due to different human body
sizes or distances from the camera), background and speed
of performing an action. Some challenges have been simplified by the use of real-time depth cameras (e.g. Kinect)
that capture the texture and illumination invariant human
body shape and simplify human segmentation. However,
variations due to viewpoint remains a major challenge and
is explicitly addressed in this paper.
Many methods [23, 31, 34, 36–38, 44, 47, 48, 55–57, 63,
67, 68, 74] have been proposed which achieve impressive
action recognition results when videos are acquired from a
common viewpoint. However, their performance degrades
sharply under viewpoint changes [38, 39, 60]. This is because the same human pose appears quite different when

observed from different viewpoints. To cope with this problem, view-invariant approaches [17, 39–42, 54, 59, 60] have
been recently proposed for action recognition in videos acquired from novel views. Most of these methods operate
on RGB videos [17, 20, 41, 42, 60] or skeleton data [54, 59].
Joints extraction methods are inaccurate and sometimes fail
when subject is not in the upright or frontal view position [39, 64]. Moreover, view-invariant information can be
more reliably extracted from depth videos [39]. For instance, [39, 40] have achieved higher accuracy by extracting view-invariant local spatio-temporal features from depth
videos. However, their performance is limited by the discriminative power of the local features [60].
To overcome these drawbacks, we propose a depth video
based cross-view action recognition method that consists
of two main steps: (1) learning a general view-invariant
human pose model from synthetic depth images, and (2)
modeling the temporal action variations. The former is a
deep CNN which represents different human body shapes
and poses observed from numerous viewpoints in a viewinvariant high-level space. However, learning such a model
requires a large corpus of training data containing a large
number of human body poses observed from many viewpoints. Such data is not publicly available and is very expensive to acquire and label. Our solution is to generate
the training data synthetically but in the most realistically
possible way. To achieve this, we fit realistic synthetic 3D
human models to real mocap data [2] and then render each
pose from a large number of viewpoints as shown in Fig. 1.
We learn a single model for all poses and views without using action labels and show that our model generalizes
to real depth images of unseen human poses acquired from
novel views without re-training or fine-tuning. Our learned
model operates on a frame by frame basis transferring human pose in each frame to a high-level view-invariant representation. Our motivation for using a frame based CNN
model comes from the findings [21] that a single frame
model performs equally well as the multiframe CNN model.
Since actions are performed over a period of time, modeling the temporal structure of videos is performed in the next
stage. Many methods [15, 41, 51, 60] model the temporal
11506

