Robust, Real-Time 3D Tracking of Multiple Objects with Similar Appearances
Taiki Sekii
Panasonic System Networks R&D Lab. Co., Ltd.
sekii.taiki@jp.panasonic.com

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel method for tracking multiple moving objects and recovering their three-dimensional
(3D) models separately using multiple calibrated cameras.
For robustly tracking objects with similar appearances, the
proposed method uses geometric information regarding 3D
scene structure rather than appearance. A major limitation
of previous techniques is foreground confusion, in which
the shapes of objects and/or ghosting artifacts are ignored
and are hence not appropriately specified in foreground regions. To overcome this limitation, our method classifies
foreground voxels into targets (objects and artifacts) in each
frame using a novel, probabilistic two-stage framework.
This is accomplished by step-wise application of a track
graph describing how targets interact and the maximum a
posteriori expectation-maximization algorithm for the estimation of target parameters. We introduce mixture models
with semiparametric component distributions regarding 3D
target shapes. In order to not confuse artifacts with objects of interest, we automatically detect and track artifacts
based on a closed-world assumption. Experimental results
show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art trackers
on seven public sequences while achieving real-time performance.

(a) APIDIS dataset.

(b) LEAF-2 sequence.

Figure 1: 3D models of objects separately recovered using
the proposed method (cf. § 5).
models of multiple objects on a standard desktop PC, as
shown in Fig. 1.

1.1. Related works

1. Introduction
Multiple object tracking has long been an important task
in computer vision research. It has broad applications such
as surveillance, sports analysis, and human-computer interaction and is available in various types, depending on the
final goal and the assumptions made:
• Track objects from one or more cameras.
• Track objects offline or online.
This paper focuses on online tracking of multiple objects and takes advantage of multiple cameras to deal with
crowded scenes exhibiting objects and occlusions with significant density. In such a scenario, we pursue real-time performance for separately recovering three-dimensional (3D)

We review not only existing multiple object trackers using multiple cameras but also previous works that involve
separately recovering 3D models of multiple objects. In
the initial tracking steps (TSs), most conventional works extract foreground information regarding foreground moving
objects, e.g., foreground voxels, foreground point crowds,
and object presence likelihood maps at discretized locations. This information is typically obtained by projecting
or accumulating detection responses from each camera in a
common 3D space [6, 11, 15, 18, 19, 22, 24, 26] or twodimensional (2D) plane [8, 10, 13, 16, 17, 21] in which
objects move. These detection responses are generally acquired using either object detectors or standard background
subtraction techniques [25]. Foreground information defined in a 2D space (2DFI) tends to generate more artifacts

4275

