TenSR: Multi-Dimensional Tensor Sparse Representation
Na Qi1 , Yunhui Shi1 , Xiaoyan Sun2 , Baocai Yin13
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Intelligent Software Technology,
College of Metropolitan Transportation, Beijing University of Technology
q1987n@emails.bjut.edu.cn, syhzm@bjut.edu.cn
2

Microsoft Research

xysun@microsoft.com

3

Faculty of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering,
Dalian University of Technology
ybc@bjut.edu.cn

Abstract
The conventional sparse model relies on data representation in the form of vectors. It represents the vector-valued
or vectorized one dimensional (1D) version of an signal as
a highly sparse linear combination of basis atoms from a
large dictionary. The 1D modeling, though simple, ignores
the inherent structure and breaks the local correlation inside multidimensional (MD) signals. It also dramatically
increases the demand of memory as well as computational
resources especially when dealing with high dimensional
signals. In this paper, we propose a new sparse model
TenSR based on tensor for MD data representation along
with the corresponding MD sparse coding and MD dictionary learning algorithms. The proposed TenSR model is
able to well approximate the structure in each mode inherent in MD signals with a series of adaptive separable structure dictionaries via dictionary learning. The proposed MD
sparse coding algorithm by proximal method further reduces the computational cost significantly. Experimental
results with real world MD signals, i.e. 3D Multi-spectral
images, show the proposed TenSR greatly reduces both the
computational and memory costs with competitive performance in comparison with the state-of-the-art sparse representation methods. We believe our proposed TenSR model
is a promising way to empower the sparse representation
especially for large scale high order signals.

1. Introduction
In the past decade, sparse representation has been widely
used in a variety of tasks in computer vision such as image
denoising [10, 7, 22, 8], image super-resolution [37, 33, 36],
face recognition [34, 39], and pattern recognition [16, 13].
Generally speaking, a classic sparse model represents a
vector-valued signal by a linear combination of certain

atoms of an overcomplete dictionary. Higher-order signals
(e.g. images and videos) need to be dealt with primarily by
vectorizing them and applying any of the available vector
techniques [29]. Researches on the conventional one dimensional (1D) sparse representation include the proposal
of 1D sparse model [4, 9], sparse coding [23, 32, 3], and
dictionary learning algorithms [1, 18]. Though simple, the
1D sparse model suffers from high memory as well as high
computational costs especially when handling high dimensional data since the vectorized data will be quite long and
must be measured using very large sampling matrices.
Recent research has demonstrated the advantages of
maintaining the higher-order data in their original form
[31, 26, 14, 40, 24, 29, 27, 6]. For image data, the two
dimensional (2D) sparse model is proposed to make use
of the intrinsic 2D structure and local correlations within
images and has been applied to image denoising [26] and
super-resolution [25]. The 2D dictionary learning problem is solved by the two-phase block-coordinate-relaxation
approach. Given the 2D dictionaries, the 1D sparse coding algorithms are extended to solve the 2D sparse coding
problem [12, 11] or converted to 1D problem and solved
via the kronecker product [26]. By learning 2D dictionaries for images, the 2D sparse model helps to greatly reduce
the time complexity and memory cost for image processing [26, 14, 25]. On the other hand, the 2D sparse model is
difficult to be extended for multidimensional (MD) sparse
modeling due to the use of 1D sparse coding method.
Tensors are also introduced in the sparse representation
of vectors to approximate the structure in each mode of MD
signals. Due to the equivalence of the constrained Tucker
model and the Kronecker representation of a tensor, the tensor is assumed to be represented by separable given dictionaries, known as Kronecker dictionaries, with a sparsity
constraint, such as multi-way sparsity and block sparsity
[5]. The corresponding Kroneker-OMP and N-way Block
15916

