Beyond Local Search: Tracking Objects Everywhere with Instance-Specific
Proposals
Gao Zhu1 , Fatih Porikli1,2,3 , and Hongdong Li1,3
Australian National University1 and NICTA2
ARC Centre of Excellence for Robotic Vision3
{gao.zhu,fatih.porikli,hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au ∗

Abstract
Most tracking-by-detection methods employ a local
search window around the predicted object location in the
current frame assuming the previous location is accurate,
the trajectory is smooth, and the computational capacity
permits a search radius that can accommodate the maximum speed yet small enough to reduce mismatches. These,
however, may not be valid always, in particular for fast
and irregularly moving objects. Here, we present an object tracker that is not limited to a local search window and
has ability to probe efficiently the entire frame. Our method
generates a small number of “high-quality” proposals by
a novel instance-specific objectness measure and evaluates
them against the object model that can be adopted from an
existing tracking-by-detection approach as a core tracker.
During the tracking process, we update the object model
concentrating on hard false-positives supplied by the proposals, which help suppressing distractors caused by difficult background clutters, and learn how to re-rank proposals according to the object model. Since we reduce significantly the number of hypotheses the core tracker evaluates,
we can use richer object descriptors and stronger detector.
Our method outperforms most recent state-of-the-art trackers on popular tracking benchmarks, and provides improved
robustness for fast moving objects as well as for ultra lowframe-rate videos.

1. Introduction
Model-free object tracking, which aims to track arbitrary objects based on a single bounding-box annotation,
has gained significant attention recently with numerous approaches [22, 16, 18] proposed and several large benchmark
∗ This work was supported under the Australian Research Councils Dis-

covery Projects funding scheme (project DP150104645, DP120103896),
Linkage Projects funding scheme (LP100100588), ARC Centre of Excellence on Robotic Vision (CE140100016) and NICTA (Data61).

(a) Frame t

(b) Frame t + 1

Figure 1: Top row: Most existing tracking-by-detection
methods examine hypothesis locations within a local and
heuristically defined search window around the last detected
location. Bottom row: Our tracker seeks high-quality hypotheses over the entire image using instance-specific edgebox locations.

datasets [39, 32, 26, 38] released. Significant amount of effort has been devoted to either designing a better object representation, including subspace [30], sparsity [28, 43], and
deep learned features [34, 41], or building complex classifiers [16, 4, 45, 40, 29] for better discrimination of the
object from its background patches. Most of these methods, however, require a search window centered at the previous object location to select candidate patches, partly due
to computational complexity. This is sometimes referred as
the motion model [35], and it is implicitly assumed that the
object is correctly tracked in the previous frames and the
object motion is not large. Even though this simplification
works in some situations, it also introduces serious difficulties especially when the object undergoes deformations and
1943

