Visualizing and Understanding Deep Texture Representations
Tsung-Yu Lin
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

Subhransu Maji
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

tsungyulin@cs.umass.edu

smaji@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
A number of recent approaches have used deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to build texture representations. Nevertheless, it is still unclear how these models represent texture and invariances to categorical variations. This work conducts a systematic evaluation of recent CNN-based texture descriptors for recognition and attempts to understand the nature of invariances captured by
these representations. First we show that the recently proposed bilinear CNN model [25] is an excellent generalpurpose texture descriptor and compares favorably to other
CNN-based descriptors on various texture and scene recognition benchmarks. The model is translationally invariant
and obtains better accuracy on the ImageNet dataset without requiring spatial jittering of data compared to corresponding models trained with spatial jittering. Based on
recent work [13, 28] we propose a technique to visualize pre-images, providing a means for understanding categorical properties that are captured by these representations. Finally, we show preliminary results on how a
unified parametric model of texture analysis and synthesis
can be used for attribute-based image manipulation, e.g. to
make an image more swirly, honeycombed, or knitted. The
source code and additional visualizations are available at
http://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/texture.

1. Introduction
The study of texture has inspired many of the early representations of images. The idea of representing texture using the statistics of image patches have led to the development of “textons” [21, 24], the popular “bag-of-words”
models [6] and their variants such as the Fisher vector [30]
and VLAD [19]. These fell out of favor when the latest
generation of deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
showed significant improvements in recognition performance over a wide range of visual tasks [2, 14, 20, 33]. Recently however, the interest in texture descriptors have been
revived by architectures that combine aspects of texture representations with CNNs. For instance, Cimpoi et al. [4]
showed that Fisher vectors built on top of CNN activations

dotted

water

landromat

honeycombed

wood

bookstore

Figure 1. How is texture represented in deep models? Visualizing various categories by inverting the bilinear CNN model [25]
trained on DTD [3], FMD [34], and MIT Indoor dataset [32] (each
column from left to right). These images were obtained by starting from a random image and adjusting it though gradient descent
to obtain high log-likelihood for the given category label using
a multi-layer bilinear CNN model (See Sect. 2 for details). Best
viewed in color and with zoom.

lead to better accuracy and improved domain adaptation not
only for texture recognition, but also for scene categorization, object classification, and fine-grained recognition.
Despite their success little is known how these models represent invariances at the image and category level.
Recently, several attempts have been made in order to
understand CNNs by visualizing the layers of a trained
model [40], studying the invariances by inverting the
model [8, 28, 35], and evaluating the performance of CNNs
for various recognition tasks. In this work we attempt to
provide a similar understanding for CNN-based texture representations. Our starting point is the bilinear CNN model
of our previous work [25]. The technique builds an orderless image representation by taking the location-wise outer
product of image features extracted from CNNs and aggregating them by averaging. The model is closely related to
Fisher vectors but has the advantage that gradients of the
model can be easily computed allowing fine-tuning and inversion. Moreover, when the two CNNs are identical the bi-

2791

