Learning from the Mistakes of Others:
Matching Errors in Cross-Dataset Learning
Viktoriia Sharmanska and Novi Quadrianto
SMiLe CLiNiC, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK
sharmanska.v@gmail.com; n.quadrianto@sussex.ac.uk

Abstract
Can we learn about object classes in images by looking
at a collection of relevant 3D models? Or if we want to
learn about human (inter-)actions in images, can we benefit from videos or abstract illustrations that show these actions? A common aspect of these settings is the availability of additional or privileged data that can be exploited at
training time and that will not be available and not of interest at test time. We seek to generalize the learning with privileged information (LUPI) framework, which requires additional information to be defined per image, to the setting
where additional information is a data collection about the
task of interest. Our framework minimizes the distribution
mismatch between errors made in images and in privileged
data. The proposed method is tested on four publicly available datasets: Image+ClipArt, Image+3Dobject, and Image+Video. Experimental results reveal that our new LUPI
paradigm naturally addresses the cross-dataset learning.

1. Introduction
Vapnik et al. [35, 24, 34] introduced learning with
privileged information (LUPI) as a learning with teacher
paradigm, where at the training stage, a teacher gives some
additional explanation x⋆i about an example xi . LUPI has
been shown useful in a variety of learning scenarios such as
ranking [28], categorization [37], structured prediction [9],
data clustering [8], metric learning [10], face/gesture recognition [38], glaucoma detection [7], and recently learning
with annotation disagreements [27]. Most LUPI methods
(e.g. [35, 28, 20, 14]) follow the assumption that the extra information is useful to discriminate between easy and
difficult examples. This knowledge is then used to determine the influence of each instance in the training process.
Specifically, one puts less emphasis or even ignores difficult instances during training in hope that this will improve
performance. Reflecting on how per-instance privileged information can be used to identify whether this instance is

Video Collection

Clip Art Collection

3D Model Collection

MISTAKES
in videos

MISTAKES
in clip arts

MISTAKES
in 3D models

CORRECTION

MISTAKES
in images

Image Collection

CORRECTION

MISTAKES
in images

Image Collection

CORRECTION

MISTAKES
in images

Image Collection

Figure 1: In this work, we propose a framework to solve vision tasks in images by acquiring knowledge from the mistakes committed by other data collections (videos, clip arts,
and 3D models) when learning the same concepts.
an easy or a difficult one, we ask the following question: is
it possible to transfer easiness and hardness in a class sense
instead of per-instance?
This paper seeks to advice the learner to acquire knowledge from the mistakes committed by others when learning the same concept. One will learn that making errors on
an example-by-example basis is unavoidable, but one will
make the right decisions at a larger scale by minimizing divergence between own mistakes and others’. We will explore a distribution matching over the mistakes in original
and privileged representations as a principled approach to
achieve the class-level information transfer. We will use the
regularized risk functional framework and replace the empirical risk with an (empirical) divergence term characterizing the mismatch between error distributions on the privileged and original spaces. This approach is innovative in
two senses: (1) Prior knowledge is normally encoded in
the regularization term, instead we introduce bias into the
risk (loss) term. (2) Almost all distribution matching methods match input features and/or function outputs, instead we
match error distributions.

3967

