Online Detection and Classification of Dynamic Hand Gestures
with Recurrent 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
Pavlo Molchanov Xiaodong Yang Shalini Gupta Kihwan Kim Stephen Tyree
NVIDIA

Jan Kautz

{pmolchanov,xiaodongy,shalinig,kihwank,styree,jkautz}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Automatic detection and classification of dynamic hand
gestures in real-world systems intended for human computer interaction is challenging as: 1) there is a large diversity in how people perform gestures, making detection and
classification difficult; 2) the system must work online in
order to avoid noticeable lag between performing a gesture
and its classification; in fact, a negative lag (classification
before the gesture is finished) is desirable, as feedback to the
user can then be truly instantaneous. In this paper, we address these challenges with a recurrent three-dimensional
convolutional neural network that performs simultaneous
detection and classification of dynamic hand gestures from
multi-modal data. We employ connectionist temporal classification to train the network to predict class labels from inprogress gestures in unsegmented input streams. In order to
validate our method, we introduce a new challenging multimodal dynamic hand gesture dataset captured with depth,
color and stereo-IR sensors. On this challenging dataset,
our gesture recognition system achieves an accuracy of
83.8%, outperforms competing state-of-the-art algorithms,
and approaches human accuracy of 88.4%. Moreover, our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on SKIG and
ChaLearn2014 benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Hand gestures and gesticulations are a common form of
human communication. It is therefore natural for humans to
use this form of communication to interact with machines
as well. For instance, touch-less human computer interfaces can improve comfort and safety in vehicles. Computer vision systems are useful tools in designing such interfaces. Recent work using deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) with video sequences has significantly advanced the accuracy of dynamic hand gesture [22, 23, 25]
and action [13, 34, 37] recognition. CNNs are also useful
for combining multi-modal data inputs [23, 25], a technique
which has proved useful for gesture recognition in challeng-

ing lighting conditions [23, 27].
However, real-world systems for dynamic hand gesture
recognition present numerous open challenges. First, these
systems receive continuous streams of unprocessed visual
data, where gestures from known classes must be simultaneously detected and classified. Most prior work, e.g.,
[21, 23, 25, 27], regards gesture segmentation and classification separately. Two classifiers, a detection classifier to
distinguish between gesture and no gesture and a recognition classifier to identify the specific gesture type, are often
trained separately and applied in sequence to the input data
streams. There are two reasons for this: (1) to compensate
for variability in the duration of the gesture and (2) to reduce noise due to unknown hand motions in the no gesture
class. However, this limits the system’s accuracy to that of
the upstream detection classifier. Additionally, since both
problems are highly interdependent, it is advantageous to
address them jointly. A similar synergy was shown to be
useful for joint face detection and pose estimation [28].
Second, dynamic hand gestures generally contain three
temporally overlapping phases: preparation, nucleus, and
retraction [8, 14], of which the nucleus is most discriminative. The other two phases can be quite similar for different
gesture classes and hence less useful or even detrimental to
accurate classification. This motivates designing classifiers
which rely primarily on the nucleus phase.
Finally, humans are acutely perceptive of the response
time of user interfaces, with lags greater than 100 ms perceived as annoying [3, 20]. This presents the challenge of
detecting and classifying gestures immediately upon or before their completion to provide rapid feedback.
In this paper, we present an algorithm for joint segmentation and classification of dynamic hand gestures from continuous depth, color and stereo-IR data streams. Building
on the recent success of CNN classifiers for gesture recognition, we propose a network that employs a recurrent three
dimensional (3D)-CNN with connectionist temporal classification (CTC) [10]. CTC enables gesture classification to
be based on the nucleus phase of the gesture without requiring explicit pre-segmentation. Furthermore, our network
14207

