Predicting the Where and What of actors and actions through
Online Action Localization
Khurram Soomro, Haroon Idrees, Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision (CRCV), University of Central Florida (UCF)
{ksoomro, haroon, shah}@cs.ucf.edu

Offline&Action&Localization&=&Action&Detection&+&Recognition

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel approach to tackle
the challenging problem of ‘online action localization’
which entails predicting actions and their locations as
they happen in a video. Typically, action localization
or recognition is performed in an offline manner where
all the frames in the video are processed together and
action labels are not predicted for the future. This disallows timely localization of actions - an important consideration for surveillance tasks.
In our approach, given a batch of frames from the
immediate past in a video, we estimate pose and oversegment the current frame into superpixels. Next, we discriminatively train an actor foreground model on the superpixels using the pose bounding boxes. A Conditional
Random Field with superpixels as nodes, and edges connecting spatio-temporal neighbors is used to obtain action segments. The action confidence is predicted using dynamic programming on SVM scores obtained on
short segments of the video, thereby capturing sequential information of the actions. The issue of visual drift
is handled by updating the appearance model and pose
refinement in an online manner. Lastly, we introduce a
new measure to quantify the performance of action prediction (i.e. online action localization), which analyzes
how the prediction accuracy varies as a function of observed portion of the video. Our experiments suggest
that despite using only a few frames to localize actions
at each time instant, we are able to predict the action
and obtain competitive results to state-of-the-art offline
methods.

Online&Action&Localization&=&Action&Detection&+&Prediction

Figure 1. This figure illustrates the problem we address in this
paper. The top row shows the case when we have an entire
video to detect and recognize actions, i.e., offline action localization. The bottom row is an example of online action localization, which involves predicting the action class (e.g. Kicking) as well as the location of the actor in every frame, as the
video is streamed.

plications associated with monitoring and security, it is
crucial to detect and localize actions in a timely fashion. A particular example is detection and localization
of undesirable or malicious actions. There have been
recent efforts to predict activities by early recognition
[18, 16, 26, 14]. These methods only attempt to predict
the label of the action, what of an action, without any
localization. Thus, the important question about where
an action is being performed cannot be answered easily.
Existing action localization methods [17, 35, 41, 29,
10, 27] classify and localize actions after completely observing an entire video sequence (top row in Fig. 1).
The goal is to localize an action by finding the volume
that encompasses an entire action. Some approaches are
based on sliding-windows [29, 22], while others segment the video into supervoxels which are merged into
action proposals [10, 21, 27]. The action proposals from
either methods are then labeled using a classifier. Essentially, an action segment is classified after it has been

1. Introduction
Predicting what and where an action will occur is an
important and challenging computer vision problem for
automatic video analysis [17, 35, 41, 4]. In many ap-

2648

