Picking Deep Filter Responses for Fine-grained Image Recognition
Xiaopeng Zhang1 Hongkai Xiong1 Wengang Zhou2 Weiyao Lin1 Qi Tian3
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 University of Science and Technology of China 3 University of Texas at San Antonio
{zxphistory,xionghongkai,wylin}@sjtu.edu.cn zhwg@ustc.edu.cn qitian@cs.utsa.edu

Abstract
Recognizing fine-grained sub-categories such as birds
and dogs is extremely challenging due to the highly localized and subtle differences in some specific parts. Most previous works rely on object / part level annotations to build
part-based representation, which is demanding in practical applications. This paper proposes an automatic finegrained recognition approach which is free of any object / part annotation at both training and testing stages. Our
method explores a unified framework based on two steps of
deep filter response picking. The first picking step is to find
distinctive filters which respond to specific patterns significantly and consistently, and learn a set of part detectors via
iteratively alternating between new positive sample mining
and part model retraining. The second picking step is to
pool deep filter responses via spatially weighted combination of Fisher Vectors. We conditionally pick deep filter responses to encode them into the final representation, which
considers the importance of filter responses themselves. Integrating all these techniques produces a much more powerful framework, and experiments conducted on CUB-2002011 and Stanford Dogs demonstrate the superiority of our
proposed algorithm over the existing methods.

1. Introduction
As an emerging research topic, fine-grained recognition
aims at discriminating usually hundreds of sub-categories
belonging to the same basic-level category. It lies between
the basic-level category classification (e.g. categorizing
bikes, boats, cars, and so on in Pascal VOC [8]) and the identification of individual instances (e.g. face recognition).
An inexperienced person can easily recognize basic-level
categories like bikes or horses immediately since they are
visually very dissimilar, while it is difficult for him / her to
tell a black bird from a crow without specific expert guidance. As a matter of fact, fine-grained sub-categories often share the same parts (e.g., all birds should have wings,
legs, etc.), and are often discriminated by the subtle differ-

Ch. 4
Distinctive
Filters
Ch. 92

Ch. 185

Ch. 99

Nondistinctive
Filters

Figure 1. Illustration of filter selectivity for a typical network
VGG-M [4] on CUB-200-2011. We generate candidate patches
with selective search [25] and compute response of each patch at
conv4 layer. We show several top responding patches of some
channels and observe that there exist some filters which respond
to specific patterns (e.g., the head or leg of bird), while most of
them respond chaotically. This paper proposes to pick deep filters with significant and consistent responses, and learn a set of
discriminative detectors for recognition.

ences in texture and color properties of these parts (e.g. only
the breast color counts when discriminating similar birds).
Hence localizing and describing object and the corresponding parts become crucial for fine-grained recognition.
In order to achieve accurate object and part locations,
most existing works explicitly require object level or even
part level annotations at both training and testing stages [3],
[28], [33]. However, such a requirement is demanding in
practical applications. Some works consider a more reasonable setting, i.e. object / part level annotations at only
training stage but not at testing time [15], [32]. However,
even with such a setup, it still requires expensive annotations at training stage, and is especially hard for large scale
recognition problems. Hence, one promising research direction is to free us from the tedious and subjective manual annotations for fine-grained recognition, which we refer to automatic part discovery. However, discovering parts
automatically is a classical chicken-and-egg problem, i.e.
without an accurate appearance model, examples of a part
cannot be discovered, and an accurate appearance model
cannot be learned without having part examples. Some pioneering works begin to consider this issue [21], [27]. How-

1134

