EmotioNet: An accurate, real-time algorithm for the automatic annotation of a
million facial expressions in the wild
C. Fabian Benitez-Quiroz*, Ramprakash Srinivasan*, Aleix M. Martinez
Dept. Electrical and Computer Engineering
The Ohio State University
∗

These authors contributed equally to this paper.

Abstract
Research in face perception and emotion theory requires
very large annotated databases of images of facial expressions of emotion. Annotations should include Action Units
(AUs) and their intensities as well as emotion category.
This goal cannot be readily achieved manually. Herein,
we present a novel computer vision algorithm to annotate
a large database of one million images of facial expressions of emotion in the wild (i.e., face images downloaded
from the Internet). First, we show that this newly proposed algorithm can recognize AUs and their intensities reliably across databases. To our knowledge, this is the first
published algorithm to achieve highly-accurate results in
the recognition of AUs and their intensities across multiple databases. Our algorithm also runs in real-time (>30
images/second), allowing it to work with large numbers of
images and video sequences. Second, we use WordNet to
download 1,000,000 images of facial expressions with associated emotion keywords from the Internet. These images
are then automatically annotated with AUs, AU intensities
and emotion categories by our algorithm. The result is a
highly useful database that can be readily queried using semantic descriptions for applications in computer vision, affective computing, social and cognitive psychology and neuroscience; e.g., “show me all the images with happy faces”
or “all images with AU 1 at intensity c.”

1. Introduction
Basic research in face perception and emotion theory
cannot be completed without large annotated databases of
images and video sequences of facial expressions of emotion [7]. Some of the most useful and typically needed annotations are Action Units (AUs), AU intensities, and emotion categories [8]. While small and medium size databases
can be manually annotated by expert coders over several
months [11, 5], large databases cannot. For example, even if

it were possible to annotate each face image very fast by an
expert coder (say, 20 seconds/image)1 , it would take 5,556
hours to code a million images, which translates to 694 (8hour) working days or 2.66 years of uninterrupted work.
This complexity can sometimes be managed, e.g., in image segmentation [18] and object categorization [17], because everyone knows how to do these annotations with
minimal instructions and online tools (e.g., Amazon’s Mechanical Turk) can be utilized to recruit large numbers of
people. But AU coding requires specific expertise that takes
months to learn and perfect and, hence, alternative solutions
are needed. This is why recent years have seen a number
of computer vision algorithms that provide fully- or semiautomatic means of AU annotation [20, 10, 22, 2, 26, 27, 6].
The major problem with existing algorithms is that they
either do not recognize all the necessary AUs for all applications, do not specify AU intensity, are too computational demanding in space and/or time to work with large database,
or are only tested within databases (i.e., even when multiple
databases are used, training and testing is generally done
within each database independently).
The present paper describes a new computer vision algorithm for the recognition of AUs typically seen in most
applications, their intensities, and a large number (23) of
basic and compound emotion categories across databases.
Additionally, images are annotated semantically with 421
emotion keywords. (A list of these semantic labels is in the
Supplementary Materials.)
Crucially, our algorithm is the first to provide reliable
recognition of AUs and their intensities across databases
and runs in real-time (>30 images/second). This allows
us to automatically annotate a large database of a million
facial expressions of emotion images “in the wild” in about
11 hours in a PC with a 2.8 GHz i7 core and 32 Gb of RAM.
The result is a database of facial expressions that can be
readily queried by AU, AU intensity, emotion category, or
1 Expert coders typically use video rather than still images. Coding in
stills is generally done by comparing the images of an expressive face with
the neutral face of the same individual.

5562

