Predicting Motivations of Actions by Leveraging Text
Carl Vondrick Deniz Oktay Hamed Pirsiavash†
Antonio Torralba
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
†University of Maryland, Baltimore County
{vondrick,denizokt,torralba}@mit.edu hpirsiav@umbc.edu
Abstract
Understanding human actions is a key problem in computer vision. However, recognizing actions is only the first
step of understanding what a person is doing. In this paper, we introduce the problem of predicting why a person
has performed an action in images. This problem has many
applications in human activity understanding, such as anticipating or explaining an action. To study this problem, we
introduce a new dataset of people performing actions annotated with likely motivations. However, the information in
an image alone may not be sufficient to automatically solve
this task. Since humans can rely on their lifetime of experiences to infer motivation, we propose to give computer
vision systems access to some of these experiences by using
recently developed natural language models to mine knowledge stored in massive amounts of text. While we are still
far away from fully understanding motivation, our results
suggest that transferring knowledge from language into vision can help machines understand why people in images
might be performing an action.

Why are they doing that?

to sell ice cream

to commute to work

to answer emergency call

to win race

Figure 1: Understanding Motivations: You can probably
recognize that all of these people are riding bikes. Can you
tell why they are riding their bikes? In this paper, we learn
to predict the motivations of people’s actions by leveraging
large amounts of text.

1. Introduction
Recognizing human actions is an important problem in
computer vision. However, recognizing actions is only the
first step of understanding what a person is doing. For example, you can probably tell that the people in Figure 1
are riding bicycles. Can you determine why they are riding
bicycles? Unfortunately, while computer vision systems today can recognize actions well, they do not yet understand
the intentions and motivations behind people’s actions.
Humans can often infer why another person performs an
action, in part due to a cognitive skill known as the theory of
mind [39]. This capacity to infer another person’s intention
may stem from the ability to impute our own beliefs onto
others [3, 32]. For example, if we needed to commute to
work, we might choose to ride our bicycle, similar to the
top right in Figure 1. Since we would be commuting to
work in that situation, we might assume others in a similar
situation would do the same.

In this paper, we seek to predict the motivation behind
people’s actions in images. To our knowledge, inferring
why a person is performing an action from images has not
yet been extensively explored in computer vision. We believe that predicting motivations can help understand human
actions, such as anticipating or explaining an action.
To study this problem, we first assembled an image
dataset of people (about 10, 000 people) and annotated them
with their actions, motivations, and scene. We then combine these labels with state-of-the-art image features [41] to
train classifiers that predict a person’s motivation from images. However, visual features alone may not be sufficient
to automatically solve this task. Humans can rely on a lifetime of experiences to predict motivations. How do we give
computer vision systems access to similar experiences?
We propose to transfer knowledge from unlabeled text
into visual classifiers in order to predict motivations. Us12997

