Natural Language Object Retrieval
Ronghang Hu1 Huazhe Xu2 Marcus Rohrbach1,3 Jiashi Feng4 Kate Saenko5 Trevor Darrell1
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Tsinghua University 3 ICSI, Berkeley
4
National University of Singapore 5 University of Massachusetts, Lowell
{ronghang, rohrbach, trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu, xhz12@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
elefjia@nus.edu.sg, saenko@cs.uml.edu

Abstract

input image
object
proposal

In this paper, we address the task of natural language
object retrieval, to localize a target object within a given
image based on a natural language query of the object. Natural language object retrieval differs from text-based image
retrieval task as it involves spatial information about objects within the scene and global scene context. To address
this issue, we propose a novel Spatial Context Recurrent
ConvNet (SCRC) model as scoring function on candidate
boxes for object retrieval, integrating spatial configurations
and global scene-level contextual information into the network. Our model processes query text, local image descriptors, spatial configurations and global context features
through a recurrent network, outputs the probability of the
query text conditioned on each candidate box as a score for
the box, and can transfer visual-linguistic knowledge from
image captioning domain to our task. Experimental results
demonstrate that our method effectively utilizes both local
and global information, outperforming previous baseline
methods significantly on different datasets and scenarios,
and can exploit large scale vision and language datasets
for knowledge transfer.

1. Introduction
Significant progress has been made in object detection
in recent years; with the help of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), it is possible to detect a predefined set of
object categories with high accuracy [8, 7], and the number of categories in object detection has grown over 10K to
100K with the help of domain adaptation [12] and hashing
[2]. However, in practical application scenarios, instead of
using a predefined fixed set of object categories, one would
often prefer to refer to an object with natural language rather
than use a predefined category label. Such natural language
query can include different types of phrases such as categories, attributes, spatial configurations and interactions
with other objects, such as “the young lady in a white dress

candidate
location set

...

natural language query:

white car on the right

global
context

spatial
configuration

local
descriptor

Spatial Context Recurrent ConvNet
candidate
scores

output object retrieval result

0.28
0.15

top score
candidate

0.42
...
0.07
0.54

Figure 1. Overview of our method. Given an input image, a text
query and a set of candidate locations (e.g. from object proposal
methods), a recurrent neural network model is used to score candidate locations based on local descriptors, spatial configurations
and global context. The highest scoring candidate is retrieved.

sitting on the left” or “white car on the right” in Figure 1.
In this paper, we address the problem of natural language
object retrieval: given an image and a natural language description of an object as query, we want to retrieve the object by localizing the object in the image. Natural language
object retrieval can be seen as a generalization of generic
object detection and has a wide range of applications, such
as handling natural language commands in robotics where
the user may ask to a robot to pick up “the TV remote control on the shelf”.

4555

