Material Classification Using Raw Time-of-Flight Measurements
Shuochen Su3,1
1

KAUST

Felix Heide3,4 Robin Swanson1 Jonathan Klein2
Matthias Hullin2 Wolfgang Heidrich1,3
2
3
University of Bonn
University of British Columbia

Clara Callenberg2
4

Stanford University

Abstract
We propose a material classification method using raw
time-of-flight (ToF) measurements. ToF cameras capture
the correlation between a reference signal and the temporal
response of material to incident illumination. Such measurements encode unique signatures of the material, i.e.
the degree of subsurface scattering inside a volume. Subsequently, it offers an orthogonal domain of feature representation compared to conventional spatial and angular
reflectance-based approaches. We demonstrate the effectiveness, robustness, and efficiency of our method through
experiments and comparisons of real-world materials.

1. Introduction
Material classification is a popular, yet difficult, problem
in computer vision. Everyday scenes may contain a variety
of visually similar, yet structurally different, materials that
may be useful to identify. Autonomous robots and self driving vehicles, for example, must be aware of whether they
are driving on concrete, metal, pavement, or black ice. As
further advances in robotics and human computer interaction are made, the need for more accurate material classification will grow.
One aspect of materials that has seen little use in classification is the way light temporally interacts with a material. As light interacts with an object, e.g. via reflection
and subsurface scattering, it creates a temporal point spread
function (TPSF), a unique signature that can describe the
physical properties of each material. Past efforts to capture and analyze this signature have relied on detailed reconstructions of this temporal point spread function in the
form of transient images. These can be captured either directly using bulky and expensive equipment such as streak
cameras and femtosecond lasers [25, 27], or indirectly with
inexpensive time of flight cameras [6], albeit at a significant
computational cost as well as a lower resolution.
1 Each material was captured under the exact same illumination and
camera settings. No adjustments were made except for some white balancing only for reproducing the images.

Figure 1: Visually similar1 but structurally distinct material
samples in RGB.

Our approach exploits raw measurements from ToF cameras’ correlation image sensor for material feature representation. This method requires very few frequency sweeps
allowing for near one-shot captures similar to coded flash
methods. By completely circumventing the inverse problem
which is neither easy to solve nor able to produce robust
solutions [6], our features can be directly fed into a pretrained material classifier that predicts results in a timely
manner. Furthermore, our method allows for per pixel labeling which enables more accurate material classification.
Nevertheless, there are significant challenges inherent to
this approach, including depth and noise which create ambiguities due to the correlation nature of the ToF image formation model, and the camera’s limited temporal resolution
[6] relative to that of a streak camera [25].
In this work, we take the first step to collect a dataset
consisting of visually similar but structurally distinct materials, i.e. paper, styrofoam, towel, and wax as seen in Figure 1. To ensure that our classifier is robust to both distance
and angle variations, we take measurements from a variety
of positions. Experimental results show that classification
from ToF raw measurements alone can achieve accuracies
up to 81%. We also present superior results of our method
13503

