Camera Calibration from Periodic Motion of a Pedestrian
Shiyao Huang, Xianghua Ying*, Jiangpeng Rong, Zeyu Shang and Hongbin Zha
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (Ministry of Education)
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Center for Information Science
Peking University, Beijing 100871, P.R. China
{h41, xhying, rjp, shangzeyu, zha}@cis.pku.edu.cn

a camera with known aspect ratio and skew from a single
view of the TOVPs. They demonstrated that the principal
point of the camera coincides with the orthocenter of the
triangle with vertices being the TOVPs. Cipolla et al. [4]
proposed a simple and geometrically intuitive method using
the TOVPs and one reference point to determine both
intrinsic and extrinsic parameters, and the method was
realized with various viewpoints in indoor and outdoor
architectural scenes when the TOVPs are available.
Since calibration objects are often absent in surveillance
scenes and parameters of surveillance cameras may be
changed over time, using vanishing points extracted from
image sequences of a pedestrian seems to be an imperfect,
but not-that-bad choice for camera calibration, though the
extracted vanishing points are not always as accurate as
those in structured scenes like buildings with sufficient and
strong rigidity constraints of parallelism and orthogonality.
Lv et al. [16] recovered the vertical vanishing point and the
horizon line by detecting leg-crossings of a walking human.
In order to determine the two orthogonal vanishing points
in the horizontal plane, they need to point out two
orthogonal lines on the ground which must be
simultaneously taken with the pedestrian. Krahnstoever and
Mendonca [13] presented a Bayesian method for calibration
using the foot-to-head homology acquired from the visual
surveillance of human activity, where the probabilistic
spatial distribution of the tracks on the horizontal plane is
required. Junejo and Foroosh [11] used the detected head
and feet locations to compute two epipoles as two
orthogonal vanishing points. They assumed that the
camera’s intrinsic parameters are almost fully known
except for the focal length. The Total Least Squares method
was applied to the observation points to estimate the focal
length. Micusik and Pajdla [18] proposed a method for
automatic simultaneous camera calibration and the foothead homology estimation by observing a person standing
at various locations in the scene with the same pose, e.g.,
standing to attention and facing the same direction in front
of the camera. They formulated the calibration of intrinsic
and extrinsic camera parameters as a Quadratic Eigenvalue
Problem. Kusakunniran et al. [14] utilized the cross-ratio
relationship in projective geometry to directly estimate a
full projection matrix. However, they required observing
three or more positions of person walking on a ground
plane, where the three positions are not collinear. It means

Abstract
Camera calibration directly from image sequences of a
pedestrian without using any calibration object is a really
challenging task and should be well solved in computer
vision, especially in visual surveillance. In this paper, we
propose a novel camera calibration method based on
recovering the three orthogonal vanishing points (TOVPs),
just using an image sequence of a pedestrian walking in a
straight line, without any assumption of scenes or motions,
e.g., control points with known 3D coordinates, parallel or
perpendicular lines, non-natural or pre-designed special
human motions, as often necessary in previous methods.
The traces of shoes of a pedestrian carry more rich and
easily detectable metric information than all other body
parts in the periodic motion of a pedestrian, but such
information is usually overlooked by previous work. In this
paper, we employ the images of the toes of the shoes on the
ground plane to determine the vanishing point
corresponding to the walking direction, and then utilize
harmonic conjugate properties in projective geometry to
recover the vanishing point corresponding to the
perpendicular direction of the walking direction in the
horizontal plane and the vanishing point corresponding to
the vertical direction. After recovering all of the TOVPs, the
intrinsic and extrinsic parameters of the camera can be
determined. Experiments on various scenes and viewing
angles prove the feasibility and accuracy of the proposed
method.

1. Introduction
In the field of computer vision, camera calibration is one of
the most fundamental issues for many applicants including
3D reconstruction, object recognition, metrology, and
surveillance. Considerable efforts have been made to
compute the intrinsic and extrinsic parameters of the camera
with consideration of speed, accuracy and robustness [8, 10,
17, 26]. Vanishing point based calibration methods have
been proved to be suitable for the situation of structured
scenes. Caprile and Torre [3] proposed a method to calibrate
_____________________________
* Corresponding Author

3025

