Efficient Globally Optimal 2D-to-3D Deformable Shape Matching
Zorah Lähner
TU München
laehner@in.tum.de

Emanuele Rodolà
TU München
Università della Svizzera Italiana

Frank R. Schmidt
TU München
f.schmidt@cs.tum.edu

emanuele.rodola@usi.ch

Michael M. Bronstein
Università della Svizzera Italiana

Daniel Cremers
TU München

michael.bronstein@usi.ch

cremers@tum.de

Abstract
We propose the first algorithm for non-rigid 2D-to-3D
shape matching, where the input is a 2D query shape as well
as a 3D target shape and the output is a continuous matching curve represented as a closed contour on the 3D shape.
We cast the problem as finding the shortest circular path on
the product 3-manifold of the two shapes. We prove that
the optimal matching can be computed in polynomial time
with a (worst-case) complexity of O(mn2 log(n)), where m
and n denote the number of vertices on the 2D and the 3D
shape respectively. Quantitative evaluation confirms that
the method provides excellent results for sketch-based deformable 3D shape retrieval.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We propose the first shape matching method between a
2D query shape (left) and a 3D target shape (right), both of which
are allowed to deform non-rigidly. The globally optimal matching (shown on top of the 3D target) is guaranteed to be continuous.

The last decade has witnessed a tremendous growth in
the quantity and quality of geometric data available in the
public domain. One of the driving forces of this growth has
been the development in 3D sensing and printing technology, bringing affordable sensors such as Microsoft Kinect
or Intel RealSense and 3D printers such as MakerBot to the
mass market. The availability of large geometric datasets
brings forth the need to explore, organize, and search in 3D
shape collections, ideally in the same easy and efficient way
as modern search engines allow to process text documents.
Numerous works on content-based shape retrieval [8,
32, 5] try to extend popular search paradigms to a setting where the3D query shape is matched to shapes in the
database using geometric similarities. Typically, a 3D shape
is represented as a descriptor vector aggregating some local
geometric features, and retrieval is done efficiently by comparing such vectors [5]. However, the need for the query to
be a 3D shape significantly limits the practical usefulness
of such search engines: non-expert human users are typi-

cally not very skilled with 3D modeling, and thus providing
a good query example can be challenging.
As an alternative to 3D-to-3D shape retrieval, several recent works proposed 2D-to-3D or sketch-based shape retrieval, where the query is a 2D image representing the projection or the silhouette of a 3D shape as seen from some
viewpoint [7, 9, 14, 30, 11]. This setting is much more
natural to human users who in most cases are capable of
sketching a 2D drawing of the query shape; however, the underlying problem of ‘multi-modal’ similarity between a 3D
object and its 2D representation is a very challenging one,
especially if one desires to deal with non-rigid shapes such
as human body poses. In fact, so far all methods for 2D-to3D matching have limited the attention to rigid shapes such
as chairs, cars, etc.
In this paper, we propose a method for automatically
finding correspondence between 2D and 3D deformable ob12185

