Action Recognition in Video Using Sparse Coding and Relative Features
Analı́ Alfaro

Domingo Mery

Alvaro Soto

P. Universidad Catolica de Chile
Santiago, Chile

P. Universidad Catolica de Chile
Santiago, Chile

P. Universidad Catolica de Chile
Santiago, Chile

ajalfaro@uc.cl

dmery@ing.puc.cl

asoto@ing.uc.cl

Abstract
This work presents an approach to category-based action recognition in video using sparse coding techniques.
The proposed approach includes two main contributions:
i) A new method to handle intra-class variations by decomposing each video into a reduced set of representative
atomic action acts or key-sequences, and ii) A new video
descriptor, ITRA: Inter-Temporal Relational Act Descriptor,
that exploits the power of comparative reasoning to capture
relative similarity relations among key-sequences. In terms
of the method to obtain key-sequences, we introduce a loss
function that, for each video, leads to the identification of a
sparse set of representative key-frames capturing both, relevant particularities arising in the input video, as well as
relevant generalities arising in the complete class collection. In terms of the method to obtain the ITRA descriptor, we introduce a novel scheme to quantify relative intra
and inter-class similarities among local temporal patterns
arising in the videos. The resulting ITRA descriptor demonstrates to be highly effective to discriminate among action
categories. As a result, the proposed approach reaches remarkable action recognition performance on several popular benchmark datasets, outperforming alternative state-ofthe-art techniques by a large margin.

1. Introduction
This work presents a new method for action recognition in video that incorporates two novel ideas: (1) A new
method to select relevant key-frames from each video, and
(2) A new method to extract an informative video descriptor. In terms of our technique for key-frame selection, previous works have also built their action recognition schemes
on top of key-frames [45], Snippets [33], Exemplars [40],
Actoms [14], or other informative subset of short video
sub-sequences [27][30]. As a relevant advantage, by representing a video using a compressed set of distinctive subsequences, it is possible to eliminate irrelevant or noisy temporal patterns and to reduce computation, while still retaining enough information to recognize a target action [4]. Fur-

thermore, it is possible to obtain a normalized video representation that avoids distracting sources of intra-class variation, such as different velocities in the execution of an action.
Previous works have mainly defined a set of key-frames
using manual labelling [14], clustering techniques [45], or
discriminative approaches [30]. In the case of clustering
techniques, the usual loss functions produce a set of keyframes that captures temporal action patterns occurring frequently in the target classes. As a relevant drawback, training instances presenting less common patterns are usually
poorly represented [47] and, as a consequence, the diversity of intra-class patterns is not fully captured. In the case
of discriminative approaches, identification of relevant keyframes is usually connected to classification stages, focusing learning on mining patterns that capture relevant interclass differences. As a relevant drawback, the mining of
key-frames again does not focus directly on effectively capturing the diversity of intra-class patterns that usually arise
in complex action videos.
In contrast to previous work, our method to select keyframes explicitly focuses on an effective mining of relevant
intra-class variations. As a novel guiding strategy, our technique selects, from each training video, a set of key-frames
that balances two main objectives: (i) They are informative
about the target video, and (ii) They are informative about
the complete set of videos in an action class. In other words,
we simultaneously favour the selection of relevant particularities arising in the input video, as well as meaningful generalities arising in an entire class collection. To achieve this,
we establish a loss function that selects from each video a
sparse set of key-frames that minimizes the reconstruction
error of the input video and the complete set of videos in the
corresponding action class.
In terms of our technique to obtain an informative video
descriptor, most current video descriptors are based on
quantifying the absolute presence or absence of a set of
visual features. Bag-of-Words schemes are a good example of this strategy [19]. As a relevant alternative, recent
works have shown that the relative strength [42], or sim12688

