Random Features for Sparse Signal Classification
Jen-Hao Rick Chang∗, Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan, B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA

Abstract
Random features is an approach for kernel-based inference on large datasets. In this paper, we derive performance guarantees for random features on signals, like images, that enjoy sparse representations and show that the
number of random features required to achieve a desired
approximation of the kernel similarity matrix can be significantly smaller for sparse signals. Based on this, we propose
a scheme termed compressive random features that first obtains low-dimensional projections of a dataset and, subsequently, derives random features on the low-dimensional
projections. This scheme provides significant improvements
in signal dimensionality, computational time, and storage
costs over traditional random features while enjoying similar theoretical guarantees for achieving inference performance. We support our claims by providing empirical results across many datasets.

1. Introduction
Random features [26,37,38,43,46] is an approach to perform kernel-based inference on very large datasets. In the
traditional kernel approach, we need to construct the kernelsimilarity matrix whose storage and computational time are
quadratic in the size of the dataset; the quadratic dependence on the size of the dataset makes the approach infeasible for Big Data scenarios. Random features addresses this
problem by explicitly constructing finite-dimensional random features from the data such that inner products between
the random features approximate the kernel functions. Inference with random features achieves comparable performance as those of the kernel-based ones while enjoying the
scalability of linear inference methods. Recently, it also
achieves performance comparable to a convolutional neural network on datasets like the ImageNet [13].
We show that for signals enjoying sparse representations
(either canonically or in a transform basis), the performance
guarantees of random features can be significantly strengthened. Specifically, we prove that the dimension of random
∗ This work was supported by the ARO Grant W911NF-15-1-0126.

features required to approximate a stationary kernel function [42] dominantly depends on the signal sparsity instead
of the ambient dimension. For images, whose ambient dimension is often far greater than their sparsity, our analysis
greatly improves the theoretical bounds of random features.
We next show that both computational and storage costs
of random features applied to sparse signals can be significantly improved by first performing a dimensionality reduction using random projection and subsequently, applying random features to the dimensionality-reduced signals.
There are several advantages to this scheme. First, we show
that the theoretical guarantees in approximating the original kernel function are similar to that of random features
applied on sparse signals. This means that the additional
dimensionality reduction step does not hinder our ability
to approximate kernel functions. Second, the dimensionality reduction can be performed optically with compressive
cameras [19]. In regimes where sensing is costly, (for example, short-wave infrared and midwave infrared), the use of
compressive cameras enables sensing with low-resolution
sensors [12, 32] with associated savings in cost of the camera. Third, in the context of compressive imaging, inference tasks such as classification and detection are often simpler than recovery [1, 31, 41] and hence, we can expect to
use high compression ratios in the dimensionality reduction
step. In our experiments, we are able to achieve 10 − 30×
compression with little loss in classification accuracy.
Contributions. In this paper, we propose a scheme called
compressive random features that applies random features
on compressive measurements of signals that enjoy sparse
representations either canonically or in a transform basis
(see Figure 1). Our contributions are three-fold:
• We prove that the number of random features required to
accurately approximate the kernel function depends predominantly on the sparsity of the signals.
• We show that random features applied to dimensionalityreduced signals or equivalently, compressive measurements, are able to approximate isometric kernel functions
of the original uncompressed data and provide analytical
guarantees that bound the loss in performance.

15404

