Personalizing Human Video Pose Estimation
James Charles
University of Leeds

Tomas Pfister
University of Oxford

Derek Magee
University of Leeds

j.charles@leeds.ac.uk

tp@robots.ox.ac.uk

d.r.magee@leeds.ac.uk

David Hogg
University of Leeds

Andrew Zisserman
University of Oxford

d.c.hogg@leeds.ac.uk

az@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a personalized ConvNet pose estimator that
automatically adapts itself to the uniqueness of a person’s
appearance to improve pose estimation in long videos.
We make the following contributions: (i) we show that
given a few high-precision pose annotations, e.g. from a
generic ConvNet pose estimator, additional annotations can
be generated throughout the video using a combination of
image-based matching for temporally distant frames, and
dense optical flow for temporally local frames; (ii) we develop an occlusion aware self-evaluation model that is able
to automatically select the high-quality and reject the erroneous additional annotations; and (iii) we demonstrate that
these high-quality annotations can be used to fine-tune a
ConvNet pose estimator and thereby personalize it to lock
on to key discriminative features of the person’s appearance. The outcome is a substantial improvement in the
pose estimates for the target video using the personalized
ConvNet compared to the original generic ConvNet.
Our method outperforms the state of the art (including
top ConvNet methods) by a large margin on three standard
benchmarks, as well as on a new challenging YouTube video
dataset. Furthermore, we show that training from the automatically generated annotations can be used to improve the
performance of a generic ConvNet on other benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in 2D human pose estimation exploit
complex appearance models [2, 24, 35, 38] and more recently convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) [10, 13,
21, 23, 27, 32, 33, 44, 45]. However, even the state of the
art ConvNets often produce absurdly erroneous predictions
in videos – particularly for unusual poses, challenging illumination or viewing conditions, self-occlusions or unusual
shapes (e.g. when wearing baggy clothing, or unusual body
proportions). This is due to the lack of large quantities of
annotated data, which is critical for training ConvNets; and,
as we show below, the models failing to exploit personspecific information.
To address these issues, this paper proposes an

occlusion-aware method for automatically learning reliable,
person-specific pose estimators in long videos. Using the
fact that people tend not to change appearance over the
course of a video (same clothes, same body shape), we show
that the large quantity of data in the video can be exploited
to ‘personalize’ a pose estimator, thereby improving performance for unusual poses. The key idea is to ‘spread’ a
small number of high quality automatic pose annotations
throughout the video using spatial image matching techniques and temporal propagation (see Fig 1), and use this
new annotation to fine-tune a generic ConvNet pose estimator. We demonstrate that such personalization yields significant improvements in detection performance over the original generic pose estimation method.
Our idea stems from the observation that current pose
estimation methods fail to exploit person-specific information, such as jewelery, clothing, tattoos etc. For example, if
one learns a person is wearing an item of clothing which is
easily tracked, such as a necklace, then this information can
be used to help localize the head and shoulders. Similarly,
for a distinctive pattern or color on an item of clothing, or
a tattoo/watch on a wrist. The personalization algorithm
essentially ‘locks on’ to these person-specific features, and
exploits them to more accurately determine the pose.
Operationalizing personalization requires a novel set of
methods: (i) spatial matching for body parts; (ii) temporal propagation based on dense optical flow; and (iii) an
occlusion-aware pose model for self-evaluation to verify or
excise erroneous annotations. We evaluate the personalization algorithm on both long and short videos from YouTube,
sign language TV broadcasts and cooking videos, and show
that our method significantly outperforms state of the art
generic pose estimators.
More generally, the approach provides a ‘production system’ for effortlessly and automatically generating copious
quantities of high quality annotated pose data, for example starting from the abundant repository of long video sequences containing the same person on YouTube (e.g. comedy and cooking shows; DJs; single player sports such as
golf, aerobics, gymnastics; training videos etc.). These an13063

