Monocular 3D Object Detection for Autonomous Driving
Xiaozhi Chen1 , Kaustav Kundu2 , Ziyu Zhang2 , Huimin Ma1 , Sanja Fidler2 , Raquel Urtasun2
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
{chenxz12@mails., mhmpub@}tsinghua.edu.cn, {kkundu, zzhang, fidler, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to perform 3D object detection from a single monocular image in the domain of autonomous driving. Our method first aims to generate a
set of candidate class-specific object proposals, which are
then run through a standard CNN pipeline to obtain highquality object detections. The focus of this paper is on
proposal generation. In particular, we propose an energy
minimization approach that places object candidates in 3D
using the fact that objects should be on the ground-plane.
We then score each candidate box projected to the image
plane via several intuitive potentials encoding semantic segmentation, contextual information, size and location priors and typical object shape. Our experimental evaluation
demonstrates that our object proposal generation approach
significantly outperforms all monocular approaches, and
achieves the best detection performance on the challenging KITTI benchmark, among published monocular competitors.

1. Introduction
In recent years, autonomous driving has been a focus of
attention of both industry as well as the research community. Most initial efforts rely on expensive LIDAR systems,
such as the Velodyne, and hand-annotated maps of the environment. In contrast, recent efforts try to replace the LIDAR with cheap on-board cameras, which are readily available in most modern cars. This is an exciting time for the
vision community, as this application domain provides us
with many interesting challenges.
The focus of this paper is on high-performance 2D and
3D object detection from monocular imagery in the context of autonomous driving. Most of the recent object detection pipelines [19, 20] typically proceed by generating a
diverse set of object proposals that have a high recall and
are relatively fast to compute [45, 2]. By doing this, computationally more intense classifiers such as CNNs [28, 42]
can be devoted to a smaller subset of promising image re-

gions, avoiding computation on a large set of futile candidates. Our paper follows this line of work.
Different types of object proposal methods have been
developed in the past few years. A common approach
is to over-segment the image into superpixels and group
these using several similarity measures [45, 2]. Approaches
that efficiently explore an exhaustive set of windows using
simple “objectness” features [1, 11], or contour information [55] have also been proposed. The most recent line
of work aims to learn how to propose promising object
candidates using either ensembles of binary segmentation
models [27], parametric energies [29] or window classifiers
based on CNN features [18].
These proposal generation approaches have been shown
to be very effective in the context of the PASCAL VOC
challenge, which require a rather loose notion of localization, i.e., a detection is said to be correct if it overlaps
more than 50% with the ground truth. In the context of autonomous driving, however, a much more strict overlap is
required, in order to provide a more accurate estimate of the
distance from the ego-car to the potential obstacles. As a
consequence, popular approaches, such as R-CNN [20] fall
significantly behind the competitors on autonomous driving benchmarks such as KITTI [16]. The current leader on
KITTI is Chen et al. [10], which exploits stereo imagery to
create accurate 3D proposals. However, most cars are currently equipped with a single camera, and thus monocular
object detection is of crucial importance.
Inspired by this approach, this paper proposes a method
that learns to generate class-specific 3D object proposals
with very high recall by exploiting contextual models as
well as semantics. These proposals are generated by exhaustively placing 3D bounding boxes on the ground-plane
and scoring them via simple and efficiently computable image features. In particular, we use semantic and object
instance segmentation, context, as well as shape features
and location priors to score our boxes. We learn per-class
weights for these features using S-SVM [24], adapting to
each individual object class. The top object candidates are
then scored with a CNN, resulting in the final set of detec-

2147

