End-to-end Learning of Action Detection from Frame Glimpses in Videos
Serena Yeung1 , Olga Russakovsky1,2 , Greg Mori3 , Li Fei-Fei1
1

Stanford University, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 Simon Fraser University

serena@cs.stanford.edu, olgarus@cmu.edu, mori@cs.sfu.ca, feifeili@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
In this work we introduce a fully end-to-end approach
for action detection in videos that learns to directly predict
the temporal bounds of actions. Our intuition is that the
process of detecting actions is naturally one of observation
and refinement: observing moments in video, and refining
hypotheses about when an action is occurring. Based on
this insight, we formulate our model as a recurrent neural network-based agent that interacts with a video over
time. The agent observes video frames and decides both
where to look next and when to emit a prediction. Since
backpropagation is not adequate in this non-differentiable
setting, we use REINFORCE to learn the agent’s decision
policy. Our model achieves state-of-the-art results on the
THUMOS’14 and ActivityNet datasets while observing only
a fraction (2% or less) of the video frames.

1. Introduction
Action detection in long, real-world videos is a challenging problem in computer vision. Algorithms must reason
not only about whether an action occurs somewhere in a
video, but also on the temporal extent of when it occurs.
Most existing work [22, 39, 13, 46] take the approach of
building frame-level classifiers, running them exhaustively
over a video at multiple temporal scales, and applying postprocessing such as duration priors and non-maximum suppression. However, this indirect modeling of action localization is unsatisfying in terms of both accuracy as well as
computational efficiency.
In this work, we introduce an end-to-end approach to action detection that reasons directly on the temporal bounds
of actions. Our key intuition (Fig. 1) is that the process of
detecting an action is one of continuous, iterative observation and refinement. Given a single or a few frame observations, a human can already formulate hypotheses about
when an action may occur. We can then skip ahead or back
some frames to verify, and quickly narrow down the action
location (e.g. swinging a baseball bat in Fig. 1). We are able
to sequentially decide where to look and how to refine our

Baseball Swing

[

]

Figure 1: Action detection is a process of observation and refinement. Effectively choosing a sequence of frame observations
allows us to quickly narrow down when the baseball swing occurs.

hypotheses to obtain precise localization of the action with
far less exhaustive search compared to existing algorithms.
Based on this intuition, we present a single coherent
model that takes a long video as input, and outputs the temporal bounds of detected action instances. Our model is
formulated as an agent that learns a policy for sequentially
forming and refining hypotheses about action instances.
Casting this into a recurrent neural network-based architecture, we train the model in a fully end-to-end fashion using
a combination of backpropagation and REINFORCE [42].
Our model draws inspiration from works that have used
REINFORCE to learn spatial glimpse policies for image
classification and captioning [19, 1, 30, 43]. However, action detection presents the additional challenge of how to
handle a variable-sized set of structured detection outputs.
To address this, we present a model that decides both which
frame to observe next as well as when to emit a prediction,
and we introduce a reward mechanism that enables learning this policy. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
end-to-end approach for learning to detect actions in video.
We show that our model is able to reason effectively on
the temporal bounds of actions, and achieve state-of-the-art
performance on the THUMOS’14 [11] and ActivityNet [3]
datasets. Moreover, because it learns policies for which
frames to observe, or temporally glimpse, it is able to do so
while observing only a fraction (2% or less) of the frames.
12678

