Progressive Feature Matching with Alternate Descriptor Selection and
Correspondence Enrichment

Yuan-Ting Hu

Yen-Yu Lin

Academia Sinica, Taiwan

Abstract
We address two difficulties in establishing an accurate
system for image matching. First, image matching relies
on the descriptor for feature extraction, but the optimal descriptor often varies from image to image, or even patch
to patch. Second, conventional matching approaches carry
out geometric checking on a small set of correspondence
candidates due to the concern of efficiency. It may result
in restricted performance in recall. We aim at tackling the
two issues by integrating adaptive descriptor selection and
progressive candidate enrichment into image matching. We
consider that the two integrated components are complementary: The high-quality matching yielded by adaptively
selected descriptors helps in exploring more plausible candidates, while the enriched candidate set serves as a better
reference for descriptor selection. It motivates us to formulate image matching as a joint optimization problem, in
which adaptive descriptor selection and progressive correspondence enrichment are alternately conducted. Our approach is comprehensively evaluated and compared with
the state-of-the-art approaches on two benchmarks. The
promising results manifest its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Image matching aims to seek the correspondences of
common regions across images. It is an active and fundamental research topic in computer vision, since it has been
an inherent part in a broad set of vision applications, such
as panoramic stitching [6], common pattern discovery [27],
object recognition [16, 28], image retrieval [31] and 3D reconstruction [1, 32]. A predominant paradigm of image feature matching, e.g., [28] involves three steps: 1) detecting
feature points and characterizing the detected points with
a chosen descriptor, 2) establishing a reduced set of correspondence candidates, and 3) removing outliers from the
reduced set by referring to both photometric and geometric
consistency to get the final matching results.

Despite the popularity, there are still two main obstacles
preventing us from getting satisfactory results for feature
matching. First, most matching algorithms choose a specific descriptor. However, existing descriptors are designed
with the trade-off between distinctiveness and invariance.
The effectiveness of a descriptor depends on not only intraimage appearance but also inter-image variation. Thus, the
optimal descriptor for matching is often image-dependent
or even region-dependent. Most matching methods do not
consider this issue. Second, geometric checking for outlier removal is widely adopted to enhance feature matching,
but it is of a high computational complexity. The trade-off
between accuracy and efficiency results in a compromising
mechanism. Namely, geometric checking is applied only to
a small, putative set of correspondence candidates. It degrades the performance in recall.
We aim at address the two aforementioned issues and
design an algorithm that adaptively and efficiently selects
good descriptors. We observe that descriptor selection
and candidate enrichment are complementary to each other.
High-quality matching results by adaptively selected descriptors reveal the transformations, which give a more authentic guidance on candidate enrichment. On the other
hand, the enriched candidate set serves as a better reference for descriptor selection. This observation motivated
us to cast image matching as a joint optimization problem
in which descriptor selection and candidate enrichment are
alternately carried out. Specifically, it is formulated as a labeling problem over a graph structure, and can be iteratively
optimized by using only graph cut [5]. It turns out that our
approach can produce matching results with high quality by
leveraging multiple descriptors, and does not compromise
in running time owing to dynamic candidate enrichment.
As an illustration, Figure 1 shows the matching results on
two pairs of images, jigsaws and painted ladies,
by using three different descriptors, SIFT [28], LIOP [37]
and GB [3], and our approach. For each feature point that
has corresponding point in the opposite image, we seek
its match by the nearest neighbor search with one of the
1346

