Sample-Specific SVM Learning for Person Re-identification
Ying Zhang1 , Baohua Li1 , Huchuan Lu1 , Atshushi Irie2 and Xiang Ruan2
1
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116023, China
2
OMRON Corporation, Kusatsu, Japan

Abstract
Person re-identification addresses the problem of matching people across disjoint camera views and extensive efforts have been made to seek either the robust feature representation or the discriminative matching metrics. However,
most existing approaches focus on learning a fixed distance
metric for all instance pairs, while ignoring the individuality of each person. In this paper, we formulate the person
re-identification problem as an imbalanced classification
problem and learn a classifier specifically for each pedestrian such that the matching model is highly tuned to the
individual’s appearance. To establish correspondence between feature space and classifier space, we propose a Least
Square Semi-Coupled Dictionary Learning (LSSCDL) algorithm to learn a pair of dictionaries and a mapping function efficiently. Extensive experiments on a series of challenging databases demonstrate that the proposed algorithm
performs favorably against the state-of-the-art approaches,
especially on the rank-1 recognition rate.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental task in multi-camera surveillance system, person re-identification aims to match people observed
from different cameras or across different time with a single camera. Although has gained much attention among
researchers [11, 8, 33, 44, 16, 28, 19, 32, 42, 29, 40, 2,
20, 15, 24] in recent years, person re-identification remains a challenging problem since a person’s appearance can
change significantly when large variations in view angle, illumination, background clutter and occlusion are involved.
To address these challenges, a lot of approaches have
been proposed to develop robust feature representations
which are discriminative for identity, such as Ensemble of
Localized Features (ELF) [11], Symmetry-Driven Accumulation of Local Features (SDALF) [8], Covariance descriptor based on Bio-inspired Features (gBiCov) [29] and Local
Maximal Occurrence (LOMO) [20].
On the other hand, there are many efforts attempting to
learn optimal matching metrics under which instances be-

longing to the same person are closer than different persons, like Probabilistic Relative Distance Comparison (PRDC) [44], Keep It Simple and Straightforward Metric Learning (KISSME) [16], Local Fisher Discriminant Analysis
(LFDA) [32], Cross-view Quadratic Discriminant Analysis
(XQDA) [20], etc. Taking the person re-identification as a
relative ranking problem, some researchers [33, 24] employ
the Support Vector Machine (SVM) model to learn a ranking function such that the scores of matched image pairs are
larger than unmatched ones.
However, most of the existing methods focus on learning a fixed distance metric or ranking function to measure
the similarity between all images, while ignoring the fact that different instances have different feature representations, and the metric or function derived for matching all
objects may not be optimal for every single person. Since
the primary goal of person re-identification is to seek the
optimal match for each pedestrian, a sample-specific distance metric or ranking function should be more investigated. Zheng et al. [43] utilized the initial rank scores of each
sample to compute the adaptive weights for feature fusion.
The Query based Adaptive Re-Ranking (QARR) algorithm [27] was developed to learn a weighted combination of
a base score function and a perturbation linear function for
each query. Nevertheless, both of the query-adaptive methods learn the new weighting scheme in the re-ranking stage,
and the effectiveness of the model may be easily affected by
the initial matching results.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for person
re-identification, where a sample-specific SVM is learned
for each pedestrian to seek the optimal match. The matching function parameterized by the classifier weight vector is
highly tuned to the individual’s appearance, which can provide more discriminative measurements for finding the best
candidate. To investigate the intrinsic relationship between
the feature space and weight space, we propose a Least
Square Semi-Coupled Dictionary Learning (LSSCDL) algorithm to learn a dictionary pair and a mapping function
simultaneously, through which the weight parameters of a
new sample can be easily inferred by its feature patterns.
Figure 1 shows the overview of our approach.

1278

