Saliency Guided Dictionary Learning for Weakly-Supervised Image Parsing
Baisheng Lai
Xiaojin Gong∗
College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, P. R. China,
{laibs, gongxj}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel method to perform
weakly-supervised image parsing based on the dictionary
learning framework. To deal with the challenges caused by
the label ambiguities, we design a saliency guided weight
assignment scheme to boost the discriminative dictionary
learning. More specifically, with a collection of tagged images, the proposed method first conducts saliency detection
and automatically infers the confidence for each semantic
class to be foreground or background. These clues are then
incorporated to learn the dictionaries, the weights, as well
as the sparse representation coefficients in the meanwhile.
Once obtained the coefficients of a superpixel, we use a
sparse representation classifier to determine its semantic
label. The approach is validated on the MSRC21, PASCAL VOC07, and VOC12 datasets. Experimental results
demonstrate the encouraging performance of our approach
in comparison with some state-of-the-arts.

tion. In light of the outstanding performance that dictionary
learning methods have exhibited in many other applications, we attempt to incorporate this technique to boost parsing performance. However, most discriminative dictionary
learning methods [39, 37, 10] work in a fully supervised
manner. It is a challenge to extend them to weakly supervised data because of the label ambiguities. That is, when
image-level tags are given, we only know whether an object is present or not within the image, but without location information. Therefore, we are not able to obtain pixelor superpixel-level training instances to learn dictionary for
each semantic class. In order to accomplish the task, we
make the following contributions:
• For weakly supervised discriminative dictionary learning, we design an adaptive scheme to dynamically adjust the weights that a superpixel contributes to each
semantic class. For instance, given an image labeled with ‘grass’ and ‘cow’, a superpixel within it is
not equally important for the learning of ‘grass’ and
‘cow’ dictionaries. Instead, the weights are adaptively
learned according to some constraints.

1. Introduction

• We introduce a saliency prior to guide the learning of
the weights. Intuitively, a saliency map provides us
with certain information about foreground and background, which helps to reduce the label ambiguities.
To make use of saliency, we propose an automatic
way to evaluate the confidence for a semantic class
to be foreground or background according to the cooccurrence of tags. A linear programming constraint is further formulated for the saliency guided weight
assignment. Moreover, the procedure of saliency detection [41] often considers both local and global contexts within an image. Thus, incorporating the saliency
prior implicitly introduces global information into our
model.

Image parsing is a fundamental but challenging problem
that aims to predict a semantic label for each pixel in the
image. In contrast to conventional fully supervised techniques [26, 11, 13, 7, 9, 19], in recent years, it has been attracting more and more research interest to infer labels from
weak supervision, for which expensive pixel-level annotated training samples are not required. So far, various forms
of weak supervision, such as image-level tags [27, 28, 29],
bounding boxes [36], and points [23], have been taken into
account. Considering that image-level tags are the cheapest [23] and most convenient to obtain, in this paper, we use
them to supervise image parsing.
This paper formulates our task within the dictionary
learning and sparse representation (SR) framework. Previous SR-based works [15, 16] mainly focus on sparse
constraints while using raw image patches for representa-

• We also incorporate a smoothness prior into our model. This constraint encourages label consistency by enforcing superpixels that are similar in appearance to

∗ The corresponding author.

13630

