An efficient Exact-PGA algorithm for constant curvature manifolds
Rudrasis Chakraborty1 , Dohyung Seo2 , and Baba C. Vemuri1
1
Department of CISE, University of Florida, FL 32611, USA
2
U-Systems, A GE Healthcare Company, CA, USA
1

{rudrasis, vemuri}@cise.ufl.edu

Abstract

Manifold-valued datasets are widely encountered in
many computer vision tasks. A non-linear analog of
the PCA algorithm, called the Principal Geodesic Analysis (PGA) algorithm suited for data lying on Riemannian manifolds was reported in literature a decade ago.
Since the objective function in the PGA algorithm is
highly non-linear and hard to solve efficiently in general, researchers have proposed a linear approximation.
Though this linear approximation is easy to compute, it
lacks accuracy especially when the data exhibits a large
variance. Recently, an alternative called the exact PGA
was proposed which tries to solve the optimization without any linearization. For general Riemannian manifolds, though it yields a better accuracy than the original (linearized) PGA, for data that exhibit large variance, the optimization is not computationally efficient.
In this paper, we propose an efficient exact PGA algorithm for constant curvature Riemannian manifolds
(CCM-EPGA). The CCM-EPGA algorithm differs significantly from existing PGA algorithms in two aspects,
(i) the distance between a given manifold-valued data
point and the principal submanifold is computed analytically and thus no optimization is required as in
the existing methods. (ii) Unlike the existing PGA algorithms, the descent into codimension-1 submanifolds
does not require any optimization but is accomplished
through the use of the Rimeannian inverse Exponential
map and the parallel transport operations. We present
theoretical and experimental results for constant curvature Riemannian manifolds depicting favorable performance of the CCM-EPGA algorithm compared to
existing PGA algorithms. We also present data reconstruction from the principal components which has not
been reported in literature in this setting.

2

{dhseo.118}@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a widely
used dimensionality reduction technique in Science and
Engineering. PCA however requires the input data to
lie in a vector space. With the advent of new technologies and wide spread use of sophisticated feature extraction methods, manifold-valued data have become
ubiquitous in many fields including but not limited
to, Computer Vision, Medical Imaging and Machine
Learning. A nonlinear version of PCA, called the Principal Geodesic Analysis (PGA), for data lying on Riemannian manifolds was introduced in [8].
Since the objective function of PGA is highly nonlinear and hard to solve in general, researchers proposed a linearized version of the PGA [8]. Though this
linearized PGA, hereafter referred to as PGA, is computationally efficient, it lacks accuracy for data with
large spread/variance. In order to solve the objective
function exactly, Sommer et al., [25] proposed to solve
the original objective function (not the approximation)
and called it exact PGA . While exact PGA attempts
to solve this complex nonlinear optimization problem,
it is however computationally inefficient. Though it
is not possible to efficiently and accurately solve this
optimization problem for a general manifold, however,
for manifolds with constant sectional curvature, we formulate an efficient and exact PGA algorithm, dubbed
CCM-EPGA. It is well known in geometry, by virtue
of the Killing-Hopf theorem [4], that any non-zero constant curvature manifold is isomorphic to either the hypersphere (SN ) or the hyperbolic space (HN ), hence in
this work, we present the CCM-EPGA formulation for
(SN ) and (HN ). Our formulation has several applications to Computer Vision and Statistics including directional data [21] and color spaces [19]. Several other
applications of hyperbolic geometry are, shape analysis [30], Electrical Impedance Tomography, Geoscience
Imaging [28], Brain Morphometry [29], Catadiaoptric
Vision [3] etc.
In order to depict the effectiveness of our proposed
13976

