Multivariate Regression on the Grassmannian for Predicting Novel Domains
Yongxin Yang, Timothy M. Hospedales
Queen Mary, University of London
{yongxin.yang, t.hospedales}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
We study the problem of predicting how to recognise visual objects in novel domains with neither labelled nor unlabelled training data. Domain adaptation is now an established research area due to its value in ameliorating the
issue of domain shift between train and test data. However,
it is conventionally assumed that domains are discrete entities, and that at least unlabelled data is provided in testing
domains. In this paper, we consider the case where domains
are parametrised by a vector of continuous values (e.g.,
time, lighting or view angle). We aim to use such domain
metadata to predict novel domains for recognition. This allows a recognition model to be pre-calibrated for a new domain in advance (e.g., future time or view angle) without
waiting for data collection and re-training. We achieve this
by posing the problem as one of multivariate regression on
the Grassmannian, where we regress a domain’s subspace
(point on the Grassmannian) against an independent vector
of domain parameters. We derive two novel methodologies
to achieve this challenging task: a direct kernel regression
from RM → G, and an indirect method with better extrapolation properties. We evaluate our methods on two crossdomain visual recognition benchmarks, where they perform
close to the upper bound of full data domain adaptation.
This demonstrates that data is not necessary for domain
adaptation if a domain can be parametrically described.

1. Introduction
The issue of domain shift arises when the testing data on
which we are interested to apply pattern recognition methods differs systematically from the training data available to
train them – violating the underlying assumption of supervised learning. It is becoming increasingly clear that this
issue is pervasive in practice and leads to serious drops in
performance [35, 16]. This has motivated extensive work in
the area of domain adaptation, which aims to ameliorate the
negative impact of this shift by transforming the model or
the data to bridge the train-test gap [32, 10, 28]. Although
diverse, traditional domain adaptation (DA) approaches can

be grouped according to assumptions on supervision. Supervised approaches assume the target (test) domain has labels but the data volume is very small [32], while in unsupervised approaches the target domain is completely unlabelled [10]. Nevertheless, both of these categories share
common assumptions of: (i) domains are discrete entities,
e.g., corresponding to dataset [35], or capture device [32],
and (ii) at least unlabelled data in the target domain.
Interest has recently grown in relaxing this strict assumption, and expanding the scope of domain adaptation to include a wider variety of practically valuable settings including: continuously varying rather than discrete domains [14];
domains parametrised by multiple factors rather than a single index [30, 38]; and predicting domains in advance of
seeing any samples [18]. Continuous DA considers the situation where the domain evolves continuously, for example
with time. In this case evolving the model online allows a
recognition model to remain effective, e.g., at any time of
day [14]. Multi-factor DA considers the situation where the
domain is parametrised by a vector of multiple factors, e.g.,
[pose, illumination] [30] and [capture device, location] [38].
Here, the structured nature of the domain’s parameters can
be used to improve performance compared to treating them
as discrete entities. Finally, predictive DA considers predicting a recognition model for a domain in advance of seeing any data. This provides the powerful capability of precreating models suited for immediate use in novel domains,
for example future data in a time-varying stream [18].
In this paper we provide a general framework for predictive domain adaptation – adapting a recognition model to
a new setting for which some metadata (e.g., time or view
angle) but no data is available in advance. This capability
is important, because we may not be able to wait for extensive data collection, and re-training of models as would
be required to apply conventional (un)supervised DA. Our
framework takes as input a recognition model, and set of
previously observed domains, each described by a parameter or parameter vector. It then builds a predictor for domains, that can be used to generate a recognition model for
any novel domain purely based on its parameter(s). Our
contribution is related to that of [38, 18], but it is signifi-

5071

