Robust 3D Hand Pose Estimation in Single Depth Images:
from Single-View CNN to Multi-View CNNs
Liuhao Ge, Hui Liang, Junsong Yuan, and Daniel Thalmann
Institute for Media Innovation
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{ge0001ao, hliang1}@e.ntu.edu.sg, {jsyuan, danielthalmann}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Articulated hand pose estimation plays an important
role in human-computer interaction. Despite the recent
progress, the accuracy of existing methods is still not satisfactory, partially due to the difficulty of embedded highdimensional and non-linear regression problem. Different
from the existing discriminative methods that regress for the
hand pose with a single depth image, we propose to first
project the query depth image onto three orthogonal planes
and utilize these multi-view projections to regress for 2D
heat-maps which estimate the joint positions on each plane.
These multi-view heat-maps are then fused to produce final 3D hand pose estimation with learned pose priors. Experiments show that the proposed method largely outperforms state-of-the-art on a challenging dataset. Moreover,
a cross-dataset experiment also demonstrates the good generalization ability of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
The problem of 3D hand pose estimation has aroused
a lot of attention in computer vision community for long,
as it plays a significant role in human-computer interaction
such as virtual/augmented reality applications. Despite the
recent progress in this field [14, 18, 21, 23, 29], robust and
accurate hand pose estimation remains a challenging task.
Due to large pose variations and high dimension of hand
motion, it is generally difficult to build an efficient mapping
from image features to articulated hand pose parameters.
Data-driven methods for hand pose estimation train
discriminative models, such as isometric self-organizing
map [4], random forests [7, 21, 24, 25] and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [29], to map image features to
hand pose parameters. With the availability of large annotated hand pose datasets [21, 24, 29], data-driven approaches become more advantageous as they do not require complex model calibration and are robust to poor initialization.

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed multi-view regression framework. We generate heat-maps for three views by
projecting 3D points onto three orthogonal planes. Three
CNNs are trained in parallel to map each view’s projected
image to its corresponding heat-maps, which are then fused
together to estimate 3D hand joint locations.

We focus on CNN-based data-driven methods in this paper. CNNs have been applied in body and hand pose estimation [27, 29, 30] and have shown to be effective. The
main difficulty of CNN-based methods for hand pose estimation lies in accurate 3D hand pose regression. Direct
mapping from input image to 3D locations is highly nonlinear with high learning complexity and low generalization ability of the networks [27]. One alternative way is
to map input image to a set of heat-maps which represent
the probability distributions of joint positions in the image
and recover the 3D joint locations from the depth image
with model fitting [29]. However, in this method, the heatmap only provides 2D information of the hand joint and the
depth information is not fully utilized.
In this work, we propose a novel 3D regression method
using multi-view CNNs that can better exploit depth cues to
recover fully 3D information of hand joints without model
fitting, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Specifically, the point cloud
of an input depth image is first projected onto three orthogo13593

