A Hole Filling Approach based on Background Reconstruction for View
Synthesis in 3D Video

1

Guibo Luo1
Yuesheng Zhu1
Zhaotian Li1
Liming Zhang2
Commun. Inf. Secur. Lab, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China
2
Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Macau, Macao, China

luoguibo@sz.pku.edu.cn, zhuys@pkusz.edu.cn, lizhaotian@sz.pku.edu.cn, lmzhang@umac.mo

Abstract
The depth image based rendering (DIBR) plays a key role
in 3D video synthesis, by which other virtual views can be
generated from a 2D video and its depth map. However,
in the synthesis process, the background occluded by the
foreground objects might be exposed in the new view, resulting in some holes in the synthetized video. In this paper,
a hole filling approach based on background reconstruction
is proposed, in which the temporal correlation information
in both the 2D video and its corresponding depth map are
exploited to construct a background video. To construct
a clean background video, the foreground objects are detected and removed. Also motion compensation is applied
to make the background reconstruction model suitable for
moving camera scenario. Each frame is projected to the
current plane where a modified Gaussian mixture model is
performed. The constructed background video is used to
eliminate the holes in the synthetized video. Our experimental results have indicated that the proposed approach has
better quality of the synthetized 3D video compared with
the other methods.

1. Introduction
As 3D TV and 3D movie become increasing popular recently, the technology of the production and communication
for 3D video is a hot topic. How to acquire and transmit
these 3D video data is a challenge. Depth image based rendering (DIBR) [9] technique is a practical way to generate
multi-view video by using a reference 2D video and its corresponding depth map, which can reduce the storage and
save much bandwidth. However, in the DIBR technique,
the regions of background occluded by the foreground objects in the original views might become visible in the virtual views, resulting in some holes in the synthetized video.
This is also known as “disocclusion”.
Generally, there are two types of methods to fill the

holes. One is to preprocess the depth map by a low-pass
filter so that the hole regions are reduced. The symmetric
Gaussian low-pass filter [9, 28] or asymmetric filter [14]
is employed to smooth the whole depth map, which would
lead to some geometrical distortions in the virtual view.
These methods smooth not only the horizontal edge areas
but also the areas that do not cause holes. To alleviate this
problem, an edge-dependent Gaussian filter [4] is used to
smooth the horizontal edge only and keep the non-hole areas unchanged, or an adaptive edge-oriented smoothing process [20] is utilized to preprocess the depth map with two
types of smoothing filters. This type of methods would reduce 3D effect as the depth map is smoothed. Moreover,
they are not suitable for the situation that the virtual camera
is far away from the reference camera.
The other type of methods is to use the spatial or temporal correlation of the video to fill the holes. In the spatial domain, the view blending approaches [17, 21, 32, 22] can fill
most of the holes by using multiple views, but they require
more capturing devices and transmission bandwidth. Therefore, single view approaches are more practical and draw
more attention. The hierarchical hole filling method [25]
down-samples and then progressively up-samples the virtual view, in which no geometrical distortions are produced
but blurry regions around the large holes may be introduced.
The exemplar-based inpainting method is a popular solution
to fill the large holes without introducing blur artifacts. Criminisi et al. [7] fill the holes by propagating both texture and
structure simultaneously from non-hole regions, so blurry
effect is not produced, but the foreground textures might be
sampled to fill the holes. In order to alleviate this problem, some improved methods [8, 11, 1] employ the depth
information to exclude the foreground textures in the filling process. Daribo and Saito [8] add the depth values to
compute the priority and patch distance. Gautier et al. [11]
apply 3D structure tensor of Di Zenzo matrix to compute
the priority and add depth information for patch matching.
But they [8, 11] both use the depth map of the virtual view,
which is not practical. To overcome this problem, Ahn and

1781

