Analyzing Classifiers: Fisher Vectors and Deep Neural Networks
Sebastian Lapuschkin1 , Alexander Binder2 , Grégoire Montavon3 ,
Klaus-Robert Müller3,4 , Wojciech Samek1
1
Fraunhofer HHI, 2 Singapore University of Technology and Design, 3 TU Berlin, 4 Korea University
{sebastian.lapuschkin | wojciech.samek}@hhi.fraunhofer.de , alexander binder@sutd.edu.sg
{klaus-robert.mueller | gregoire.montavon}@tu-berlin.de

Abstract
Fisher vector (FV) classifiers and Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) are popular and successful algorithms for solving
image classification problems. However, both are generally
considered ‘black box’ predictors as the non-linear transformations involved have so far prevented transparent and
interpretable reasoning. Recently, a principled technique,
Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP), has been developed in order to better comprehend the inherent structured
reasoning of complex nonlinear classification models such
as Bag of Feature models or DNNs. In this paper we (1)
extend the LRP framework also for Fisher vector classifiers
and then use it as analysis tool to (2) quantify the importance of context for classification, (3) qualitatively compare
DNNs against FV classifiers in terms of important image regions and (4) detect potential flaws and biases in data. All
experiments are performed on the PASCAL VOC 2007 and
ILSVRC 2012 data sets.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNN) have defined state of the
art in many fields, such as image classification [14], image
detection [8] and machine translation [26]. While much of
research is devoted to extending the applicability of DNNs
to more domains [9, 11, 12, 13, 31], we focus here on a
different question, namely the impact of context, and the
ability to use context. This question was raised already during times of the Pascal VOC challenge, where the amount
of context was a matter of speculation, c.f . PASCAL VOC
workshop presentation slides in [7].
The question of context is considered for two prominent
types of classifiers. The first type, Fisher vectors (FV) [24]
are based on computing a single feature map on an image
as a whole and subsequently computing one score. In such
a setup one can expect that context plays naturally a role for
the prediction as the image is processed as a whole during
training and testing. In case of small training sample sizes
and the absence of opportunities for fine-tuning, Fisher vec-

tors still might be a viable alternative to DNNs due to their
reduced parameter space. Examples for performance issues
of Deep Neural Networks on small sample sizes without
finetuning can be seen in [30]. The question of context is
also open for the second type, Deep Neural Networks. One
might assume that context plays no role for neural networks
when they are used in classification by detection setups. For
example, a recent ImageNet challenge winner relied on 144
crops per test image and classifier [27]. Another work using Pascal VOC data [20] used at test time 500 multi-scale
patches per test image. However in certain setups computing several hundred windows as required for classification
by detection setups may not be possible, e.g. when using
hardware without GPUs and much main memory, such as
used consumer laptops or smartphones, and when having
time constraints for computation of the test prediction on
an image. One can expect to see a larger impact of context
when resorting to a few regions of an image at test time only,
and thus training and testing with larger image patches.
Our contribution here is as follows. (1) We extend the
method of [1] to Fisher vectors, and apply relevance propagation for the first time to Fisher vectors. (2) We define
measures for the amount of context used for prediction in
a single test image. (3) We apply the measures of context
for neural networks and Fisher vector based classifiers on
the Pascal VOC dataset, as it offers a way to approximately
validate context by its bounding box annotation. We compare the context dependence of Fisher vectors against neural
nets which were trained on larger patches of input images.
(4) We show that this methodology is able to identify strong
cases of context and biases in the training data even without
using bounding box information.
The next section reviews related work. Section 3 briefly
describes the Fisher vector classifier. Section 4 introduces
the extended LRP method to decompose a Fisher vector prediction into scores for small regions of the order of a local
feature. The same section also proposes a novel LRP-based
measure of the importance of context. Section 5 introduces
the experimental setup and presents results. The paper concludes in Section 6 with a summary and an outlook.

2912

