Thin-Slicing for Pose:
Learning to Understand Pose without Explicit Pose Estimation
Suha Kwak
Minsu Cho
Ivan Laptev
WILLOW Project Team – Inria / École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France

1. Introduction
There can be as much value in the blink of an eye as in
months of rational analysis.
— Malcolm Gladwell

How much detail do we actually need to figure out in order
to understand a scene? While the answer largely depends
on the scene and a task at hand, we often make a good decision only with a thin slice of information. In fact, a decision
by a few glances is sometimes no worse and even better than
hours of pondering [26]. Given a limited time and resource,
this thin-slicing decision becomes crucial in particular. For
example, drivers often need to rely on their immediate understanding of situations they pass by, otherwise running
someone or themselves into danger.
This paper addresses learning a thin-slicing machine for
human pose, relieving the need for explicit pose estimation.
While a person in a specific pose is one of the most informative objects for scene understanding, the problem of pose
estimation, aiming at localizing individual body joints, still
remains a challenging open problem [13, 43, 50, 51, 61].
Even with a full body visible, frequent self-occlusion and
huge diversity in pose make the problem hard to solve. As

Dissimilar

We address the problem of learning a pose-aware, compact embedding that projects images with similar human
poses to be placed close-by in the embedding space. The
embedding function is built on a deep convolutional network, and trained with triplet-based rank constraints on
real image data. This architecture allows us to learn a
robust representation that captures differences in human
poses by effectively factoring out variations in clothing,
background, and imaging conditions in the wild. For a
variety of pose-related tasks, the proposed pose embedding provides a cost-efficient and natural alternative to explicit pose estimation, circumventing challenges of localizing body joints. We demonstrate the efficacy of the embedding on pose-based image retrieval and action recognition
problems.

Similar

Abstract

Figure 1: The manifold of our pose embedding visualized
using t-SNE [53]. Each point represents a human pose image. To better show correlation between the pose embedding and annotated pose, we color-code pose similarities in
annotation between an arbitrary target image (red box) and
all the other images. Selected examples of color-coded images are illustrated in the right-hand side. Images similar
with the target in annotated pose are colored in yellow, otherwise in blue. As can be seen, yellow images lie closer
by the target in general, which shows that a position on the
embedding space implicitly represents a human pose. (Best
viewed in color.)

often formulated a complicated structured inference problem [13, 50], human pose estimation is computationally
heavy in practice as well.
We argue that solving explicit pose estimation may not
be necessary for many problems that only require an estimate of pose similarity. To bypass pose estimation, we
learn an efficient pose embedding function based on a convolutional neural network (CNN) [18, 32] with a triplet rank
loss [12, 44, 56, 57, 59]. Our pose embedding, trained
on real data, provides a pose-aware, compact mapping that
projects images with similar human poses in same neigh14938

