Constrained Joint Cascade Regression Framework for Simultaneous Facial
Action Unit Recognition and Facial Landmark Detection
Yue Wu
Qiang Ji
ECSE Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 8th street, Troy, NY, USA
{wuy9, jiq}@rpi.edu

Abstract
Cascade regression framework has been shown to be effective for facial landmark detection. It starts from an initial face shape and gradually predicts the face shape update from the local appearance features to generate the facial landmark locations in the next iteration until convergence. In this paper, we improve upon the cascade regression framework and propose the Constrained Joint Cascade Regression Framework (CJCRF) for simultaneous facial action unit recognition and facial landmark detection,
which are two related face analysis tasks, but are seldomly
exploited together. In particular, we first learn the relationships among facial action units and face shapes as a constraint. Then, in the proposed constrained joint cascade
regression framework, with the help from the constraint, we
iteratively update the facial landmark locations and the action unit activation probabilities until convergence. Experimental results demonstrate that the intertwined relationships of facial action units and face shapes boost the performances of both facial action unit recognition and facial
landmark detection. The experimental results also demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method comparing
to the state-of-the-art works.

1. Introduction
Facial action unit recognition and facial landmark detection are two important tasks for face analysis. Facial action unit recognition refers to the automatic estimation of
the Action Units (AU) defined in the Facial Action Coding
System (FACS) [3]. FACS system and the facial action units
provide objective measurements of the facial muscle movements and the facial motions. Facial landmark detection
refers to the localization of the facial key points, such as the
eye corners and the nose tip on facial images. The locations
of the detected landmarks characterize the face shape. Both
facial action unit recognition and facial landmark detection

Update facial landmark locations
AU activation probabilities
Constraint:
1) AU and Face shape
relationship
2) AU relationship
3) Face shape pattern

Current landmark locations

Update AU activation probabilities

Figure 1. Constrained joint cascade regression framework for simultaneous facial action unit recognition and landmark detection.

would enable the machine understanding of human facial
behavior, intent, emotion etc.
Facial action unit recognition and facial landmark detection are related tasks, but they are seldomly exploited jointly
in the literatures. For example, the face shape defined by
the landmark locations are considered as effective features
for AU recognition. But, the landmark location information is usually extracted beforehand with facial landmark
detection algorithms. On the other hand, the Action Unit
information is rarely utilized in the literature to help facial
landmark detection, even though the facial muscle movements and the activation of specific facial action unit can
cause the appearance and shape changes of the face which
significantly affect facial landmark detection. The mutual
information and intertwined relationship among facial action unit recognition and facial landmark detection should
be utilized to boost the performances of both tasks.
Cascade regression framework has been shown to be an
effective method for face alignment recently [19][13]. It
starts from an initial face shape (e.g. mean face) and it iteratively updates the facial landmark locations based on the
local appearance features until convergence. Several regression models have been applied to learn the mapping from
the local appearance features to the face shape update.
To leverage the success of the cascade regression framework and to achieve the goal of joint facial action unit
13400

