Constrained Deep Transfer Feature Learning and its Applications
Yue Wu
Qiang Ji
ECSE Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 8th street, Troy, NY, USA
{wuy9, jiq}@rpi.edu

Abstract
Feature learning with deep models has achieved impressive results for both data representation and classification
for various vision tasks. Deep feature learning, however,
typically requires a large amount of training data, which
may not be feasible for some application domains. Transfer
learning can be one of the approaches to alleviate this problem by transferring data from data-rich source domain to
data-scarce target domain. Existing transfer learning methods typically perform one-shot transfer learning and often
ignore the specific properties that the transferred data must
satisfy. To address these issues, we introduce a constrained
deep transfer feature learning method to perform simultaneous transfer learning and feature learning by performing
transfer learning in a progressively improving feature space
iteratively in order to better narrow the gap between the target domain and the source domain for effective transfer of
the data from source domain to target domain. Furthermore, we propose to exploit the target domain knowledge
and incorporate such prior knowledge as constraint during
transfer learning to ensure that the transferred data satisfies
certain properties of the target domain.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed constrained deep transfer feature learning method, we apply
it to thermal feature learning for eye detection by transferring from the visible domain. We also applied the proposed
method for cross-view facial expression recognition as a
second application. The experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method for both applications.

1. Introduction
Feature learning with deep models is an active research
area. Recent research has demonstrated that with feature
learning methods, effective features can be learnt for both
representation and classification of the input data for many
computer vision tasks including face recognition [20], object detection [5], and scene classification [24]. Feature

Second feature space
Step 4: Feature learning with
both transferred and target data

Step 3: Constrained
transfer learning

First feature space
Step 2: Feature learning with
both transferred and target data

Step 1: Constrained
transfer learning
Source
data

Source domain

Transferred
data

Target
data

Raw data space

Intermediate domains Target domain

Figure 1. The framework of the proposed constrained deep transfer
feature learning method. The algorithm iteratively performs transfer learning and feature learning in more and more deeper feature
spaces.

learning with deep model, however, typically requires a
large amount of training data. Hence, feature learning for
domains with scarce data is not feasible.
Transfer learning can be one of the approaches to address
this problem and help feature learning in the data-scarce target domain by transferring data or knowledge from datarich source domain. Transfer learning not only can compensate for the lack of data in the target domain but can
also benefit the tasks in the target domain from the experience gained from the source domain. The transfer learning
techniques usually involve instance transfer, feature transfer, model parameter transfer, or relational knowledge transfer [12]. Those transfer learning techniques have been
used in natural language processing [1], document classification [23], etc. However, typical transfer learning techniques usually perform one-shot transfer in a fixed or shallow feature space, while a fixed feature space may not effectively fill the semantic gap between the target and source
domains. Another issue with transfer learning is that it is
purely data driven, without adequately considering certain
inherent properties of the target data.
To tackle these issues, we propose a constrained deep
transfer feature learning method to perform simultaneous
transfer learning and feature learning by exploiting the
knowledge in both target and source domains. The general
framework is shown in Figure 1. Specifically, we propose
15101

