Robust Light Field Depth Estimation for Noisy Scene with Occlusion
Williem and In Kyu Park
Dept. of Information and Communication Engineering, Inha University
22112195@inha.edu, pik@inha.ac.kr

Abstract
Light field depth estimation is an essential part of many
light field applications. Numerous algorithms have been developed using various light field characteristics. However,
conventional methods fail when handling noisy scene with
occlusion. To remedy this problem, we present a light field
depth estimation method which is more robust to occlusion
and less sensitive to noise. Novel data costs using angular entropy metric and adaptive defocus response are introduced. Integration of both data costs improves the occlusion
and noise invariant capability significantly. Cost volume
filtering and graph cut optimization are utilized to improve
the accuracy of the depth map. Experimental results confirm that the proposed method is robust and achieves high
quality depth maps in various scenes. The proposed method
outperforms the state-of-the-art light field depth estimation
methods in qualitative and quantitative evaluation.

1. Introduction
4D light field camera has become a potential technology in image acquisition due to its rich information captured at once. It does not capture the accumulated intensity of a pixel but captures the intensity for each light direction. Commercial light field cameras, such as Lytro [16]
and Raytrix [18], trigger the consumer and researcher interests on light field because of its practicability compared to
the conventional light field camera arrays [26]. A light field
image allows wider application to explore than a conventional 2D image. Various applications have been presented
in the recent literatures, such as refocusing [17], depth estimation [4, 15, 11, 19, 20, 22, 23], saliency detection [14],
matting [5], calibration [2, 6, 7], editing [10], etc.
Depth estimation from a light field image has become
a challenging and active problem for the last few years.
Many researchers utilize various characteristics of light
field (e.g. epipolar plane image, angular patch, and focal
stack) to develop the algorithms. However, the state-of-theart techniques mostly fail on occlusion because it breaks the
photo consistency assumption. Chen et al. [4] introduced a

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Comparison of disparity maps of various algorithms on a noisy light field image (σ = 10). (First row)
Data cost only. (Second row) Data cost + global optimization. (a) Proposed data cost with less fattening effect; (b)
Jeon’s data cost [11]; (c) Chen’s data cost [4].
method that is robust to occlusion but their method is sensitive to noise. Wang et al. [22] proposed an occlusion-aware
depth estimation method but it is limited to a single occluder
and highly depends on the edge detection result. It remains
difficult for a depth estimation method to perform well on
real data because of the occlusion and noise presence. Note
that recent works mostly evaluate the results after the global
optimization method is applied. Thus, the discrimination
power of each data cost is not evaluated deeply since the
final results depend on the individual optimization method.
In this paper, we introduce novel data costs based on our
observation on the light field. Following the idea of [19],
we utilize two different cues: correspondence and defocus
cues. An angular entropy metric is proposed as the correspondence cue, which measures the pixel color randomness
of the angular patch quantitatively. Adaptive defocus response is the modified version of the conventional defocus
response [20] that is robust to occlusion. We perform cost
volume filtering and graph cut for optimization. An extensive comparison between the proposed and the conventional
data costs is done to measure the discrimination power of
each data cost. In addition, to evaluate the proposed method
14396

