Factors in Finetuning Deep Model for Object Detection with Long-tail
Distribution
Wanli Ouyang, Xiaogang Wang,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Cong Zhang, Xiaokang Yang
Shanghai Jiaotong University

wlouyang, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

zhangcong0929, xkyang@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

4

6000

1500

4

x 10

4000

Finetuning from a pretrained deep model is found to
yield state-of-the-art performance for many vision tasks.
This paper investigates many factors that inﬂuence the performance in ﬁnetuning for object detection. There is a longtailed distribution of sample numbers for classes in object
detection. Our analysis and empirical results show that
classes with more samples have higher impact on the feature learning. And it is better to make the sample number more uniform across classes. Generic object detection
can be considered as multiple equally important tasks. Detection of each class is a task. These classes/tasks have
their individuality in discriminative visual appearance representation. Taking this individuality into account, we cluster objects into visually similar class groups and learn
deep representations for these groups separately. A hierarchical feature learning scheme is proposed. In this
scheme, the knowledge from the group with large number
of classes is transferred for learning features in its subgroups. Finetuned on the GoogLeNet model, experimental
results show 4.7% absolute mAP improvement of our approach on the ImageNet object detection dataset without increasing much computational cost at the testing stage. Code
is available on www.ee.cuhk.edu.hk/˜wlouyang/
projects/ImageNetFactors/CVPR16.html

1. Introduction
Finetuning refers to the approach that initializes the
model parameters for the target task from the parameters
pretrained on another related task. Finetuning from the
deep model pretrained on the large-scale ImageNet dataset
is found to yield state-of-the-art performance for many vision tasks such as tracking [38], segmentation [12], object
detection [35, 25, 22], action recognition [16], and human
pose estimation [5]. When ﬁnetuning the deep model for
object detection, however, we have two observations.
The ﬁrst is the long-tail property. The ImageNet image
classiﬁcation dataset is a well compiled dataset, in which
objects of different classes have similar number of samples.
In real applications, however, we will experience the long-

1000

2
2000

500

0
500
1000
ImageNet Classification
dataset (train)

0

0

100

0

200

ImageNet Detection
dataset (val1)
(a)

Finetuned for 200 classes

0

10

VOC07 Detection
dataset (train+val )

20

Finetuned for specific classes
.

Rabbit

Squirrel
(b)

Figure 1. The number of samples in y-axis sorted in decreasing order for different classes in x-axis on different datasets (a) and the
models obtained using different strategy (b). Long-tail property is
observed for ImageNet and Pascal object detection dataset in (a).
Models are visualized using the DeepDraw [1]. Compared with
the model on the left in (b) ﬁnetuned for all the 200 classes in ImageNet detection dataset, the model ﬁnetuned for speciﬁc classes
on the right column in (b) is better in representing rabbit and squirrel. Best viewed in color.

tail phenomena, where small number of object classes appear very often while most of the others appear more rarely.
For segmentation, pixel regions for certain classes appear
more often than the regions for other classes. For object
detection, some object classes such as person have much
more samples than the other object classes like sheep for
both PASCAL VOC [8] and ImageNet [29] object detection
dataset, as shown in Fig. 2(a). More examples and discussion on the long-tail property is given in a recent talk given
by Bengio [3]. For detection approaches using hand-crafted
features [10, 36], feature extraction is separated from the
classiﬁer learning task. Therefore, the feature extraction is
not inﬂuenced by the long-tail property. For deeply learned

1864

