Optimal Relative Pose with Unknown Correspondences
1

Johan Fredriksson1 ,Viktor Larsson1 , Carl Olsson1 and Fredrik Kahl1,2
Lund University, Sweden 2 Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
{johanf, viktorl, calle}@maths.lth.se fredrik.kahl@chalmers.se
Abstract

Previous work on estimating the epipolar geometry of
two views relies on being able to reliably match feature
points based on appearance. In this paper, we go one
step further and show that it is feasible to compute both
the epipolar geometry and the correspondences at the same
time based on geometry only. We do this in a globally optimal manner. Our approach is based on an efficient branch
and bound technique in combination with bipartite matching to solve the correspondence problem. We rely on several
recent works to obtain good bounding functions to battle the
combinatorial explosion of possible matchings. It is experimentally demonstrated that more difficult cases can be handled and that more inlier correspondences can be obtained
by being less restrictive in the matching phase.

1. Introduction
The ability to compute the relative pose between two
cameras is of fundamental importance in multiple view geometry. Almost all structure from motion systems rely on
this subproblem for building an overall reconstruction. Efficient minimal solvers [17] as well as globally optimal
branch and bound methods [10] exist. Like most other multiple view geometry problems, relative orientation is typically computed from a set of image point correspondences
which are generated using image appearance alone. To obtain reliable correspondences the matching criterion is quite
restrictive and will in practice only allow feature points with
unique appearance. For example, [15] requires that the best
matching score is significantly better than the second best
one. As a consequence the number of available point correspondences can be small in scenes with ambiguous and/or
repeated texture. Despite a restrictive matching criterion
one has to expect that a portion of the feature points are
incorrectly matched due to noise and appearance changes.
Since these mismatches do not obey the Gaussian noise assumption they can be devastating to the reconstruction quality. To detect and remove such outliers, minimal solvers
[17] in combination with RANSAC [6] are often employed.
While it is very efficient in cases with a relatively low number of outliers RANSAC does not offer any optimality guarantees. Recently it has been shown that in many applica-

Figure 1: Example of two images of the same scene. The
goal is to recover both the relative pose and the correct
matching between the points.

tions RANSAC tends to fail when the number of outliers is
high [13, 4, 7]. To address this problem researchers have
started to consider methods that are guaranteed to find the
largest possible inlier set. In [7] a method for determining
the relative translation that maximizes the number of inliers
is presented. The approach has a worst case complexity of
O(n2 log(n)) where n is the number of putative matches.
In [8] the same problem is addressed in a branch and bound
framework. While the worst case complexity is exponential
it is shown to outperform [7] in practice. For the full relative pose problem, [5] and [19] propose methods that also
maximize the number of inliers.
While the above approaches all assume unique putative
matches, in this paper, we take a step further and consider
problems with multiple possible matches. In the extreme
case, we consider the search space of all possible matching
pairs. This gives a way to aid the matching in settings with
ambiguous texture by incorporating geometric knowledge
into the matching process. If the camera motion is known
then the search for point correspondences is reduced to a
search over known epipolar lines [16]. On the other hand, if
the motion is unknown then we need to solve for geometry
and point correspondences simultaneously, which is much
harder. We propose a simple technique for solving this
problem. To our knowledge it has previously not been attempted. Compared to regular inlier maximization there are
two difficulties that have to be overcome. First, the space of
matches to search grows quickly when we allow more than
just the best match for each point. Second, with several
feasible matches for each point we need to enforce one-toone constraints. Our approach can be seen as a branch and
bound method in two levels. Rather than searching over all

1728

