Deep Compositional Captioning:
Describing Novel Object Categories without Paired Training Data
Lisa Anne Hendricks1
Subhashini Venugopalan3
Marcus Rohrbach1,2
3
4
Raymond Mooney
Kate Saenko
Trevor Darrell1,2
1
UC Berkeley, 2 ICSI, Berkeley, 3 UT Austin, 4 UMass Lowell

Abstract
Deep
Compositional
Captioner

While recent deep neural network models have achieved
promising results on the image captioning task, they rely
largely on the availability of corpora with paired image and sentence captions to describe objects in context.
In this work, we propose the Deep Compositional Captioner (DCC) to address the task of generating descriptions
of novel objects which are not present in paired imagesentence datasets. Our method achieves this by leveraging
large object recognition datasets and external text corpora
and by transferring knowledge between semantically similar concepts. Current deep caption models can only describe objects contained in paired image-sentence corpora,
despite the fact that they are pre-trained with large object
recognition datasets, namely ImageNet. In contrast, our
model can compose sentences that describe novel objects
and their interactions with other objects. We demonstrate
our model’s ability to describe novel concepts by empirically evaluating its performance on MSCOCO and show
qualitative results on ImageNet images of objects for which
no paired image-sentence data exist. Further, we extend
our approach to generate descriptions of objects in video
clips. Our results show that DCC has distinct advantages
over existing image and video captioning approaches for
generating descriptions of new objects in context.

Unpaired Image Data

Otter

Pizza

Paired ImageSentence Data

Alpaca

A bus driving
down the
street.

Bus

Yummy pizza
sitting on the
table.

Existing
Methods

A otter that is sitting
in the water.

Unpaired Text Data
Otters live in a
variety of
aquatic
environments.
Pepperoni is a
popular pizza
topping.

A dog sitting on a
boat in the water.

Figure 1: Existing deep caption methods are unable to generate
sentences about objects unseen in caption corpora (like otter). In
contrast, our model effectively incorporates information from independent image datasets and text corpora to compose descriptions about novel objects without any paired image-sentence data.

have the capacity to recognize thousands of object classes,
existing state-of-the-art caption models lack the ability to
form compositional structures which integrate new objects
with known concepts without explicit examples of imagesentence pairs. To address this limitation, we propose
the Deep Compositional Captioner (DCC) which can combine visual groundings of lexical units to generate descriptions about objects which are not present in caption corpora (paired image-sentence data), but are present in object
recognition datasets (unpaired image data) and text corpora
(unpaired text data).
DCC builds on recent deep captioning models [36, 5,
16, 15, 21] which combine convolutional and recurrent
networks for visual description. However unlike previous
models which can only describe objects that are present in
paired image-sentence data, DCC is compositional in the
sense that it can seamlessly construct sentences about new
objects by combining them with already seen linguistic expressions in paired training data. To illustrate, consider the
image of the otter in Figure 1. To describe the image ac-

1. Introduction
In the past year, several deep recurrent neural network
models have demonstrated promising results on the task of
generating descriptions for images and videos [36, 5, 16,
15, 21]. Large corpora of paired images and descriptions,
such as MSCOCO [20] and Flickr30k [11] have been an
important factor contributing to the success of these methods. However, these datasets describe a relatively small variety of objects in comparison to the number of labeled objects in object recognition datasets, such as ImageNet [3].
Consequently, though modern object recognition systems
11

