Two Illuminant Estimation and User Correction Preference
Dongliang Cheng1,∗
1

Abdelrahman Kamel1,∗ Brian Price2

Scott Cohen2

2

Adobe Research

National University of Singapore

dongliang.cheng@u.nus.edu

{akamel,brown}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Michael S. Brown1

{bprice,scohen}@adobe.com

Indoor
Outdoor

This paper examines the problem of white-balance correction when a scene contains two illuminations. This is a
two step process: 1) estimate the two illuminants; and 2)
correct the image. Existing methods attempt to estimate a
spatially varying illumination map, however, results are error prone and the resulting illumination maps are too lowresolution to be used for proper spatially varying whitebalance correction. In addition, the spatially varying nature
of these methods make them computationally intensive. We
show that this problem can be effectively addressed by not
attempting to obtain a spatially varying illumination map,
but instead by performing illumination estimation on large
sub-regions of the image. Our approach is able to detect
when distinct illuminations are present in the image and
accurately measure these illuminants. Since our proposed
strategy is not suitable for spatially varying image correction, a user study is performed to see if there is a preference for how the image should be corrected when two illuminants are present, but only a global correction can be
applied. The user study shows that when the illuminations
are distinct, there is a preference for the outdoor illumination to be corrected resulting in warmer final result. We use
these collective findings to demonstrate an effective two illuminant estimation scheme that produces corrected images
that users prefer.

1. Introduction
Scene illumination affects the overall color of a captured
image. Estimating the illumination and subsequent correction, i.e. white-balance, to remove the color cast caused by
the illumination is a fundamental processing step applied
to virtually all images. Most white-balance methods assume the imaged scene is uniformly illuminated with a single light source, however, it is not uncommon for a scene
to be illuminated by more than one light as shown in Figure 1-(a). Most existing approaches that attempt to estimate
multiple illuminations use a sliding window strategy or im∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

(a) RAW image

(d) User preferred correction
(b) Image corrected by
the outdoor illuminant

(c) Image corrected by
the indoor illuminant

Figure 1: An example scene with two different illuminations (indoor and outdoor). The color of the original RAW
image is biased by two illuminations. (b) and (c) show the
images corrected by each of the illuminants respectively. (d)
shows the corrected image preferred by users.

age segmentation to perform local illumination estimation.
This results in a spatially varying illumination map over the
image. Such illumination maps are typically low-resolution
(e.g. 15 × 20) and their effectiveness in subsequent whitebalance correction is often not demonstrated. Moreover,
these methods tend to be slow and require prior knowledge
that the imaged scene contains two illuminations.
In this paper, we advocate a different strategy for addressing the two illuminant estimation problem. Specifically, we find it more effective not to attempt to estimate
a spatially varying illumination map. Instead, we show
that applying a single-illuminant estimation method on a
relatively small number of large sub-images in the input
image can not only detect if two distinct illuminants are
present, but provide accurate estimations for these illuminations. Since our strategy does not provide spatial information about the two illuminations, the image must be corrected in a global manner. To this end, we perform a user
study to determine if users have a preference for which illumination they would prefer to be corrected (see Figure 1).
Our study found that users have a clear preference for a result that is a mixture of the two illuminations, with more
weight on the outdoor illumination.

469

