The Cityscapes Dataset for Semantic Urban Scene Understanding
Marius Cordts1,2
Mohamed Omran3
Sebastian Ramos1,4
Timo Rehfeld1,2
Markus Enzweiler1
Rodrigo Benenson3
Uwe Franke1
Stefan Roth2
Bernt Schiele3
1

Daimler AG R&D, 2 TU Darmstadt, 3 MPI Informatics, 4 TU Dresden
www.cityscapes-dataset.net

train/val – fine annotation – 3475 images

train – coarse annotation – 20 000 images

Abstract
Visual understanding of complex urban street scenes is
an enabling factor for a wide range of applications. Object detection has benefited enormously from large-scale
datasets, especially in the context of deep learning. For
semantic urban scene understanding, however, no current
dataset adequately captures the complexity of real-world
urban scenes. To address this, we introduce Cityscapes, a
benchmark suite and large-scale dataset to train and test
approaches for pixel-level and instance-level semantic labeling. Cityscapes is comprised of a large, diverse set of
stereo video sequences recorded in streets from 50 different
cities. 5000 of these images have high quality pixel-level
annotations; 20 000 additional images have coarse annotations to enable methods that leverage large volumes of
weakly-labeled data. Crucially, our effort exceeds previous attempts in terms of dataset size, annotation richness,
scene variability, and complexity. Our accompanying empirical study provides an in-depth analysis of the dataset
characteristics, as well as a performance evaluation of several state-of-the-art approaches based on our benchmark.

1. Introduction
Visual scene understanding has moved from an elusive
goal to a focus of much recent research in computer vision [27]. Semantic reasoning about the contents of a scene
is thereby done on several levels of abstraction. Scene
recognition aims to determine the overall scene category
by putting emphasis on understanding its global properties,
e.g. [46, 82]. Scene labeling methods, on the other hand,
seek to identify the individual constituent parts of a whole
scene as well as their interrelations on a more local pixel-

test – fine annotation – 1525 images

and instance-level, e.g. [41, 71]. Specialized object-centric
methods fall somewhere in between by focusing on detecting a certain subset of (mostly dynamic) scene constituents,
e.g. [6,12,13,15]. Despite significant advances, visual scene
understanding remains challenging, particularly when taking human performance as a reference.
The resurrection of deep learning [34] has had a major
impact on the current state-of-the-art in machine learning
and computer vision. Many top-performing methods in a
variety of applications are nowadays built around deep neural networks [30, 41, 66]. A major contributing factor to
their success is the availability of large-scale, publicly available datasets such as ImageNet [59], PASCAL VOC [14],
PASCAL-Context [45], and Microsoft COCO [38] that allow deep neural networks to develop their full potential.
Despite the existing gap to human performance, scene
understanding approaches have started to become essential components of advanced real-world systems. A particularly popular and challenging application involves selfdriving cars, which make extreme demands on system
performance and reliability. Consequently, significant research efforts have gone into new vision technologies for
understanding complex traffic scenes and driving scenarios [4, 16–18, 58, 62]. Also in this area, research progress
can be heavily linked to the existence of datasets such as
the KITTI Vision Benchmark Suite [19], CamVid [7], Leuven
[35], and Daimler Urban Segmentation [61] datasets. These
urban scene datasets are often much smaller than datasets
addressing more general settings. Moreover, we argue that
they do not fully capture the variability and complexity
of real-world inner-city traffic scenes. Both shortcomings
currently inhibit further progress in visual understanding
of street scenes. To this end, we propose the Cityscapes
benchmark suite and a corresponding dataset, specifically
13213

