GraB: Visual Saliency via Novel Graph Model and Background Priors
Qiaosong Wang1 , Wen Zheng2 , and Robinson Piramuthu2
1

University of Delaware 2 eBay Research

Abstract
We propose an unsupervised bottom-up saliency detection approach by exploiting novel graph structure and background priors. The input image is represented as an undirected graph with superpixels as nodes. Feature vectors are
extracted from each node to cover regional color, contrast
and texture information. A novel graph model is proposed
to effectively capture local and global saliency cues. To
obtain more accurate saliency estimations, we optimize the
saliency map by using a robust background measure. Comprehensive evaluations on benchmark datasets indicate that
our algorithm universally surpasses state-of-the-art unsupervised solutions and performs favorably against supervised approaches.

1. Introduction
Humans are able to rapidly identify the visually distinctive objects in a scene. This fundamental capability has long
been studied in neuroscience and cognitive psychology. In
the computer vision community, researchers focus on similar tasks to determine regions that attract attention from
a human perception system. The selected regions contain
ﬁner details of interest and can be used for extraction of intermediate and higher level information. Therefore, a fast
and robust saliency detection algorithm can beneﬁt various
other vision tasks.
The literature of saliency map estimation is vast. However, most existing approaches can be categorized into
unsupervised (typically bottom-up) [10, 28, 32, 36, 19]
and supervised (typically bottom-up, but more recent approaches are a combination of top-down and bottom-up)
[17, 24, 15, 20] approaches.
While supervised approaches are able to automatically
integrate multiple features and in general achieve better
performance than unsupervised methods, it is still expensive to perform the training process, especially data collection. Also, compared to traditional special-purpose object detectors (e.g. pedestrian detection) where objects un-

Figure 1: Our novel graph structure with superpixels as
nodes. The purple and blue lines represent connections to
ﬁrst and second order neighbors, respectively. The green
lines indicate that each node is connected to the boundary
nodes on four sides of the image. The red lines show that
the all boundary nodes are connected among themselves.
See Sec. 3.1 for details.
der the same class share some consistency, the salient objects from two images are often found vastly different in
terms of visual appearance, especially when the object can
be anything. Furthermore, the process of generating pixelwise ground truth annotations itself is expensive and laborintensive, and sometimes may even be impossible considering the scale of today’s massive long-tailed visual repositories. This is typically the case in large e-commerce scenarios. A fast saliency technique can be an essential preprocessing step for background removal or object/product
detection and recognition in large ecommerce applications.
In this paper, we propose an unsupervised bottom-up
saliency estimation approach. Our method is based on
the remarkable success of the spectral graph theory. We
focus on the core elements of spectral clustering algorithms. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a new graph model
which captures local/global contrast and effectively utilizes
the boundary prior. Inspired by ISOMAP manifold learning [31], we introduce geodesic distance to calculate the
weight matrix. This constraint maximally enforces the
background connectivity prior. Furthermore, we exploit

535

