Using Self-Contradiction to Learn Confidence Measures in Stereo Vision
Christian Mostegel
Markus Rumpler
Friedrich Fraundorfer
Horst Bischof
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology∗
{surname}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
Learned confidence measures gain increasing importance for outlier removal and quality improvement in stereo
vision. However, acquiring the necessary training data is
typically a tedious and time consuming task that involves
manual interaction, active sensing devices and/or synthetic
scenes. To overcome this problem, we propose a new, flexible, and scalable way for generating training data that only
requires a set of stereo images as input. The key idea of
our approach is to use different view points for reasoning about contradictions and consistencies between multiple depth maps generated with the same stereo algorithm.
This enables us to generate a huge amount of training data
in a fully automated manner. Among other experiments,
we demonstrate the potential of our approach by boosting the performance of three learned confidence measures
on the KITTI2012 dataset by simply training them on a
vast amount of automatically generated training data rather
than a limited amount of laser ground truth data.

1. Introduction
Many works have demonstrated that machine learning
can be greatly beneficial for stereo vision [23, 31, 36, 24,
10]. All these works have one thing in common:
They require training data – the more the better.
Previous approaches used three main sources of training
data. The first source is manual labeling. While this is the
traditional approach in the fields of classification and segmentation (e.g. [5, 33, 29]), it requires hundreds of manhours even in 2D. Because the task becomes even more
taxing in 3D, only very few manually labeled datasets exist in this domain (e.g. [18]). The second source is synthetic data generation [2, 24]. Unfortunately, pure synthetic
data generation has not yet reached the level where it generalizes to natural images without an extreme modeling ef∗ The research leading to these results has received funding from the

EC FP7 project 3D-PITOTI (ICT-2011-600545) and from the Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG) as Vision+ project 836630 and together
with OMICRON electronics GmbH as Bridge1 project 843450.

Figure 1. Our approach automatically detects and classifies contradictions and consistencies between multiple depth maps to generate labeled training images, which can be used for training confidence measures. From top to bottom: RGB input images, depth
maps created with a query stereo algorithm (here [26]), label images based on laser ground truth [7] and our automatically generated label images. In the label images, green stands for positive
samples, red for negative and blue is ignored during training.

fort. The third source is to record ground truth data with
active depth sensors, which is currently the most popular
source [32, 7, 21, 27]. If a projector based setup is used [27],
the ground truth can achieve a very high accuracy, but the
data acquisition takes a lot of time and is restricted to indoor
scenes. For outdoor scenes the method of choice is typically
the use of a laser scanner [32, 7, 21]. Aside from requiring a
non-trivial registration between the laser reconstruction and
the recorded images, this method is also subject to a range
of assumptions itself. This fact makes a manual removal of
obviously incorrect ground truth data necessary for outdoor
datasets [7, 21]. Some approaches, like [21], combine these
three sources. They combine active sensing with synthetic
car models and manual annotation to increase the quality of
ground truth data.
14067

