Semi-supervised Vocabulary-informed Learning
Yanwei Fu and Leonid Sigal
Disney Research
y.fu@qmul.ac.uk, lsigal@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
Despite significant progress in object categorization, in
recent years, a number of important challenges remain;
mainly, ability to learn from limited labeled data and ability
to recognize object classes within large, potentially open,
set of labels. Zero-shot learning is one way of addressing
these challenges, but it has only been shown to work with
limited sized class vocabularies and typically requires separation between supervised and unsupervised classes, allowing former to inform the latter but not vice versa. We
propose the notion of semi-supervised vocabulary-informed
learning to alleviate the above mentioned challenges and
address problems of supervised, zero-shot and open set
recognition using a unified framework. Specifically, we propose a maximum margin framework for semantic manifoldbased recognition that incorporates distance constraints
from (both supervised and unsupervised) vocabulary atoms,
ensuring that labeled samples are projected closest to their
correct prototypes, in the embedding space, than to others.
We show that resulting model shows improvements in supervised, zero-shot, and large open set recognition, with up to
310K class vocabulary on AwA and ImageNet datasets.

1. Introduction
Object recognition, and more specifically object categorization, has seen unprecedented advances in recent years
with development of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
[23]. However, most successful recognition models, to
date, are formulated as supervised learning problems, in
many cases requiring hundreds, if not thousands, labeled instances to learn a given concept class [10]. This exuberant
need for large labeled datasets has limited recognition models to domains with 100’s to few 1000’s of classes. Humans,
on the other hand, are able to distinguish beyond 30, 000 basic level categories [5]. What is more impressive, is the fact
that humans can learn from few examples, by effectively
leveraging information from other object category classes,
and even recognize objects without ever seeing them (e.g.,
by reading about them on the Internet). This ability has
spawned research in few-shot and zero-shot learning.

Figure 1. Illustration of the semantic embeddings learned (left)
using support vector regression (SVR) and (right) using the proposed semi-supervised vocabulary-informed (SS-Voc) approach.
In both cases, t-SNE visualization is used to illustrate samples
from 4 source/auxiliary classes (denoted by ×) and 2 target/zeroshot classed (denoted by ◦) from the ImageNet dataset. Decision
boundaries, illustrated by dashed lines, are drawn by hand for visualization. Note, that (i) large margin constraints in SS-Voc, both
among the source/target classes and the external vocabulary atoms
(denoted by arrows and words), and (ii) fine-tuning of the semantic word space, lead to a better embedding with more compact and
separated classes (e.g., see truck and car or unicycle and tricycle).

Zero-shot learning (ZSL) has now been widely studied in a variety of research areas including neural decoding by fMRI images [31], character recognition [26], face
verification [24], object recognition [25], and video understanding [17, 45]. Typically, zero-shot learning approaches aim to recognize instances from the unseen or
unknown testing target categories by transferring information, through intermediate-level semantic representations,
from known observed source (or auxiliary) categories for
which many labeled instances exist. In other words, supervised classes/instances, are used as context for recognition
of classes that contain no visual instances at training time,
but that can be put in some correspondence with supervised
classes/instances. As such, a general experimental setting
of ZSL is that the classes in target and source (auxiliary)

5337

