Direct Prediction of 3D Body Poses from Motion Compensated Sequences
Bugra Tekin1
Artem Rozantsev1
Vincent Lepetit1,2
Pascal Fua1
1
CVLab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, {firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch
2
TU Graz, Graz, Austria, lepetit@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We propose an efficient approach to exploiting motion
information from consecutive frames of a video sequence to
recover the 3D pose of people. Previous approaches typically compute candidate poses in individual frames and
then link them in a post-processing step to resolve ambiguities. By contrast, we directly regress from a spatio-temporal
volume of bounding boxes to a 3D pose in the central frame.
We further show that, for this approach to achieve its
full potential, it is essential to compensate for the motion
in consecutive frames so that the subject remains centered.
This then allows us to effectively overcome ambiguities and
improve upon the state-of-the-art by a large margin on the
Human3.6m, HumanEva, and KTH Multiview Football 3D
human pose estimation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
In recent years, impressive motion capture results have
been demonstrated using depth cameras, but 3D body pose
recovery from ordinary monocular video sequences remains
extremely challenging. Nevertheless, there is great interest in doing so, both because cameras are becoming ever
cheaper and more prevalent and because there are many potential applications. These include athletic training, surveillance, and entertainment.
Early approaches to monocular 3D pose tracking involved recursive frame-to-frame tracking and were found to
be brittle, due to distractions and occlusions from other people or objects in the scene [43]. Since then, the focus has
shifted to “tracking by detection,” which involves detecting human pose more or less independently in every frame
followed by linking the poses across the frames [2, 31],
which is much more robust to algorithmic failures in isolated frames. More recently, an effective single-frame approach to learning a regressor from a kernel embedding
of 2D HOG features to 3D poses has been proposed [17].
Excellent results have also been reported using a Convolutional Neural Net [25].
However, inherent ambiguities of the projection from 3D

Figure 1. 3D human pose estimation in Human3.6m, HumanEva
and KTH Multiview Football datasets. The recovered 3D skeletons are reprojected into the images in the top row and shown
by themselves in the bottom row. Our approach can reliably recover 3D poses in complex scenarios by collecting appearance
and motion evidence simultaneously from motion compensated
sequences. All the figures in this paper are best viewed in color.

to 2D, including self-occlusion and mirroring, can still confuse these state-of-the-art approaches. A linking procedure
can correct for these ambiguities to a limited extent by exploiting motion information a posteriori to eliminate erroneous poses by selecting compatible candidates over consecutive frames. However, when such errors happen frequently for several frames in a row, enforcing temporal consistency afterwards is not enough.
In this paper, we therefore propose to exploit motion information from the start. To this end, we learn a regression function that directly predicts the 3D pose in a given
frame of a sequence from a spatio-temporal volume centered on it. This volume comprises bounding boxes surrounding the person in consecutive frames coming before
and after the central one. We will show that this approach is
more effective than relying on regularizing initial estimates
a posteriori. We evaluated different regression schemes and
obtained the best results by applying a Deep Network to
the spatiotemporal features [21, 45] extracted from the image volume. Furthermore, we show that, for this approach

991

