Occlusion Boundary Detection via Deep Exploration of Context
Huan Fu1

Chaohui Wang2
Dacheng Tao1
Michael J. Black3
1
QCIS and FEIT, University of Technology Sydney
2
Université Paris-Est, LIGM - CNRS UMR 8049
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

Huan.Fu@student.uts.edu.au

chaohui.wang@u-pem.fr

dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au

black@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
Occlusion boundaries contain rich perceptual information about the underlying scene structure. They also provide important cues in many visual perception tasks such as
scene understanding, object recognition, and segmentation.
In this paper, we improve occlusion boundary detection via
enhanced exploration of contextual information (e.g., local
structural boundary patterns, observations from surrounding regions, and temporal context), and in doing so develop
a novel approach based on convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and conditional random fields (CRFs). Experimental results demonstrate that our detector significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art (e.g., improving the F-measure
from 0.62 to 0.71 on the commonly used CMU benchmark).
Last but not least, we empirically assess the roles of several important components of the proposed detector, so as
to validate the rationale behind this approach.

1. Introduction
Occlusions are ubiquitous in 2D images of natural
scenes (Fig. 1). They are introduced in the 3D-to-2D projection process during the image formation, due to the overlapping of the 2D extents (in the image plane) of 3D components/surfaces. In this paper, we focus on the problem
of detecting occlusion boundaries, each of which separates
two 2D regions projected from two parts of scene surfaces
that overlap locally in either of those regions.
Occlusion boundary detection is of interest in computer vision, image analysis, and other related fields (e.g.,
[14, 15, 34, 45]). Indeed, occlusions constitute an obstacle to designing rigorous models and efficient algorithms
in computer vision and image analysis. Besides the lack of
information on invisible scene components, another main
reason is that occlusions invalidate the assumption that two
neighboring pixels in a 2D image correspond to two adjacent points lying on a common part of a 3D surface. Nevertheless, this invalid assumption is often made, either ex-

Figure 1. Illustration of ubiquitous occlusions and local occlusion
patterns (source image from [38]).

plicitly or implicitly, in existing methods (e.g., the use of
smoothness priors for aggregating spatial information in
the 2D image). The localization of occlusion boundaries
would, therefore, be very useful for overcoming this limitation and improving the solution in these tasks. Furthermore,
since occlusion boundaries separate visible scene components from locally occluded components and usually correspond to an abrupt change in depth (along the line of
view), these boundaries contain rich perceptual information
about the underlying 3D scene structure, the exploitation
of which would be beneficial in various visual perception
applications. For example, occlusion boundaries can serve
as important cues for object discovery and segmentation
(e.g., [3, 14]), since an object is generally delimited from
its environment by the isolation of its 3D surface. Indeed,
psychologists have long studied their importance in human
visual perception (e.g., Gibson, Biederman) [5, 17].
Despite the considerable number of studies on occlusion
boundary detection (e.g., [18, 21, 35, 36, 40, 44]), the stateof-the-art is still unsatisfactory. We believe that one main
reason for this is that contextual information has not been
sufficiently explored in an efficient way. In fact, numerous previous studies developed their approaches based on
structural modeling tools, e.g., Markov/Conditional Ran-

241

