Visually Indicated Sounds
Andrew Owens1
Antonio Torralba1

2

MIT

Josh McDermott1
William T. Freeman1,3
3

U.C. Berkeley

Google Research

(Amplitude1/2)
Amplitude

Predicted Sound

Input video

1

Phillip Isola2,1
Edward H. Adelson1

0.5

0.5

0

0

-0.5

-0.5
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Time (seconds)

Figure 1: We train a model to synthesize plausible impact sounds from silent videos, a task that requires implicit knowledge of material
properties and physical interactions. In each video, someone probes the scene with a drumstick, hitting and scratching different objects.
We show frames from two videos and below them the predicted audio tracks. The locations of these sampled frames are indicated by the
dotted lines on the audio track. The predicted audio tracks show seven seconds of sound, corresponding to multiple hits in the videos.

Abstract
Objects make distinctive sounds when they are hit or
scratched. These sounds reveal aspects of an object’s material properties, as well as the actions that produced them.
In this paper, we propose the task of predicting what sound
an object makes when struck as a way of studying physical
interactions within a visual scene. We present an algorithm
that synthesizes sound from silent videos of people hitting
and scratching objects with a drumstick. This algorithm
uses a recurrent neural network to predict sound features
from videos and then produces a waveform from these features with an example-based synthesis procedure. We show
that the sounds predicted by our model are realistic enough
to fool participants in a “real or fake” psychophysical experiment, and that they convey significant information about
material properties and physical interactions.

1. Introduction
From the clink of a ceramic mug placed onto a saucer,
to the squelch of a shoe pressed into mud, our days are
filled with visual experiences accompanied by predictable
sounds. On many occasions, these sounds are not just statistically associated with the content of the images – the way,
for example, that the sounds of unseen seagulls are associated with a view of a beach – but instead are directly caused

by the physical interaction being depicted: you see what is
making the sound.
We call these events visually indicated sounds, and we
propose the task of predicting sound from videos as a way
to study physical interactions within a visual scene (Figure 1). To accurately predict a video’s held-out soundtrack,
an algorithm has to know about the physical properties of
what it is seeing and the actions that are being performed.
This task implicitly requires material recognition, but unlike
traditional work on this problem [4, 36], we never explicitly
tell the algorithm about materials. Instead, it learns about
them by identifying statistical regularities in the raw audiovisual signal.
We take inspiration from the way infants explore the
physical properties of a scene by poking and prodding at
the objects in front of them [34, 3], a process that may help
them learn an intuitive theory of physics [3]. Recent work
suggests that the sounds objects make in response to these
interactions may play a role in this process [37, 41].
We introduce a dataset that mimics this exploration
process, containing hundreds of videos of people hitting,
scratching, and prodding objects with a drumstick. To synthesize sound from these videos, we present an algorithm
that uses a recurrent neural network to map videos to audio
features. It then converts these audio features to a waveform, either by matching them to exemplars in a database
12405

