Pairwise Decomposition of Image Sequences for Active Multi-View Recognition
Edward Johns, Stefan Leutenegger and Andrew J. Davison
Dyson Robotics Laboratory at Imperial College, Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK

Abstract
A multi-view image sequence provides a much richer
capacity for object recognition than from a single image.
However, most existing solutions to multi-view recognition
typically adopt hand-crafted, model-based geometric methods, which do not readily embrace recent trends in deep
learning. We propose to bring Convolutional Neural Networks to generic multi-view recognition, by decomposing
an image sequence into a set of image pairs, classifying
each pair independently, and then learning an object classifier by weighting the contribution of each pair. This allows
for recognition over arbitrary camera trajectories, without
requiring explicit training over the potentially infinite number of camera paths and lengths. Building these pairwise
relationships then naturally extends to the next-best-view
problem in an active recognition framework. To achieve
this, we train a second Convolutional Neural Network to
map directly from an observed image to next viewpoint.
Finally, we incorporate this into a trajectory optimisation
task, whereby the best recognition confidence is sought for
a given trajectory length. We present state-of-the-art results
in both guided and unguided multi-view recognition on the
ModelNet dataset, and show how our method can be used
with depth images, greyscale images, or both.

1. Introduction
Consider the scenario in Figure 1. What trajectory
should the camera move around the object in order to
achieve the highest recognition confidence in a given time?
For practical tasks, recognition from a multi-view image
sequence is a more realistic setting than the single-image
recognition tasks typically addressed in computer vision,
and controlling a camera actively for efficient recognition
has great significance in real-world applications, where time
or power constraints become realities. For example, a robot
rotating an object before its eyes, or a mobile robot semantically mapping a room, benefit from efficient solutions.
Traditionally, multi-view object recognition has been
achieved by building up compositions of hand-crafted features shared across viewpoints, and finding correspon-

Image Sequence
to Image Pairs

Object Label
Next View

Figure 1: We propose a method for multi-view object recognition, by decomposing an image sequence into a set of image pairs. Training on these pairs then allows for recognition and trajectory planning, without the need to train directly over the infinite possible number of camera paths that
may exist.
dences between a test image and the learned models [23,
36, 28]. However, recent trends in Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) [21, 34] have seen attention in singleview object recognition move away from these explicit,
hand-modelled, geometric solutions, and towards end-toend learning ideologies which inject fewer assumptions into
the learned object models. Recently, the introduction of the
ModelNet dataset of 3D CAD meshes [39] provided data
of sufficient magnitude for training deep networks with images covering the full sphere of viewpoints over an object,
enabling view synthesis without the need for laborious manual labelling of each image [16]. It was subsequently shown
that rendering these meshes as synthetic greyscale images,
and classifying objects in a view-based manner with a CNN
architecture acting over a fixed trajectory, achieved stateof-the-art results for multi-view recognition [35]. However,
extending this to generalised recognition over trajectories of

3813

