We don’t need no bounding-boxes:
Training object class detectors using only human verification
Dim P. Papadopoulos

Jasper R. R. Uijlings

dim.papadopoulos@ed.ac.uk

jrr.uijlings@ed.ac.uk

Frank Keller
keller@inf.ed.ac.uk

Vittorio Ferrari
vferrari@inf.ed.ac.uk

University of Edinburgh

Abstract
Training object class detectors typically requires a large
set of images in which objects are annotated by boundingboxes. However, manually drawing bounding-boxes is very
time consuming. We propose a new scheme for training
object detectors which only requires annotators to verify
bounding-boxes produced automatically by the learning algorithm. Our scheme iterates between re-training the detector, re-localizing objects in the training images, and human verification. We use the verification signal both to
improve re-training and to reduce the search space for
re-localisation, which makes these steps different to what
is normally done in a weakly supervised setting. Extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC 2007 show that (1) using human verification to update detectors and reduce the
search space leads to the rapid production of high-quality
bounding-box annotations; (2) our scheme delivers detectors performing almost as good as those trained in a fully
supervised setting, without ever drawing any bounding-box;
(3) as the verification task is very quick, our scheme substantially reduces total annotation time by a factor 6×-9×.

1. Introduction
Object class detection is a central problem in computer
vision. Training a detector typically requires a large set
of images in which objects have been manually annotated
with bounding-boxes [10, 16, 18, 19, 20, 34, 53, 57, 62].
Bounding-box annotation is tedious, time consuming and
expensive. For instance, annotating ILSVRC, currently the
most popular object class detection dataset, required 42s
per bounding-box by crowd-sourcing on Mechanical Turk
[40] using a technique specifically developed for efficient
bounding-box annotation [50].
In order to reduce the cost of bounding-box annotation,
researchers have mainly focused on two strategies. The
first is learning in the weakly supervised setting, i.e. given
only labels indicating which object classes are present in
an image. While this setting is much cheaper, it produces
lower quality detectors, typically performing only about

half as well as when trained from bounding-boxes [4, 5,
9, 12, 42, 47, 48, 49, 60]. The second strategy is active
learning, where the computer requests human annotators
to draw bounding-boxes on a subset of images actively selected by the learner itself. This strategy can produce high
quality detectors, but it still requires humans to draw a lot
of bounding-boxes in order to get there, leading to limited
gains in terms of total annotation time [56, 63].
In this paper we propose a new scheme for learning object detectors which only requires humans to verify
bounding-boxes produced automatically by the learning algorithm: the annotator merely needs to decide whether a
bounding-box is correct or not. Crucially, answering this
verification question takes much less time than actually
drawing the bounding-box.
Given a set of training images with image-level labels,
our scheme iteratively alternates between updating object
detectors, re-localizing objects in the training images, and
querying humans for verification. At each iteration we use
the verification signal in two ways. First, we update the object class detector using only positively verified boundingboxes. This makes it stronger than when using all detected
bounding-boxes, as it is commonly done in the weakly supervised setting, because typically many of them are incorrect. Moreover, once the object location in an image has
been positively verified, it can be fixed and removed from
consideration in subsequent iterations. Second, we observe
that bounding-boxes judged as incorrect still provide valuable information about where the object is not. Building on
this observation, we use the negatively verified boundingboxes to reduce the search space of possible object locations
in subsequent iterations. Both these points help to rapidly
find more objects in the remaining images. This results in
a framework for training object detectors which minimizes
human annotation effort and eliminates the need to draw
any bounding-box.
In extensive experiments on the popular PASCAL VOC
2007 dataset [16] with both simulated and actual annotators, we show that: (1) using human verification to update
detectors and reduce the search space leads to rapid pro1854

