Ambiguity Helps: Classification with
Disagreements in Crowdsourced Annotations
Viktoriia Sharmanska⋆,1 , Daniel Hernández-Lobato⋆,2 , José Miguel Hernández-Lobato3 , Novi Quadrianto1
1
SMiLe CLiNiC, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK
2
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
3
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, US

Abstract
Imagine we show an image to a person and ask her/him
to decide whether the scene in the image is warm or not
warm, and whether it is easy or not to spot a squirrel in the
image. For exactly the same image, the answers to those
questions are likely to differ from person to person. This
is because the task is inherently ambiguous. Such an ambiguous, therefore challenging, task is pushing the boundary of computer vision in showing what can and can not be
learned from visual data. Crowdsourcing has been invaluable for collecting annotations. This is particularly so for a
task that goes beyond a clear-cut dichotomy as multiple human judgments per image are needed to reach a consensus.
This paper makes conceptual and technical contributions.
On the conceptual side, we define disagreements among annotators as privileged information about the data instance.
On the technical side, we propose a framework to incorporate annotation disagreements into the classifiers. The proposed framework is simple, relatively fast, and outperforms
classifiers that do not take into account the disagreements,
especially if tested on high confidence annotations.

1. Introduction
There exists an anecdote in the computer vision community that every graduate student has to annotate at least
one dataset during the graduate school life. With a rise
of crowdsourcing platforms, such as Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk), Microworkers, and CrowdFlower, it becomes possible instead to crowdsource annotations from
people everywhere in the world. One might expect that
the graduate life becomes more of an easy and manageable
ride. However, the ambitions and visions in the community
evolve together with the possibility afforded by the crowdsourcing platforms. With MTurk, now it becomes possible
to collect annotations for large datasets such as ImageNet
[26], TinyImages [31], COCO [14], and Places [38]. More-

over, it becomes prevalent to collect task-specific datasets,
for example for studying the attributes and their strength
[20] and for determining the easiness or hardness of a particular classification task [22]. Those task-specific datasets
often require annotations that are more ambiguous than typical object annotations ‘present’ or ‘not present’.
Working with a crowdsourcing platform has its own positive and negative aspects. On the positive side, we could
mass collect annotations within a short period of time. The
annotations come from people with a diverse background,
therefore to some degree it reflects on an unbiased process
of data collection. On the other hand, this process requires
a tight control over the quality of annotations. It is common
that we get noisy or even random annotations by the inexperienced and distrusted MTurk annotators. Escaping from a
task to annotate a dataset ourselves, we are confronted with
a task to master a whole collection of tricks on the quality
control in a crowdsourcing scenario [30, 10, 1].
This paper focuses on: a) the case that the quality control has been successfully applied and the annotations are
collected from those highly reputed annotators, and b) the
annotation task goes beyond a clear-cut dichotomy such as,
for example, a squirrel is ‘present’ or ‘not present’ in the
given image. In the ambiguous task, such as determining
‘how easy’ it is to spot a squirrel in an image, or deciding
whether the scene is ‘warm’ or ‘not warm’ from the image, the necessity of obtaining multiple human judgments
for each image data grows. A confidence in the label annotations, ranging from a simple percentage agreement to the
kappa statistic, is then computed from the multiple annotations at each data point. For sufficiently high confidence annotations, a majority voting scheme is then widely adopted
as the ground-truth label [31, 14, 38, 20, 22, 26].
It is now worth highlighting the following two observations regarding disagreements in multiple annotations. The
first is that the removal of disputed cases results in a reduced
size of datasets; those datasets are typically already moderate in size. The second is that the notion of a true groundtruth label might not be available, at least for a subset of the

2194

