Multilinear Hyperplane Hashing
Xianglong Liu†
†

Xinjie Fan†

Cheng Deng‡∗ Zhujin Li†

Dacheng Tao♮

State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡
§

School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA


QCIS and FEIT, University of Technology, Sydney, Australia

xlliu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn

chdeng.xd@gmail.com

Abstract
Hashing has become an increasingly popular
technique for fast nearest neighbor search. Despite its successful progress in classic pointto-point search, there are few studies regarding point-to-hyperplane search, which has strong
practical capabilities of scaling up applications like active learning with SVMs. Existing hyperplane hashing methods enable the fast search
based on randomly generated hash codes, but still suffer from a low collision probability and thus
usually require long codes for a satisfying performance. To overcome this problem, this paper
proposes a multilinear hyperplane hashing that
generates a hash bit using multiple linear projections. Our theoretical analysis shows that with
an even number of random linear projections, the
multilinear hash function possesses strong locality sensitivity to hyperplane queries. To leverage
its sensitivity to the angle distance, we further
introduce an angular quantization based learning framework for compact multilinear hashing, which considerably boosts the search performance with less hash bits. Experiments with applications to large-scale (up to one million) active
learning on two datasets demonstrate the overall
superiority of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the success of fast approximated nearest neighbor search in many domains and applications including large-scale visual search [6], objec∗ corresponding author

Hao Su§

dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au

t detection [3], classiﬁcation [8, 15, 21] and recommendation [16, 27]. Locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) [1, 2] pioneered the hash based solution with a good balance between the search performance and computational efﬁciency. In LSH, the linear projection paradigm was adopted to
efﬁciently generate the hash codes for the speciﬁc similarity metric like lp -norm (p ∈ (0, 2]), and has been widely accepted in many following research for compact hash
codes learning [5, 12, 14, 18, 19, 23, 25, 31], equipped with
a number of techniques like double bit quantization [9], bit
selection [17], asymmetric quantization [24] and discrete
optimization [13, 26].
Despite the progress of hashing research, most of existing methods mainly deal with the classic point-to-point
nearest neighbor search, where according to certain distance measure the closest database points to the query one
are desired as the nearest neighbors. However, in practice there are also a variety of cases that require the nearest
points to a hyperplane, namely, point-to-hyperplane search
problem. Typical instances includes the large-scale active
learning with support vector machines (SVM) [28], maximum margin clustering [32] and large-margin dimensionality reduction [30]. In the task of large-scale active learning
with SVMs, the active learning iteration process selects the
unlabeled point closest (with minimum-margin) to current SVM’s decision hyperplane into the training set, and retrains the SVM classiﬁer with the increasing training data,
gaining a provable performance improvement in a few iterations. A common solution for point-to-hyperplane search is
the exhaustive search, which nevertheless spends expensive
computation and memory on large-scale datasets.
To address this problem, [22] proposed the concomitant hashing to accelerate the min/max inner product, which
exploits properties of order statistics of statistically correlated random vectors. Different from the idea of concomitant hashing, prior research [8] ﬁrst successfully devised hyperplane hashing paradigm with applications to large-scale
active learning. Based on the theoretical guarantee of colli15119

