Deep Region and Multi-label Learning for Facial Action Unit Detection
Kaili Zhao1 Wen-Sheng Chu2 Honggang Zhang1
1
School of Comm. and Info. Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecom., Beijing China
2
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA

Abstract
AU1

Region learning (RL) and multi-label learning (ML)
have recently attracted increasing attentions in the field of
facial Action Unit (AU) detection. Knowing that AUs are
active on sparse facial regions, RL aims to identify these regions for a better specificity. On the other hand, a strong
statistical evidence of AU correlations suggests that ML is
a natural way to model the detection task. In this paper, we
propose Deep Region and Multi-label Learning (DRML),
a unified deep network that simultaneously addresses these
two problems. One crucial aspect in DRML is a novel region layer that uses feed-forward functions to induce important facial regions, forcing the learned weights to capture structural information of the face. Our region layer
serves as an alternative design between locally connected
layers (i.e., confined kernels to individual pixels) and conventional convolution layers (i.e., shared kernels across an
entire image). Unlike previous studies that solve RL and ML
alternately, DRML by construction addresses both problems, allowing the two seemingly irrelevant problems to interact more directly. The complete network is end-to-end
trainable, and automatically learns representations robust
to variations inherent within a local region. Experiments on
BP4D and DISFA benchmarks show that DRML performs
the highest average F1-score and AUC within and across
datasets in comparison with alternative methods.

1. Introduction
The face reveals thoughts and feelings. Facial expressions, in particular, tell a person’s internal states, psychopathology, and social behavior. Facial Action Unit (AU)
detection plays a fundamental role in describing comprehensive facial expressions, and has become an important
problem in computer vision. In automated facial AU detection, two problems have attracted an increasing attention: Region Learning (RL) and Multi-label Learning (ML).
Given the deﬁnition that an AU is active only on sparse facial regions, RL aims at identifying speciﬁc regions to improve detection performance. For example, AU 12 is re-

AU2

AU10
Facial image

AU12

AU12

AU26
important

not import.
(a) Patch-based
(b) DRML (ours)
Figure 1. An illustration of (a) a conventional patch-based method,
and (b) the proposed DRML. DRML by construction models both
important facial regions and relations among multiple AUs, showing a better capability of localization and classiﬁcation.

ferred as lip corner puller, and by deﬁnition is identiﬁed
only around the region of lip corners. On the other hand,
there has been strong statistics showing evidence of correlations between AUs [32, 35]. For instance, AUs 6 and 12
have been observed to frequently co-occur in a Duchenne
smile. Building upon these AU correlations, ML attempts
to jointly learn multiple AUs as one classiﬁcation problem.
However, it remains unclear how these two problems can
interact with each other and jointly be solved.
Recent work on patch learning is a particular example
of RL. Conventional patch-based methods divide face images into uniform patches, as shown in Fig. 1(a), and then
model the importance for each patch as the magnitude of
corresponding model parameters (e.g., [17, 18, 39]). In general, higher importance implies higher relevance for such
patches to a particular AU. The selected patches, due to
their spatial dependencies, are shown more effective and
robust to noise than individual feature values. Nevertheless, the patches are manually deﬁned and the majority of
existing work ignores the relationship among AUs. More

3391

