Do computational models differ systematically from human object perception?
R. T. Pramod

S. P. Arun

Department of Electrical Communication Engineering
& Centre for Neuroscience,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.
E-mail: pramodrt@ece.iisc.ernet.in

Centre for Neuroscience,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.
E-mail: sparun@cns.iisc.ernet.in

Abstract

A simpler alternative would be to compare distances
between objects in feature space. For a machine algorithm
this involves calculating the distance between the
corresponding feature vectors. In humans, these distances
can be measured experimentally in behavior [8-10] or in
distinct brain regions [11, 12]. This has permitted the
detailed comparison of object representations in the brain
with existing computer vision algorithms, which has
yielded several insights. First, object representations in
early visual areas are explained best by Gabor filters [13],
which is not surprising given the well-known orientation
selectivity of early visual areas. Second, object
representations in higher visual areas (that are crucial for
object recognition) in both human and monkey, are
explained well by later layers in convolutional neural
networks [12, 14-16], as well as by other computational
models such as SIFT [11] and other hierarchical models
such as HMAX [12]. Thus, the consensus view is that
deep neural networks have object representations that are
highly similar to those in the brain. But this predicts that
these networks should perform as well as humans, yet
they clearly do not.
This apparent contradiction could have arisen for two
reasons. First, most of these comparisons are based on
~50-100 natural objects differing in many features. This
could have produced a large correlation even if the object
representations were entirely different. Second, there may
be systematic patterns in the match between brain
representations and computational models: it could be
worse for certain types of images and better for others.
These issues have never been investigated.
Here,
we
systematically
compared
object
representations in humans with a number of
computational models. To this end, we collected a large
dataset of 26,675 perceived dissimilarity measurements
from 2,801 visual objects across 269 human subjects. To
measure perceived dissimilarity in humans, we asked
subjects to locate the oddball in an array containing one
object among multiple instances of the other. The
reciprocal of the visual search time was taken as an
estimate of perceived dissimilarity. This measure behaves
like a mathematical distance [10], shows linear
summation across multiple features [17], explains rapid
visual categorization [18] and is strongly correlated with
subjective dissimilarity ratings [19]. We used this dataset
to train and test a number of popular computational

Recent advances in neural networks have
revolutionized computer vision, but these algorithms are
still outperformed by humans. Could this performance
gap be due to systematic differences between object
representations in humans and machines? To answer this
question we collected a large dataset of 26,675 perceived
dissimilarity measurements from 2,801 visual objects
across 269 human subjects, and used this dataset to train
and test leading computational models. The best model (a
combination of all models) accounted for 68% of the
explainable variance. Importantly, all computational
models showed systematic deviations from perception: (1)
They underestimated perceptual distances between
objects with symmetry or large area differences; (2) They
overestimated perceptual distances between objects with
shared features. Our results reveal critical elements
missing in computer vision algorithms and point to
explicit encoding of these properties in higher visual
areas in the brain.

1. Introduction
What is a good man but a bad man's teacher?
What is a bad man but a good man's job?
-- Tao Te Ching [1]
Convolutional or deep neural networks have
revolutionized computer vision with their impressive
performance on object classification tasks [2-4]. This
performance (~75% correct on top-1 classification), while
impressive compared to older algorithms, is nowhere
close to humans, whose ability is so high that it is rarely
measured and often taken as ground-truth [5]. This
performance gap raises the intriguing possibility that
human vision can be used to “teach” machines to do
better. Conversely, understanding the specific deficiencies
in machine algorithms can elucidate the specialized
computations performed by the brain [6, 7]. The obvious
approach would be to compare humans and machines on a
classification task, but this involves an additional
classification process that complicates any inference
about the underlying features.

1601

