Efficient Training of Very Deep Neural Networks for Supervised Hashing
Ziming Zhang, Yuting Chen and Venkatesh Saligrama
Center for Information & Systems Engineering, Boston University
{zzhang14, yutingch, srv}@bu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose training very deep neural networks (DNNs) for supervised learning of hash codes. Existing methods in this context train relatively “shallow” networks limited by the issues arising in back propagation (e.g.
vanishing gradients) as well as computational efficiency.
We propose a novel and efficient training algorithm inspired
by alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) that
overcomes some of these limitations. Our method decomposes the training process into independent layer-wise local updates through auxiliary variables. Empirically we
observe that our training algorithm always converges and
its computational complexity is linearly proportional to the
number of edges in the networks. Empirically we manage to train DNNs with 64 hidden layers and 1024 nodes
per layer for supervised hashing in about 3 hours using a
single GPU. Our proposed very deep supervised hashing
(VDSH) method significantly outperforms the state-of-theart on several benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Supervised hashing techniques aim to learn compact and
similarity-preserving binary representations from labeled
data, such that similar inputs are mapped to nearby binary hash codes in the Hamming space, and information retrieval can be efficiently and effectively done in large-scale
databases. A large category of these methods seek to learn a
set of hyperplanes as linear hash functions, such as Iterative
Quantization (ITQ) [12], supervised Minimal Loss Hashing (MLH) [32], Semi-Supervised Hashing (SSH) [46], and
FastHash [28]. Several kernel-based hashing methods like
Binary Reconstructive Embedding (BRE) [24] and KernelBased Supervised Hashing (KSH) [30] have also been proposed.
It is well recognized that deep models are able to learn
powerful image representations in a latent space where samples with different properties can be well separated. In this
context convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) based hashing schemes have been developed [10, 19, 22, 44, 47, 48,

54]. Hash codes learned from these latent spaces have been
shown to significantly improve the retrieval performance on
many benchmark datasets.
Nevertheless, the efficacy of deep learning in applications such as hashing hinges on the ability to efficiently train
deep models [11]. Back propagation (or “backprop”) [36]
is currently the most widely-used training method in deep
learning due to its simplicity. Backprop is known to suffer from the so called vanishing gradient issue [16], where
gradients in the front layers of an n-layer network decrease
exponentially with n. This directly impacts computational
efficiency, which in turn limits the size of the networks that
can be trained. For instance, the training of VGG’s very
deep features [39] for ILSVRC2014 with 16 convolutional
layers takes approximately one month using 4 GPUs.
Contributions: We propose a very deep supervised hashing
(VDSH) algorithm by training very deep neural networks
for hashing. Our method can take in any form of vector input, such as raw image intensities, traditional features like
GIST [33], or even CNN features [26]. Given training data
with class labels, our network learns a data representation
tailored for hashing, and outputs binary hash codes with
varying lengths. VDSH can easily train large very deep networks within hours on a single GPU.
Our learning objective is to generate optimal hash codes
for linear classification. To this end we minimize the least
square between the weighted encoding features (i.e. the output of our last hidden layer) and their label vectors with regularization on model parameters to prevent overfitting.
Rather than using backprop, we propose a novel computationally efficient training algorithm for VDSH inspired
by alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) [2].
We represent DNN features in a recursive way by introducing an auxiliary variable to model the output of each
hidden layer for each data sample. Then we apply the
augmented Lagrangian to incorporate our learning objective with equality constraints, where another set of auxiliary variables are introduced to store the network weights
between every pair of adjacent layers locally for efficient
update.
Empirically we demonstrate smooth convergence and
11487

