From Dusk till Dawn: Modeling in the Dark
Filip Radenović1 Johannes L. Schönberger2,3 Dinghuang Ji2
Jan-Michael Frahm2 Ondřej Chum1 Jiřı́ Matas1
1

2

CMP, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
Department of Computer Science, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
3
Department of Computer Science, Eidgenössisch Technische Hochschule Zürich

Abstract
Internet photo collections naturally contain a large variety of illumination conditions, with the largest difference
between day and night images. Current modeling techniques do not embrace the broad illumination range often
leading to reconstruction failure or severe artifacts. We
present an algorithm that leverages the appearance variety
to obtain more complete and accurate scene geometry along
with consistent multi-illumination appearance information.
The proposed method relies on automatic scene appearance
grouping, which is used to obtain separate dense 3D models. Subsequent model fusion combines the separate models
into a complete and accurate reconstruction of the scene.
In addition, we propose a method to derive the appearance
information for the model under the different illumination
conditions, even for scene parts that are not observed under one illumination condition. To achieve this, we develop
a cross-illumination color transfer technique. We evaluate
our method on a large variety of landmarks from across Europe reconstructed from a database of 7.4M images.

1. Introduction
Image retrieval and 3D reconstruction have made big
strides in the past decade. Recently, image retrieval and
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) methods have been combined
to achieve modeling from 100 million images [10]. Combining them can not only tackle scale but also allows to reconstruct spatially complete models with high levels of detail [21]. A key observation is that an increasing number
of images in the collections ease the registration of images
taken under very different illumination conditions into a sinThis work was done while J. L. Schönberger was at the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill. We thank Marc Eder for helping with experiments. F. Radenović, O. Chum and J. Matas were supported by the MSMT
LL1303 ERC-CZ and GACR P103/12/G084 grants. J. L. Schönberger,
D. Ji and J.-M. Frahm were supported in part by the National Science
Foundation No. IIS-1349074, No. CNS-1405847, and the MITRE Corp.

Figure 1. Night model of St. Peter’s Cathedral in Rome reconstructed by our method. Left: Model obtained from night images
only. Right: Fused, recolored model from day and night images.

gle 3D model. A feat that is not achieved by direct matching
techniques, but rather by discovering sequences of matching images with a gradual change of the illumination, see
Figure 2 for such a transition sequence.
A sparse 3D reconstruction of feature points, obtained
from a mixed set of day and night images, is reliable and
naturally occurs in large-scale photo collections. This is
due to the presence of “transition” images and due to the
fact, that some of the detected features after photometric
normalization provide sufficiently stable matches across illumination transitions. Examples of such feature points, the
corresponding image patches, and their normalized descriptor patches are shown in Figure 4.
However, while beneficial for SfM, the registration of
mixed illumination images creates challenges for dense 3D
reconstruction, which delivers poor results or even fails in
the presence of day and night images [15]. In particular, mixed illuminations cause erroneous dense correspondences due to accidental photo-consistency in multi-view
stereo that distort the texture composition of the models.
As a first contribution of the paper, we propose a method
for automatically separating day and night images based
on the sparse scene graph produced by SfM and a learned
day/night color model. The separated sets of day and night
images then allow to compute reliable dense reconstructions
for each of the two modalities separately.

5488

