Convolutional Two-Stream Network Fusion for Video Action Recognition
Christoph Feichtenhofer
Graz University of Technology

Axel Pinz
Graz University of Technology

Andrew Zisserman
University of Oxford

feichtenhofer@tugraz.at

axel.pinz@tugraz.at

az@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent applications of Convolutional Neural Networks
(ConvNets) for human action recognition in videos have
proposed different solutions for incorporating the appearance and motion information. We study a number of ways
of fusing ConvNet towers both spatially and temporally in
order to best take advantage of this spatio-temporal information. We make the following findings: (i) that rather
than fusing at the softmax layer, a spatial and temporal
network can be fused at a convolution layer without loss
of performance, but with a substantial saving in parameters; (ii) that it is better to fuse such networks spatially at
the last convolutional layer than earlier, and that additionally fusing at the class prediction layer can boost accuracy;
finally (iii) that pooling of abstract convolutional features
over spatiotemporal neighbourhoods further boosts performance. Based on these studies we propose a new ConvNet architecture for spatiotemporal fusion of video snippets, and evaluate its performance on standard benchmarks
where this architecture achieves state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Action recognition in video is a highly active area of research with state of the art systems still being far from human performance. As with other areas of computer vision,
recent work has concentrated on applying Convolutional
Neural Networks (ConvNets) to this task, with progress
over a number of strands: learning local spatiotemporal filters [11, 28, 30]), incorporating optical flow snippets [22],
and modelling more extended temporal sequences [6, 17].
However, action recognition has not yet seen the substantial gains in performance that have been achieved in
other areas by ConvNets, e.g. image classification [12, 23,
27], human face recognition [21], and human pose estimation [29]. Indeed the current state of the art performance [30, 34] on standard benchmarks such as UCF101 [24] and HMDB51 [13] is achieved by a combination of
ConvNets and a Fisher Vector encoding [20] of hand-crafted
features (such as HOF [14] over dense trajectories [33]).

Temporal Stream

Spatial Stream

*

Figure 1. Example outputs of the first three convolutional layers
from a two-stream ConvNet model [22]. The two networks separately capture spatial (appearance) and temporal information at a
fine temporal scale. In this work we investigate several approaches
to fuse the two networks over space and time.

Part of the reason for this lack of success is probably
that current datasets used for training are either too small
or too noisy (we return to this point below in related work).
Compared to image classification, action classification in
video has the additional challenge of variations in motion
and viewpoint, and so might be expected to require more
training examples than that of ImageNet (1000 per class)
– yet UCF-101 has only 100 examples per class. Another
important reason is that current ConvNet architectures are
not able to take full advantage of temporal information and
their performance is consequently often dominated by spatial (appearance) recognition.
As can be seen from Fig. 1, some actions can be identified from a still image from their appearance alone (archery
in this case). For others, though, individual frames can be
ambiguous, and motion cues are necessary. Consider, for
example, discriminating walking from running, yawning
from laughing, or in swimming, crawl from breast-stroke.
The two-stream architecture [22] incorporates motion information by training separate ConvNets for both appearance
in still images and stacks of optical flow. Indeed, this work
showed that optical flow information alone was sufficient to
discriminate most of the actions in UCF101.
Nevertheless, the two-stream architecture (or any previous method) is not able to exploit two very important cues
for action recognition in video: (i) recognizing what is mov11933

