Real-Time Salient Object Detection with a Minimum Spanning Tree
Wei-Chih Tu1 , Shengfeng He2 , Qingxiong Yang3∗, Shao-Yi Chien1
1
Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
3
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract

bottom-up models owing to the task-free nature and superior computational efficiency over top-down approach.
The background and connectivity priors proposed by
Wei et al. [26] have been shown to be effective in bottomup salient object detection. The background prior assumes
the image boundaries are mostly background. The connectivity prior describes the fact that background regions are
usually large and homogeneous so that pixels in the background can be easily connected to each other. In [26], the
boundary patches are set as the background seeds and the
saliency of a patch is defined as the shortest-path geodesic
distance towards the background seeds.
Many recent approaches [28, 12, 35, 21, 34] achieve
state-of-the-art results by extending the background and
connectivity priors. In [35], Zhu et al. also utilize the
geodesic distance and take the spatial layout of image
patches into consideration for a more robust boundary measurement. Yang et al. [28] compute the saliency value of a
region according to its relevance to boundary patches by
manifold ranking. Jiang et al. [12] formulate the problem as absorbing Markov chain on an image graph model.
The boundary nodes are chosen as the absorbing nodes in
a Markov chain and the absorbed time is used to measure
saliency. In [21], they propose a saliency optimization approach based on Cellular Automata. They also leverage
the background prior to compute a global color distinction
map as well as a spatial distance map. These two maps
are integrated into a simple background-based map for initialization. To achieve feasible complexity, all the above
methods rely on superpixel abstraction to reduce the processing units. However, the over-segmentation step usually
becomes the processing bottleneck and restricted this type
of methods from real-time applications. Lately, Zhang et
al. [34] use the minimum barrier distance (MBD) [24, 6]
for salient object detection. They show that minimum barrier distance is superior to geodesic distance in several numerical evaluation. Instead of processing with superpixels,
they demonstrate an efficient pixel-wise raster-scanning algorithm to compute the approximated MBD transform.
We also tackle the problem from the distance trans-

In this paper, we present a real-time salient object detection system based on the minimum spanning tree. Due to the
fact that background regions are typically connected to the
image boundaries, salient objects can be extracted by computing the distances to the boundaries. However, measuring
the image boundary connectivity efficiently is a challenging
problem. Existing methods either rely on superpixel representation to reduce the processing units or approximate the
distance transform. Instead, we propose an exact and iteration free solution on a minimum spanning tree. The minimum spanning tree representation of an image inherently
reveals the object geometry information in a scene. Meanwhile, it largely reduces the search space of shortest paths,
resulting an efficient and high quality distance transform
algorithm. We further introduce a boundary dissimilarity
measure to compliment the shortage of distance transform
for salient object detection. Extensive evaluations show that
the proposed algorithm achieves the leading performance
compared to the state-of-the-art methods in terms of efficiency and accuracy.

1. Introduction
The goal of salient object detection is to identify the most
important objects in a scene. Recently, it has attracted much
attention [15, 19, 5, 10, 25, 11, 4] for its wide range of applications such as image retargeting [16, 7], object recognition [22] and image segmentation [9], to name a few. As a
preprocessing step, a desirable saliency detection algorithm
should be computational efficient for practical usage.
In general, previous works can be categorized into
bottom-up or top-down methods. Top-down methods [8,
29] are task-driven and usually require supervised learning
with high-level information. Bottom-up methods [1, 26, 5,
28, 12] are usually based on low-level features such as color,
gradient or contrast. Most saliency detection methods are
∗ Correspondence author.

2334

