Noisy Label Recovery for Shadow Detection in Unfamiliar Domains
Tomás F. Yago Vicente, Minh Hoai, Dimitris Samaras
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
{tyagovicente, minhhoai, samaras}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Recent shadow detection algorithms have shown initial success on small datasets of images from specific domains. However, shadow detection on broader image domains is still challenging due to the lack of annotated training data. This is due to the intense manual labor in annotating shadow data. In this paper we propose “lazy annotation”, an efficient annotation method where an annotator only needs to mark the important shadow areas and
some non-shadow areas. This yields data with noisy labels that are not yet useful for training a shadow detector.
We address the problem of label noise by jointly learning
a shadow region classifier and recovering the labels in the
training set. We consider the training labels as unknowns
and formulate the label recovery problem as the minimization of the sum of squared leave-one-out errors of a Least
Squares SVM, which can be efficiently optimized. Experimental results show that a classifier trained with recovered labels achieves comparable performance to a classifier trained on the properly annotated data. These results
suggest a feasible approach to address the task of detecting
shadows in an unfamiliar domain: collecting and lazily annotating some images from the new domain for training. As
will be demonstrated, this approach outperforms methods
that rely on precisely annotated but less relevant datasets.
Initial results suggest more general applicability.

1. Introduction
The problem of single image shadow detection has been
widely studied. Early work such as the illumination invariant approaches [5, 6] are based on physical modeling of the
illumination and shadowing phenomena [20, 21]. These
physics-based methods only work well with high quality
images. In contrast, statistical learning approaches (e.g.,
[9, 15, 23, 29, 31]) have shown significant success in detecting shadows in consumer-grade photos and web quality images. The performance of these methods, however, depend
on the quality and quantity of training images. Guo et al.
[9], Zhu et al. [31] were the firsts to collect sizable datasets
of images with annotated shadows, which are referred to as

the UCF and UIUC datasets respectively. These two publicly available datasets have been used to develop several
shadow detection methods [13, 14, 17, 28, 29], and staggering progress has been made in the past few years. However, these two datasets are small, and the methods trained
on them do not generalize well to new domains (e.g., see
[10] for poor cross-dataset performance analysis). Unfortunately, there is no larger and publicly available shadow
datasets; this is perhaps due to the huge effort required to
properly annotate shadows in images.
In this paper we propose “lazy annotation”, a method
that allows a human annotator to quickly label images to
create shadow datasets. The annotator needs to focus only
on the most relevant shadows in an image and draw several
strokes on the perceived important shadow and non-shadow
areas of the image. We process the input strokes to segment
shadow areas based on image features using the geodesic
convexity image segmentation [8]. Figure 1 shows an example of this process, from the annotator’s strokes to the
generated binary shadow mask.
With lazy annotation, it is possible to quickly collect
shadow annotation. The annotation, however, is imperfect. Due to the nature of the task, some shadow areas
may be ignored, or imperfectly segmented, as shown in Figure 1.The resulting annotated data presents noticeable class
label noise; we refer to shadow and non-shadow regions as
positive and negative classes respectively. Label noise is
asymmetric. The negative class contains “dirty negatives”,
corresponding to missed shadows, or poorly segmented regions that contain both shadow and non-shadow pixels. The
positive class is significantly cleaner and more reliable, because the annotator is asked to label some shadows, so the
shadow regions obtained are generally well segmented.
The presence of label noise in training data has huge impact on the performance of classifiers trained on the data
(e.g., see [7, 32]). To address the problem of noisy labels,
we propose to jointly learn a shadow region classifier and
recover the labels in the training set. Our objective is to reduce the level of label noise in the training set so as to minimize the generalization error of the learned classifier. Our
framework is based on Least-Squares Support Vector Ma13783

