Context Encoders: Feature Learning by Inpainting
Deepak Pathak

Philipp Krähenbühl
Jeff Donahue
Trevor Darrell
University of California, Berkeley

Alexei A. Efros

{pathak,philkr,jdonahue,trevor,efros}@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present an unsupervised visual feature learning algorithm driven by context-based pixel prediction. By analogy
with auto-encoders, we propose Context Encoders – a convolutional neural network trained to generate the contents
of an arbitrary image region conditioned on its surroundings. In order to succeed at this task, context encoders
need to both understand the content of the entire image,
as well as produce a plausible hypothesis for the missing
part(s). When training context encoders, we have experimented with both a standard pixel-wise reconstruction loss,
as well as a reconstruction plus an adversarial loss. The
latter produces much sharper results because it can better
handle multiple modes in the output. We found that a context encoder learns a representation that captures not just
appearance but also the semantics of visual structures. We
quantitatively demonstrate the effectiveness of our learned
features for CNN pre-training on classification, detection,
and segmentation tasks. Furthermore, context encoders can
be used for semantic inpainting tasks, either stand-alone or
as initialization for non-parametric methods.

1. Introduction
Our visual world is very diverse, yet highly structured,
and humans have an uncanny ability to make sense of this
structure. In this work, we explore whether state-of-the-art
computer vision algorithms can do the same. Consider the
image shown in Figure 1a. Although the center part of the
image is missing, most of us can easily imagine its content
from the surrounding pixels, without having ever seen that
exact scene. Some of us can even draw it, as shown on Figure 1b. This ability comes from the fact that natural images,
despite their diversity, are highly structured (e.g. the regular
pattern of windows on the facade). We humans are able to
understand this structure and make visual predictions even
when seeing only parts of the scene. In this paper, we show
The supplementary material, trained models and code are available at
the author’s website.

(a) Input context

(b) Human artist

(c) Context Encoder
(L2 loss)

(d) Context Encoder
(L2 + Adversarial loss)

Figure 1: Qualitative illustration of the task. Given an image with a missing region (a), a human artist has no trouble
inpainting it (b). Automatic inpainting using our context
encoder trained with L2 reconstruction loss is shown in (c),
and using both L2 and adversarial losses in (d).
that it is possible to learn and predict this structure using
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), a class of models
that have recently shown success across a variety of image
understanding tasks.
Given an image with a missing region (e.g., Fig. 1a), we
train a convolutional neural network to regress to the missing pixel values (Fig. 1d). We call our model context encoder, as it consists of an encoder capturing the context of
an image into a compact latent feature representation and a
decoder which uses that representation to produce the missing image content. The context encoder is closely related to
autoencoders [3, 20], as it shares a similar encoder-decoder
architecture. Autoencoders take an input image and try
12536

