Going Deeper into First-Person Activity Recognition
Minghuang Ma, Haoqi Fan and Kris M. Kitani
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
minghuam@andrew.cmu.edu haoqif@andrew.cmu.edu kkitani@cs.cmu.edu

Appearance stream

Abstract
We bring together ideas from recent work on feature
design for egocentric action recognition under one framework by exploring the use of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN). Recent work has shown that features such
as hand appearance, object attributes, local hand motion
and camera ego-motion are important for characterizing
first-person actions. To integrate these ideas under one
framework, we propose a twin stream network architecture, where one stream analyzes appearance information
and the other stream analyzes motion information. Our appearance stream encodes prior knowledge of the egocentric paradigm by explicitly training the network to segment
hands and localize objects. By visualizing certain neuron
activation of our network, we show that our proposed architecture naturally learns features that capture object attributes and hand-object configurations. Our extensive experiments on benchmark egocentric action datasets show
that our deep architecture enables recognition rates that
significantly outperform state-of-the-art techniques – an average 6.6% increase in accuracy over all datasets. Furthermore, by learning to recognize objects, actions and activities jointly, the performance of individual recognition tasks
also increase by 30% (actions) and 14% (objects). We also
include the results of extensive ablative analysis to highlight
the importance of network design decisions.

1. Introduction
Recently there has been a renewed interest in the use of
first-person point-of-view cameras to better understand human activity. In order to accurately recognize first-person
activities, recent work in first-person activity understanding
has highlighted the importance of taking into consideration
both appearance and motion information. Since the majority of actions are centered around hand-object interactions
in the first-person sensing scenario, it is important to capture
appearance corresponding to such features as hand regions,
grasp shape, object type or object attributes. Capturing motion information such as local hand movements and global

object
'milk container'

hand segmentation

object localization

activity
Motion stream

'take milk container'

action
'take'

optical ﬂow

Figure 1: Approach overview. Our framework integrates
both appearance and motion information. The appearance
stream captures hand configurations and object attributes
to recognize objects. The motion stream captures objects
motion and head movement to recognize actions. The two
streams are also learned jointly to recognize activities.
head motion, is another important visual cue as the temporal
motion signature can be used to differentiate between complementary actions such as take and put or periodic actions
such as the cut with knife action. It is also critical to reason about appearance and motion jointly. It has been shown
in both third-person [11] and first-person activity analysis
[20] that these two streams of activity information, appearance and motion, should be analyzed jointly to obtain best
performance.
Based on these insights, we propose a deep learning architecture designed specifically for egocentric video, that
integrates both action appearance and motion within a single model 1. More specifically, our proposed network
has a two stream architecture composed of an appearancebased CNN that works on localized object of interest image frames and a motion-based CNN that uses stacked optical flow fields as input. Using the terminology of [5], we
use late fusion with a fully-connected top layer to formulate a multi-task prediction network over actions, objects
and activities. The term action describes motions such as
put, scoop or spread. The term object refers to item such as
bread, spoon or cup. The term activity is used to represent
an action-object pair such as take milk container.
The appearance-based stream is customized for ego-

1894

