Learning Multi-Domain Convolutional Neural Networks for Visual Tracking
Hyeonseob Nam
Bohyung Han
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Korea
{namhs09, bhhan}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract

classification and tracking problems, i.e., predicting object
class labels versus locating targets of arbitrary classes.

We propose a novel visual tracking algorithm based on
the representations from a discriminatively trained Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Our algorithm pretrains
a CNN using a large set of videos with tracking groundtruths to obtain a generic target representation. Our network is composed of shared layers and multiple branches
of domain-specific layers, where domains correspond to individual training sequences and each branch is responsible
for binary classification to identify target in each domain.
We train each domain in the network iteratively to obtain
generic target representations in the shared layers. When
tracking a target in a new sequence, we construct a new network by combining the shared layers in the pretrained CNN
with a new binary classification layer, which is updated online. Online tracking is performed by evaluating the candidate windows randomly sampled around the previous target
state. The proposed algorithm illustrates outstanding performance in existing tracking benchmarks.

To fully exploit the representation power of CNNs in visual tracking, it is desirable to train them on large-scale data
specialized for visual tracking, which cover a wide range
of variations in the combination of target and background.
However, it is truly challenging to learn a unified representation based on the video sequences that have completely
different characteristics. Note that individual sequences involve different types of targets whose class labels, moving
patterns, and appearances are different, and tracking algorithms suffer from sequence-specific challenges including
occlusion, deformation, lighting condition change, motion
blur, etc. Training CNNs is even more difficult since the
same kind of objects can be considered as a target in a sequence and as a background object in another. Due to such
variations and inconsistencies across sequences, we believe
that the ordinary learning methods based on the standard
classification task are not appropriate, and another approach
to capture sequence-independent information should be incorporated for better representation.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have recently
been applied to various computer vision tasks such as image classification [4, 28, 37], semantic segmentation [19,
31, 33], object detection [12], and many others [34, 40, 41].
Such great success of CNNs is mostly attributed to their
outstanding performance in representing visual data. Visual tracking, however, has been less affected by these popular trends since it is difficult to collect a large amount of
training data for video processing applications and training algorithms specialized for visual tracking are not available yet, while the approaches based on low-level handcraft
features still work well in practice [5, 17, 21, 47]. Several recent tracking algorithms [20, 44] have addressed the
data deficiency issue by transferring pretrained CNNs on
a large-scale classification dataset such as ImageNet [36].
Although these methods may be sufficient to obtain generic
feature representations, its effectiveness in terms of tracking is limited due to the fundamental inconsistency between

Motivated by this fact, we propose a novel CNN architecture, referred to as Multi-Domain Network (MDNet), to
learn the shared representation of targets from multiple annotated video sequences for tracking, where each video is
regarded as a separate domain. The proposed network has
separate branches of domain-specific layers for binary classification at the end of the network, and shares the common
information captured from all sequences in the preceding
layers for generic representation learning. Each domain in
MDNet is trained separately and iteratively while the shared
layers are updated in every iteration. By employing this
strategy, we separate domain-independent information from
domain-specific one and learn generic feature representations for visual tracking. Another interesting aspect of our
architecture is that we design the CNN with a small number
of layers compared to the networks for classification tasks
such as AlexNet [28] and VGG nets [4, 37].
We also propose an effective online tracking framework
based on the representations learned by MDNet. When a
test sequence is given, all the existing branches of binary

4293

