CNN-N-Gram for Handwriting Word Recognition
Arik Poznanski and Lior Wolf
The Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
arik.com@gmail.com, wolf@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Given an image of a handwritten word, a CNN is employed to estimate its n-gram frequency profile, which is the
set of n-grams contained in the word. Frequencies for unigrams, bigrams and trigrams are estimated for the entire
word and for parts of it. Canonical Correlation Analysis is
then used to match the estimated profile to the true profiles
of all words in a large dictionary. The CNN that is used
employs several novelties such as the use of multiple fully
connected branches. Applied to all commonly used handwriting recognition benchmarks, our method outperforms,
by a very large margin, all existing methods.

1. Introduction
The most prominent method in the current application
of deep learning to computer vision is the Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) [30]. Developed initially for the
task of reading handwritten digits, this method is now utilized for almost every perceptual task relating to image and
video data. In many such tasks, CNNs lead to state of the
art performance. It is, therefore, somewhat surprising that
in the field of handwriting recognition, CNNs are currently
not leading the performance charts.
CNNs are trained in a supervised way. The first question
when training it, is what type of supervision to use. Previous
applications of CNNs in the field of printed word recognition [25] have demonstrated that a word based encoding is
preferable to encoding using bag-of-n-grams. The results
presented in this work show that, at least for handwriting
recognition, a very effective system can be built using an
attributes based encoding, in which the input image is described as having or lacking a set of n-grams in some spatial
sections of the word.
The attributes used in our work are heavily based on the
earlier work of Almazán et al. [3]. These binary attributes
check whether the word contains a specific n-gram in some
part of the word. For example, one such property may be:
Does the word contain the bigram “ou” in the second half of

the word? If the examined word is “ingenious” then the answer is positive, whereas if the checked word is “outstanding” the answer is negative.
While the original work of [3] uses SVMs over Fisher
Vectors of SIFTs, we employ CNNs directly over raw pixel
values. Moreover, in order to reach high levels of performance, multiple novelties had to be incorporated. These include the creation of specialized sub-networks that focus on
subsets of the set of 600-1200 attributes used (this number
depends on the size of the alphabet).
The obtained network is fairly large, and training it
on the relatively small datasets available for handwriting
recognition is challenging. We incorporate gradual training
and other ideas in order to tackle this.
The resulting method is extremely potent. The same architecture applied to all significant handwriting benchmarks
that we are aware of, achieves a very sizable improvement
over state of the art. While the network was not designed
for printed text, it also achieves state of the art results on the
Street View Text (SVT) benchmark [54] and results comparable to state of the art on IIIT5K [37] benchmark.

2. Related work
Currently, the leading handwriting recognition benchmarks are IAM, RIMES and IFN/ENIT. The performance
charts for these datasets are currently dominated by the use
of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and its extensions
such as Long-Short-Term-Memory (LSTM) networks, Hidden Markov Models (HMMs), and various combinations of
these methods. CNNs are absent from current results.
The IAM dataset [33] contains images of handwritten
English words. The current state of the art on the IAM
benchmark is a system by Bluche et al. [10] which uses
the ROVER voting scheme [15] for combining four models.
Two of them are based on Bidirectional Long Short-Term
Memory (BDLSTM) RNNs, and the other two are based on
deep Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs).
A close second to the state of the art method on IAM is
a system by Doetsch et al. [11], which uses an LSTM-RNN
with an additional parameter that controls the shape of the

2305

