Fast ConvNets Using Group-wise Brain Damage
Vadim Lebedev1,2
1

Victor Lempitsky1

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech)
2
Yandex
{vadim.lebedev, lempitsky}@skoltech.ru

Abstract
We revisit the idea of brain damage, i.e. the pruning of
the coefficients of a neural network, and suggest how brain
damage can be modified and used to speedup convolutional
layers in ConvNets. The approach uses the fact that many
efficient implementations reduce generalized convolutions
to matrix multiplications. The suggested brain damage process prunes the convolutional kernel tensor in a group-wise
fashion. After such pruning, convolutions can be reduced
to multiplications of thinned dense matrices, which leads to
speedup. We investigate different ways to add group-wise
prunning to the learning process, and show that severalfold speedups of convolutional layers can be attained using
group-sparsity regularizers. Our approach can adjust the
shapes of the receptive fields in the convolutional layers,
and even prune excessive feature maps from ConvNets, all
in data-driven way.

1. Introduction
In the original Optimal Brain Damage work [32] of
25 years ago, LeCun et al. observed that a carefully designed “brain-damage” process can sparsify the coefficients
of a multi-layer neural network very significantly while
incurring minimal or no loss of the prediction accuracy.
Such process resembles the biological learning processes
in mammals, in whose brains the number of synapses peak
during early childhood and is then reduced substantially in
the process of synaptic pruning [8]. The optimal brain damage algorithm and its variants, however, impose sparsity in
an unstructured way. As a result, while a large number
of parameters can be pruned, the attained level of sparsity
in the network is usually insufficient to achieve substantial
computational speedup on modern architectures.
These days, due to the overwhelming success of very big
convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) [30] on a variety

of machine learning problems, the task of speeding up ConvNets has become a topic of active research and engineering. Generalized convolution, i.e. the operation of convolving a 4D kernel tensor with the stack of input maps in order
to produce the stack of output maps, is at the core of ConvNets and also represents their speed bottleneck. Here, we
present a simple approach that modifies the standard generalized convolution process by imposing structured “braindamage” on the kernel tensor. We demonstrate that considerable speed-up of ConvNets can be obtained for a certain
structure.
This structure is motivated by the observation that the
majority of current implementations of generalized convolutions (including the most efficient one at the time of submission) [9, 16, 26, 12, 46, 37] compute generalized convolutions by reducing them to matrix multiplications (this
reduction is also referred to as lowering, unrolling, or the
im2col operation). While unstructured brain damage in a
convolutional layer, i.e. shrinking some of the coefficients
of the convolutional kernel tensor to zero, will make one
of the factor matrices (the filter matrix) sparse, it will not
make the overall multiplication run faster. Our idea therefore is to group together the entries of the convolutional tensor in a certain fashion and to shrink such groups to zero in
a coordinated way. By doing this, we can eliminate rows
and columns from both factor matrices that are multiplied
when convolution is reduced to matrix multiplication. Repeated elimination of rows and columns makes both factor
matrices thinner (but still dense) and results in faster matrix
multiplication.
We demonstrate that conventional group sparsity regularizer [48] embedded into stochastic gradient descent minimization is able to accomplish group-wise brain damage
efficiently. The use of group sparsity thus allows us to optimize receptive fields in the convolutional network. Our
approach therefore makes the case for the natural idea of
using structured sparsity as a simple way to optimize connectivity in deep architectures. In the experiments, our
12554

