ProNet: Learning to Propose Object-specific Boxes
for Cascaded Neural Networks
Chen Sun1,2
1

Manohar Paluri2
USC

{chensun, nevatia}@usc.edu

Ronan Collobert2 Ram Nevatia1 Lubomir Bourdev3
3
Facebook AI Research
UC Berkeley

2

{mano, locronan}@fb.com

Abstract
This paper aims to classify and locate objects accurately
and efficiently, without using bounding box annotations. It
is challenging as objects in the wild could appear at arbitrary locations and in different scales. In this paper, we
propose a novel classification architecture ProNet based on
convolutional neural networks. It uses computationally efficient neural networks to propose image regions that are
likely to contain objects, and applies more powerful but
slower networks on the proposed regions. The basic building block is a multi-scale fully-convolutional network which
assigns object confidence scores to boxes at different locations and scales. We show that such networks can be trained
effectively using image-level annotations, and can be connected into cascades or trees for efficient object classification. ProNet outperforms previous state-of-the-art significantly on PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO datasets for
object classification and point-based localization.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of object classification and localization in natural images. As objects could be small and
appear at arbitrary locations, several frameworks [18, 37]
rely on bounding boxes to train object-centric classifiers,
and apply the classifiers by searching over different locations of the images. However, the annotation process for
object bounding boxes is usually resource intensive and difficult to scale up. In light of this, we aim to simultaneously
classify and locate objects given only image-level annotations for training.
To cope with the lack of object-level annotations, several
methods [2, 10, 28] extract feature activations from convolutional neural networks (CNN) by scanning over different
image regions. They then aggregate the extracted features
into image-level representations for classification purpose.
Under this scheme, regions that belong to the background
are considered as important as regions that contain objects.

lubomir.bourdev@gmail.com

Bird?

Bird?

Yes!

Probably
Potted plant?

No

Cat?

Cat?

Probably

Yes!

Figure 1. We approach object classification problem by zooming onto promising image boxes. No object-level annotations are
needed during training.

Such global approaches tend to be sensitive to background,
and cannot be used directly for localization.
We choose to use the fully-convolutional network (FCN)
architecture [16, 19, 23, 27, 21] for simultaneous object classification and localization. It replaces the fullyconnected layers of a standard CNN (e.g. AlexNet [12])
with convolutional layers. This enables an FCN to take
images of arbitrary sizes, and generate classification score
maps efficiently. Each element in a score map corresponds
to a rectangular box (receptive field) in the original image.
The score maps can then be used for classification and localization.
The sampling strides and box sizes are determined by
the FCN’s network architecture. As box sizes are fixed,
FCN might face difficulty dealing with objects of different
scales. We address this problem by using a multi-stream
multi-scale architecture. All streams share the same parameters, but take input images of different scales. To train
the multi-scale FCN without object-level annotations, we
generate image-level scores by pooling the score maps over
multiple-scales, and compute the losses with image-level la13485

