Large Scale Semi-supervised Object Detection using Visual and Semantic
Knowledge Transfer
Yuxing Tang1

Josiah Wang2
Boyang Gao1,3
Emmanuel Dellandréa1
2
Robert Gaizauskas
Liming Chen1
1
Ecole Centrale de Lyon, France 2 University of Sheffield, UK 3 Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Italy
{yuxing.tang, emmanuel.dellandrea, liming.chen}@ec-lyon.fr
{j.k.wang, r.gaizauskas}@sheffield.ac.uk
boyang.gao@iit.it

Abstract
Deep CNN-based object detection systems have achieved
remarkable success on several large-scale object detection
benchmarks. However, training such detectors requires a
large number of labeled bounding boxes, which are more
difficult to obtain than image-level annotations. Previous
work addresses this issue by transforming image-level classifiers into object detectors. This is done by modeling the
differences between the two on categories with both imagelevel and bounding box annotations, and transferring this
information to convert classifiers to detectors for categories
without bounding box annotations. We improve this previous work by incorporating knowledge about object similarities from visual and semantic domains during the transfer
process. The intuition behind our proposed method is that
visually and semantically similar categories should exhibit
more common transferable properties than dissimilar categories, e.g. a better detector would result by transforming
the differences between a dog classifier and a dog detector onto the cat class, than would by transforming from
the violin class. Experimental results on the challenging
ILSVRC2013 detection dataset demonstrate that each of our
proposed object similarity based knowledge transfer methods outperforms the baseline methods. We found strong evidence that visual similarity and semantic relatedness are
complementary for the task, and when combined notably
improve detection, achieving state-of-the-art detection performance in a semi-supervised setting.

1. Introduction
Object detection/localization in images is one of the
most widely studied problems in computer vision. Most object detectors adopt strong supervision in learning appear* This work was supported by the EU CHIST-ERA D2K Visual Sense
(Visen) project (ANR-12-CHRI-0002-04 and EPSRC EP/K019082/1).

ance models of object categories, that is by using training
images annotated with bounding boxes encompassing the
objects of interest, along with their category labels. The recent success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN)
[16] for object detection, such as DetectorNet [35], OverFeat [31], R-CNN [12], SPP-net [13], Fast R-CNN [11]
and Faster R-CNN [25], is heavily dependent on a large
amount of training data manually labeled with object localizations (e.g. PASCAL VOC [8], ILSVRC (subset of ImageNet) [30], and Microsoft COCO [18]).
Although localized object annotations are extremely
valuable, the process of manually annotating object bounding boxes is extremely laborious and unreliable, especially
for large-scale databases. On the other hand, it is usually
much easier to obtain annotations at image level (e.g. from
user-generated tags on Flickr or Web queries). For example, ILSVRC contains image-level annotations for 1,000
categories, while object-level annotations are currently restricted to only 200 categories. One could apply imagelevel classifiers directly to detect object categories, but this
will result in a poor performance as there are differences in
the statistical distribution between the training data (whole
images) and the test data (localized object instances). Previous work by Hoffman et al. [14] addresses this issue, by
learning a transformation between classifiers and detectors
of object categories with both image-level and object-level
annotations (“strong” categories), and applying the transformation to adapt image-level classifiers to object detectors
for categories with only image-level labels (“weak” categories). Part of this work involves transferring categoryspecific classifier and detector differences of visually similar “strong” categories equally to a classifier of a “weak”
category to form a detector for that category. We argue that
more can potentially be exploited from such similarities in
an informed manner to improve detection beyond using the
measures solely for nearest neighbor selection.
Our main contribution in this paper is therefore to incor-

2119

