Recognizing Emotions from Abstract Paintings
using Non-Linear Matrix Completion
Xavier Alameda-Pineda1 , Elisa Ricci2,3 , Yan Yan1 , Nicu Sebe1
1

2

University of Trento, Via Sommarive 9, 38123 Trento, Italy
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Via Sommarive 18, 38123 Trento, Italy
3
University of Perugia, Via Duranti 93, 06123, Perugia, Italy

{xavier.alamedapineda,yan.yan,niculae.sebe}@unitn.it, eliricci@fbk.eu

Abstract

Beyond the automatic recognition of objective properties of images, in the past few years the computer vision research community successfully invested large efforts in the
systematic characterization of subjective properties from visual cues. Image aesthetics [27, 45, 26], portrait beauty
assessment [31], meaningful texture selection [7], memorability gaugement [13], emotion recognition [28] and creativity [30] are examples of such subjective vision-based
recognition tasks. Remarkably, researchers made a tremendous progress in the automatic analysis of artworks targeting a diverse range of tasks, such as inferring paintings
styles [23], studying the influences between artists and art
movements [37], distinguishing authentic drawings from

imitations [12], automatically generating artworks [34] and
assessing evoked emotions [32, 46]. Figure 1 shows examples of abstract paintings from the MART dataset eliciting
positive and negative emotions: which one does what?1
The particular case of the automatic analysis of modern
art is exciting and challenging for the research community,
since the artist aims to convey strong and deep emotional
content to the observer. Indeed, artists immersed into the
abstract art movement tend to enhance the non-figurative
component and to express “only internal truths, renouncing in consequence all consideration of external form” [18].
Subsequently, when analysing modern art paintings, it is of
utmost importance to study the relationship between visual
features (e.g. colour, shapes, textures) and evoked emotions.
In other words, it is crucial, and even more intriguing, to design vision-based learning models able to exploit this link
and to predict the emotion evoked by a particular painting. It is therefore unsurprising that there exist several attempts to develop computational approaches for analysing
people’s emotional experience in reaction to modern artworks [25, 44, 46, 33, 32]. Most of these studies rely on advanced computer vision and machine learning approaches
for emotionally categorising artworks [25, 46, 32] and for
inferring the parts of the paintings responsible for evoking
specific feelings [44]. Other studies investigate how the tex1

15240

. Filled boxes correspond to negative emotions.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Sample abstract paintings of the MART dataset: which
one does elicite in you a positive or a negative emotion?

The answer is

Advanced computer vision and machine learning techniques tried to automatically categorize the emotions
elicited by abstract paintings with limited success. Since
the annotation of the emotional content is highly resourceconsuming, datasets of abstract paintings are either constrained in size or partially annotated. Consequently, it is
natural to address the targeted task within a transductive
framework. Intuitively, the use of multi-label classification
techniques is desirable so to synergically exploit the relations between multiple latent variables, such as emotional
content, technique, author, etc. A very popular approach for
transductive multi-label recognition under linear classification settings is matrix completion. In this study we introduce
non-linear matrix completion (NLMC), thus extending classical linear matrix completion techniques to the non-linear
case. Together with the theory grounding the model, we
propose an efficient optimization solver. As shown by our
extensive experimental validation on two publicly available
datasets, NLMC outperforms state-of-the-art methods when
recognizing emotions from abstract paintings.

