Discriminative Multi-modal Feature Fusion for RGBD Indoor Scene Recognition
Hongyuan Zhu
I R, A∗ Star, Singapore

Jean-Baptiste Weibel
Georgia Tech, USA

Shijian Lu
I R, A∗ Star, Singapore

zhuh@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Jean-Baptiste.weibel@gatech.edu

slu@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

2

Abstract
RGBD scene recognition has attracted increasingly attention due to the rapid development of depth sensors and
their wide application scenarios. While many research
has been conducted, most work used hand-crafted features
which are difficult to capture high-level semantic structures.
Recently, the feature extracted from deep convolutional neural network has produced state-of-the-art results for various
computer vision tasks, which inspire researchers to explore
incorporating CNN learned features for RGBD scene understanding. On the other hand, most existing work combines rgb and depth features without adequately exploiting
the consistency and complementary information between
them. Inspired by some recent work on RGBD object recognition using multi-modal feature fusion, we introduce a
novel discriminative multi-modal fusion framework for rgbd
scene recognition for the first time which simultaneously
considers the inter- and intra-modality correlation for all
samples and meanwhile regularizing the learned features to
be discriminative and compact. The results from the multimodal layer can be back-propagated to the lower CNN layers, hence the parameters of the CNN layers and multimodal layers are updated iteratively until convergence. Experiments on the recently proposed large scale SUN RGB-D
datasets show that our method achieved the state-of-the-art
without any image segmentation.

1. Introduction
Indoor scene recognition based on RGBD camera has attracted increasingly attention due to its wide applications in
computer vision and robotics and the popularity of depth
sensors. Although much progress has been achieved in the
past few years, indoor scene recognition is still challenging due to the large intra-object variation and spatial layout
changes, not to mention the challenges caused by the occlusion and low-light condition.
Given an input indoor image, we human can quickly
recognize the scene category and generalize the brained
learned recognizer to the new place which is not seen be-

2

fore. The key to success of our brain lies in three aspects:
(1) its exposure to the dense and diversity sampling of our
visual world; (2) its versatile capacity to abstract compact
and discriminative representations of different complexities; (3) its high efficiency to fuse information from multimodalities to perform high-level reasoning.
To improve current scene recognition systems, a large
dataset is very helpful to learn meaningful representations
and prevent overfitting. Early scene-centric datasets [21,
13] for outdoor and indoor scene recognition either has a
small number of scene categories or dataset size compared
with the counterparts in object centric datasets, such as ImageNet [14]. Recently, Zhou et al [22] proposed the Places
dataset which contains 7 million images from 476 places
categories, making it the largest scene and place database,
which allows us to train data hungry models. Although
depth sensors has become cheaper, the number of influential RGBD dataset is still relative smaller than RGB counterparts. The first generation benchmarks, such as NYU
D2 [16] and Berkeley B3DO dataset [6], have bootstrapped
the initial progress of RGBD scene understanding. Recently, Song et al [17] proposed the large scale SUN-RGBD
dataset, which is the first RGBD dataset that has a similar
scale as the PASCAL VOC dataset [3], hence make it possible to borrow the success technique in RGB scene understanding to RGBD research.
Besides a large dataset, features are also vital for scene
recognition. Many features have been proposed for scene
recognition, here we just briefly mention some recent influential and related works due to the space limits. Early scene
recognition uses hand-crafted features such as SIFT [11],
GIST [12] and CENTRIST [20], which achieved reasonable performance for certain tasks. On the other hand, as
the hand-crafted features models low-level activations from
V1 cells, they can ignore the more discriminative information in higher hierarchies which are vital for scene understanding. Moreover, the hand-craft features also have a low
generalization capability when migrating to new tasks. To
avoid the limitations of hand-craft features, the unsupervised feature learning has been proposed, such as deep belief nets [5], deep Boltzmann machines [15], deep autoen-

2969

