A Benchmark Dataset and Evaluation Methodology for
Video Object Segmentation
F. Perazzi1,2

J. Pont-Tuset1

B. McWilliams2
1
ETH Zurich

L. Van Gool1 M. Gross1,2
Disney Research

A. Sorkine-Hornung2

2

Abstract
Over the years, datasets and benchmarks have proven
their fundamental importance in computer vision research,
enabling targeted progress and objective comparisons in
many fields. At the same time, legacy datasets may impend
the evolution of a field due to saturated algorithm performance and the lack of contemporary, high quality data. In
this work we present a new benchmark dataset and evaluation methodology for the area of video object segmentation. The dataset, named DAVIS (Densely Annotated VIdeo
Segmentation), consists of fifty high quality, Full HD video
sequences, spanning multiple occurrences of common video
object segmentation challenges such as occlusions, motionblur and appearance changes. Each video is accompanied
by densely annotated, pixel-accurate and per-frame ground
truth segmentation. In addition, we provide a comprehensive analysis of several state-of-the-art segmentation approaches using three complementary metrics that measure
the spatial extent of the segmentation, the accuracy of the
silhouette contours and the temporal coherence. The results
uncover strengths and weaknesses of current approaches,
opening up promising directions for future works.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation is a binary labeling problem aiming to separate foreground object(s) from the background region of a video. A pixel-accurate, spatio-temporal
bipartition of the video is instrumental to several applications including, among others, action recognition, object
tracking, video summarization, and rotoscoping for video
editing. Despite remarkable progress in recent years, video
object segmentation still remains a challenging problem and
most existing approaches still exhibit too severe limitations
in terms of quality and efficiency to be applicable in practical applications, e.g. for processing large datasets, or video
post-production and editing in the visual effects industry.
What is most striking is the performance gap among
state-of-the-art video object segmentation algorithms and
closely related methods focusing on image segmentation

Figure 1: Sample sequences from our dataset, with ground
truth segmentation masks overlayed. Please refer to the supplemental material for the complete dataset.

and object recognition, which have experienced remarkable progress in the recent years. A key factor bootstrapping this progress has been the availability of large
scale datasets and benchmarks [12, 26, 29, 42]. This is in
stark contrast to video object segmentation. While several datasets exists for various different video segmentation
tasks [1, 4, 5, 15, 20, 21, 25, 38, 41, 44, 46, 47], none of them
targets the specific task of video object segmentation.
To date, the most widely adopted dataset is that of [47],
which, however, was originally proposed for joint segmentation and tracking and only contains six low-resolution
video sequences, which are not representative anymore for
the image quality and resolution encountered in today’s
video processing applications. As a consequence, evaluations performed on such datasets are likely to be overfitted, without reliable indicators regarding the differences between individual video segmentation approaches, and the
real performance on unseen, more contemporary data becomes difficult to determine [6]. Despite the effort of some
authors to augment their evaluation with additional datasets,
a standardized and widely adopted evaluation methodology
for video object segmentation does not yet exists.
To this end, we introduce a new dataset specifically designed for the task of video object segmentation. The
1724

