Learning Deep Representations of Fine-Grained Visual Descriptions
Scott Reed1 , Zeynep Akata2 , Honglak Lee1 and Bernt Schiele2
1

University of Michigan

2

Max-Planck Institute for Informatics

Abstract
State-of-the-art methods for zero-shot visual recognition
formulate learning as a joint embedding problem of images and side information. In these formulations the current
best complement to visual features are attributes: manuallyencoded vectors describing shared characteristics among
categories. Despite good performance, attributes have limitations: (1) finer-grained recognition requires commensurately more attributes, and (2) attributes do not provide
a natural language interface. We propose to overcome
these limitations by training neural language models from
scratch; i.e. without pre-training and only consuming words
and characters. Our proposed models train end-to-end to
align with the fine-grained and category-specific content of
images. Natural language provides a flexible and compact
way of encoding only the salient visual aspects for distinguishing categories. By training on raw text, our model can
do inference on raw text as well, providing humans a familiar mode both for annotation and retrieval. Our model
achieves strong performance on zero-shot text-based image
retrieval and significantly outperforms the attribute-based
state-of-the-art for zero-shot classification on the CaltechUCSD Birds 200-2011 dataset.

1. Introduction
A key challenge in image understanding is to correctly
relate natural language concepts to the visual content of images. In recent years there has been significant progress
in learning visual-semantic embeddings, e.g. for zero-shot
learning [36, 38, 24, 33, 12, 41, 2] and automatically generating image captions for general web images [23, 35, 45,
20, 8]. These methods have harnessed large image and text
datasets [39, 50, 25], as well as advances in deep neural networks for image and language modeling, already enabling
powerful new applications such as auto-captioning images
for blind users on the web [27].
Despite these advances, the problem of relating images
and text is still far from solved. In particular for the finegrained regime [46, 10, 7, 51], where images of differ-

Accumulate
matching score
CNN

The beak is yellow and pointed

+8.56
-5.23
0.03

Figure 1: Our model learns a scoring function between images and text descriptions. A word-based LSTM is shown
here, but we also evaluate several alternative models.
ent classes have only subtle distinctions, sophisticated language models have not been employed, perhaps due to the
scarcity of large and high-quality training data. For instance on the Caltech-UCSD birds database (CUB) [46],
previous zero-shot learning approaches [13, 2, 3] have
used human-encoded attributes [24], or simplified language
models such as bag-of-words [16], WordNet-hierarchyderived features [29], and neural word embeddings such as
Word2Vec [28] and GloVE [37].
Previous text corpora used for fine-grained label embedding were either very large but not visually focused, e.g. the
entire wikipedia, or somewhat visually relevant but very
short, e.g. the subset of wikipedia articles that are related
to birds. Furthermore, these wikis do not provide enough
aligned images and text to train a high-capacity sentence encoder. Given the data limitations, previous text embedding
methods work surprisingly well for zero-shot visual recognition, but there remains a large gap between the text embedding methods and human-annotated attributes (28.4% vs
50.1% average top-1 per-class accuracy on CUB [2]).
In order to close the performance gap between text embeddings and human-annotated attributes for fine-grained
visual recognition, we hypothesize that higher-capacity text
models are required. However, more sophisticated text
models would in turn require more training data, in particular aligned images and multiple visual descriptions per
image for each fine-grained category. These descriptions
1 49

