Temporal Action Localization in Untrimmed Videos via Multi-stage CNNs
Zheng Shou, Dongang Wang, and Shih-Fu Chang
Columbia University
New York, NY, USA
{zs2262,dw2648,sc250}@columbia.edu

Abstract
We address temporal action localization in untrimmed
long videos. This is important because videos in real applications are usually unconstrained and contain multiple
action instances plus video content of background scenes
or other activities. To address this challenging issue, we
exploit the effectiveness of deep networks in temporal action localization via three segment-based 3D ConvNets: (1)
a proposal network identifies candidate segments in a long
video that may contain actions; (2) a classification network
learns one-vs-all action classification model to serve as initialization for the localization network; and (3) a localization network fine-tunes the learned classification network to
localize each action instance. We propose a novel loss function for the localization network to explicitly consider temporal overlap and achieve high temporal localization accuracy. In the end, only the proposal network and the localization network are used during prediction. On two largescale benchmarks, our approach achieves significantly superior performances compared with other state-of-the-art
systems: mAP increases from 1.7% to 7.4% on MEXaction2
and increases from 15.0% to 19.0% on THUMOS 2014.

1. Introduction
Impressive progress has been reported in recent literature for action recognition [42, 28, 2, 3, 39, 40, 24, 18, 31,
44, 13, 37]. Besides detecting action in manually trimmed
short video, researchers start to develop techniques for detecting actions in untrimmed long videos in the wild. This
trend motivates another challenging topic - temporal action
localization: given a long untrimmed video, “when does a
specific action start and end?” This problem is important
because real applications usually involve long untrimmed
videos, which can be highly unconstrained in space and
time, and one video can contain multiple action instances
plus background scenes or other activities. Localizing actions in long videos, such as those in surveillance, can save
tremendous time and computational costs.

Most state-of-the-art methods rely on manually selected
features, and their performances still require much improvement. For example, top performing approaches in THUMOS Challenge 2014 [27, 41, 17, 15] and 2015 [46, 9] both
used improved Dense Trajectory (iDT) with Fisher Vector
(FV) [40, 25]. There have been some recent attempts at incorporating iDT features with appearance features automatically extracted by frame-level deep networks [27, 41, 17].
Nevertheless, such 2D ConvNets do not capture motion information, which is important for modeling actions and determining their temporal boundaries.
As an analogy in still images, object detection recently
achieved large improvements by using deep networks. Inspired by Region-based Convolutional Neural Networks (RCNN) [7] and its upgraded versions [6, 30, 21], we develop
Segment-CNN1 , which is an effective deep network framework for temporal action localization as outlined in Figure
1. We adopt 3D ConvNets [13, 37], which recently has
been shown to be promising for capturing motion characteristics in videos, and add a new multi-stage framework.
First, multi-scale segments are generated as candidates for
three deep networks. The proposal network classifies each
segment as either action or background in order to eliminate
background segment estimated to be unlikely to contain actions of interest. The classification network trains typical
one-vs-all classification model for all action categories plus
the background.
However, the classification network aims at finding key
evidences to distinguish different categories, rather than localizing precise action presences in time. Sometimes, the
scores from the classification network can be high even
when the segment has only a very small overlap with the
ground truth instance. This can be detrimental because subsequent post-processing steps, such as Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS), might remove segment of small score but
large overlap with ground truth. To explicitly take temporal overlap into consideration, we introduce the localization network based on the same architecture, but this net1 Source code and trained models are available online at https://
github.com/zhengshou/scnn/.

1049

