Shallow and Deep Convolutional Networks for Saliency Prediction
Junting Pan∗, Elisa Sayrol and Xavier Giro-i-Nieto
Image Processing Group
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Catalonia/Spain

Kevin McGuinness∗ and Noel E. O’Connor
Insight Center for Data Analytics
Dublin City University
Dublin, Ireland

xavier.giro@upc.edu

kevin.mcguinness@insight-centre.org

Abstract
The prediction of salient areas in images has been traditionally addressed with hand-crafted features based on
neuroscience principles. This paper, however, addresses the
problem with a completely data-driven approach by training
a convolutional neural network (convnet). The learning process is formulated as a minimization of a loss function that
measures the Euclidean distance of the predicted saliency
map with the provided ground truth. The recent publication
of large datasets of saliency prediction has provided enough
data to train end-to-end architectures that are both fast and
accurate. Two designs are proposed: a shallow convnet
trained from scratch, and a another deeper solution whose
first three layers are adapted from another network trained
for classification. To the authors’ knowledge, these are the
first end-to-end CNNs trained and tested for the purpose of
saliency prediction.

1. Introduction
This work presents two approaches for end-to-end convolutional neural networks (convnets or CNNs) for saliency
prediction. Our objective is to compute saliency maps that
represent the probability of visual attention on an image,
defined as the eye gaze fixation points. This problem has
been traditionally addressed with hand-crafted features inspired by neurology studies. In our case we have adopted a
completely data-driven approach, using a large amount of
annotated data for saliency prediction. Figure 1 provides an
example of an image together with its ground truth saliency
map and the two saliency maps predicted by the proposed
convnets: a shallow one and a deep one.
Convnets are popular architectures in the field of deep
learning and have been widely explored for visual pattern
recognition, ranging from a global scale image classification
[16] to a more local object detection [7] or semantic segmen∗ Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Input Image (top left) and saliency maps from the ground
truth (top right), our shallow convnet (bottom left) and our deep
convnet (bottom right).

tation [21]. The hierarchy of layers in convnets are inspired
by biological models, and some works have pointed to a
relation between the activity of certain areas in the brain and
the hierarchy of layers in the convnets [4]. Provided with
enough training data, convnets have shown impressive results, often outperforming other hand-crafted methods. The
rise of convnets originated with image classification [23]
in the context of increasing availability of annotated data.
Large datasets like ImageNet [5] or Places [33] have provided enough visual examples to train the millions of parameters that most popular convnets contain. These datasets
provide thousands of images for each discrete label typically
associated to a semantic class.
The saliency prediction problem, however, poses two
specific challenges that differentiate it from classic image

598

