Recurrent Attention Models for Depth-Based Person Identification
Albert Haque, Alexandre Alahi, Li Fei-Fei
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
{ahaque,alahi,feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We present an attention-based model that reasons on human body shape and motion dynamics to identify individuals in the absence of RGB information, hence in the dark.
Our approach leverages unique 4D spatio-temporal signatures to address the identification problem across days.
Formulated as a reinforcement learning task, our model is
based on a combination of convolutional and recurrent neural networks with the goal of identifying small, discriminative regions indicative of human identity. We demonstrate
that our model produces state-of-the-art results on several
published datasets given only depth images. We further
study the robustness of our model towards viewpoint, appearance, and volumetric changes. Finally, we share insights gleaned from interpretable 2D, 3D, and 4D visualizations of our model’s spatio-temporal attention.

Time
Figure 1: Gait has been shown to be unique to each person.
We propose a 4D recurrent attention model to learn spatiotemporal signatures and identify people from depth images.

1. Introduction
A quick, partial view of a person is often sufficient for a
human to recognize an individual. This remarkable ability
has proven to be an elusive task for modern computer vision systems. Nevertheless, it represents a valuable task for
security authentication, human tracking, public safety, and
role-based activity understanding [34, 30, 2].
Given an input image, person identification aims to assign identification labels to individuals present in the image.
Despite the best efforts from previous work [79, 80, 40], this
problem remains largely unsolved. Without accurate spatial or temporal constraints, visual features alone are often
intrinsically weak for matching people across time due to
intra-class differences. Additional variances due to illumination, viewpoint, and pose further exacerbate the problem.
Research findings from physiology and psychology have
shown that gait is unique to each individual [57, 56, 17].
Building on this observation, we aim to learn body shape
and motion signatures unique to each person (see Figure 1).
Inspired by the recent success of the depth modality [4, 77],
our goal is to output an identification label from a depth
image or video.

The primary challenge towards this goal is designing a
model that is not only rich enough to reason about motion and body shape but also robust to intra-class variability. The second challenge is that person identification inherently comprises of a large number of classes with few
training examples per class (in some cases a single training
example). Existing datasets [52, 5, 54] often collect frontfacing views with constant appearances (i.e. similar sets of
clothing). While this makes the identification problem more
tractable, we are interested in relaxing these assumptions to
solve a more general identification task which is applicable
to a broader audience.
Our core insight is that we can leverage raw depth video
despite the scarcity of training inputs, to address the aforementioned challenges by formulating the task as a reinforcement learning problem. Our approach involves pruning the high dimensional input space and focuses on small,
discriminative regions while being free of visual and temporal assumptions. Concretely, our contributions are:
(i) We develop a recurrent attention model that identifies
humans based on depth videos. Our model leverages a 4D

1229

