Contour detection in unstructured 3D point clouds
Timo Hackel, Jan D. Wegner, Konrad Schindler
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, ETH Zürich

Abstract
We describe a method to automatically detect contours, i.e. lines along which the surface orientation sharply
changes, in large-scale outdoor point clouds. Contours are
important intermediate features for structuring point clouds
and converting them into high-quality surface or solid models, and are extensively used in graphics and mapping applications. Yet, detecting them in unstructured, inhomogeneous point clouds turns out to be surprisingly difficult, and
existing line detection algorithms largely fail. We approach
contour extraction as a two-stage discriminative learning
problem. In the first stage, a contour score for each individual point is predicted with a binary classifier, using a set
of features extracted from the point’s neighborhood. The
contour scores serve as a basis to construct an overcomplete graph of candidate contours. The second stage selects an optimal set of contours from the candidates. This
amounts to a further binary classification in a higher-order
MRF, whose cliques encode a preference for connected contours and penalize loose ends. The method can handle point
clouds > 107 points in a couple of minutes, and vastly outperforms a baseline that performs Canny-style edge detection on a range image representation of the point cloud.

1. Introduction
By and large, modern 3D reconstruction techniques like
dense multi-view matching, laser scanning or structured
light projection deliver 3D point clouds as primary output. But raw point clouds are of limited use for most
applications, and mostly serve as a basis for further processing. Either they are triangulated into an unstructured
surface model, e.g. a triangle mesh, for low-level tasks
such as visualization; or they are processed into more
compact and structured CAD-like higher-level structures,
e.g. [24, 16, 32]. Perhaps the most widely used approach in
this context, especially for indoor applications, is to locally
fit parametric surfaces or solids to the data. Line features
then follow as a last step, by intersecting surface primitives.
Such an approach can work well for schematic surface geometries, but quickly reaches its limits when portions of the
scene are not covered by the primitive library.

Figure 1: Given an unstructured 3D point cloud (black), our
method detects contours (red). Challenges include strongly
varying point density (e.g., front facade vs. roof of the
church); occlusions and missing data (e.g., dormer on the
left); and sheer data volume (here, ≈ 3 · 107 points).
Here, we propose to proceed the other way round. Our
goal is to extract contours in outdoor point clouds such as
those acquired by terrestrial laser scanners, see Fig. 1. By
contours we mean linear features along which the orientation (normal) of the underlying surface exhibits an unusual discontinuity. Arguably, such wireframe-like line features are a lower-level representation than CAD surfaces
or solids, in the sense that humans can “see” them in the
raw data – the point cloud alone is sufficient to draw contours, even for relatively unconstrained surfaces that cannot
be represented with a small library of primitives.
In that sense, it seems natural to detect contours before
surface reconstruction, and use them to drive the segmentation and/or to fit surface patches – which is in fact how
interactive modelling systems operate, both in graphics and
vision [25] and in commercial mapping [26, 6].
At first sight, it may seem quite simple to detect crease
edges in point clouds. In practice, it turns out to be surprisingly challenging, for several reasons. On the conceptual
side, the definition of what constitutes a contour is not as
clear-cut as it seems, and hard to formalise. While it should
certainly have one high and one relatively low principal curvature at some (not necessarily fixed) scale, there are fur11610

