A Multi-Stream Bi-Directional Recurrent Neural Network for Fine-Grained
Action Detection
Bharat Singh
U. of Maryland

Tim K. Marks Michael Jones Oncel Tuzel
Mitsubish Electric Research Labs (MERL)

Ming Shao
Northeastern University

bharat@cs.umd.edu

{tmarks, mjones, oncel}@merl.com

mingshao@ccs.neu.edu

Abstract
We present a multi-stream bi-directional recurrent neural network for fine-grained action detection. Recently, twostream convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained on
stacked optical flow and image frames have been successful
for action recognition in videos. Our system uses a tracking algorithm to locate a bounding box around the person,
which provides a frame of reference for appearance and
motion and also suppresses background noise that is not
within the bounding box. We train two additional streams
on motion and appearance cropped to the tracked bounding
box, along with full-frame streams. Our motion streams use
pixel trajectories of a frame as raw features, in which the
displacement values corresponding to a moving scene point
are at the same spatial position across several frames. To
model long-term temporal dynamics within and between actions, the multi-stream CNN is followed by a bi-directional
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) layer. We show that our
bi-directional LSTM network utilizes about 8 seconds of
the video sequence to predict an action label. We test on
two action detection datasets: the MPII Cooking 2 Dataset,
and a new MERL Shopping Dataset that we introduce and
make available to the community with this paper. The results demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art action detection methods on both datasets.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we present an approach for detecting actions in videos. Action detection refers to the problem of
localizing temporally and spatially every occurrence of each
action from a known set of action classes in a long video sequence. This is in contrast to most of the previous work in
video activity analysis, which has focused on the problem
of action recognition (also called action classification). In
action recognition, a temporally segmented clip of a video
is given as input, and the task is to classify it as one of N
known actions. For action recognition, temporal localiza-

tion is not required, as each video clip is trimmed to contain precisely the full duration (from start to finish) of one
action. Furthermore, action recognition algorithms do not
need to consider the case that a presented clip might not
contain any of the known actions. In general, action detection is more difficult than action recognition. However, it is
worth overcoming that difficulty because action detection is
also much more relevant to real-world applications.
In this work, we focus on fine-grained action detection.
We use the term fine-grained in the same sense as [20] to
indicate that the differences among the classes of actions
to be detected are small. For example, in a cooking scenario, detecting similar actions such as chopping, grating,
and peeling constitutes fine-grained action detection.
We propose a method for fine-grained action detection
in long video sequences, based on a Multi-Stream BiDirectional Recurrent Neural Network (MSB-RNN). We
call our neural network multi-stream because it begins
with a convolutional neural network (CNN) that has four
streams: two different streams of information (motion and
appearance) for each of two different spatial frames (fullframe and person-centric). The video that is input to the network is split into a sequence of brief (6-frame-long) chunks.
The multi-stream network output is a sequence of highlevel representations of these chunks. These are input to
bi-directional long short-term memory (LSTM) [8, 6] units
to analyze long-term temporal dynamics.
Previous deep learning approaches use features that are
computed over the full spatial extent of the video frame.
We show the importance of using a tracked bounding box
around the person to compute features relative to the location of the person, in addition to full-frame features, to provide both location-independent and location-dependent information. Unlike some previous work that represents motion information using a sequence of flow fields [22], we instead use a sequence of corresponding pixel displacements
that we call pixel trajectories, as illustrated in Figure 3. The
advantage of pixel trajectories is that the displacements for a
moving point in the scene are represented at the same pixel
location across several frames. We analyze the relative im11961

