Multi-scale Patch Aggregation (MPA)
for Simultaneous Detection and Segmentation∗
Shu Liu†
Xiaojuan Qi†
Jianping Shi♭
†
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

♭

{sliu, xjqi, hzhang, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Aiming at simultaneous detection and segmentation (SDS), we propose a proposal-free framework, which detect and
segment object instances via mid-level patches. We design
a unified trainable network on patches, which is followed
by a fast and effective patch aggregation algorithm to infer object instances. Our method benefits from end-to-end
training. Without object proposal generation, computation
time can also be reduced. In experiments, our method yields
results 62.1% and 61.8% in terms of mAP r on VOC2012
segmentation val and VOC2012 SDS val, which are stateof-the-art at the time of submission. We also report results
on Microsoft COCO test-std/test-dev dataset in this paper.

1. Introduction
Object detection and semantic segmentation have been
core tasks of image understanding for long time. Object detection focuses on generating bounding boxes for objects.
These boxes may not be accurate enough to localize objects. Meanwhile semantic segmentation is to predict a more
detailed mask in pixel-level for different classes. It however ignores existence of single-object instances.
Recently, simultaneous detection and segmentation (SDS) [14] becomes a promising direction to generate pixellevel labels for every object instance, naturally leading to
the next-generation object recognition [24] goal. Accurate
and efficient SDS can be used in a lot of disciplines as a
fundamental tool, where both pixel-wise label and object
instance information can help build robotics, achieve automatic driving, enhance surveillance systems, construct intelligent home, to name a few.
SDS is more challenging than object detection and semantic segmentation separately. In this task, instance-level
information and pixel-wise accurate mask for objects are to
be estimated. Nearly all previous work [14, 5, 15, 3] took
∗ This work is supported by a grant from the Research Grants Council
of the Hong Kong SAR (project No. 413113).

Hong Zhang†
Jiaya Jia†
SenseTime Group Limited
shijianping@sensetime.com

the bottom-up segment-based object proposals [35, 31] as
input and modeled the system as classifying proposals with
the help of powerful deep convolutional neural networks
(DCNNs). Classified proposals are either output or refined
in post-processing to produce final results.
Issues of Object Proposals in SDS It has been noticed
that systems with object-proposal input may be accompanied by a few shortcomings. First, generating segmentbased proposals takes time. The high-quality proposal
generator [31] that was employed in previous SDS work
[14, 5, 15, 3] takes about 40 seconds to process one image.
It was discussed in [5] that using previous faster segmentbased proposals decreases performance. The newest proposal generators [30] are not evaluated yet for SDS.
Second, the overall SDS performance is bounded by the
quality of proposals since they only select provided proposals. Object proposals inevitably contain noise regarding
missing objects and errors inside each proposal. Last but
not least, if a SDS system is independent of object proposal generation, end-to-end parameter tuning is impossible.
Consequently, the system loses the chance to learn feature
and structure information from images directly, which however could be important to further improve the system performance with information feedback.
Our End-to-End SDS Solution To address these issues,
we propose a systematically feasible scheme to integrate
object proposal generation into the networks, enabling
end-to-end training from images to pixel-level labels for
instance-aware semantic segmentation.
Albeit beautiful in concept, practically establishing suitable models is difficult due to various scales, aspect ratios,
and deformation of objects. In our work, instead of segmenting objects directly, we propose segmenting and classifying part of or entire objects using many densely located patches. The mask of an object is then generated by
aggregating masks of the overlapping patches in a postprocessing step, as shown in Fig. 1. This scheme shares the
spirit of mid-level representation [1, 7, 36] and part-based
13141

