The Multiverse Loss for Robust Transfer Learning
Etai Littwin
Department of Electrical Engineering
Tel-Aviv University

Abstract
Deep learning techniques are renowned for supporting
effective transfer learning. However, as we demonstrate,
the transferred representations support only a few modes of
separation and much of its dimensionality is unutilized. In
this work, we suggest to learn, in the source domain, multiple orthogonal classifiers. We prove that this leads to a reduced rank representation, which, however, supports more
discriminative directions. Interestingly, the softmax probabilities produced by the multiple classifiers are likely to be
identical. Experimental results, on CIFAR-100 and LFW,
further demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
One of the hallmarks of the recent success of deep learning methods in computer vision is the ability to learn effective representations in one domain and apply these on another domain [15, 7, 6, 39, 22, 34, 16]. The source and
target domains might differ in the underlying probability
distribution, the imaging modality, and, often, in the task
performed. A striking example is image captioning [12],
in which image representations trained on ImageNet [4]
are transferred along with word embeddings trained on
Wikipedia and other corpora [21] in order to solve a seemingly complex task of describing images with sentences.
Another task where transfer learning has been shown to
be effective is face recognition. In this task, face representations are trained on large datasets collected from social networks or search engines. The representations are
trained to solve the multiclass classification problem using
a cross entropy loss and are then transferred to a different
domain, e.g., the celebrity images of the LFW dataset [11].
Moreover, the task changes post-transfer to face verification
(same/not-same).
An effective algorithm for face verification based on engineered or learned representations is the Joint Bayesian
(JB) method [2]. JB, similarly to other Bayesian methods, such as Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), is based
on the interplay between the within class covariance matrix

Lior Wolf
The Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University

Sw and the between class covariance matrix Sb . We prove
(Thm. 5) that JB fails to be discriminative whenever LDA
fails, i.e., when the Fisher ratio (Eq. 20 below) is low.
When empirically observing the spectrum of Fisher ratios associated with the transferred representations, we noticed that only a handful of the generalized eigenvectors of
Sb and Sw present large eigenvalues. The other directions
are therefore non-discriminative and the representation can
be considered flat.
To amend this situation, we propose to employ, in the
source domain, a generalization of the cross entropy loss. In
this generalization, multiple sets of classifiers are learned,
such that the group of classifiers for each class is orthogonal. Each set of classifiers is trained using a separate cross
entropy loss, and gives rise to its own set of probabilities.
When performing such training a few non-trivial properties emerge: (i) For each training sample, the vector of
probabilities obtained is identical across the classifier sets;
(ii) The dimensionality of the representation is reduced and
(iii) The Fisher Spectrum displays multiple directions with
high Fisher scores. In a series of theorems, we expose how
the new loss leads to these properties.
Finally, we demonstrate experimentally the both the effectiveness of our method and the consequences of the
emerging properties. For example, using a single network, we obtain 2nd best results for a single network on
LFW [11]. This is achieved using a a training set that is
a few orders of magnitude smaller than that of the leading
literature network [23], and using a very compact representation of only 51 dimensions.

2. Related work
Compound losses for training deep neural networks that
are created by combining multiple losses are now commonplace. In the very deep GoogLeNet network [30] multiple
cross entropy losses are distributed at different intermediate
layers of the deep network in order to help avoid vanishing gradients. In contrast, our work supports multiple cross
entropy losses at the top layer and for different reasons.
In many other cases, multiple losses are used in order to
support multiple tasks by the same network. For example,
13957

