Progressively Parsing Interactional Objects for Fine Grained Action Detection
Bingbing Ni
Shanghai Jiaotong University
Shanghai, China

Xiaokang Yang
Shanghai Jiaotong University
Shanghai, China

Shenghua Gao
ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai, China

nibingbing@sjtu.edu.cn

xkyang@sjtu.edu.cn

gaoshh@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Fine grained video action analysis often requires reliable detection and tracking of various interacting objects and human body parts, denoted as Interactional Object Parsing. However, most of the previous methods based
on either independent or joint object detection might suffer
from high model complexity and challenging image content,
e.g., illumination/pose/appearance/scale variation, motion,
and occlusion etc. In this work, we propose an end-to-end
system based on recurrent neural network to perform frame
by frame interactional object parsing, which can alleviate
the difficulty through an incremental/progressive manner.
Our key innovation is that: instead of jointly outputting all object detections at once, for each frame we use a set of
long-short term memory (LSTM) nodes to incrementally refine the detections. After passing through each LSTM node,
more object detections are consolidated and thus more contextual information could be utilized to localize more difficult objects. The object parsing results are further utilized
to form object specific action representation for fine grained
action detection. Extensive experiments on two benchmark
fine grained activity datasets demonstrate that our proposed
algorithm achieves better interacting object detection performance, which in turn boosts the action recognition performance over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained action analysis has been an emerging research direction during recent years [22, 14, 20, 18, 37, 36].
The major task of fine-grained interaction action analysis
is to detect the interacting objects or human body parts for
each video frame (in the rest of the paper, we will simply
use the term objects to denote both interactional objects and
human body parts). However, detecting and tracking the objects under interaction (also denoted as interactional object
parsing) in fine-grained action videos is very challenging
due to frequent occlussion/self-occlusion, change of object
scale/orientation/appearance, and fast object or background

motion, etc.
Early methods detect and track each of the interacting objects independently. For example, some works [3, 27, 15] only attempt to detect and track hands in interaction videos, without consideration of the relationship
between the hands and the objects being manipulated. In
some contextual object recognition works [17, 7, 33, 11],
hands and objects are detected using different methods independently, and the detections are further fused via probabilistic graphical models for high level inference, e.g., action detection or joint object and action recognition. With
RGB-Depth data, Lei et al. [14] proposed a system to perform fine-grained kitchen activity recognition. Different objects are detected independently. Obviously, this method is
not able to utilize rich contextual information among various objects during interaction, e.g., hands and objects, to
improve the joint detection performance.
Geometrical contextual information among objects,
body parts and body poses could be jointly explored to
enhance both object and action recognition performance.
Packer et al. [20] presented a joint model for objects, human poses and motion features to recognize complex, finegrained human actions in cooking action sequences. Koppula et al. [12] jointly detected manipulation activities and
object affordances. These works require 3D skeleton data
which are not easy to obtain in practice. Ni et al. [18] recently proposed a joint hand and object tracking framework
called interaction tracking, which is based on the observation that there exists rich contextual information between
the interaction status and the occurrence of mutual occlusion. Their method outperforms prior art.
However, joint object detection framework still has two
issues. First, joint object detection frameworks are usually based on tree-like graphical models, for example, deformable part-based models [5, 32], And-Or graph models [38, 16], probabilistic graphical models [20, 18]. These
models usually can only handle the binary contextual relationship between objects. While a large portion of actions
involve high order interaction, e.g., hand, knife, and chopping board for the action cutting, simply considering the
11020

