Deep Metric Learning via Lifted Structured Feature Embedding
Hyun Oh Song
Stanford University
hsong@cs.stanford.edu

Yu Xiang
Stanford University

Stefanie Jegelka
MIT

yuxiang@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Learning the distance metric between pairs of examples
is of great importance for learning and visual recognition.
With the remarkable success from the state of the art convolutional neural networks, recent works [1, 31] have shown
promising results on discriminatively training the networks
to learn semantic feature embeddings where similar examples are mapped close to each other and dissimilar examples are mapped farther apart. In this paper, we describe an
algorithm for taking full advantage of the training batches
in the neural network training by lifting the vector of pairwise distances within the batch to the matrix of pairwise
distances. This step enables the algorithm to learn the state
of the art feature embedding by optimizing a novel structured prediction objective on the lifted problem. Additionally, we collected Stanford Online Products dataset: 120k
images of 23k classes of online products for metric learning. Our experiments on the CUB-200-2011 [37], CARS196
[19], and Stanford Online Products datasets demonstrate
significant improvement over existing deep feature embedding methods on all experimented embedding sizes with the
GoogLeNet [33] network. The source code and the dataset
are available at: https://github.com/rksltnl/
Deep-Metric-Learning-CVPR16.

1. Introduction
Comparing and measuring similarities between pairs of
examples is a core requirement for learning and visual competence. Being able to first measure how similar a given pair
of examples are makes the following learning problems a
lot simpler. Given such a similarity function, classification
tasks could be simply reduced to the nearest neighbor problem with the given similarity measure, and clustering tasks
would be made easier given the similarity matrix. In this
regard, metric learning [13, 39, 34] and dimensionality reduction [18, 7, 29, 2] techniques aim at learning semantic
distance measures and embeddings such that similar input
objects are mapped to nearby points on a manifold and dissimilar objects are mapped apart from each other.

Silvio Savarese
Stanford University

stefje@csail.mit.edu

ssilvio@stanford.edu

Query

Retrieval

Figure 1: Example retrieval results on our Stanford Online
Products dataset using the proposed embedding. The images in the first column are the query images.

Furthermore, the problem of extreme classification [6,
26] with enormous number of categories has recently attracted a lot of attention in the learning community. In this
setting, two major problems arise which renders conventional classification approaches practically obsolete. First,
algorithms with the learning and inference complexity linear in the number of classes become impractical. Second, the availability of training data per class becomes
very scarce. In contrast to conventional classification approaches, metric learning becomes a very appealing technique in this regime because of its ability to learn the general concept of distance metrics (as opposed to category
specific concepts) and its compatibility with efficient nearest neighbor inference on the learned metric space.
With the remarkable success from the state of the art convolutional neural networks [20, 33], recent works [1, 31]
discriminatively train neural network to directly learn the
the non-linear mapping function from the input image to a
lower dimensional embedding given the input label annotations. In high level, these embeddings are optimized to pull
examples with different class labels apart from each other
and push examples from the same classes closer to each
other. One of the main advantages of these discriminatively
14004

