Automatic Content-Aware Color and Tone Stylization
Joon-Young Lee
Adobe Research

Kalyan Sunkavalli
Adobe Research

Zhe Lin
Adobe Research

Abstract
We introduce a new technique that automatically generates diverse, visually compelling stylizations for a photograph in an unsupervised manner. We achieve this by
learning style ranking for a given input using a large
photo collection and selecting a diverse subset of matching
styles for final style transfer. We also propose an improved
technique that transfers the global color and tone of the
chosen exemplars to the input photograph while avoiding
the common visual artifacts produced by the existing style
transfer methods. Together, our style selection and transfer
techniques produce compelling, artifact-free results on a
wide range of input photographs, and a user study shows
that our results are preferred over other techniques.

1. Introduction
Photographers often stylize their images by editing their
color, contrast and tonal distributions – a process that
requires a significant amount of skill with tools like Adobe
Photoshop. Instead, casual users use preset style filters provided by apps like Instagram to stylize their photographs.
However, these fixed sets of styles do not work well for
every photograph and in many cases, produce poor results.
Example-based style transfer techniques [22, 3] can
transfer the look of a given stylized exemplar to another
photograph. However, the quality of these results is tied
to the choice of the exemplar used, and the wrong choices
often result in visual artifacts. This can be avoided in
some cases by directly learning style transforms from inputstylized image pairs [5, 25, 12, 28]. However, these
approaches require large amounts of training data, limiting
them to a small set of styles.
Our goal is to make the process of image stylization
adaptive by automatically finding the “right” looks for
a photograph (from potentially hundreds or thousands of
different styles), and robustly applying them to produce a
diverse set of stylized outputs. In particular, we consider
stylizations that can be represented as global transformations of color and luminance. We would also like to do
this in an unsupervised manner, without the need for input-

Xiaohui Shen
Adobe Research

In So Kweon
KAIST

stylized example pairs for different content and looks.
We introduce two datasets to derive our stylization
technique. The first is our manually curated target style
database, which consists of 1500 stylized exemplar images
that capture color and tonal distributions that we consider
as good styles. Given an input photograph, we would like
to automatically select a subset of these style exemplars
that will guarantee good stylization results. We do this by
leveraging our second dataset – a large photo collection
that contains millions of photographs and spans the range
of styles and semantic content that we expect in our input photographs (e.g., indoor photographs, urban scenes,
landscapes, portraits, etc.). These datasets cannot be used
individually for stylization; the style dataset is small and
does not span the full content-style space, and the photo
collection is not curated and contains both good and poorlystylized images. The key idea of our work is that we can
use the large photo collection to learn a content-to-style
mapping and bridge the gap between the source photograph
and the target style database. We do this in a completely
unsupervised manner, allowing us to easily scale to a large
range of image content and photographic styles.
We segment the large photo collection into content-based
clusters using semantic features, and learn a ranking of
the style exemplars for each cluster by evaluating their
style similarities to the images in the cluster. At run time,
we determine the semantic clusters nearest to the input
photograph, retrieve their corresponding stylized exemplar
rankings, and sample this set to obtain a diverse subset of
relevant style exemplars.
We propose a new robust technique to transfer the global
color and tone statistics of the chosen exemplars to the
input photo. Doing this using previous techniques can
produce artifacts, especially when the exemplar and input
statistics are very disparate. We use regularized color and
tone mapping functions, and use a face-specific luminance
correction step to minimize artifacts in the final results.
We introduce a new benchmark dataset of 55 images
with manually stylized results created by an artist. We
compare our style selection method with other variants
as well as the artist’s results through a blind user study.
We also evaluate the performance of a number of current
statistics-based style transfer techniques on this dataset,

2470

