CP-mtML: Coupled Projection multi-task Metric Learning
for Large Scale Face Retrieval
Binod Bhattarai1,∗
1

University of Caen, France

Gaurav Sharma2,3,†
2

Frederic Jurie1,∗
3

MPI for Informatics, Germany

Abstract
We propose a novel Coupled Projection multi-task Metric Learning (CP-mtML) method for large scale face retrieval. In contrast to previous works which were limited to
low dimensional features and small datasets, the proposed
method scales to large datasets with high dimensional face
descriptors. It utilises pairwise (dis-)similarity constraints
as supervision and hence does not require exhaustive class
annotation for every training image. While, traditionally,
multi-task learning methods have been validated on same
dataset but different tasks, we work on the more challenging setting with heterogeneous datasets and different
tasks. We show empirical validation on multiple face image datasets of different facial traits, e.g. identity, age and
expression. We use classic Local Binary Pattern (LBP) descriptors along with the recent Deep Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) features. The experiments clearly demonstrate the scalability and improved performance of the proposed method on the tasks of identity and age based face
image retrieval compared to competitive existing methods,
on the standard datasets and with the presence of a million
distractor face images.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision algorithms heavily rely on a distance function over image signatures and their performance
strongly depends on the quality of the metric. Metric learning (ML) i.e. learning an optimal distance function for a
given task, using annotated training data, is in such cases, a
key to good performance. Hence, ML has been a very active
topic of interest in the machine learning community and has
been widely used in many computer vision algorithms for
image annotation [11], person re-identification [2] or face
matching [12], to mention a few of them.
∗ GREYC CNRS UMR 6072. Supported by projects ANR–12–CORD–
014–SECULAR ANR-12-SECU-005–PHYSIONOMIE
† Currently with CSE, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur. Majority
of the work was done at Max Planck Institute for Informatics.

IIT Kanpur, India

Task 1: Identity
Same

Task 2: Age

Not same

Task 1 specific
projection

Same

Not same

Task 2 specific
projection

Common projection
close

far

Identity space

Information shared
via coupling

close

far

Age space

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed method. We propose a
multi-task metric learning method which learns a distance function as a projection into a low dimensional Euclidean space, from
pairwise (dis-)similarity constraints. It learns two types of projections jointly: (i) a common projection shared by all the tasks and
(ii) task related specific projections. The final projection for each
task is given by a combination of the common projection and the
task specific projection. By coupling the projections and learning
them jointly, the information shared between the related tasks can
lead to improved performance.

This paper focuses on the task of face matching i.e. comparing images of two faces with respect to different criteria
such as identity, expression or age. More precisely, the task
is to retrieve faces similar to a query, according to the given
criteria (e.g. identity) and rank them using their distances to
the query.
One key contribution of this paper is the introduction of a
cross-dataset multi-task ML approach. The main advantage
of multi-task ML is leveraging the performance of single
task ML by combining data coming from different but related tasks. While many recent works on classification have
shown that learning metrics for related tasks together using
multi-task learning approaches can lead to improvements in
performance [1, 6, 19, 21, 28, 43], most of earlier works on
face matching are based on a single task. In addition, there
14226

