What if we do not have multiple videos of the same action? —
Video Action Localization Using Web Images
Waqas Sultani, Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision (CRCV), University of Central Florida (UCF)
waqassultani@knights.ucf.edu, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
This paper tackles the problem of spatio-temporal action localization in a video, without assuming the availability of multiple videos or any prior annotations. Action is
localized by employing images downloaded from internet
using action name. Given web images, we first dampen image noise using random walk and evade distracting backgrounds within images using image action proposals. Then,
given a video, we generate multiple spatio-temporal action
proposals. We suppress camera and background generated
proposals by exploiting optical flow gradients within proposals. To obtain the most action representative proposals,
we propose to reconstruct action proposals in the video by
leveraging the action proposals in images. Moreover, we
preserve the temporal smoothness of the video and reconstruct all proposal bounding boxes jointly using the constraints that push the coefficients for each bounding box toward a common consensus, thus enforcing the coefficient
similarity across multiple frames. We solve this optimization problem using variant of two-metric projection algorithm. Finally, the video proposal that has the lowest reconstruction cost and is motion salient is used to localize the action. Our method is not only applicable to the
trimmed videos, but it can also be used for action localization in untrimmed videos, which is a very challenging
problem. We present extensive experiments on trimmed as
well as untrimmed datasets to validate the effectiveness of
the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Bounding box annotations have played a crucial role in
development of several computer vision applications, such
as: object/action recognition, detection, tracking and segmentation [36, 33, 6]. However, these annotations are cumbersome to obtain, require hundreds of hours and are subject
to human biases.
To mitigate this annotation challenge, several weakly-

Video clip

Action proposals in each
clip

Top Ranked Action
Proposal

Rank video proposals using
image proposals

Google image downloaded
using text based search

Outliers Removal

Action proposals in each
image

Figure 1: This figure illustrates our key idea of action localization in a video using images. We first download images
of an action of interest from internet. After removing noisy
images, we co-localize all the images jointly to obtain action proposals in each of the image. Then, given the candidate action locations in a video, we leverage image proposals to discover the most action representative proposal in a
video.

supervised approaches have been introduced recently [22,
5, 21, 29, 3, 9], particularly in the object domain. In general,
all these approaches assume presence of dominant centered
objects in multiple images. For instance, the method proposed in [9] annotate objects from previously annotated images, [21] obtain bounding boxes by involving human eye
tracking, and [29, 3] achieve object annotation using multiple images, where most of these images contain the object
of interest.
As compared to object annotation, spatio-temporal action annotations in videos are far more challenging and,
therefore, it is not surprising that most of recent action

1077

