Progressive Prioritized Multi-view Stereo
Alex Locher1
1

Michal Perdoch1

Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
This work proposes a progressive patch based multiview stereo algorithm able to deliver a dense point cloud
at any time. This enables an immediate feedback on the
reconstruction process in a user centric scenario. With increasing processing time, the model is improved in terms
of resolution and accuracy. The algorithm explicitly handles input images with varying effective scale and creates
visually pleasing point clouds. A priority scheme assures
that the limited computational power is invested in scene
parts, where the user is most interested in or the overall
error can be reduced the most. The architecture of the proposed pipeline allows fast processing times in large scenes
using a pure open-source CPU implementation. We show
the performance of our algorithm on challenging standard
datasets as well as on real-world scenes and compare it to
the baseline.

1. Introduction
Accurate 3D reconstruction from calibrated cameras is a
long studied topic in computer vision. Multi-view stereo reconstruction offers an inexpensive alternative to costly laser
scans, while providing highly accurate results [16]. Despite
the many proposed solutions, none of it fully addresses the
usage of Multi-View Stereo (MVS) in a user centric scenario. Systems like Arc3D [12], MVE [4],VisualSFM [21],
Agisoft Photoscan [1] or Acute 3D [14] provide a user
friendly interface to algorithms, allowing non-scientific
users to reconstruct a large variety of objects and scenes
from a set of images. The availability of new hardware
platforms such as smartphones and Micro Aerial Vehicle
(MAV) opened up whole new possibilities in 3D content acquisition [20, 18]. Highly dynamic and flexible Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) systems deal with
view selection and pose tracking in real-time and deliver
a sparse point cloud for navigation or coarse visualization
purposes. Unfortunately, when it comes to more accurate
dense reconstructions, algorithms offer very low flexibility. Existing MVS methods were not developed with the
interactiveness of a real-time system in mind, but rather as

Luc Van Gool1,2
2

VISICS, KU Leuven, Belgium

after 2 s

after 12 s

after 56 s

after 579 s

Figure 1: Progressive reconstruction of the citywall dataset
(562 images). With increasing runtime, the resulting dense
point cloud gets more accurate and covers finer details.
a batch processing step with a single resulting point cloud
shown to the user at the end of processing. An immediate
user feedback of the reconstruction’s current state, which
would be necessary for possible interventions such as taking additional pictures, is not available and the user has to
run the algorithm to the very end in order to see his/her
success. Coarse visualization methods such as triangulation
of the Structure-from-Motion (SfM) points (e.g. Bodis et
al. [2]) or low resolution filter based methods (e.g. Pizzoli et
al. [13]) give a good insight into the currently reconstructed
scene. But they are not able to cover fine details, and more
importantly, do not reflect the status of the actual accurate
dense reconstruction (which may give totally different results).
In contrast, we propose a MVS algorithm delivering a
highly accurate and complete dense point cloud. The output point cloud can be visualized at any timepoint and improves with increasing runtime. As a user centric scenario
is addressed, intermediate point clouds are ”visually pleasing”. A scene, where e.g. the door handle is reconstructed
in every fine detail but the house around it is not covered
at all, would not only look awkward, but also the algorithm
might waste its resources on details, the user might not even
be interested in. Therefore, we explicitly analyse the effective scale of input images and maintain a homogeneous
resolution within the 3D point cloud. In order to optimize
the available resources, complex and important scene parts
are prioritized over trivial regions. Moreover, the algorithm

3244

