Occlusion-free Face Alignment: Deep Regression Networks Coupled with
De-corrupt AutoEncoders

1

Jie Zhang1,2 Meina Kan1,3 Shiguang Shan1,3 Xilin Chen1
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{jie.zhang,meina.kan,shiguang.shan,xilin.chen}@vipl.ict.ac.cn
Abstract

Face alignment or facial landmark detection plays an
important role in many computer vision applications, e.g.,
face recognition, facial expression recognition, face animation, etc. However, the performance of face alignment system degenerates severely when occlusions occur. In this
work, we propose a novel face alignment method, which
cascades several Deep Regression networks coupled with
De-corrupt Autoencoders (denoted as DRDA) to explicitly
handle partial occlusion problem. Different from the previous works that can only detect occlusions and discard the
occluded parts, our proposed de-corrupt autoencoder network can automatically recover the genuine appearance for
the occluded parts and the recovered parts can be leveraged
together with those non-occluded parts for more accurate
alignment. By coupling de-corrupt autoencoders with deep
regression networks, a deep alignment model robust to partial occlusions is achieved. Besides, our method can localize occluded regions rather than merely predict whether the
landmarks are occluded. Experiments on two challenging
occluded face datasets demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Face alignment or facial landmark detection, as an fundamental problem in computer vision, is widely used in
face recognition, 3D face modeling, face animation, etc.
For decades, many efforts are devoted to exploring robust
alignment methods and great progresses have been achieved
on face alignment under control condition or even in the
wild [8, 7, 41, 34, 6, 29, 28, 40, 35, 11, 18, 32, 30, 27].
However, it is still a challenging problem due to various
variations in appearance and shape, e.g., pose, expression,
especially partial occlusions. The alignment system usually

degenerates severely under partial occlusions, and this problem is hard to tackle as any part of the face can be occluded
by arbitrary objects.
Typical alignment models like Active Shape Models (ASMs) [8, 14] and Active Appearance Models (AAMs) [7, 23] employ Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to
build a shape model or simultaneously establish shape and
appearance models. These methods are sensitive to partial
occlusions although the shape deformations are restricted
by a PCA-based shape model.
Regression based methods have achieved impressive results on face alignment in the wild [11, 34, 2, 6, 24, 18, 28,
39]. Different from the parametric models ASM and AAM,
these methods directly model the mapping from local features to the face shape with linear [34, 24] or deep architecture [28, 38, 39]. Especially, deep models (e.g., Convolutional Neural Networks, Auto-encoders and Restricted Boltzmann Machines) make great progresses benefited
from their favorable ability of modeling nonlinearity. Sun
et al. [28] conduct a deep convolutional neural network to
regress facial points by taking the holistic face as input
and then cascade several convolutional neural networks to
further refine the detection results within each local patch,
which is extracted around the current face shape. Zhang
et al. [39] design deep auto-encoder networks with joint shape-indexed features to regress the face shape. These
methods achieve promising results on LFPW [3] and HELEN [20]. Benefited from the local features, these methods
are somewhat robust to occlusions. However, they may still fail when severe partial occlusion occurs as they do not
exclusively consider the occlusion problem.
Although the above methods have a certain tolerance of
partial occlusion, the occlusion problem is not essentially
solved. In this work, we propose a novel Deep Regression
network coupled with De-corrupt Autoencoders (DRDA) to
explicitly tackle the partial occlusion problem. As illustrat-

3428

