Structure from Motion with Objects
Marco Crocco, Cosimo Rubino, Alessio Del Bue
Pattern Analysis and Computer Vision Department (PAVIS)
Visual Geometry and Modelling Lab (VGM)
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy
alessio.delbue@iit.it

Abstract
This paper shows for the first time that is possible to reconstruct the position of rigid objects and to jointly recover
affine camera calibration solely from a set of object detections in a video sequence. In practice, this work can be considered as the extension of Tomasi and Kanade factorization
method using objects. Instead of using points to form a rank
constrained measurement matrix, we can form a matrix with
similar rank properties using 2D object detection proposals.
In detail, we first fit an ellipse onto the image plane at each
bounding box as given by the object detector. The collection
of all the ellipses in the dual space is used to create a measurement matrix that gives a specific rank constraint. This
matrix can be factorised and metrically upgraded in order
to provide the affine camera matrices and the 3D position of
the objects as an ellipsoid. Moreover, we recover the full 3D
quadric thus giving additional information about object occupancy and 3D pose. Finally, we also show that 2D points
measurements can be seamlessly included in the framework
to reduce the number of objects required. This last aspect
unifies the classical point-based Tomasi and Kanade approach with objects in a unique framework. Experiments
with synthetic and real data show the feasibility of our approach for the affine camera case.

1. Introduction
Factorization methods for Structure from Motion (SfM)
deliver highly efficient solutions for the simultaneous calibration and 3D reconstruction using image point trajectories/matches. The seminal paper of Tomasi and Kanade [19]
was based on the intuition that if we form a matrix containing matched 2D image points, such resulting matrix is rank
constrained. This property can be used to obtain an initial
affine solution with Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)

for the camera matrices and 3D points. Such solution can
be then linearly upgraded to metric by imposing orthogonality constraints on the camera matrices, giving a closed-form
solution to the SfM problem. Even if modern 3D reconstruction pipelines from images have reached impressive
results through non-linear optimization [1, 8, 18], factorization methods still entails a theoretical appealing solution
to the SfM problem. Such approaches have been further updated to more complex camera models [13, 21], to deal with
the case of missing data [11, 17] and multiple moving objects [4, 6], or to model articulated [22, 20] and deformable
[5]) objects, demonstrating that the research on this type of
methods is still very active and promising. As a peculiar
aspect, up to now, every factorization method for 3D reconstruction mostly deals with points, while very few exceptions exist in the literature using different geometrical entities such as lines [15, 14] and conic features [12, 16]. The
limit of these methods is that they can reconstruct geometric primitives starting from projected outlines only, but they
cannot deal with image object detections and their gross inaccuracies over size and position.
This work takes a different direction from previous SfM
methods by showing that it is possible to solve simultaneously for affine camera calibration and 3D structure in a
closed-form using multi-view relations given only by the location of a set of objects in an image sequence (see Fig 1 for
a graphical representation). Instead of considering points as
an input of our method, here we use as measurements the
output of an object detector, i.e. a set of bounding boxes.
We show that, by fitting the bounding boxes with 2D ellipsoids, it is possible to form a measurement matrix that
contains the matrices of each 2D conics. If the collection of
conics is expressed in the dual space, the resulting matrix C
will show a specific rank constraint since the matrix of the
dual conics can be decomposed in terms of two factors as
C = G V where G contains the parameters of the affine camera and V the 3D quadrics whose reprojection gives the 2D
14141

