Large-pose Face Alignment via CNN-based Dense 3D Model Fitting
Amin Jourabloo, Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{jourablo, liuxm}@msu.edu
Abstract
Large-pose face alignment is a very challenging problem in computer vision, which is used as a prerequisite
for many important vision tasks, e.g, face recognition and
3D face reconstruction. Recently, there have been a few
attempts to solve this problem, but still more research is
needed to achieve highly accurate results. In this paper, we
propose a face alignment method for large-pose face images, by combining the powerful cascaded CNN regressor
method and 3DMM. We formulate the face alignment as a
3DMM fitting problem, where the camera projection matrix and 3D shape parameters are estimated by a cascade
of CNN-based regressors. The dense 3D shape allows us
to design pose-invariant appearance features for effective
CNN learning. Extensive experiments are conducted on the
challenging databases (AFLW and AFW), with comparison
to the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Face alignment is the process of aligning a face image
and detecting specific fiducial points, such as eye corners,
nose tip, etc. Improving the face alignment accuracy is beneficial for many computer vision tasks related to facial analysis, because it is used as a prerequisite for these tasks, e.g.,
face recognition [28], 3D face reconstruction [20, 21] and
face de-identification [10].
Given its importance, face alignment has been an active research topic since 1990s [29], with the well-known
Active Shape Model [5] and Active Appearance Model
(AAM) [15, 13]. Recently, face alignment works are
very popular in top vision venues, as demonstrated by the
progress in Constrained Local Model based approaches [5,
22], AAM-based approaches [15, 13, 14] and regressionbased approaches [27, 4, 33]. Despite the fruitful prior work
and continuous progress of face alignment (e.g., the latest
impressive iBUG results [26]), face alignment for largepose faces is still very challenging and there is only a few
published work in this direction, as summarized in Table 1.

Figure 1. The proposed method estimates landmarks for large-pose
faces by fitting a dense 3D shape. From left to right: initial landmarks, fitted 3D dense shape, estimated landmarks with visibility. The green/red/yellow dots in the right column show the visible/invisible/cheek landmarks, respectively.

Therefore, this is a clear research gap that needs to be addressed, which is exactly the focus of this work.
To tackle large-pose face alignment, our technical approach is driven by the inherent challenges associated with
this problem. First of all, faces have different numbers of
visible landmarks under pose variation, and the spatial distribution of the landmarks is highly pose dependent. This
presents challenges for existing face alignment approaches
since most are based on 2D shape models, which inherently
have difficulty in modeling the 3D out-of-plane deformation. In contrast, given the fact that a face image is a projection of a 3D face, we propose to use a dense 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) and the projection matrix as the representation of a 2D face image. Therefore, face alignment
amounts to estimating this representation, i.e., performing
the 3DMM fitting to a face image with arbitrary poses.
Second, the typical analysis-by-synthesis-based optimization approach for 3DMM fitting is inefficient and also
assumes the 2D landmarks are provided either manually or
with a separate face alignment method, which conflicts with
the goal of our work. This motivates us to employ the powerful cascaded regressor approach to learn the mapping between a 2D face image and its representation. Since the
representation is composed of 3D parameters, the mapping

4188

