Fast Zero-Shot Image Tagging
Yang Zhang, Boqing Gong, and Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816
yangzhang@knights.ucf.edu, bgong@crcv.ucf.edu, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
The well-known word analogy experiments show that the
recent word vectors capture fine-grained linguistic regularities in words by linear vector offsets, but it is unclear how
well the simple vector offsets can encode visual regularities
over words. We study a particular image-word relevance
relation in this paper. Our results show that the word vectors of relevant tags for a given image rank ahead of the
irrelevant tags, along a principal direction in the word vector space. Inspired by this observation, we propose to solve
image tagging by estimating the principal direction for an
image. Particularly, we exploit linear mappings and nonlinear deep neural networks to approximate the principal direction from an input image. We arrive at a quite versatile
tagging model. It runs fast given a test image, in constant
time w.r.t. the training set size. It not only gives superior
performance for the conventional tagging task on the NUSWIDE dataset, but also outperforms competitive baselines
on annotating images with previously unseen tags.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in the vector-space representations of
words [37, 38, 45] have benefited both NLP [49, 60, 52] and
computer vision tasks such as zeros-shot learning [50, 15, 1]
and image captioning [31, 26, 27]. The use of word vectors
in NLP is grounded on the fact that the fine-grained linguistic regularities over words are captured by linear word vector offsets—a key observation from the well-known word
analogy experiments [39, 45], such as the syntactic relation
dance − dancing ≈ f ly − f lying and semantic relation
king − man ≈ queen − woman. However, it is unclear
whether the visual regularities over words, which are implicitly used in the aforementioned computer vision problems, can still be encoded by the simple vector offsets.
In this paper, we are interested in the problem of image tagging, where an image (e.g., of a zoo in Figure 1)
calls for a partition of a vocabulary of words into two
disjoint sets according to the image-word relevance (e.g.,
relevant tags Y = {people, animal, zoo} and irrelevant

Figure 1: Given an image, its relevant tags’ word vectors
rank ahead of the irrelevant tags’ along some direction in
the word vector space. We call that direction the principal
direction for the image. To solve the problem of image
tagging, we thus learn a function f (·) to approximate the
principal direction from an image. This function takes as the
input an image xm and outputs a vector f (xm ) for defining
the principal direction in the word vector space.
ones Y = {sailor, book, landscape}). This partitioning of
words, (Y, Y ), is essentially different from the fine-grained
syntactic (e.g., dance to dancing) or semantic (e.g., king to
man) relation tested in the word analogy experiments. Instead, it is about the relationship between two sets of words
due to a visual image. Such a relation in words is semantic
and descriptive, and focuses on visual association, albeit
relatively coarser. In this case, do the word vectors still
offer the nice property, that the simple linear vector offsets
can depict the visual (image) association relations in words?
For the example of the zoo, while humans are capable of
easily answering that the words in Y are more related to the
zoo than those in Y , can such zoo-association relation in
words be expressed by the 9 pairwise word vector offsets
{people − sailor, people − book, · · · , zoo − landscape}
between the relevant Y and irrelevant Y tags’ vectors?
One of the main contributions of this paper is to empirically examine the above two questions (cf. Section 3). Every image introduces a visual association rule (Y, Y ) over
words. Thanks to the large number of images in benchmark

5985

