The Global Patch Collider
Shenlong Wang1,2

Sean Ryan Fanello1

Christoph Rhemann1

Microsoft Research1

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel extremely efficient, fullyparallelizable, task-specific algorithm for the computation
of global point-wise correspondences in images and videos.
Our algorithm, the Global Patch Collider, is based on detecting unique collisions between image points using a collection of learned tree structures that act as conditional
hash functions. In contrast to conventional approaches that
rely on pairwise distance computation, our algorithm isolates distinctive pixel pairs that hit the same leaf during
traversal through multiple learned tree structures. The split
functions stored at the intermediate nodes of the trees are
trained to ensure that only visually similar patches or their
geometric or photometric transformed versions fall into the
same leaf node. The matching process involves passing
all pixel positions in the images under analysis through
the tree structures. We then compute matches by isolating
points that uniquely collide with each other ie. fell in the
same empty leaf in multiple trees. Our algorithm is linear in the number of pixels but can be made constant time
on a parallel computation architecture as the tree traversal for individual image points is decoupled. We demonstrate the efficacy of our method by using it to perform optical flow matching and stereo matching on some challenging benchmarks. Experimental results show that not only
is our method extremely computationally efficient, but it is
also able to match or outperform state of the art methods
that are much more complex.

1. Introduction
Correspondence estimation ie. the task of estimating
how parts of visual signals (images or volumes) correspond
to each other, is an important and challenging problem in
Computer Vision. Point-wise correspondences between images or 3D volumes can be used for tasks such as camera
pose estimation, multi-view stereo, structure-from-motion,
co-segmentation, retrieval, and compression etc. Due to its
wide applicability, many variants of the general correspondence estimation problem like stereo and optical flow have

Shahram Izadi1

Pushmeet Kohli1

University of Toronto2

been extensively studied in the literature.
There are two key challenges in matching visual content across images or volumes. First, robust modelling of
the photometric and geometric transformations present in
real-world data, such as occlusions, large displacements,
viewpoints, shading, and illumination change. Secondly,
and perhaps more importantly, the hardness of performing inference in the above-mentioned model. The latter
stems from the computational complexity of performing
search in the large space of potential correspondences and
is a major impediment in the development of real time
algorithms. A popular approach to handle the problem
involves detecting ‘interest or salient points’ in the image which are then matched based on measuring the euclidean distance between hand specified [24, 34, 20, 7] or
learned [38, 35, 23, 32, 30, 6, 39, 29, 31] descriptors that
are designed to be invariant to certain classes of transformations and in some cases can also work across different
modalties. While these methods generate accurate matches,
the computational complexity (quadratic in the number of
interest points) of matching potential interest points restricts
their applicability to small number of key-points.
An effective strategy to generate dense correspondences
is to limit the search space of possible correspondences.
For instance, in the case of optical flow by only searching for matches in the immediate vicinity of the pixel location. However, this approach fails to detect large motions/displacements. Methods like [3, 22] overcome this
problem by adaptively sampling the search space and have
been shown to be very effective for optical flow and disparity estimation [1, 4]. However, they rely on the implicit
assumption that the correspondence field between images
is smooth and fail when this assumption is violated. Techniques based on algorithms for finding approximate nearest neighbors such as KD-Tree [18, 2] and hashing [22, 9]
can be used to search large-displacement correspondences
and have been used for initializing optical flow algorithms
[37, 1, 36, 25]. However, these approaches search for candidate matches based on the appearance similarity and they
are not robust in scenarios when geometric and photometric
transformations occurs (see Fig. 2).
1127

