WarpNet: Weakly Supervised Matching for Single-view Reconstruction
Angjoo Kanazawa
David W. Jacobs
University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
We present an approach to matching images of objects in
fine-grained datasets without using part annotations, with an
application to the challenging problem of weakly supervised
single-view reconstruction. This is in contrast to prior works
that require part annotations, since matching objects across
class and pose variations is challenging with appearance
features alone. We overcome this challenge through a novel
deep learning architecture, WarpNet, that aligns an object in
one image with a different object in another. We exploit the
structure of the fine-grained dataset to create artificial data
for training this network in an unsupervised-discriminative
learning approach. The output of the network acts as a spatial prior that allows generalization at test time to match real
images across variations in appearance, viewpoint and articulation. On the CUB-200-2011 dataset of bird categories,
we improve the AP over an appearance-only network by
13.6%. We further demonstrate that our WarpNet matches,
together with the structure of fine-grained datasets, allow
single-view reconstructions with quality comparable to using
annotated point correspondences.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing an object from a single image is a significant challenge, that can be tackled by matching keypoints
to other instances in a fine-grained dataset. However, such
datasets exhibit large intra-class shape variations or interclass appearance variations, which cannot be handled by traditional features such as SIFT [20]. Recently, methods have
been proposed to match instances across categories, relying
on supervision in the form of part (keypoint) annotations
[7, 15, 29] or 3D CAD models [3, 8] to augment appearance
information with shape priors. Such annotations are laborintensive, thus, too sparse for reconstruction and not scalable.
Further, it can be quite difficult to obtain human-labeled annotations for parts that are not nameable. In contrast, this
paper presents a framework to match images of objects with
some degree of non-rigidity and articulation, across category
and pose variations, without requiring supervised annotations. We then present an approach to the challenging novel
problem of unsupervised single-view object reconstruction.
We postulate that the structure of fine-grained datasets,

Manmohan Chandraker
NEC Labs America

Input$image$

Fine5grained$
Dataset$

5$

Matches$with$Classiﬁca@on$ConvNet$

Matches$with$WarpNet$$
(Trained$without$part$annota@ons)$

…

WarpNet$

Reconstruc@on$

Figure 1: Given a single image of an object, we propose a novel
deep learning framework for obtaining keypoint matches to other
objects in a fine-grained dataset, without using any part annotations.
The output of our network is used as spatial prior for matching
across variations in appearance, pose and articulation (bottom),
which is not possible with appearance features alone (top). Our
match quality is high enough to be propagated across images to
be used for single-view reconstruction without using any manually
annotated keypoints (right).

combined with the power of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), allows matching instances of different categories
without supervised annotation. Fine-grained datasets for objects such as birds can be analyzed along two dimensions
– appearance and shape. Instances within the same category that are imaged in different poses can be matched by
appearance similarity, while instances with similar pose or
viewpoint from different categories can be matched through
similarity in global shape. Instances with both appearance
and shape variations may then be matched by propagation
(Fig. 3). In Section 3, we demonstrate a practical realization
of this intuition by introducing a deep learning architecture,
WarpNet, that learns to warp points on one object into corresponding ones on another (from a possibly different category
or pose), without requiring supervised annotations.
WarpNet is a Siamese network that accepts two images
as input (Section 3.2). To overcome the absence of annotated keypoints, our training presents an image and a warped
version related by a known thin-plate spline (TPS) transformation, which yields artificial correspondences. We assume
the object bounding box and foreground segmentation are
known, which can be obtained through state-of-the-art segmentation [10] or co-segmentation methods [17]. We experi13253

