Real-Time Depth Refinement for Specular Objects
Roy Or - El1 Rom Hershkovitz1 Aaron Wetzler1
Guy Rosman2 Alfred M. Bruckstein1 Ron Kimmel1
1
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
2
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, MIT
royorel@cs.technion.ac.il sromh@campus.technion.ac.il twerd@cs.technion.ac.il
rosman@csail.mit.edu

freddy@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
The introduction of consumer RGB-D scanners set off a
major boost in 3D computer vision research. Yet, the precision of existing depth scanners is not accurate enough to recover fine details of a scanned object. While modern shading based depth refinement methods have been proven to
work well with Lambertian objects, they break down in the
presence of specularities. We present a novel shape from
shading framework that addresses this issue and enhances
both diffuse and specular objects’ depth profiles. We take
advantage of the built-in monochromatic IR projector and
IR images of the RGB-D scanners and present a lighting
model that accounts for the specular regions in the input
image. Using this model, we reconstruct the depth map
in real-time. Both quantitative tests and visual evaluations
prove that the proposed method produces state of the art
depth reconstruction results.

1. Introduction
The introduction of commodity RGB-D scanners
marked the beginning of a new age for computer vision and
computer graphics. Despite their popularity, such scanners
can obtain only the rough geometry of scanned surfaces due
to limited depth sensing accuracy. One way to mitigate this
limitation is to refine the depth output of these scanners using the available RGB and IR images.
A popular approach to surface reconstruction from image shading cues is the Shape from Shading (SfS). Shape
reconstruction from a single image is an ill-posed problem
since beside the surface geometry, the observed image also
depends on properties like the surface reflectance, the lighting conditions and the viewing direction. Incorporating data
from depth sensors has proved to be successful in eliminating some of these ambiguities [7, 22, 12]. However, many
of these efforts are based on the assumption that the scanned
surfaces are fully Lambertian, which limits the variety of
objects they can be applied to. Directly applying such meth-

ron@cs.technion.ac.il

ods to specular objects introduces artifacts to the surface in
highly specular regions due to the model’s inability to account for sudden changes in image intensity.
Here, we propose a novel real-time framework for depth
enhancement of non-diffuse surfaces. To that end, we use
the IR image supplied by the depth scanners. The narrowband nature of the IR projector and IR camera provides
a controlled lighting environment. Unlike previous approaches, we exploit this friendly environment to introduce
a new lighting model for depth refinement that accounts for
specular reflections as well as multiple albedos. To enable
our real-time method we directly enhance the depth map
by using an efficient optimization scheme which avoids the
traditional normals refinemet step.
The paper outline is as follows: Section 2 reviews previous efforts in the field. An overview of the problem is
presented in Section 3. The new method is introduced in
Section 4, with results in Section 5. Section 6 concludes the
paper.

2. Related Efforts
The classical SfS framework assumes a Lambertian object with constant albedo and a single, distant, lighting
source with known direction. There are several notable
methods which solve the classical SfS problem. These can
be divided into two groups: propagation methods and variational ones. Both frameworks were extensively researched
during the last four decades. Representative papers from
each school of thought are covered in [24, 6].
The main practical drawback about classical shape from
shading, is that although a diffusive single albedo setup can
be easily designed in a laboratory, it can be rarely found
in more realistic environments. As such, modern SfS approaches attempt to reconstruct the surface without any assumptions about the scene lighting and/or the object albedos. In order to account for the unknown scene conditions,
these algorithms either use learning techniques to construct
14378

