Shortlist Selection with Residual-Aware Distance Estimator
for K-Nearest Neighbor Search
Jae-Pil Heo1 , Zhe Lin2 , Xiaohui Shen2 , Jonathan Brandt2 , Sung-Eui Yoon1
1
2
KAIST
Adobe Research

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel shortlist computation algorithm for approximate, high-dimensional nearest
neighbor search. Our method relies on a novel distance
estimator: the residual-aware distance estimator, that accounts for the residual distances of data points to their respective quantized centroids, and uses it for accurate shortlist computation. Furthermore, we perform the residualaware distance estimation with little additional memory and
computational cost through simple pre-computation methods for inverted index and multi-index schemes. Because
it modifies the initial shortlist collection phase, our new
algorithm is applicable to most inverted indexing methods
that use vector quantization. We have tested the proposed
method with the inverted index and multi-index on a diverse
set of benchmarks including up to one billion data points
with varying dimensions, and found that our method robustly improves the accuracy of shortlists (up to 127% relatively higher) over the state-of-the-art techniques with a
comparable or even faster computational cost.

1. Introduction
Approximate K-nearest neighbor (ANN) search is a fundamental problem in computer science, which has many
practical applications, especially in many computer vision
tasks such as image retrieval, feature matching, tracking,
object recognition, etc. Conventional ANN techniques can
be inefficient in both speed and memory, when the size of
the database is large and the dimensionality of the feature
space is high, as is the case for large-scale image retrieval
using holistic descriptors.
In order to achieve high scalability, recent search methods typically adopt an inverted index-based representation
with a compact data representation to perform large-scale
retrieval in two steps: candidate retrieval and candidate reranking. These approaches first collect candidates for Knearest neighbors called a shortlist by quantized indices,
and then reorder them by exhaustive distance computations with more accurate distance approximations. Accu-

rate shortlist retrieval is a crucial first step for large-scale
retrieval systems as it determines the upper-bound performance for the K-nearest neighbor search in such two-step
search process.
Previous methods have attempted to introduce better
quantization models (e.g., product quantization [14]) and
inverted indexing schemes (e.g., the inverted index and inverted multi-index [1]). These approaches identify inverted
lists whose centroids are close to the query, and include all
the data points in those inverted lists to the shortlist. While
these approaches are very efficient for collecting shortlists,
they do not consider fine-grained positions of those data
points, and thus the computed shortlist may still contain
many data points that are too far away from the query, and
close neighbors could be missed in the shortlist due to the
quantization error.
Our contributions. In this paper, we introduce a novel
shortlist computation algorithm based on the inverted
lists for high-dimensional, approximate K-nearest neighbor search. We first propose a novel distance estimator,
residual-aware distance estimator, between a query and data
points by considering the residual distances to the quantized centroids (Sec. 4.1). We also propose effective precomputation methods of using our distance estimator for
runtime queries with minor memory and computation costs
with the inverted index (Sec. 4.2) and multi-index (Sec. 4.3).
We have extensively evaluated our method on a diverse set
of large-scale benchmarks consisting of up to one billion
data with SIFT, GIST, VLAD, and CNN features. We have
found that our method significantly improves the accuracy
of shortlists over the state-of-the-art techniques with a comparable or even faster computational performance (Sec. 5).

2. Related Work
There have been many tree-based techniques for ANN
search, since those hierarchical structures provide a logarithmic search cost. Notable approaches include KDtree [5], randomized KD-tree forests [24], HKM (Hierarchical K-means tree) [21], etc. Unfortunately, those tree12009

