Object Co-segmentation via Graph Optimized-Flexible Manifold Ranking
Rong Quan1, Junwei Han1, Dingwen Zhang1, Feiping Nie2
1 School of Automation, 2 School of Computer Science and Center for OPTIMAL,
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, 710072, P. R. China
rongquan0806, junweihan2010, zhangdingwen2006yyy, feipingnie@gmail.com

Abstract
Aiming at automatically discovering the common objects
contained in a set of relevant images and segmenting them
as foreground simultaneously, object co-segmentation has
become an active research topic in recent years. Although a
number of approaches have been proposed to address this
problem, many of them are designed with the misleading
assumption, unscalable prior, or low flexibility and thus
still suffer from certain limitations, which reduces their
capability in the real-world scenarios. To alleviate these
limitations, we propose a novel two-stage co-segmentation
framework, which introduces the weak background prior to
establish a globally close-loop graph to represent the
common object and union background separately. Then a
novel graph optimized-flexible manifold ranking algorithm
is proposed to flexibly optimize the graph connection and
node labels to co-segment the common objects.
Experiments on three image datasets demonstrate that our
method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: The first row: example images containing similar
objects from the same semantic class. The second row: the
co-segmentation results of our framework.

1. Introduction
Figure 2: (a) Several original images from the same object class.
(b) The co-segmentation results of [1]. (c) The co-segmentation
results of [2]. (d) Our results.

Given a set of images containing the same or similar
objects from the same semantic class, the goal of object
co-segmentation is to discover and segment out such
common objects from all images, as shown in Figure 1. The
problem of object co-segmentation is first proposed by
Rother et al. [3], which demonstrates that simultaneously
segmenting out the common objects in an image pair can
achieve higher accuracy than segmenting in either single
image alone. Following this work, a number of researchers
make their efforts to develop more effective computational
models [4-7] for co-segmenting objects in such image pairs.
However, these methods only seek to co-segment objects in
two images at a time, which results in direct limitations
when extending beyond pairwise relations. By realizing this
problem, more recent object co-segmentation approaches
[8-16] propose to discover the common patterns of the
co-occurring objects in group-level and thus can segment
out them in more than two images. With such important
progress, object co-segmentation has become to be more
practical for the real-world problems because there are rich

collections of multiple related pictures sharing the common
objects or events in reality [17], such as the photo-sharing
websites like Flickr and Facebook. However, when
performing object co-segmentation in such real-world
scenarios, the existing methods still suffer from certain
limitations, which are mainly lied in the following aspects:
Misleading assumption: Some existing methods are
based on a misleading assumption that the common regions
contained by the given image group should be the objects of
interest. However, lots of real-world image groups
containing similar objects are collected in similar scenes
and thus they also contain similar and co-occurring image
background which may confuse these methods seriously. In
this case, these methods always wrongly segment out the
similar co-occurring image backgrounds, as shown in
Figure 2. For example, Faktor et al. [2] proposed to
discover the co-occurring regions firstly, and then perform
co-segmentation by mapping between the co-occurring

687

