Robust Visual Place Recognition with Graph Kernels
Elena Stumm, Christopher Mei, Simon Lacroix,
LAAS-CNRS,
University of Toulouse

Juan Nieto, Marco Hutter, Roland Siegwart
Autonomous Systems Lab
ETH Zurich

{estumm, cmei, simon}@laas.fr

{nietoj, mahutter, rsiegwart}@ethz.ch

Abstract
A novel method for visual place recognition is introduced and evaluated, demonstrating robustness to perceptual aliasing and observation noise. This is achieved by
increasing discrimination through a more structured representation of visual observations. Estimation of observation
likelihoods are based on graph kernel formulations, utilizing both the structural and visual information encoded
in covisibility graphs. The proposed probabilistic model
is able to circumvent the typically difficult and expensive
posterior normalization procedure by exploiting the information available in visual observations. Furthermore, the
place recognition complexity is independent of the size of
the map. Results show improvements over the state-of-theart on a diverse set of both public datasets and novel experiments, highlighting the benefit of the approach.

1. Introduction

Figure 1: In an effort to move towards robust mapping
and localization in unconstrained environments, this paper
investigates graph comparison approaches to visual place
recognition. Structural and visual information provided by
covisibility graphs is combined, in order to cope with variations and noise in observations, such as those coming from
heterogeneous teams of robots.

Efficient and reliable place recognition is a core requirement for mobile robot localization, used to reduce estimation drift, especially in the case of exploring large, unconstrained environments [7, 20]. In addition to robotics,
place recognition is increasingly being used within tasks
such as 3D reconstruction, map fusion, semantic recognition, and augmented reality [9, 11, 15, 28]. This paper
examines appearance-based place recognition approaches
which combine visual and structural information from covisibility graphs for achieving robust results even under large
amounts of noise and variety in input data. For instance,
dealing with appearance changes, self-similar and repetitive environments, viewpoint and trajectory variations, heterogeneous teams of robots or cameras, and other sources
of observation noise make the task particularly challenging. Figure 1 shows an example that illustrates how different cameras affect the appearance of a location.
By representing locations with their corresponding covisibility graphs, pseudo-geometric relations between local
visual features can boost the discriminative power of observations. Covisibility graphs can be constructed as the en-

vironment is traversed, by detecting local landmarks, and
connecting those landmarks which are co-observed in a
sparse graph structure [24]. Candidate locations resembling
a given query can then be efficiently retrieved as clusters of
landmarks from a global map, using visual word labels assigned to each landmark and an inverted index lookup table.
Such a location-based covisibility subgraph will be referred
to as a location graph. Using this representation, inspiration
is taken from the field of graph theory, more specifically
graph kernels, for computing the similarity between the corresponding query and candidate location graphs. As a result, inference can be achieved using more spatial and structural information than bag-of-words or word co-occurrence
approaches to visual place recognition.
The presented approach does not require any detailed
prior representation of the environment, using only rough
priors on feature occurrences as additional input. Furthermore, computation does not scale with the size of the map.
The approach is therefore well suited to applications including exploration and mapping of unknown areas.

4535

