Scale-Aware Alignment of Hierarchical Image Segmentation
Yuhua Chen1
1

Dengxin Dai1

Jordi Pont-Tuset1
2

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich

Luc Van Gool1,2

VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven

{yuhua.chen,dai,jponttuset,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Image segmentation is a key component in many computer vision systems, and it is recovering a prominent spot
in the literature as methods improve and overcome their
limitations. The outputs of most recent algorithms are in the
form of a hierarchical segmentation, which provides segmentation at different scales in a single tree-like structure.
Commonly, these hierarchical methods start from some lowlevel features, and are not aware of the scale information of
the different regions in them. As such, one might need to
work on many different levels of the hierarchy to find the
objects in the scene. This work tries to modify the existing
hierarchical algorithm by improving their alignment, that
is, by trying to modify the depth of the regions in the tree
to better couple depth and scale. To do so, we first train a
regressor to predict the scale of regions using mid-level features. We then define the anchor slice as the set of regions
that better balance between over-segmentation and undersegmentation. The output of our method is an improved hierarchy, re-aligned by the anchor slice. To demonstrate the
power of our method, we perform comprehensive experiments, which show that our method, as a post-processing
step, can significantly improve the quality of the hierarchical segmentation representations, and ease the usage of
hierarchical image segmentation to high-level vision tasks
such as object segmentation. We also prove that the improvement generalizes well across different algorithms and
datasets, with a low computational cost.1

1. Introduction
Generic image segmentation has been part of computer
vision and image processing communities since the advent
of these fields many decades ago. The definition of the
problem, although vague, is easy to give and understand:
“to divide the pixels of an image into different pieces, where
each piece represents a distinguished thing in the image.”
1 Codes are publicly available at:
yuhuayc/alignhier

https://github.com/

Figure 1. Example of improved hierarchy alignment: The original hierarchy (top row) needs three different flat partitions to represent the four objects (highlighted in red). Our aligned hierarchy
(bottom row) correctly puts all objects in the same level.

Martin et al. [19] provided these instructions to annotators to create the Berkeley Segmentation Database (BSDS),
which proved that the problem of image segmentation was,
indeed, well defined, as humans provided consistent partitions of the images up to refinement. In other words, image
segmentation is inherently a multi-scale problem.
We refer to flat image segmentation techniques as those
whose output is a single partition of the image pixels into
sets [29, 4, 10]. In these cases, in order to capture the aforementioned multi-scale nature of objects, one needs to sweep
different parameterizations to obtain multiple partitions that
contain the different scales when working with flat segmentation techniques.
On the other hand, hierarchical segmentation produces
a single multi-scale structure that aims at capturing the
objects at all scales [1, 14, 28, 26, 22]. These types
of structures have been successfully used in image filtering [28], semantic segmentation [16, 9], salient object detection [34], object proposals generation [22], or video segmentation [32, 31].
The representation power of these hierarchies comes at a
cost, however, which is the difficulty to handle them from a
practical (coding) point of view. While a flat partition can
be represented by a matrix of labels of each pixel, hierarchical structures need a much more complex representation. In
this context, the Ultrametric Contour Map (UCM) [1] representation is the one that gained more traction and it is widely
used in the literature. In it, flattening the hierarchy can be
achieved simply by thresholding the UCM.
1364

