Semantic Channels for Fast Pedestrian Detection
Arthur Daniel Costea
Sergiu Nedevschi
Image Processing and Pattern Recognition Research Center
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania
{arthur.costea, sergiu.nedevschi}@cs.utcluj.ro

Abstract
Pedestrian detection and semantic segmentation are high
potential tasks for many real-time applications. However
most of the top performing approaches provide state of art
results at high computational costs. In this work we propose a fast solution for achieving state of art results for both
pedestrian detection and semantic segmentation.
As baseline for pedestrian detection we use sliding windows over cost efficient multiresolution filtered LUV+HOG
channels. We use the same channels for classifying pixels
into eight semantic classes. Using short range and long
range multiresolution channel features we achieve more
robust segmentation results compared to traditional codebook based approaches at much lower computational costs.
The resulting segmentations are used as additional semantic channels in order to achieve a more powerful pedestrian
detector. To also achieve fast pedestrian detection we employ a multiscale detection scheme based on a single flexible pedestrian model and a single image scale. The proposed solution provides competitive results on both pedestrian detection and semantic segmentation benchmarks at 8
FPS on CPU and at 15 FPS on GPU, being the fastest top
performing approach.

1. Introduction
A good perception and understanding of the surroundings is essential for an efficient and safe interaction with the
environment. In this work we focus on traffic scenarios and
in particular on the perception of pedestrians. They are the
most important traffic participants and also the most vulnerable ones. Their perception can impose difficulties due
to challenging weather, lighting conditions or difficult occlusion cases. In addition, their behavior can be sometimes
very unpredictable.
Pedestrian detection is of high interest especially for the
automotive industry, in order to design safe driver assistance
systems or autonomous vehicles and represents one of the
most challenging computer vision tasks.

Figure 1. Semantic context provided by the proposed solution

Computer vision based pedestrian detection is one of the
most active research areas. The accuracy and precision of
detectors increases every year, with a significant improvement over the last decade [6]. However, the computational
cost of the top performing approaches still represents a bottleneck. Most of the approaches are impractical for realtime applications. Our main goal is to obtain a powerful
detector that competes well with the top performing approaches at significantly lower computational costs.
In this work we propose a sliding window type detection solution based on multiresolution filtered LUV+HOG
channels [53], focusing on computational cost reduction by
optimizing the feature extraction, multiscale sliding window and classification schemes. We show that the same
framework can be used to obtain semantic segmentations
by classifying pixels into semantic classes such as sky,
building, road, vehicle. As seen in figure 1, semantic segmentations provide a higher level representation. Background classes provide semantic context that can be used
for search space reductions for different applications, while
foreground classes can provide an alternative detection approach for obstacles.
We use the semantic segmentations as context informa-

2360

