Conformal Surface Alignment with Optimal Möbius Search
Huu Le, Tat-Jun Chin and David Suter
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide
{huu.le, tat-jun.chin, david.suter}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Deformations of surfaces with the same intrinsic shape
can often be described accurately by a conformal model.
A major focus of computational conformal geometry is the
estimation of the conformal mapping that aligns a given
pair of object surfaces. The uniformization theorem enables this task to be acccomplished in a canonical 2D domain, wherein the surfaces can be aligned using a Möbius
transformation. Current algorithms for estimating Möbius
transformations, however, often cannot provide satisfactory
alignment or are computationally too costly. This paper introduces a novel globally optimal algorithm for estimating
Möbius transformations to align surfaces that are topological discs. Unlike previous methods, the proposed algorithm
deterministically calculates the best transformation, without requiring good initializations. Further, our algorithm is
also much faster than previous techniques in practice. We
demonstrate the efficacy of our algorithm on data commonly
used in computational conformal geometry.

1. Introduction
Given two 3D shapes, the problem of shape correspondence is to find a meaningful relation (or mapping) between
the elements of the shapes [35]. Solving such a problem is
fundamental to many vision and graphics applications, such
as object recognition, 3D shape retrieval, shape morphing
and attribute transfer - to name a few. A plethora of variants
also exist for the general problem, where the variants differ
based on the type of input data (point cloud, mesh, etc.),
type of alignment function, partial or full overlap, whether
pre-identified landmarks are available, etc.
Within the broad literature on shape correspondence, our
work belongs to the class of conformal geometric methods [38]. A conformal mapping preserves angles locally,
and is thus insensitive to surface deformations [36]. It has
been observed that object instances with the same intrinsic shape (e.g., faces with different expressions [36], deformable 2D shapes [12], brains between different individuals [15]) can be aligned well conformally.

The uniformization theorem [7] states that all surfaces
that are topological spheres or discs can be conformally
embedded to a canonical 2D domain, e.g., a unit sphere,
a hyperbolic disc. In Fig. 1(a), these embeddings are represented by ΦM̃ and ΦB̃ for respectively two surfaces M̃ and
B̃. The embedded surfaces can be aligned conformally by a
Möbius transformation f . The direct mapping between the
◦ f ◦ ΦM̃ . Note that
surfaces can then be composed as Φ−1
B̃
in practice, discrete analogues of the mappings are used.
Conformal shape correspondence thus amounts to finding ΦM̃ , ΦB̃ and f . Many authors first calculate the embeddings ΦM̃ and ΦB̃ in a “flattening” step, before estimating
f , e.g., [17, 15, 28, 9, 27, 24]. Various methods have been
devised for flattening [6, 22, 16, 17, 33]. In this paper, we
focus on the second step, i.e., Möbius alignment.
A class of existing methods for Möbius alignment are
correspondence-based. Correspondences between the surfaces can be obtained by identifying landmarks (meaningful locations such as corners of eyes or tips of noses) or
matching salient keypoints [17, 15, 36, 9, 29]. Given a
sufficient number of correspondences, a Möbius transformation can be directly estimated [28]. The effectiveness
of correspondence-based methods hinges on the veracity of
the correspondences and their coverage of the surfaces.
Correspondence-free techniques as we consider in this
paper must directly estimate the Möbius transformation,
and implicitly the surface correspondence. Current methods include randomized search [28], iterative closest points
(ICP) [8], gradient-based local optimization [24], brute
force enumeration [27], and graph matching [40]. While
not affected by inaccurate or insufficient pre-identified correspondences, these methods suffer, however, from other
weaknesses; namely, no guarantee of success [28], dependence on good initialisation [8, 24], and very high computational cost [27, 40].
Contributions We propose a novel globally optimal algorithm for correspondence-free Möbius alignment. We focus
on surfaces that are topological discs, i.e., f acts on the hyperbolic disc. Based on branch-and-bound (BnB) [20], our
algorithm guarantees global optimality, thus obviating the
need for good intializations. Further, our method is also
12507

