TI- POOLING: transformation-invariant pooling
for feature learning in Convolutional Neural Networks
Dmitry Laptev∗
Nikolay Savinov∗
Joachim M. Buhmann
Marc Pollefeys
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{dlaptev, nikolay.savinov, jbuhmann, marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
In this paper we present a deep neural network topology
that incorporates a simple to implement transformationinvariant pooling operator (TI- POOLING). This operator
is able to efficiently handle prior knowledge on nuisance
variations in the data, such as rotation or scale changes.
Most current methods usually make use of dataset augmentation to address this issue, but this requires larger number
of model parameters and more training data, and results in
significantly increased training time and larger chance of
under- or overfitting. The main reason for these drawbacks
is that that the learned model needs to capture adequate
features for all the possible transformations of the input.
On the other hand, we formulate features in convolutional
neural networks to be transformation-invariant. We achieve
that using parallel siamese architectures for the considered
transformation set and applying the TI- POOLING operator
on their outputs before the fully-connected layers. We show
that this topology internally finds the most optimal ”canonical” instance of the input image for training and therefore
limits the redundancy in learned features. This more efficient use of training data results in better performance on
popular benchmark datasets with smaller number of parameters when comparing to standard convolutional neural networks with dataset augmentation and to other baselines.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning lead to impressive results in various applications of machine learning and computer vision to different fields. These advances are largely
attributed to expressiveness of deep neural networks with
many parameters, that are effectively able to approximate
any decision function in the data space [18].
While this is true for all the neural network architectures
with many layers and with sufficient number of parameters,
the most impressive results are being achieved in the fields
∗ The authors assert equal contribution and joint first authorship.

where deep architectures heavily rely on internal structure
of the input data, such as speech recognition, natural language processing and image recognition [16]. For example,
convolutional neural networks [12] learn kernels to be applied on images or signals reflecting the spatial or temporal
dependencies between the neighbouring pixels or moments
in time. This structural information serves for internal regularization through weight sharing in convolutional layers
[17]. When combined with the expressiveness of multilayer
neural networks, it allows for learning very rich feature representation of input data with little to no preprocessing.
Incorporating structural information permits to work
with the inner dependencies in the representation of the
data, but only few works have addressed the possible use of
other structural prior information known about the data. For
example, many datasets in computer vision contain some
nuisance variations, such as rotations, shifts, scale changes,
illumination variations, etc. These variations are in many
cases known in advance from experts collecting the data and
one can significantly improve the performance when being
considered during training.
The effect is even more explicit when dealing with
domain-specific problems. E.g. in many medical imaging
datasets, the rotation can be irrelevant due to symmetric nature of some biological structures. At the same time, the
scale is fixed during imaging process and should not be considered as a nuisance factor. Moreover scale-invariance can
even harm the performance if object size is at least somehow informative, for example, in case of classifying healthy
cells from cancer cells [24]. We describe one biomedical
example in details in section 4.2.
The state of the art approach to deal with these variations and the most popular one in deep learning is data augmentation [27] – a powerful technique that transforms the
data point according to some predefined rules and uses it
as a separate training sample during the learning procedure.
The most common transformations being used in general
computer vision are rotations, scale changes and random
crops. This approach works especially good when applied
with deep learning algorithms, because the models in deep

289

