Geospatial Correspondences for Multimodal Registration
Diego Marcos
University of Zurich

Raffay Hamid
DigitalGlobe Inc.

Devis Tuia
University of Zurich

diego.marcos@geo.uzh.ch

raffay@cc.gatech.edu

devis.tuia@geo.uzh.ch

Domain A

In recent years, there has been a tremendous increase in
the amount and resolution of commercially available satellite imagery [14]. This growth has opened numerous avenues to monitor and analyze the land-cover and land-use
around the world, resulting in many novel applications including precision agriculture [45], population density estimation [23], and location based services [32].
A key challenge common to these applications is the efficient generation of land-cover maps, i.e. segmenting remotely sensed images into semantic classes such as forests,
roads, buildings etc. This problem is exacerbated by the
need to frequently update these maps by accounting for the
constant natural and man-made changes on the Earth’s surface. The growing number of available air and space-borne
sensors, together with their short revisit time makes the au-

Subsampling

0.1 0.1 0.2

1.0 0.9 0.0

0.1 0.0 0.1

0.1 0.0 0.1

0.0 0.2 1.0

0.0 0.2 1.0

0.0 0.5 0.1

0.0 0.5 0.1

1.0 0.9 0.0

1.0 0.9 0.0

_ 0.0 0.1 0.4
0.0 0.1 0.4 ∼

1.0 0.4 0.5 _
∼ 1.0 0.4 0.5

(c)

Subsampling

1. Introduction

0.0 0.5 0.1

0.1 0.7 0.2 =
/ 1.0 0.4 0.5

(b)

(a)

Domain B
1.0 0.3 1.0

Superpixels

The growing availability of very high resolution
(<1 m/pixel) satellite and aerial images has opened up unprecedented opportunities to monitor and analyze the evolution of land-cover and land-use across the world. To do
so, images of the same geographical areas acquired at different times and, potentially, with different sensors must
be efficiently parsed to update maps and detect land-cover
changes. However, a naı̈ve transfer of ground truth labels
from one location in the source image to the corresponding location in the target image is generally not feasible,
as these images are often only loosely registered (with up
to ± 50m of non-uniform errors). Furthermore, land-cover
changes in an area over time must be taken into account
for an accurate ground truth transfer. To tackle these challenges, we propose a mid-level sensor-invariant representation that encodes image regions in terms of the spatial
distribution of their spectral neighbors. We incorporate this
representation in a Markov Random Field to simultaneously
account for nonlinear mis-registrations and enforce locality priors to find matches between multi-sensor images. We
show how our approach can be used to assist in several multimodal land-cover update and change detection problems.

Superpixels

Abstract

(d) SDSN Similarity

Figure 1. Illustration of Spatial Distribution of Spectral Neighbors
(SDSN). (a): Remotely sensed image IA in domain A. (b): Superpixels computed for IA . (c): Downsampled version of IA . (d):
The SDSN features are computed as similarities of a superpixel in
(b) with every value in (c). The same procedure is applied to the
image in domain B. Superpixels belonging to the same land-cover
class tend have similar SDSN values across domains.

tomatic updating of such maps with remote sensing data an
important and challenging research direction [28].
Traditional mapping approaches cannot be directly applied to solve this problem, as the appearance-consistency
assumption they make does not generally hold true for
multi-sensor multi-temporal (heterogeneous) images. This
is due to the large variation in acquisition conditions e.g.
frequency bands, resolution, acquisition times and geometry. It is therefore common to view multi-sensor land-cover
update from the perspective of domain adaptation [2] where
correspondences between the source and target domains are
defined using a shared feature-space.
In this work, we propose a novel mid-level representation that assists in performing domain adaptation by extracting a domain-invariant feature for every image region
(a super-pixel, Figure 1b) in each image in terms of the
spatial distribution of its spectral neighbors (SDSN). Our
representation is particularly geared towards image series
acquired over the same geographical area at different times
and using different sensors. In order to obtain domain invariance we exploit the fact that satellite images are loosely
geo-registered, usually up to a non-uniform registration error of ±50 m. We can therefore divide the images into a
relatively coarse set of patches (Figure 1c) in order to obtain an approximately registered shared coordinate system.
15091

