Dense Human Body Correspondences Using Convolutional Networks
Lingyu Wei
University of Southern California

Qixing Huang
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

cosimo.dw@gmail.com

huangqx@ttic.edu

Duygu Ceylan
Adobe Research

Etienne Vouga
University of Texas at Austin

Hao Li
University of Southern California

ceylan@adobe.com

evouga@cs.utexas.edu

hao@hao-li.com
20

0
error (in cm):
full-to-full correspondences

full-to-partial correspondences

partial-to-partial correspondences

Figure 1: We introduce a deep learning framework for computing dense correspondences between human shapes in arbitrary,
complex poses, and wearing varying clothing. Our approach can handle full 3D models as well as partial scans generated
from a single depth map. The source and target shapes do not need to be the same subject, as highlighted in the left pair.

Abstract
We propose a deep learning approach for finding dense
correspondences between 3D scans of people. Our method
requires only partial geometric information in the form of
two depth maps or partial reconstructed surfaces, works for
humans in arbitrary poses and wearing any clothing, does
not require the two people to be scanned from similar viewpoints, and runs in real time. We use a deep convolutional
neural network to train a feature descriptor on depth map
pixels, but crucially, rather than training the network to
solve the shape correspondence problem directly, we train
it to solve a body region classification problem, modified to
increase the smoothness of the learned descriptors near region boundaries. This approach ensures that nearby points
on the human body are nearby in feature space, and vice
versa, rendering the feature descriptor suitable for computing dense correspondences between the scans. We validate
our method on real and synthetic data for both clothed and
unclothed humans, and show that our correspondences are
more robust than is possible with state-of-the-art unsupervised methods, and more accurate than those found using
methods that require full watertight 3D geometry.

1. Introduction
The computation of correspondences between geometric shapes is a fundamental building block for many impor-

tant tasks in 3D computer vision, such as reconstruction,
tracking, analysis, and recognition. Temporally-coherent
sequences of partial scans of an object can be aligned
by first finding corresponding points in overlapping regions, then recovering the motion by tracking surface points
through a sequence of 3D data; semantics can be extracted
by fitting a 3D template model to an unstructured input
scan. With the popularization of commodity 3D scanners
and recent advances in correspondence algorithms for deformable shapes, human bodies can now be easily digitized [24, 29, 11] and their performances captured using a
single RGB-D sensor [23, 42].
Most techniques are based on robust non-rigid surface
registration methods that can handle complex skin and cloth
deformations, as well as large regions of missing data due to
occlusions. Because geometric features can be ambiguous
and difficult to identify and match, the success of these techniques generally relies on the deformation between source
and target shapes being reasonably small, with sufficient
overlap. While local shape descriptors [34] can be used
to determine correspondences between surfaces that are far
apart, they are typically sparse and prone to false matches,
which require manual clean-up. Dense correspondences between shapes with larger deformations can be obtained reliably using statistical models of human shapes [4, 7], but the
subject has to be naked [6]. For clothed bodies, the automatic computation of dense mappings [20, 25, 33, 10] have
been demonstrated on full surfaces with significant shape
11544

