Unsupervised Cross-Dataset Transfer Learning for Person Re-identification
Peixi Peng1,5 , Tao Xiang2 , Yaowei Wang3∗ , Massimiliano Pontil4 ,
Shaogang Gong2 , Tiejun Huang1 ,Yonghong Tian1,5∗
1
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London, UK
3
Department of Electronic Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
4
Italian Institute of Technology, Italy
5
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, China
{pxpeng, yhtian, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn, yaoweiwang@bit.edu.cn,
{t.xiang, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk, massimiliano.pontil@iit.it

Abstract
Most existing person re-identification (Re-ID) approaches follow a supervised learning framework, in which
a large number of labelled matching pairs are required
for training. This severely limits their scalability in realworld applications. To overcome this limitation, we develop a novel cross-dataset transfer learning approach to
learn a discriminative representation. It is unsupervised in
the sense that the target dataset is completely unlabelled.
Specifically, we present an multi-task dictionary learning
method which is able to learn a dataset-shared but targetdata-biased representation. Experimental results on five
benchmark datasets demonstrate that the method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is the problem of matching people across non-overlapping camera views. It has become one of the most studied problems in video surveillance due to its great potentials for security and safety management applications. Despite the best efforts from the
computer vision researchers [33, 10], it remains an unsolved
problem. This is because a person’s appearance often
changes dramatically across camera views due to changes
in body pose, view angle, occlusion and illumination conditions.
To address these challenges, most existing research efforts on Re-ID [25, 15, 16, 4, 20, 37, 39, 36, 23, 31, 2]
are based on supervised learning. Specifically, they require
a large number of labelled matching pairs across each two
∗ Corresponding author:
Yaowei Wang and Yonghong Tian
(email:yaoweiwang@bit.edu.cn and yhtian@pku.edu.cn).

camera views to learn a representation or matching function
that is invariant to the appearance changes. However, relying on manually labelled data for each camera-pair leads
to poor scalability. This is due to two reasons: (1) For
each pair of cameras, eye-balling the two views to annotate
correctly matching pairs among hundreds of imposters is a
tough job even for humans. (2) Given a camera network of
even a moderate size, e.g. one installed in an underground
station, there can be easily over one hundred cameras and
thousands of camera pairs. Since hundreds of labelled image pairs are typically needed from each camera pair for supervised learning, the labelling cost would be prohibitively
high. This scalability issue thus severely limits the applicability of the existing methods.
In order to make a person Re-ID model scalable, one solution is to utilise the unlabelled data, which are abundant in
the context of Re-ID – in a busy public space, thousands of
people pass by in each camera view everyday. There are a
few existing efforts on exploiting unlabelled data for unsupervised Re-ID modelling [24, 34, 6]. However, compared
to supervised learning approaches, the matching performance of unsupervised models are typically much weaker,
rendering them less effective. The reason is that without
labelled matching pairs across camera views, existing unsupervised models are unable to learn what makes a person
recognisable under severe appearance changes.
Different from existing unsupervised Re-ID methods, we
propose to solve the Re-ID problem without any labelled
matching pairs of target data using cross-dataset transfer
learning. The idea is that labelling matching pairs for a set
of given target camera views is tedious for practical applications. However, there already exist labelled datasets collected elsewhere from other camera networks; it is therefore possible to learn a representation that captures the
11306

