Augmented Blendshapes for Real-time Simultaneous 3D Head Modeling and
Facial Motion Capture
Diego Thomas
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan

Rin-Ichiro Taniguchi
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan

diegot.thomas@gmail.com

rin@kyudai.jp

t = 6.7s

=0.0s
t=

t=
9.6s
=9.6s

t = 11.3s

t=
14s
=14.0s

Figure 1: Real-time simultaneous 3D head modeling and facial motion capture using an RGB-D camera. The 3D model of
the head of a moving person refines over time (left to right) while the facial motion is being captured.

Abstract

industry, for example, facial performances are captured and
then retargeted to a CAD 3D model of the head.

We propose a method to build in real-time animated 3D
head models using a consumer-grade RGB-D camera. Our
framework is the first one to provide simultaneously comprehensive facial motion tracking and a detailed 3D model
of the user’s head. Anyone’s head can be instantly reconstructed and his facial motion captured without requiring
any training or pre-scanning. The user starts facing the
camera with a neutral expression in the first frame, but is
free to move, talk and change his face expression as he wills
otherwise. The facial motion is tracked using a blendshape
representation while the fine geometric details are captured
using a Bump image mapped over the template mesh. We
propose an efficient algorithm to grow and refine the 3D
model of the head on-the-fly and in real-time. We demonstrate robust and high-fidelity simultaneous facial motion
tracking and 3D head modeling results on a wide range
of subjects with various head poses and facial expressions.
Our proposed method offers interesting possibilities for animation production and 3D video telecommunications.

Marker-less facial motion capture, on one hand, is well
established in the computer graphics community. Several
methods using template 3D models [3, 14, 25] achieve realtime accurate facial motion capture from videos of RGBD images. On the other hand, dense 3D reconstruction of
the head has made significant progress in the computer vision community since the development of consumer depth
cameras. Applications of dense 3D modeling techniques to
build 3D head models from static scenes [2, 13, 32] showed
compelling results in terms of details in the produced 3D
models. Recently, an extension of the popular KinectFusion algorithm [17] called DynamicFusion [18] was proposed that can handle even dynamic scenes.

1. Introduction
High-fidelity 3D reconstruction of the human head using RGB-D cameras is a key component for realistic human
avatar creation. For efficient and realistic animation production, the facial animation sequence of the built 3D model of
the head also needs to be captured. In the film and game

While recent advances have shown compelling results in
either facial motion capture or dense 3D modeling, they do
not allow to produce both results at the same time. Though
DynamicFusion [18] allows to capture deformations of the
face, the results are limited compared to those obtained
with facial motion capture systems (e.g., eyelids movements
can not be captured). Moreover, the obtained deformations
are not intuitive for animation purpose (animations such as
”mouth open” or ”mouth closed” are more intuitive to animate the face). This is because the head is animated using unstructured deformation nodes, without any semantic meaning. Note that DynamicFusion was designed for a
more general purpose: dynamic scene reconstruction, while
in this work we focus on 3D modeling of the animated head.
13299

