Instance-aware Semantic Segmentation via Multi-task Network Cascades
Jifeng Dai

Kaiming He

Jian Sun

Microsoft Research
{jifdai,kahe,jiansun}@microsoft.com

Abstract

Since the development of fully convolutional networks
(FCNs) [23], the accuracy of semantic segmentation has
been improved rapidly [5, 24, 6, 31] thanks to deeply
learned features [20, 27], large-scale annotations [22], and
advanced reasoning over graphical models [5, 31]. Nevertheless, FCNs [23] and improvements [5, 24, 6, 31] are
designed to predict a category label for each pixel, but are
unaware of individual object instances. Accurate and fast
instance-aware semantic segmentation is still a challenging
problem. To encourage the research on this problem, the recently established COCO [22] dataset and competition only
accept instance-aware semantic segmentation results.
There have been a few methods [10, 13, 7, 14] addressing instance-aware semantic segmentation using convolu-

task 2

task 3

task 1
shared features

1. Introduction

shared features

Semantic segmentation research has recently witnessed
rapid progress, but many leading methods are unable to
identify object instances. In this paper, we present Multitask Network Cascades for instance-aware semantic segmentation. Our model consists of three networks, respectively differentiating instances, estimating masks, and categorizing objects. These networks form a cascaded structure, and are designed to share their convolutional features.
We develop an algorithm for the nontrivial end-to-end training of this causal, cascaded structure. Our solution is a
clean, single-step training framework and can be generalized to cascades that have more stages. We demonstrate
state-of-the-art instance-aware semantic segmentation accuracy on PASCAL VOC. Meanwhile, our method takes only
360ms testing an image using VGG-16, which is two orders
of magnitude faster than previous systems for this challenging problem. As a by product, our method also achieves
compelling object detection results which surpass the competitive Fast/Faster R-CNN systems.
The method described in this paper is the foundation of
our submissions to the MS COCO 2015 segmentation competition, where we won the 1st place.

task 1

task 2

task 3

Figure 1. Illustrations of common multi-task learning (left) and our
multi-task cascade (right).

tional neural networks (CNNs) [21, 20]. These methods all
require mask proposal methods [29, 3, 1] that are slow at
inference time. In addition, these mask proposal methods
take no advantage of deeply learned features or large-scale
training data, and may become a bottleneck for segmentation accuracy.
In this work, we address instance-aware semantic segmentation solely based on CNNs, without using external
modules (e.g., [1]). We observe that the instance-aware semantic segmentation task can be decomposed into three different and related sub-tasks. 1) Differentiating instances. In
this sub-task, the instances can be represented by bounding
boxes that are class-agnostic. 2) Estimating masks. In this
sub-task, a pixel-level mask is predicted for each instance.
3) Categorizing objects. In this sub-task, the category-wise
label is predicted for each mask-level instance. We expect
that each sub-task is simpler than the original instance segmentation task, and is more easily addressed by convolutional networks.
Driven by this decomposition, we propose Multi-task
Network Cascades (MNCs) for accurate and fast instanceaware semantic segmentation. Our network cascades have
three stages, each of which addresses one sub-task. The
three stages share their features, as in traditional multi-task
learning [4]. Feature sharing greatly reduces the test-time
computation, and may also improve feature learning thanks
to the underlying commonality among the tasks. But unlike
many multi-task learning applications, in our method a later
stage depends on the outputs of an earlier stage, forming
a causal cascade (see Fig. 1). So we call our structures
“multi-task cascades”.
Training a multi-task cascade is nontrivial because of the
13150

