Online Reconstruction of Indoor Scenes from RGB-D Streams
Hao Wang∗, Jun Wang∗, Liang Wang
Baidu Research - Institute of Deep Learning
{wanghao29, wangjun21, wangliang18}@baidu.com

Abstract

ly on outdoor scenes [23, 30], small objects and compact
workspaces [16, 18, 24].

A system capable of performing robust online volumetric
reconstruction of indoor scenes based on input from a handheld RGB-D camera is presented. Our system is powered
by a two-pass reconstruction scheme. The first pass tracks
camera poses at video rate and simultaneously constructs
a pose graph on-the-fly. The tracker operates in real-time,
which allows the reconstruction results to be visualized during the scanning process. Live visual feedbacks makes the
scanning operation fast and intuitive. Upon termination of
scanning, the second pass takes place to handle loop closures and reconstruct the final model using globally refined
camera trajectories. The system is online with low delay
and returns a dense model of sufficient accuracy. The beauty of this system lies in its speed, accuracy, simplicity and
ease of implementation when compared to previous methods. We demonstrate the performance of our system on several real-world scenes and quantitatively assess the modeling
accuracy with respect to ground truth models obtained from
a LIDAR scanner.

Dense modeling research has recently experienced
somewhat of a new era, as a result of the emergence of
consumer-level depth sensors. The availability of real-time,
reliable depth sensing capabilities together with the advance of general purpose graphics processing units (GPGPU) open new avenues for camera tracking and dense mapping. The pioneer work in RGB-D reconstruction literature
is KinectFusion [17]. Since [17], many methods (both online and offline) have been proposed to address the RGB-D
scene reconstruction problem [34, 12, 3, 19, 38, 36, 13, 37,
35, 4, 32], from graphics, vision and robotics communities.

1. Introduction
The paper is about generating dense models of rigid indoor scenes using inputs streamed from a handheld RGBD camera. The reconstruction is performed online with
low delay as the sensor moves. The system also continuously estimates the 6 degrees of freedom (6DOF) pose of
the sensor and returns the globally optimized camera trajectory. An example is shown in figure 1. In computer
vision, structure from motion (SFM) and visual odometry
have been highly active research topics for a long time. In
the robotics community, closely related is what is known
as simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). Seminal works [20, 21, 5, 14] demonstrate that robust tracking
and sparse 3D mapping is possible in real-time from visual
input alone. Attempts at real-time dense surface modelling
from passive cameras to date have had limited results, most∗ indicates equal contributions and joint first authors

Previous work on RGB-D reconstruction can be categorized into two groups based on the method’s emphasis and
target application. Robotics researchers in general formulate the problem in a SLAM framework [8, 34, 12, 13, 31,
32], minimizing the absolute trajectory error (ATE) is their
main focus and the root mean square error (RMSE) of the
ATE is used as the evaluation metric. These SLAM systems
are seldom designed for high fidelity modeling, thus mesh
quality and geometry details are not fully appreciated. By
contrast, graphics and vision communities focus more on
the fidelity of the reconstructed model [36, 38, 37, 35, 4].
Qualitative or quantitative analysis of 3D models is performed to assess the surface quality. Note that to obtain high
quality meshes, expert users are required to operate the sensor and image surfaces at close range. The scanning process
is inherently different from some of the dense SLAM applications, in which a robot drives a rigidly mounted camera
to create a dense map for an unknown environment.
Our work belongs to the second category, i.e., meshes
are the main outcome of our system and high accuracy is
desired in our applications. While methods for modeling small objects are relatively mature [29, 17], modeling indoor
scenes automatically still remains a tough challenge. To one
part this is because real-world environments contain sophisticated structures and must be reconstructed from complex
camera trajectories, with each view covering only a small
portion of the scene, making tracking prone to gross failure. More importantly, scanning large environments suffers
13271

