On Benefits of Selection Diversity via Bilevel Exclusive Sparsity
Haichuan Yang† , Yijun Huang† , Lam Tran† , Ji Liu†[ , and Shuai Huang‡
†
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester
[
Goergen Institute for Data Science, University of Rochester
‡
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Washington
{hyang1990.cs, huangyj0, lam.c.tran, ji.liu.uwisc, shuai.huang.ie}@gmail.com

Group 2
Group 3

Group sparsity

Group 4

Group 4

Group 4

Group 4
Overall sparsity

Group 1

Group 3

Group 3

Group 3
No sparsity

Group 2

Group 2

Group 2

Sparse feature (dictionary) selection is critical for
various tasks in computer vision, machine learning, and
pattern recognition to avoid overfitting. While extensive
research efforts have been conducted on feature selection using sparsity and group sparsity, we note that there
has been a lack of development on applications where
there is a particular preference on diversity. That is,
the selected features are expected to come from different
groups or categories. This diversity preference is motivated from many real-world applications such as advertisement recommendation, privacy image classification,
and design of survey.
In this paper, we proposed a general bilevel exclusive
sparsity formulation to pursue the diversity by restricting the overall sparsity and the sparsity in each group.
To solve the proposed formulation that is NP hard in
general, a heuristic procedure is proposed. The main
contributions in this paper include: 1) A linear convergence rate is established for the proposed algorithm; 2)
The provided theoretical error bound improves the approaches such as L1 norm and L0 types methods which
only use the overall sparsity and the quantitative benefits
of using the diversity sparsity is provided. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first work to show the theoretical benefits of using the diversity sparsity; 3) Extensive
empirical studies are provided to validate the proposed
formulation, algorithm, and theory.

Group 1

Group 1

Group 1

Abstract

Diversity sparsity

Figure 1. Illustration of different sparsity preferences. The orange color indicates the active (or selected) feature. “No sparsity” potentially selects all features; “overall sparsity” (commonly used sparsity such as L1 norm and L0 norm regularization) only restricts the number of selected features without
any restriction on the structure; “group sparsity” prefers selects
features staying in the same group; and “diversity sparsity” restricts selected features in different groups.

1. Introduction

will overfit the training data and dramatically degrades
the performance on testing data. Sparse feature (dictionary) selection is one of key steps in various tasks in
computer vision, machine learning, and pattern recognition to overcome the overfitting issue (e.g., visualtracking [47], face recognition [38], sparse coding for
image classification [37], joint restoration and recognition [45]). Extensive research efforts have been conducted on sparse feature selection by explicitly or implicitly restricting the number of active features (e.g.,
LASSO [31]) or the number of active feature group (e.g.,
group LASSO [42]), where the assumption is that active
features (or active groups of features) should be sparse.

Nowadays people can easily extract tons of features
in computer vision applications, for example, the wellknown open source library VLFeat [34] provides a large
collection of feature extraction algorithms, while the
number of labeled samples are usually limit. Without restricting the number of active features, the learned model

In the paper, we are interested in the sparse feature selection with a particular preference on diversity, that is,
the selected features are expected from different groups
or categories. Figure 1 provides an illustration for the
different sparsity preference that are commonly used and
the diversity preference considered in this paper.

5945

