Multi-Oriented Text Detection with Fully Convolutional Networks
Zheng Zhang1∗ Chengquan Zhang1∗ Wei Shen2 Cong Yao1 Wenyu Liu1 Xiang Bai1†
1
School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Key Laboratory of Specialty Fiber Optics and Optical Access Networks, Shanghai University
macaroniz1990@gmail.com, zchengquan@gmail.com, xbai@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for text detection in natural images. Both local and global cues are taken
into account for localizing text lines in a coarse-to-fine procedure. First, a Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) model
is trained to predict the salient map of text regions in a
holistic manner. Then, text line hypotheses are estimated by
combining the salient map and character components. Finally, another FCN classifier is used to predict the centroid
of each character, in order to remove the false hypotheses.
The framework is general for handling text in multiple orientations, languages and fonts. The proposed method consistently achieves the state-of-the-art performance on three
text detection benchmarks: MSRA-TD500, ICDAR2015 and
ICDAR2013.

1. Introduction
Driven by the increasing demands for many computer
vision tasks, reading text in the wild (from scene images)
has become an active direction in this community. Though
extensively studied in recent years, text spotting under uncontrolled environments is still quite challenging. Especially, detecting text lines with arbitrary orientations is an
extremely difficult task, as it takes much more hypotheses into account, which drastically enlarges the searching
space. Most existing approaches are successfully designed
for detecting horizontal or near-horizontal text [3, 4, 15,
17, 2, 8, 6, 35, 23, 20, 27]. However, there is still a large
gap when applying them to multi-oriented text, which has
been verified by the low accuracies reported in the recent
ICDAR2015 competition for text detection [10].
Text, which can be treated as sequence-like objects
with unconstrained lengths, possesses very distinctive appearance and shape compared to generic objects. Consequently, the detection methods in scene images based on
∗ Authors contributed equally
† Corresponding author

(b)

(a)

(e)

(d)

(c)

(f)

(g)

Figure 1. The procedure of the proposed method. (a) An input image; (b) The salient map of the text regions predicted by the TextBlock FCN; (c) Text block generation; (d) Candidate character
component extraction; (e) Orientation estimation by component
projection; (f) Text line candidates extraction; (g) The detection
results of the proposed method.

sliding windows [8, 25, 3, 24, 17] and connected component [16, 6, 4, 32, 28] have become mainstream in this
specific domain. In particular, the component-based methods utilizing Maximally Stable Extremal Regions (MSER)
[15] as the basic representations achieved the state-of-theart performance on ICDAR2013 and ICDAR2015 competitions [11, 10]. Recently, [6] utilized a convolution neural network to learn highly robust representations of character components. Usually, the component grouping algorithms including clustering algorithms or some heuristic
rules are essential for localizing text at a word or line level.
As an unconventional approach, [35] directly hits text lines
from cluttered images, benefiting from symmetry and selfsimilarity properties of them. Therefore, it seems that both
local (character components) and global (text regions) information are very helpful for text detection.
In this paper, an unconventional detection framework for
multi-oriented text is proposed. The basic idea is to integrate local and global cues of text blocks with a coarse-tofine strategy. At the coarse level, a pixel-wise text/non-text
salient map is efficiently generated by utilizing a Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [12]. We show that the salient
map provides a powerful guidance for estimating orientations and generating candidate bounding boxes of text lines,
while combining it with local character components. More

4159

