An Egocentric Look at Video Photographer Identity
Yedid Hoshen
Shmuel Peleg
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusaem, Israel

Abstract
Egocentric cameras are being worn by an increasing
number of users, among them many security forces worldwide. GoPro cameras already penetrated the mass market,
reporting substantial increase in sales every year. As headworn cameras do not capture the photographer, it may seem
that the anonymity of the photographer is preserved even
when the video is publicly distributed.
We show that camera motion, as can be computed from
the egocentric video, provides unique identity information.
The photographer can be reliably recognized from a few
seconds of video captured when walking. The proposed
method achieves more than 90% recognition accuracy in
cases where the random success rate is only 3%.
Applications can include theft prevention by locking the
camera when not worn by its rightful owner. Searching
video sharing services (e.g. YouTube) for egocentric videos
shot by a specific photographer may also become possible.
An important message in this paper is that photographers
should be aware that sharing egocentric video will compromise their anonymity, even when their face is not visible.

1. Introduction
The popularity of head worn egocentric cameras is increasing. GoPro reports an increase in sales of 66% every
year, and cameras are widely used by extreme sports enthusiasts and by law enforcement and military personnel.
Special features of egocentric video include:
• The camera is worn by the photographer, and is recording while the photographer performs normal activities.
• The camera moves with the photographer’s head.
• The camera does not record images of the photographer. In spite of this we show that photographers can
often be identified.
Photographers feel secure that sharing their egocentric
videos on social media does not compromise their identity
(Fig. 1). Police forces routinely release footage of officer

a)

b)

Figure 1. a) A GoPro video uploaded to YouTube allegedly capturing a crime from the POV of the robber. Can the robber be recognized? b) A GoPro video uploaded by US soldiers in combat.
Are their identities safe?

activity and operations of special forces recorded by wearable cameras are widely published on YouTube. Some have
even recorded and published their own crimes. A consequence of our work is that the photographer identity of such
videos can sometimes be found from camera motion.
Body motion is an accurate and replicable feature for
identifying people over time. It is often recorded by accelerometers ([16]) or by an overlooking camera. Egocentric video can effectively serve as a head mounted visual
gyroscope and can accurately capture body motion information. It follows that any egocentric video which includes
walking contains body motion information that can accurately reveal the photographer.
Specifically, we use sparse optical flow vectors (50 flow
vectors per frame) taken over a few steps (4 seconds). This
results in a set of time-series, one for each component of
each optical flow vector. In Fig 2 we show the temporal
Fourier Transform of one flow vector for three different sequences, showing visible differences between different photographers.
As a first approach for determining photographer identity, we computed LPC (Linear Predictive Coding 1 ) [3] coefficients for each of the optical flow time series. All LPC
coefficients of all optical flow sequences were used as a descriptor. Photographer recognition using a non-linear SVM
trained on the LPC descriptor gave 81% identification accu1 The LPC coefficients of a time series are k values that when scalar
multiplied with the last k measurements of the time series, will optimally
predict the next measurement.

4284

