Exploiting Spectral-Spatial Correlation for Coded Hyperspectral
Image Restoration

1

Ying Fu1 , Yinqiang Zheng2 , Imari Sato2 , Yoichi Sato1
The University of Tokyo 2 National Institute of Informatics

Abstract
Conventional scanning and multiplexing techniques for
hyperspectral imaging suffer from limited temporal and/or
spatial resolution. To resolve this issue, coding techniques
are becoming increasingly popular in developing snapshot
systems for high-resolution hyperspectral imaging. For
such systems, it is a critical task to accurately restore the 3D
hyperspectral image from its corresponding coded 2D image. In this paper, we propose an effective method for coded
hyperspectral image restoration, which exploits extensive
structure sparsity in the hyperspectral image. Specifically,
we simultaneously explore spectral and spatial correlation
via low-rank regularizations, and formulate the restoration
problem into a variational optimization model, which can
be solved via an iterative numerical algorithm. Experimental results using both synthetic data and real images show
that the proposed method can significantly outperform the
state-of-the-art methods on several popular coding-based
hyperspectral imaging systems.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral (HS) imaging captures light from any
scene point over tens and hundreds of bands in the spectral domain. Such detailed spectral distribution information
has given rise to numerous applications [1] , including diagnostic medicine [2, 3], remote sensing [4, 5], surveillance
[6, 7], and more.
To capture a full HS image, traditional HS imaging methods [8, 9, 10, 11, 12] need to scan along either the spatial
or the spectral dimension, and they often sacrifice temporal resolution due to the limitations of hardware in perceiving light. To enable hyperspectral acquisition of dynamic
scenes, snapshot approaches [13, 14, 15, 16] are developed
to capture the full 3D spectral cube in a single image, which
multiplex the 3D HS image into a 2D spatial sensor, at the
cost of reducing spatial resolution.
Recently, some coding-based HS imaging approaches
[17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22] have been proposed to overcome
the tradeoff between temporal and spatial resolution, re-

HS Image

Extracted Patches
⋯

2D Patches in a Cubic Patch

Similar Cubic Patches

Low‐Rank Matrix

Low‐Rank across Spectra

⋯
Spatial Non‐Local Low‐Rank

Figure 1. Illustration of the low-rank matrices from a HS image.
Each cubic patch is reshaped as a 2D matrix, where each row describes the spectral distribution of each pixel. This low-rank matrix encodes the correlation across spectra. Besides, a set of similar patches for each exemplar patch are grouped into a low-rank
matrix, which accounts for the spatial non-local similarities.

lying on the compressive sampling (CS) theory. All these
imaging approaches are under-determined, and their underlying restoration methods exploit the l1 -norm based sparsity
of HS images. Since the number of measurements is far less
than that of variables in the desired HS image, the l1 -norm
based constraints are still insufficient for accurate hyperspectral image restoration. This inspires us to better exploit
the intrinsic properties of a HS image, i.e. the high correlation across spectra [23] and the non-local self-similarity in
space [24].
In this paper, we propose an effective coded HS image
restoration method, by exploiting spectral and spatial correlation via low-rank approximation (Figure 1). Specifically,
to utilize the sparsity across spectra, we reshape each exemplar patch as a 2D matrix, where each row describes
the spectral distribution of each spatial pixel, and use the
spectral low-rank constraint on it. To take into account the
non-local self-similarity in space, we group a set of similar patches for each exemplar patch and enforce the spatial non-local low-rank regularization on this set. In addition, we employ the weighted nuclear norm as a smooth
surrogate function for the low-rank regularization, which
can adaptively adjust the regularization parameters. Later,
these two low-rank regularizations are involved into a uni-

3727

