The Next Best Underwater View
Mark Sheinin and Yoav Y. Schechner
Viterbi Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Technion - Israel Inst. of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel
markshe@campus.technion.ac.il , yoav@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
To image in high resolution large and occlusion-prone
scenes, a camera must move above and around. Degradation of visibility due to geometric occlusions and distances is exacerbated by scattering, when the scene is in a
participating medium. Moreover, underwater and in other
media, artificial lighting is needed. Overall, data quality
depends on the observed surface, medium and the timevarying poses of the camera and light source (C&L). This
work proposes to optimize C&L poses as they move, so that
the surface is scanned efficiently and the descattered recovery has the highest quality. The work generalizes the next
best view concept of robot vision to scattering media and
cooperative movable lighting. It also extends descattering
to platforms that move optimally. The optimization criterion is information gain, taken from information theory. We
exploit the existence of a prior rough 3D model, since underwater such a model is routinely obtained using sonar.
We demonstrate this principle in a scaled-down setup.

1. Introduction
Scattering media degrade images. Visibility enhancement often seeks single-image dehazing [13, 18] or relies
on modulation of illumination properties, such as spatiotemporal structure [3, 8, 14, 19, 27, 34] and polarization [45, 47]. None of these methods exploit an important
degree of freedom: the dynamic pose of the camera.
Pose dynamics is important, because most imaging platforms move anyway. Platform motion, however, needs to be
efficient, covering the surface domain in the highest quality,
in the shortest time. The camera needs to move, so that object regions that have not been well observed, will be efficiently recovered next. This is the next best view (NBV)
concept, which has been extensively studied in the computer vision and robotics communities. There, viewpoint
selection was driven by occlusions [30], geometric uncertainty in three dimensional (3D) scene reconstruction [9, 50]
and active recognition [38]. Prior NBV designs, however,

φC (t)
φC (t + 1)

φL (t)

φL (t + 1)

Figure 1. In a scattering medium at time t, the camera and lightsource poses are represented by φC (t), φL (t) respectively. The next
best underwater view task optimizes the poses φC (t+1), φL (t+1)
for object reconstruction.

assumed no participating medium. A scattering medium
may significantly disrupt visibility. This affects drones
overflying wide hazy scenes, autonomous underwater vehicles scanning the sea floor to inspect infrastructure [10, 20]
and fire-fighting rovers operating in smoke. Despite their
motion and need to overcome scatter, existing systems conduct imaging paths [4] while ignoring scattering.
This work generalizes NBV to scattering media. We
achieve 3D descattering in large areas and around occlusions, through sequential changes of pose. The obvious
need to move the platform around large areas and occlusions is exploited for optimized dehazing, i.e, estimation of
surface albedo. On the other hand, scattering by the medium
influences the optimal changes of pose.
The challenge is exacerbated when lighting must be
brought-in, in deep underwater operations, tissue and indoor smoky scenes. Scattering affects object irradiance and
volumetric backscatter [16, 23] as a function of the lighting
pose, not only the camera pose (Fig. 1). Usually both the
13764

