Learning Local Image Descriptors with Deep Siamese and Triplet Convolutional
Networks by Minimizing Global Loss Functions
Vijay Kumar B G, Gustavo Carneiro, Ian Reid
The University of Adelaide and Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
{vijay.kumar,gustavo.carneiro,ian.reid}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Recent innovations in training deep convolutional neural network (ConvNet) models have motivated the design
of new methods to automatically learn local image descriptors. The latest deep ConvNets proposed for this task consist
of a siamese network that is trained by penalising misclassification of pairs of local image patches. Current results
from machine learning show that replacing this siamese by
a triplet network can improve the classification accuracy in
several problems, but this has yet to be demonstrated for local image descriptor learning. Moreover, current siamese
and triplet networks have been trained with stochastic gradient descent that computes the gradient from individual
pairs or triplets of local image patches, which can make
them prone to overfitting. In this paper, we first propose the
use of triplet networks for the problem of local image descriptor learning. Furthermore, we also propose the use of
a global loss that minimises the overall classification error
in the training set, which can improve the generalisation
capability of the model. Using the UBC benchmark dataset
for comparing local image descriptors, we show that the
triplet network produces a more accurate embedding than
the siamese network in terms of the UBC dataset errors.
Moreover, we also demonstrate that a combination of the
triplet and global losses produces the best embedding in
the field, using this triplet network. Finally, we also show
that the use of the central-surround siamese network trained
with the global loss produces the best result of the field on
the UBC dataset.

1. Introduction
The design of effective local image descriptors has been
instrumental for the application of computer vision methods
in several problems involving the matching of local image
patches, such as wide baseline stereo [21], structure from
motion [22], image classification [19, 29], just to name a
few. Over the last decades, numerous hand-crafted [8, 19,
25] and automatically learned [3, 4, 10, 12, 20, 28, 32, 36]
local image descriptors have been proposed and used in
the applications above. Despite their conceptual differ-

ences, these two types of local descriptors are formed based
on similar goals: descriptors extracted from local image
patches of the same 3-D location of a scene must be unique
(compared with descriptors from different 3-D locations)
and robust to brightness and geometric deformations. Given
the difficulty in guaranteeing such goals for hand-crafted local descriptors [8, 19, 25], the field has gradually focused
more on the automatic learning of such local descriptors,
where an objective function that achieves the goals above
is used in an optimisation procedure. In particular, the most
common objective function minimises the distance between
the descriptors from the same 3-D location (i.e., same class)
extracted under varying imaging conditions and different
viewpoints and, at the same time, maximises that distance
between patches from different 3-D locations (or different
classes) [3, 4, 10, 12, 20, 27, 28, 32, 36].
The more recently proposed approaches [10, 12, 20, 36]
based on deep ConvNets [18] optimise slightly new objective functions that have the same goal as mentioned above.
Specifically, Zagoruyko and Komodakis [36] and Han et
al. [12] minimise a pairwise similarity loss of local image
patches using a siamese network [2] (see Fig. 1-(b)), where
the patches can belong to the same or different classes (a
class is for example a specific 3-D location). Dosovitskiy
et al. [10] minimise a multi-class classification loss (Fig. 1(c)), where the model outputs the classification of a single
input patch into one of the many descriptor classes (estimated in an unsupervised manner). Moreover, Masci et
al. [20] propose a siamese network trained with a pairwise loss that minimises the distance (in the embedded
space) between patches of the same class and maximises
the distance between patches of different classes (Fig. 1(b)). Even though these methods show substantial gains
compared to the previous state of the art in public benchmark datasets [3, 4, 5, 24, 28, 31, 32], we believe that the
loss functions and network structures being explored for
this task can be improved. For instance, the triplet network [33, 14, 26, 35] (see Fig. 1-(d)) has been shown to
improve the siamese network on several classification problems, and the training of the siamese and triplet networks
can involve loss functions based on global classification results, which has the potential to generalise better.
In this paper, we propose the use of the triplet net15385

