Synthesized Classifiers for Zero-Shot Learning
Soravit Changpinyo∗ , Wei-Lun Chao∗
U. of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA

Boqing Gong
U. of Central Florida
Orlando, FL

Fei Sha
U. of California
Los Angeles, CA

schangpi, weilunc@usc.edu

bgong@crcv.ucf.edu

feisha@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

Handbag”. While handbag, flap, tweed, and Chanel are
popular accessory, style, fabric, and brand, respectively,
the combination of them is rare — the query generates
about 55,000 results on Google search with a small number of images. The amount of labeled images is thus far
from enough for directly building a high-quality classifier, unless we treat this category as a composition of
attributes, for each of which more training data can be
easily acquired [22].

Given semantic descriptions of object classes, zeroshot learning aims to accurately recognize objects of the
unseen classes, from which no examples are available
at the training stage, by associating them to the seen
classes, from which labeled examples are provided. We
propose to tackle this problem from the perspective of
manifold learning. Our main idea is to align the semantic space that is derived from external information to the
model space that concerns itself with recognizing visual
features. To this end, we introduce a set of “phantom”
object classes whose coordinates live in both the semantic space and the model space. Serving as bases in a
dictionary, they can be optimized from labeled data such
that the synthesized real object classifiers achieve optimal discriminative performance. We demonstrate superior accuracy of our approach over the state of the art
on four benchmark datasets for zero-shot learning, including the full ImageNet Fall 2011 dataset with more
than 20,000 unseen classes.

It is thus imperative to develop methods for zero-shot
learning, namely, to expand classifiers and the space of
possible labels beyond seen objects, of which we have
access to the labeled images for training, to unseen ones,
of which no labeled images are available [22, 31]. To
this end, we need to address two key interwoven challenges [31]: (1) how to relate unseen classes to seen
ones and (2) how to attain optimal discriminative performance on the unseen classes even though we do not
have their labeled data.
To address the first challenge, researchers have been
using visual attributes [9, 21, 32] and word vectors [10,
28, 40] to associate seen and unseen classes. We call
them the semantic embeddings of objects. Much work
takes advantage of such embeddings directly as middle
layers between input images and output class labels [1,
10, 16, 22, 24, 25, 30, 36, 40], whereas others derive new
representations from the embeddings using, for example, Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) [11, 12, 26]
or sparse coding [19, 46, 47]. For the second challenge, the hand-designed probabilistic models in [22]
have been competitive baselines. More recent studies
show that nearest neighbor classifiers in the semantic
space are very effective [10, 11, 12, 13, 30]. Finally,
classifiers for the unseen classes can directly be constructed in the input feature space [1, 8, 23, 27, 44, 47].

1. Introduction
Visual recognition has made significant progress due
to the widespread use of deep learning architectures [20,
41] that are optimized on large-scale datasets of humanlabeled images [37]. Despite the exciting advances, to
recognize objects “in the wild” remains a daunting challenge. Many objects follow a long-tailed distribution:
in contrast to common objects such as household items,
they do not occur frequently enough for us to collect and
label a large set of representative exemplar images.
For example, this challenge is especially crippling
for fine-grained object recognition (classifying species
of birds, designer products, etc.). Suppose we want to
carry a visual search of “Chanel Tweed Fantasy Flap
∗

In this paper, we tackle these two challenges with
ideas from manifold learning [5, 15], converging to a
two-pronged approach. We view object classes in a se-

Equal contributions

1
5327

