Linear Shape Deformation Models with Local Support using Graph-based
Structured Matrix Factorisation
Florian Bernard1,2

Peter Gemmar2,3
Frank Hertel1
Jorge Goncalves2
Johan Thunberg2
1
Centre Hospitalier de Luxembourg, Luxembourg
2
Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
3
Trier University of Applied Sciences, Trier, Germany
PCA (global
support)

...

+[
x̄

PCA (global
support)

Our (local
support)

Φ1

PCA (global
support)

] α=
Our (local
support)

ΦM

Our (local
support)

y(α)

Figure 1. Global support factors of PCA lead to implausible body shapes, whereas the local support factors of our method give more
realistic results. See our accompanying video for animated results.

Abstract
Representing 3D shape deformations by highdimensional linear models has many applications in
computer vision and medical imaging. Commonly, using
Principal Components Analysis a low-dimensional subspace of the high-dimensional shape space is determined.
However, the resulting factors (the most dominant eigenvectors of the covariance matrix) have global support,
i.e. changing the coefficient of a single factor deforms the
entire shape. Based on matrix factorisation with sparsity
and graph-based regularisation terms, we present a method
to obtain deformation factors with local support. The
benefits include better flexibility and interpretability as
well as the possibility of interactively deforming shapes
locally. We demonstrate that for brain shapes our method
outperforms the state of the art in local support models
with respect to generalisation and sparse reconstruction,
whereas for body shapes our method gives more realistic
deformations.

1. Introduction
Due to their simplicity, linear models in highdimensional space are frequently used for modelling nonlinear deformations of shapes in 2D or 3D space. For example, Active Shape Models (ASM) [11], based on a sta-

tistical shape model, are popular for image segmentation.
Usually, surface meshes, comprising faces and vertices, are
employed for representing the surfaces of shapes in 3D. Dimensionality reduction techniques are used to learn a lowdimensional representation of the vertex coordinates from
training data. Frequently, an affine subspace close to the
training shapes is used. To be more specific, mesh deformations are modelled by expressing the vertex coordinates
as the sum of a mean shape x̄ and a linear combination of
M modes of variation Φ = [Φ1 , . . . , ΦM ], i.e. the vertices
deformed by the weight or coefficient vector α are given by
y(α) = x̄ + Φα, see Fig. 1. Commonly, by using Principal
Components Analysis (PCA), the modes of variation are set
to the most dominant eigenvectors of the sample covariance
matrix. PCA-based models are computationally convenient
due to the orthogonality of the eigenvectors of the (real and
symmetric) covariance matrix. Due to the diagonalisation
of the covariance matrix, an axis-aligned Gaussian distribution of the weight vectors of the training data is obtained.
A problem of PCA-based models is that eigenvectors have
global support, i.e. adjusting the weight of a single factor
affects all vertices of the shape (Fig. 1).
Thus, in this work, instead of eigenvectors, we consider more general factors as modes of variation that have
local support, i.e. adjusting the weight of a single factor
leads only to a spatially localised deformation of the shape
(Fig. 1). The set of all factors can be seen as a dictionary for
representing shapes by a linear combination of the factors.

5629

