3D Shape Attributes
David F. Fouhey, Abhinav Gupta
Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University

Andrew Zisserman
Dept. of Engineering Science
University of Oxford

Abstract
In this paper we investigate 3D attributes as a means to
understand the shape of an object in a single image. To this
end, we make a number of contributions: (i) we introduce
and define a set of 3D Shape attributes, including planarity,
symmetry and occupied space; (ii) we show that such properties can be successfully inferred from a single image using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN); (iii) we introduce a 143K image dataset of sculptures with 2197 works
over 242 artists for training and evaluating the CNN; (iv)
we show that the 3D attributes trained on this dataset generalize to images of other (non-sculpture) object classes;
and furthermore (v) we show that the CNN also provides a
shape embedding that can be used to match previously unseen sculptures largely independent of viewpoint.

1. Introduction
Suppose you saw the sculpture in Fig. 1(a) on vacation
and wanted to call your friend and tell her what you saw.
How might you describe it so she would know that you
were referring to the one in Fig. 1(a) and not the one in
(b)? What you would not do is describe the sculpture pixel
by pixel. Instead you would probably give a high level description in terms of overall shape, holes, curvature, sharpness/smoothness, etc. This is in stark contrast to most contemporary 3D understanding algorithms that in the first instance produce a metric map, i.e. a prediction of a local metric property like depth or surface normals at each pixel.
The objective of this paper is to infer such generic 3D
shape properties directly from appearance. We term these
properties 3D shape attributes and introduce a variety of
specific examples, for instance planarity, thinness, pointcontact, to concretely explore this concept. Although such
attributes can be derived from an estimated depthmap in
principle, in practice (as we will show with baselines) view
dependence, insufficient resolution, errors and ambiguities
in the reconstruction render this indirect approach inferior.
As with classical object attributes and relative attributes [12, 13, 35], 3D attributes offer a means of describing 3D object shape when confronted with something

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. How would you describe the shape of (a) and contrast
it with (b)? Probably not by quantifying the depth at each pixel,
but instead characterizing the overall 3D shape: in (a) the object
has a hole, does not have planar regions and is mostly smooth,
has unequal aspect ratio, and touches the ground once. In contrast
(b) has no hole and multiple parts that touch the ground multiple
times. This paper proposes to infer shape in these terms.

entirely new – the open world problem. This is in contrast to a long line of work which is able to say something
about 3D shape, or indeed recover it, from single images
given a specific object class, e.g. faces [7], semantic category [23] or cuboidal room structure [18]. While there
has been success in determining how to apply these constraints, the problem of which constraints to apply is much
less explored, especially in the case of completely new
objects. Used inappropriately, scene understanding methods produce either unconstrained results [10, 14] in which
walls that should be flat bend arbitrarily or planar interpretations [15, 33] in which non-planar objects like lamps are
flat. Shape attributes can act as a generic way of representing top-down properties for 3D understanding, sharing with
classical attributes the advantage of both learning and application across multiple object classes.
There are two natural questions to ask: what 3D attributes should be inferred, and how to infer them? In Section 3, we introduce our attribute vocabulary, which draws
inspiration from and revisits past work in both the computer
and the human vision literature. We return to these ideas
with modern computer vision tools. In particular, as we describe in Section 5, we use Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) to model this mapping and learn a model over all
11516

