The SYNTHIA Dataset: A Large Collection of Synthetic Images for Semantic
Segmentation of Urban Scenes
German Ros†‡ , Laura Sellart† , Joanna Materzynska§ , David Vazquez† , Antonio M. Lopez†‡
†

Computer Vision Center
Edifici O,
Campus UAB
Barcelona, Spain

‡

Computer Science Dept.
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona
Campus UAB
Barcelona, Spain

§

Faculty of Mathematics,
University of Vienna
Oskar-Morgenstern-Platz
Vienna, Austria

{gros, laura.sellart, dvazquez, antonio}@cvc.uab.es, a1248555@unet.univie.ac.at
Sky
Building
Road
Sidewalk
Fence
Vegetation
Pole
Marking
Car
Sign
Pedestrian
Cyclist

Figure. 1. The SYNTHIA Dataset. A sample frame (Left) with its semantic labels (center) and a general view of the city (right).
Sky

Building
Road

Sidewalk
Fence

Vegetation
Pole

Marking
Car

Sign

Pedestrian
Cyclist

Abstract
Vision-based semantic segmentation in urban scenarios is
a key functionality for autonomous driving. Recent revolutionary results of deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) foreshadow the advent of reliable classifiers to perform such visual tasks. However, DCNNs require learning
of many parameters from raw images; thus, having a sufficient amount of diverse images with class annotations is
needed. These annotations are obtained via cumbersome,
human labour which is particularly challenging for semantic segmentation since pixel-level annotations are required.
In this paper, we propose to use a virtual world to automatically generate realistic synthetic images with pixel-level
annotations. Then, we address the question of how useful
such data can be for semantic segmentation – in particular, when using a DCNN paradigm. In order to answer this
question we have generated a synthetic collection of diverse
urban images, named SYNTHIA, with automatically generated class annotations. We use SYNTHIA in combination
with publicly available real-world urban images with manually provided annotations. Then, we conduct experiments
with DCNNs that show how the inclusion of SYNTHIA in the
training stage significantly improves performance on the semantic segmentation task.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving (AD) will be one of the most revolutionary technologies in the near future in terms of the
impact on the lives of citizens of the industrialized countries [43]. Nowadays, advanced driver assistance systems
(ADAS) are already improving traffic safety. The computer
vision community, among others, is contributing to the development of ADAS and AD due to the rapidly increasing
performance of vision-based tools such as object detection,
recognition of traffic signs, road segmentation, etc. At the
core of such functionality are various types of classifiers.
Roughly until the end of the first decade of this century,
the design of classifiers for recognizing visual phenomena
was viewed as a two-fold problem. First, enormous effort
was invested in research of discriminative visual descriptors to be fed as features to classifiers; as a result, descriptors such as Haar wavelets, SIFT, LBP, or HOG, were born
and there use became widespread. Second, many different machine learning methods were developed, with disAcknowledgements: Authors want to thank Andrew Bagdanov for
his help and proofreading and the next funding bodies: the Spanish MEC
Project TRA2014-57088-C2-1-R, the Spanish DGT Project SPIP201401352, the People Programme (Marie Curie Actions) FP7/2007-2013 REA
grant agreement no. 600388, and by the Agency of Competitiveness for
Companies of the Government of Catalonia, ACCIO, the Generalitat de
Catalunya Project 2014-SGR-1506 and the NVIDIA Corporation for the
generous support in the form of different GPU hardware units.

4321
3234

