Spatially Binned ROC: A Comprehensive Saliency Metric
Calden Wloka, John Tstotsos
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department
York University, Toronto
calden@cse.yorku.ca, tsotsos@cse.yorku.ca

Abstract
A recent trend in saliency algorithm development is
large-scale benchmarking and algorithm ranking with
ground truth provided by datasets of human fixations. In
order to accommodate the strong bias humans have toward
central fixations, it is common to replace traditional ROC
metrics with a shuffled ROC metric which uses randomly
sampled fixations from other images in the database as the
negative set. However, the shuffled ROC introduces a number of problematic elements, including a fundamental assumption that it is possible to separate visual salience and
image spatial arrangement.
We argue that it is more informative to directly measure the effect of spatial bias on algorithm performance
rather than try to correct for it. To capture and quantify
these known sources of bias, we propose a novel metric
for measuring saliency algorithm performance: the spatially binned ROC (spROC). This metric provides direct insight into the spatial biases of a saliency algorithm without
sacrificing the intuitive raw performance evaluation of traditional ROC measurements. By quantitatively measuring
the bias in saliency algorithms, researchers will be better
equipped to select and optimize the most appropriate algorithm for a given task. We use a baseline measure of
inherent algorithm bias to show that Adaptive Whitening
Saliency (AWS) [14], Attention by Information Maximization (AIM) [8], and Dynamic Visual Attention (DVA) [20]
provide the least spatially biased results, suiting them for
tasks in which there is no information about the underlying spatial bias of the stimuli, whereas algorithms such as
Graph Based Visual Saliency (GBVS) [18] and ContextAware Saliency (CAS) [15] have a significant inherent central bias.

tion selection [27], and heavily influenced by Treisman and
Gelade’s Feature Integration Theory [46]. One of the earliest and most popular saliency map models, referred to here
as IKN, was developed by Itti et al. [21]. Since then an
enormous variety of saliency map models have been developed and refined; the unifying feature of these disparate
algorithms is the assignment of a conspicuity value to every location within a visual scene. A visual element which
has a higher conspicuity value is something which can be
considered interesting or important, and indicates a visual
location which is worthy of allocating further processing
resources. Examples of subsequently developed saliency
algorithms include those based on information theory and
sparse coding [8, 20], Bayesian reasoning over learned features [52], graph-based approaches [18], spectral analysis
[19, 42], and machine learning techniques combined with
pre-chosen object detectors (such as face detection) to create a salience classifier [25].

1. Introduction

In addition to a rapidly expanding set of approaches, the
concept of saliency has grown beyond just attentional gating and has been applied to a number of additional areas.
The broadest category of models are largely still focused
on understanding how humans allocate fixations when freeviewing scenes (e.g. [8, 18]). More recently, some algorithms forgo any modeling of the underlying computational
structure of overt human attention and instead focus solely
on predicting where in an image humans will fixate with
the greatest possible accuracy (e.g. [25, 22]). Although potentially less informative to neuroscientists and psychologists interested in attentional eye movements, the focus on
performance is motivated by potential commercial applications such as fixation-guided heterogeneous image compression [17]. Additionally, a third avenue of saliency research seeks to develop a system useful for prioritizing attentional resources (irrespective of human performance) for
tasks such as mobile robot navigation [39, 10] and robotic
visual search [37].

Saliency map algorithms are a popular class of algorithm originally designed to provide bottom-up attentional
gating based on Koch and Ullman’s architecture for atten-

A continuing challenge in saliency modeling is the formulation of fair and informative metrics with which to evaluate and compare different saliency algorithms. Over the
1525

