Rotational Crossed-Slit Light Fields
Nianyi Li1
Haiting Lin1
Bilin Sun1
Mingyuan Zhou1
Jingyi Yu2,1
1
University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA. {nianyi,haiting,sunbilin,mzhou}@eecis.udel.edu
2
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China. yujy1@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Light ﬁelds (LFs) are image-based representation that
records the radiance along all rays along every direction
through every point in space. Traditionally LFs are acquired by using a 2D grid of evenly spaced pinhole cameras
or by translating a pinhole camera along the 2D grid using
a robot arm. In this paper, we present a novel LF sampling
scheme by exploiting a special non-centric camera called
the crossed-slit or XSlit camera. An XSlit camera acquires
rays that simultaneously pass through two oblique slits. We
show that, instead of translating the camera as in the pinhole case, we can effectively sample the LF by rotating individual or both slits while keeping the camera ﬁxed. This
leads a “ﬁxed-location” LF acquisition scheme. We further
show through theoretical analysis and experiments that the
resulting XSlit LFs provide several advantages: they provide more dense spatial-angular sampling, are amenable
multi-view stereo matching and volumetric reconstruction,
and can synthesize unique refocusing effects.

1. Introduction
Light ﬁelds are image-based representation that records
the amount of light (radiance) falling in every direction
through every point in space. The original light ﬁeld representation can be described using the 5D plenoptic function
(3D for location and 2D for directions). If we assume that
the radiance remains constant from point to point along the
ray, the plenoptic ﬁeld is redundant in one dimension and
it is possible to describe the light ﬁeld using a 4D representation. Most notable example for representation such a
4D function is to use the two-plane parametrization or 2PP
where a pair of parallel planes Πst and Πuv are given in
prior 3D space and each ray is represented by its intersection with the planes as (s, t, u, v) [13].
One of the most important tasks in image-based modeling and later computational photography and imaging is to
conduct efﬁcient sampling of the 4D light ﬁeld. Early examples include capturing the scene using a camera array. The
MIT LF camera array uses a grid of 64 1.3 megapixel usb

LF schemes

sensor

ș
ș

slit 1

slit 2

slit 1
slit 2

Sub-Xslit images

șN

șk

ș1

Figure 1. Acquiring a Rotational XSlit Light Field (LF). Top left:
The XSlit camera. Top right: The slit rotation scheme. Bottom
right: Sample acquired views. Bottom left: Dynamic refocusing
effects.

webcams whereas the Stanford array is a two-dimensional
grid composed of 128 1.3 megapixel Firewire cameras. At
each camera location (s, t), it samples a uv slice that corresponds the image captured camera. Yu and McMillan
[27] have shown that each sampled image actually corresponds to a 2D planar slice in the 4D ﬁeld. The camera
array, in essence, samples the 4D space using a sequence
of 2D slices. More recent designs such as the light ﬁeld
camera [16] follows the same sampling strategy using a microlenslet array. Compared with the camera array, they can
sample more densely on the st dimension due to small microlenslet baselines but sacriﬁces the uv resolution.
In this paper, we demonstrate an alternative LF sampling
scheme. Speciﬁcally, we exploit the non-centric crossedslit or XSlit camera for acquiring the LF. An XSlit camera
captures rays that simultaneously pass through two oblique
(neither parallel nor intersecting) slits in 3D space [30]. If
the two slits are parallel to the 2PP, the captured rays lie on a
2D planar surface in the 4D ray space [24]. In fact, the pin14405

