Homography Estimation from the Common Self-polar Triangle of Separate
Ellipses
Haifei Huang1,2 , Hui Zhang2 , and Yiu-ming Cheung1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
2
United International College, BNU-HKBU
{mikehuang,amyzhang}@uic.edu.hk, ymc@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
How to avoid ambiguity is a challenging problem for
conic-based homography estimation. In this paper, we address the problem of homography estimation from two separate ellipses. We find that any two ellipses have a unique
common self-polar triangle, which can provide three line
correspondences. Furthermore, by investigating the location features of the common self-polar triangle, we show
that one vertex of the triangle lies outside of both ellipses,
while the other two vertices lies inside the ellipses separately. Accordingly, one more line correspondence can be
obtained from the intersections of the conics and the common self-polar triangle. Therefore, four line correspondences can be obtained based on the common self-polar
triangle, which can provide enough constraints for the homography estimation. The main contributions in this paper
include: (1) A new discovery on the location features of
the common self-polar triangle of separate ellipses. (2) A
novel approach for homography estimation. Simulate experiments and real experiments are conducted to demonstrate the feasibility and accuracy of our approach.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, homograhy estimation arises in
many situations [6], such as camera calibration [26], 3D
reconstruction [2, 8], visual metrology [15], stereo vision
[16] and scene understanding [1, 17]. The definition of homograhy described in [10] is that a homography is an invertible mapping from P2 to itself such that three points lie
on the same line if and only if their mapped points are also
collinear. The purpose of homography estimation is to find
the mapping matrix. In order to recover the matrix, object
correspondences are needed. Usually, there are three popular types of objects used in homography estimation, which

are points, lines and conics [6]. In this paper, we are interested in conics. Conics are widely used in computer vision [14, 18] due to two reasons: (1) They are well studied
in mathematics and can be represented by a simple matrix.
(2) They can be detected and estimated robustly by existing mature algorithms. In order to estimate homography
from conics, Sugimoto presented a direct conic based homography estimation method in [21], but it requires seven
conic correspondences and it has to solve the problem of
ambiguity by conducting back projection. Later, by considering two conics together, Kannala et al. [13] presented
an algorithm for the minimal case of a pair of conic correspondences, which leads to 4 solutions. In [19], Rothwell et al. showed a straightforward approach based on the
fact that any two conics always intersect in 4 points (real or
complex). Unfortunately, their method has 24 solutions and
involves in solving quartic equations. Especially, they addressed the difficulty in matching points from two separate
ellipses. They pointed out that there is no way to order the
complex points. Even the intersections pairs are complex
conjugate pairs, there are still 8 combinations. On this matter, one might use quasi-affine invariant [25] or use absolute
signature and limit points [9] to distinguish the two complex
conjugate pairs. However, It still results in 4 combinations.
The reason is that for each pair of complex conjugate points,
there are two combinations. In [4], Chum and Matas found
the homograhpy by first order Taylor expansions at two (or
more) points from two or more correspondences of local elliptical features. However, the prerequisite of their method
is that the metric information of at least two point correspondences should be known. In [5], Conomis recovered
the homography by using the pole-polar relationship. Their
approach first finds the correspondences using the common
poles. Further points are computed by intersecting the polar
of the pole with the conic. However, point order is not preserved under pojective transformation. To solve this prob-

1737

