Deep Gaussian Conditional Random Field Network: A Model-based Deep
Network for Discriminative Denoising
Raviteja Vemulapalli
Center for Automation Research, UMIACS
University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
We propose a novel end-to-end trainable deep network
architecture for image denoising based on a Gaussian Conditional Random Field (GCRF) model. In contrast to the
existing discriminative denoising methods that train a separate model for each individual noise level, the proposed
deep network explicitly models the input noise variance and
hence is capable of handling a range of noise levels. Our
deep network, which we refer to as deep GCRF network,
consists of two sub-networks: (i) a parameter generation
network that generates the pairwise potential parameters
based on the noisy input image, and (ii) an inference network whose layers perform the computations involved in
an iterative GCRF inference procedure. We train two deep
GCRF networks (each network operates over a range of
noise levels: one for low input noise levels and one for
high input noise levels) discriminatively by maximizing the
peak signal-to-noise ratio measure. Experiments on Berkeley segmentation and PASCALVOC datasets show that the
proposed approach produces results on par with the stateof-the-art without training a separate network for each individual noise level.

1. Introduction
In the recent past, deep networks have been successfully
used in various image processing and computer vision applications [3, 12, 34]. Their success can be attributed to several factors such as their ability to represent complex inputoutput relationships, feed-forward nature of their inference
(no need to solve an optimization problem during run time),
availability of large training datasets, etc. One of the positive aspects of deep networks is that fairly general architectures composed of fully-connected or convolutional layers have been shown to work reasonably well across a wide
range of applications. However, these general architectures
do not use problem domain knowledge which could be very
helpful in some of the applications.

Oncel Tuzel, Ming-Yu Liu
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories
Cambridge, MA

For example, in the case of image denoising, it has
been recently shown that conventional multilayer perceptrons (MLP) are not very good at handling multiple levels
of input noise [3]. When a single multilayer perceptron was
trained to handle multiple input noise levels (by providing
the noise variance as an additional input to the network),
it produced inferior results compared to the state-of-the-art
BM3D [6] approach. In contrast to this, the EPLL framework of [40], which is a model-based approach, has been
shown to work well across a range of noise levels. These
results suggest that we should work towards bringing deep
networks and model-based approaches together. Motivated
by this, in this work, we propose a new deep network architecture for image denoising based on a Gaussian conditional
random field model. The proposed network explicitly models the input noise variance and hence is capable of handling
a range of noise levels.
Gaussian Markov Random Fields (GMRFs) [29] are
popular models for various structured inference tasks such
as denoising, inpainting, super-resolution and depth estimation, as they model continuous quantities and can be efficiently solved using linear algebra routines. However, the
performance of a GMRF model depends on the choice of
pairwise potential functions. For example, in the case of
image denoising, if the potential functions for neighboring
pixels are homogeneous (i.e., identical everywhere), then
the GMRF model can result in blurred edges and oversmoothed images. Therefore, to improve the performance
of a GMRF model, the pairwise potential function parameters should be chosen according to the image being processed. A GMRF model that uses data-dependent potential
function parameters is referred to as Gaussian Conditional
Random Field (GCRF) [35].
Image denoising using a GCRF model consists of two
steps: a parameter selection step in which the potential
function parameters are chosen based on the input image,
and an inference step in which energy minimization is performed for the chosen parameters. In this work, we propose a novel model-based deep network architecture, which
we refer to as deep GCRF network, by converting both the

4801

