From Keyframes to Key Objects:
Video Summarization by Representative Object Proposal Selection

1

Jingjing Meng1
Hongxing Wang1,2
Junsong Yuan1
Yap-Peng Tan1
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
School of Software Engineering, Chongqing University, China
{jingjing.meng,jsyuan,eyptan}@ntu.edu.sg, ihxwang@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose to summarize a video into a few key objects by selecting representative object proposals generated
from video frames. This representative selection problem
is formulated as a sparse dictionary selection problem, i.e.,
choosing a few representatives object proposals to reconstruct the whole proposal pool. Compared with existing
sparse dictionary selection based representative selection
methods, our new formulation can incorporate object proposal priors and locality prior in the feature space when
selecting representatives. Consequently it can better locate key objects and suppress outlier proposals. We convert
the optimization problem into a proximal gradient problem
and solve it by the fast iterative shrinkage thresholding algorithm (FISTA). Experiments on synthetic data and real
benchmark datasets show promising results of our key object summarization apporach in video content mining and
search. Comparisons with existing representative selection
approaches such as K-mediod, sparse dictionary selection
and density based selection validate that our formulation
can better capture the key video objects despite appearance
variations, cluttered backgrounds and camera motions.

1. Introduction
With videos becoming the biggest big data, there has
been increasing need to summarize, index and browse the
large corpus of video content. As a common practice,
videos are often summarized by keyframes, i.e., a set of
representative video frames [19, 20, 21]. Although such a
keyframe-based summarization can capture the important
scenes, it often does not pick out the key objects from less
informative backgrounds in a video.
In this work, we propose to summarize videos into key
objects instead of keyframes, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Comparing with keyframes, summarizing videos into a collection of key objects can be attractive to many applications.
For example, the summarized key objects can serve as icons

Figure 1: Video summarization by representative object
proposal selection. A pool of object proposals (middle row)
are first generated from video keyframes (top). Representative object proposals (bottom) are selected from the pool to
summarize the video.
to establish a quick impression of the video by telling what
are there. They also provide a small footprint for indexing, browsing and search, e.g., retrieving videos by matching the key objects. Besides object-level summarization
and search, as these key objects are essential components
of higher level semantics in videos, once identified, they
can also be used to recover or help understand more complicated semantics of videos, e.g., tracking candidate objects for spatio-temporal action localization [37], constructing story based video summarization by analyzing the interactions among the key objects [26] and egoncentric analysis [27, 24].
Motivated by the recent successes of category independent object proposals for detection and weekly supervised
learning [14, 7], we propose to summarize videos by object proposals. It has been shown that generating multiple
overlapping object proposals in general provides more accurate object regions than segmentation by sidestepping the
harder problem of full segmentation [47, 1]. Start with a
pool of frame-level object proposals produced by a high recall object proposal method [47], we formulate video sum11039

