Recombinator Networks: Learning Coarse-to-Fine Feature Aggregation
Sina Honari1 , Jason Yosinski2 , Pascal Vincent1,4 , Christopher Pal3
1
University of Montreal, 2 Cornell University, 3 Ecole Polytechnique of Montreal, 4 CIFAR
1

{honaris, vincentp}@iro.umontreal.ca, 2 yosinski@cs.cornell.edu, 3 christopher.pal@polymtl.ca

Abstract
Deep neural networks with alternating convolutional,
max-pooling and decimation layers are widely used in state
of the art architectures for computer vision. Max-pooling
purposefully discards precise spatial information in order
to create features that are more robust, and typically organized as lower resolution spatial feature maps. On some
tasks, such as whole-image classification, max-pooling derived features are well suited; however, for tasks requiring
precise localization, such as pixel level prediction and segmentation, max-pooling destroys exactly the information required to perform well. Precise localization may be preserved by shallow convnets without pooling but at the expense of robustness. Can we have our max-pooled multilayered cake and eat it too? Several papers have proposed
summation and concatenation based methods for combining upsampled coarse, abstract features with finer features
to produce robust pixel level predictions. Here we introduce another model — dubbed Recombinator Networks —
where coarse features inform finer features early in their
formation such that finer features can make use of several
layers of computation in deciding how to use coarse features. The model is trained once, end-to-end and performs
better than summation-based architectures, reducing the error from the previous state of the art on two facial keypoint
datasets, AFW and AFLW, by 30% and beating the current
state-of-the-art on 300W without using extra data. We improve performance even further by adding a denoising prediction model based on a novel convnet formulation.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in computer vision has been driven by
the use of large convolutional neural networks. Such networks benefit from alternating convolution and pooling layers [16, 23, 22, 29, 24, 27, 42] where the pooling layers
serve to summarize small regions of the layer below. The
operations of convolution, followed by max-pooling, then
decimation cause features in subsequent layers of the network to be increasingly translation invariant, more robust,
and to more coarsely summarize progressively larger re-

gions of the input image. As a result, features in the fourth
or fifth convolutional layer serve as more robust detectors
of more global, but spatially imprecise high level patterns
like text or human faces [37]. In practice these properties
are critical for many visual tasks, and they have been particularly successful at enabling whole image classification
[16, 29, 24]. However, for other types of vision tasks these
architectural elements are not as well suited. For example
on tasks requiring pixel-precise localization or labeling, features arising from max-pooling and decimation operations
can only provide approximate localization, as in the process of creating them, the network has already thrown out
precise spatial information by design. If we wish to generate features that preserve accurate localization, we may do
so using shallow networks without max-pooling, but shallow networks without pooling cannot learn robust, invariant
features. What we would like is to have our cake and eat
it too: to combine the best of both worlds, merging finelylocalized information from shallow, non-pooled networks
with robust, coarsely-localized features computed by deep,
pooled networks.
Several recently proposed approaches [17, 13, 31] address this by adding or concatenating the features obtained
across multiple levels. We use this approach in our baseline model termed SumNet for our task of interest: facial
keypoint localization. To the best of our knowledge this
is the first time this general approach has been applied to
the problem of facial keypoint localization and even our
baseline is capable of yielding state of the art results. A
possible weakness of these approaches however is that all
detection paths, from coarsely to finely localized features,
only become aggregated at the very end of the feature processing pipeline. As a thought experiment to illustrate this
approach’s weakness, imagine that we have a photo of a
boat floating in the ocean and would like to train a convnet to predict with single pixel accuracy a keypoint corresponding to the tip of the boat’s bow. Coarsely localized features1 could highlight the rough region of the bow
of the boat, and finely localized features could be tuned to
1 From now on we use the shorthand fine/coarse features to mean
finely/coarsely localized features.

5743

