Geometry-Informed Material Recognition
Joseph DeGol

Mani Golparvar-Fard
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Derek Hoiem

{degol2, mgolpar, dhoiem}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Our goal is to recognize material categories using images and geometry information. In many applications, such
as construction management, coarse geometry information
is available. We investigate how 3D geometry (surface normals, camera intrinsic and extrinsic parameters) can be
used with 2D features (texture and color) to improve material classification. We introduce a new dataset, GeoMat,
which is the first to provide both image and geometry data
in the form of: (i) training and testing patches that were extracted at different scales and perspectives from real world
examples of each material category, and (ii) a large scale
construction site scene that includes 160 images and over
800,000 hand labeled 3D points. Our results show that
using 2D and 3D features both jointly and independently
to model materials improves classification accuracy across
multiple scales and viewing directions for both material
patches and images of a large scale construction site scene.

1. Introduction
Our goal is to recognize material categories using images
and estimated 3D points. In prior material recognition research, surface geometry is a confounder, and much effort
goes into creating features that are stable under varying perspective (e.g., scale and rotationally invariant features [33])
and lighting. Although the resulting systems often perform
well for standard material/texture datasets [11, 16, 5, 25],
their success does not always translate to improved categorization in natural objects or scenes [22, 12]. However,
for many important applications, 3D surface geometry can
be estimated, rather than marginalized, and used to improve
performance. For example, a ground robot can estimate surface geometry from stereo when identifying navigable terrain. Likewise, when surveying progress in a construction
site, 3D points from LiDAR or structure-from-motion can
help distinguish between concrete and stone to determine
if a facade is in place. In principal, geometric estimates
should help with material classification by revealing surface
orientation and roughness and disambiguating texture cues,
but because surface texture and geometry interact in com-

Figure 1: The material patches shown in column one were
misclassified as the class shown in column three by [8] because the classes are visually similar. However, the geometry (column two and four) for these patches is different.
This paper investigates how to use differences in 3D geometry to improve material classification. We also contribute
the GeoMat dataset consisting of images and geometry for
material patches and a large scale construction site scene.

plex ways, it is not clear how best to take advantage of 3D
points. Can local geometry cues be simply added to existing color/texture features, or do they need to be considered
jointly? Are approaches to improve robustness of texture
descriptors still helpful? Is it helpful to rectify the image
based on surface geometry? Our paper aims to answer these
questions and provide a material recognition approach that
is well-suited to applications for which surface geometry
estimates are available.
We introduce a new dataset of construction materials
photographed in natural outdoor lighting (called “GeoMat”

1554

