Deep Sliding Shapes for Amodal 3D Object Detection in RGB-D Images

Softmax

Conv
3D Box

L1
Smooth

Conv4

Conv
Class

Level 1 object proposal
Receptive field: 0.43 m3

ReLU + Pool

ReLU

Conv 3

Conv 2

ReLU + Pool

Space size: 5.2×5.2×2.5 m3
Receptive field: 0.0253 m3

Conv
Class

Softmax

Conv
3D Box

L1
Smooth

Level 2 object proposal
Receptive field: 1.03 m3

FC Class

Softmax

FC 3D Box

L1 Smooth

FC 3

Concatenation

FC 2

ReLU

2D VGG on ImageNet

FC 1

Conv 3

Conv 2

ReLU + Pool

ReLU + Pool

Conv 1

Figure 1. 3D Amodal Region Proposal Network: Taking a 3D
volume from depth as input, our fully convolutional 3D network
extracts 3D proposals at two scales with different receptive fields.

1. Introduction
Typical object detection predicts the category of an object along with a 2D bounding box on the image plane for
the visible part of the object. While this type of result is useful for some tasks, such as object retrieval, it is rather unsatisfatory for doing any further reasoning grounded in the real
3D world. In this paper, we focus on the task of amodal 3D
object detection in RGB-D images, which aims to produce
an object’s 3D bounding box that gives real-world dimensions at the object’s full extent, regardless of truncation or
occlusion. This kind of recognition is much more useful, for
instance, in the perception-manipulation loop for robotics
applications. But adding a new dimension for prediction
significantly enlarges the search space, and makes the task
much more challenging.
The arrival of reliable and affordable RGB-D sensors
(e.g., Microsoft Kinect) has given us an opportunity to revisit this critical task. However naı̈vely converting 2D detection results to 3D does not work well (see Table 3 and
[10]). To make good use of the depth information, Sliding
Shapes [25] was proposed to slide a 3D detection window
in 3D space. While it is limited by the use of hand-crafted
features, this approach naturally formulates the task in 3D.

Conv 1

We focus on the task of amodal 3D object detection in
RGB-D images, which aims to produce a 3D bounding box
of an object in metric form at its full extent. We introduce
Deep Sliding Shapes, a 3D ConvNet formulation that takes
a 3D volumetric scene from a RGB-D image as input and
outputs 3D object bounding boxes. In our approach, we
propose the first 3D Region Proposal Network (RPN) to
learn objectness from geometric shapes and the first joint
Object Recognition Network (ORN) to extract geometric
features in 3D and color features in 2D. In particular, we
handle objects of various sizes by training an amodal RPN
at two different scales and an ORN to regress 3D bounding
boxes. Experiments show that our algorithm outperforms
the state-of-the-art by 13.8 in mAP and is 200× faster than
the original Sliding Shapes.

ReLU + Pool

Abstract

3D Input

Shuran Song Jianxiong Xiao
Princeton University
http://dss.cs.princeton.edu

Figure 2. Joint Object Recognition Network: For each 3D proposal, we feed the 3D volume from depth to a 3D ConvNet, and
feed the 2D color patch (2D projection of the 3D proposal) to a 2D
ConvNet, to jointly learn object category and 3D box regression.

Alternatively, Depth RCNN [10] takes a 2D approach: detect objects in the 2D image plane by treating depth as extra channels of a color image, then fit a 3D model to the
points inside the 2D detected window by using ICP alignment. Given existing 2D and 3D approaches to the problem, it is natural to ask: which representation is better
for 3D amodal object detection, 2D or 3D? Currently, the
2D-centric Depth RCNN outperforms the 3D-centric Sliding Shapes. But perhaps Depth RCNN’s strength comes
from using a well-designed deep network pre-trained with
ImageNet, rather than its 2D representation. Is it possible
to obtain an elegant but even more powerful 3D formulation
by also leveraging deep learning in 3D?
In this paper, we introduce Deep Sliding Shapes, a complete 3D formulation to learn object proposals and classifiers using 3D convolutional neural networks (ConvNets).
1808

