Discovering the physical parts of an articulated object class from multiple videos
Luca Del Pero1,3
luca.delpero@blippar.com
1

Susanna Ricco2

Rahul Sukthankar2

ricco@google.com

sukthankar@google.com

University of Edinburgh

2

Google Research

Vittorio Ferrari1
3

vferrari@inf.ed.ac.uk

Blippar

Abstract
We propose a motion-based method to discover the physical parts of an articulated object class (e.g. head/torso/leg
of a horse) from multiple videos. The key is to find object regions that exhibit consistent motion relative to the rest of the
object, across multiple videos. We can then learn a location
model for the parts and segment them accurately in the individual videos using an energy function that also enforces
temporal and spatial consistency in part motion. Unlike our
approach, traditional methods for motion segmentation or
non-rigid structure from motion operate on one video at a
time. Hence they cannot discover a part unless it displays
independent motion in that particular video. We evaluate
our method on a new dataset of 32 videos of tigers and
horses, where we significantly outperform a recent motion
segmentation method on the task of part discovery (obtaining roughly twice the accuracy).

1. Introduction
Our goal is to discover the physical parts of an articulated object class (e.g. tiger, horse) from video. By physical
we mean a part that can move independently, for example
the head or the lower leg of an animal. An example of the
output of our method is shown in fig. 1, where video frames
are segmented into regions corresponding to physical parts
(e.g. head, torso, left lower leg).
The main novelty of our approach is the discovery of
parts jointly from multiple videos, by reasoning at a class
level. Our method discovers parts as regions that consistently move independently of the rest of the object across
many videos, which has two advantages. First, we can share
information among objects in different videos: for example, we can discover the legs of a tiger from videos where
it walks, and then transfer them to a video where a different
tiger is just turning its head, and vice versa. Second, we can
establish correspondences across the videos: our method is
aware that the brown regions in the two videos in fig. 1 correspond to the same physical part (the head in this case).
The use of multiple videos distinguishes our approach
from traditional non-rigid structure-from-motion methods,

Figure 1. Physical part discovery from multiple videos. Our
method can segment videos of an articulated object class into regions corresponding to physical parts (e.g. head, torso, left lower
leg). We do not require any prior knowledge of the parts: we
discover them automatically from a set of videos by identifying
regions that consistently move independently of the rest of the object across the videos. This allows to share information, e.g. we
can discover the legs from videos of tigers walking and transfer
them to videos of tigers just turning their head (and vice versa).
Further, it establishes correspondences across videos: note how
our method labeled the corresponding parts in the two videos with
the same color (e.g. head in brown, torso in white).

which try to decompose an articulated object into rigid parts
from the motion field of a single video (e.g. [15, 52]). It
also differs with respect to motion segmentation methods
(e.g. [24, 30]), which segment a single video into regions
with consistent motion (that might correspond to physical
parts). These two classes of methods have one main limitation: they cannot discover a physical part when it is not
moving independently of the others, like the legs in the
video of the tiger just turning its head. Reasoning at a class
level allows us to overcome this limitation: we discover
parts from videos where they move, and transfer them to
videos where they do not.
Our method is weakly supervised. It requires two labels
per video: the object class in it (e.g. tiger), and its dominant viewpoint (e.g. facing left). In order to handle realistic
video, we make these requirements not strict. In the videos
we experiment with, the object is often occluded, it enters
and leaves the screen, and exhibits variations in viewpoint.
We simply require the annotator to label the most frequent
viewpoint in the video.
We treat part discovery as a superpixel labeling problem,
where each label corresponds to a different physical part

714

