Volumetric 3D Tracking by Detection
Chun-Hao Huang ∗1 , Benjamin Allain ∗2 , Jean-Sébastien Franco2 , Nassir Navab1 , Slobodan Ilic1 , and
Edmond Boyer2
1
2

Technische Universität München
Inria, LJK, Univ. Grenoble Alpes

{huangc,ilics,navab}@in.tum.de, {firstname.lastname}@inria.fr

template

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new framework for 3D tracking by detection based on fully volumetric representations.
On one hand, 3D tracking by detection has shown robust
use in the context of interaction (Kinect) and surface tracking. On the other hand, volumetric representations have
recently been proven efficient both for building 3D features
and for addressing the 3D tracking problem. We leverage
these benefits by unifying both families of approaches into
a single, fully volumetric tracking-by-detection framework.
We use a centroidal Voronoi tessellation (CVT) representation to compactly tessellate shapes with optimal discretization, construct a feature space, and perform the tracking
according to the correspondences provided by trained random forests. Our results show improved tracking and training computational efficiency and improved memory performance. This in turn enables the use of larger training
databases than state of the art approaches, which we leverage by proposing a cross-tracking subject training scheme
to benefit from all subject sequences for all tracking situations, thus yielding better detection and less overfitting.

1. Introduction
3D visual shape tracking aims to recover the temporal
evolution of a 3D template shape using visual information.
It finds applications in many domains including computer
vision, graphics, medical imaging, and has proven successful for marker-less motion capture in recent years. A standard tracking process consists in an alternation of the following two steps. First, finding associations from each
primitive of the observed data, e.g. 3D points acquired from
camera systems, to corresponding primitives of the template
3D surface, typically based on the proximity in Euclidean
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this paper.

observations

Figure 1: We represent 3D shapes using centroidal Voronoi
tessellations. The volumetric cells of the observations are
matched to cells of the template.
space (ICP) [5] or a feature space. Second, given such associations, recompute the pose of the template under the
constraint of a deformation model, typically based on kinematic skeletons [14, 20, 24, 27], or the piecewise-rigid assumption [2, 8], among others.
Recently, a number of alternative approaches and enhancements have been explored for both stages independently. On one hand, progress has been made in the deformation stage by introducing volumetric deformation models
instead of purely surface-based ones. Thanks to its inherent
local volume preservation property, this strategy has shown
significantly improved robustness to various tracking situations, such as shape folding and volume bias of observed
shapes. On the other hand, alternatives have also been proposed for the association problem by discovering them discriminatively using machine learning techniques [21, 24].
This in turn yields the possibility for 3D tracking techniques
that are robust to partial tracking failure, while also improving the rate of convergence. Although surface-based features are used in many cases to describe local shapes and
construct the associations, volumetric features have proven
to be a promising direction for 3D shape description with
surface-based templates [16], which we generalize to a fully
volumetric pipeline.
13862

