Answer-Type Prediction for Visual Question Answering
Kushal Kafle and Christopher Kanan∗
Chester F. Carlson Center for Imaging Science
Rochester Institute of Technology
{kk6055, kanan}@rit.edu

Abstract
Recently, algorithms for object recognition and related
tasks have become sufficiently proficient that new vision
tasks can now be pursued. In this paper, we build a system capable of answering open-ended text-based questions
about images, which is known as Visual Question Answering (VQA). Our approach’s key insight is that we can predict the form of the answer from the question. We formulate our solution in a Bayesian framework. When our approach is combined with a discriminative model, the combined model achieves state-of-the-art results on four benchmark datasets for open-ended VQA: DAQUAR, COCO-QA,
The VQA Dataset, and Visual7W.

1. Introduction
Using deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [9],
object recognition systems now rival the abilities of humans
on benchmarks such as the ImageNet Large Scale Visual
Recognition Challenge [16]. Implicitly, these systems ask
the question, “What is the dominant object in this image?”
Similarly, recent captioning methods [2, 21, 19, 7, 3] are
attempting to answer the implicit question “What are the
main entities and activities in the image?” However, often
there are numerous questions that can be answered about an
image beyond recognizing the dominant object or activity.
A natural way to address this is to build a system that is
given an image and a text-based question, and then it outputs a text-based answer. This is known as the open-ended
Visual Question Answering (VQA) problem [1]. VQA requires merging computer vision with natural language processing (NLP). It is especially challenging because models
for VQA need to be implicitly capable of object recognition, object detection, attribute recognition, and more. Until
now, the main obstacle to pursuing the VQA problem was
a lack of datasets containing image-question-answer pairs;
however, five publicly available datasets for VQA became
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1: In the open-ended VQA problem, an algorithm is
given an image and a question, and it must output a string
containing the answer. We obtain state-of-the-art results on
multiple VQA datasets by adopting a Bayesian approach
that incorporates information about the form the answer
should take. In this example, the system is given an image of a bear and it is asked about the color of the bear. Our
method explicitly infers that this is a “color” question and
uses that information in its predictive process.

available in 2015: DAQUAR [11], COCO-QA [15], The
VQA Dataset [1], FM-IQA, and Visual7W [23]. In this paper, we study multiple VQA models and evaluate them on
four of these datasets. Our main contribution is to observe
that when answering a question, it is generally possible to
predict the form the answer will take. For example, for the
question “Is it raining?” a valid answer will be either “yes”
or “no.” The answer will never be “green” or “10.” However, existing models do not have this kind of reasoning explicitly built into them. Incorporating information predicted
about the answer can also potentially improve a model’s internal representation to handle the question.
We first describe a Bayesian framework for VQA that
incorporates answer-type prediction. We then show that we
can use text-based features to predict with greater than 99%
accuracy the form the answer will take for all of the datasets.
We then evaluate and compare our model against methods
from the literature and a discriminative model trained using
14976

