What’s Wrong with that Object? Identifying Images of Unusual Objects by
Modelling the Detection Score Distribution∗
Peng Wang† , Lingqiao Liu‡ , Chunhua Shen‡ , Zi Huang† , Anton van den Hengel‡ , Heng Tao Shen†
†
‡
The University of Queensland, Australia
The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract

D

A

This paper studies the challenging problem of identifying unusual instances of known objects in images within an
“open world” setting. That is, we aim to find objects that
are members of a known class, but which are not typical
of that class. Thus the “unusual object” should be distinguished from both the “regular object” and the “other objects”. Such unusual objects may be of interest in many
applications such as surveillance or quality control. We
propose to identify unusual objects by inspecting the distribution of object detection scores at multiple image regions. The key observation motivating our approach is
that “regular object” images, “unusual object” images and
“other objects” images exhibit different region-level scores
in terms of both the score values and the spatial distributions. To model these distributions we propose to use Gaussian Processes (GP) to construct two separate generative
models, one for the “regular object” and the other for the
“other objects”. More specifically, we design a new covariance function to simultaneously model the detection score at
a single location and the score dependencies between multiple regions. We demonstrate that the proposed approach
outperforms comparable methods on a new large dataset
constructed for the purpose.

1. Introduction
Humans have an innate ability to detect an unusual object, even when they have no experience of the particular
manner in which it is unusual. Mimicking this ability in
computer vision has a range of applications such as surveillance or quality control. Existing studies towards this goal
are usually conducted on small datasets and controlled scenarios i.e., with relatively simple backgrounds [2] or specific type of unusualness [4, 11]. To address this issue, in
this work we present a large dataset which captures more
∗ The first two authors contributed to this work equally. P. Wang’s con-

tribution was made when visiting The University of Adelaide. C. Shen is
the corresponding author (e-mail: chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au). This
work was partially supported by the Data 2 Decsions CRC.

motorbike,
horse,
table …

D
B

AB C

C

D
A

C D

B

A B
C

D

A

C

A BC D

B

Figure 1. Illustration of the method applied to identifying the unusual “bicycle”. By applying a detector trained on “regular bicycles” and “other objects”, we are able to identify the “regular bicycle”, the “unusual bicycle” and the “other object” (a bus in this
case) through analysis of the distribution of the scores of multiple
detectors. The discriminative information lies in both the values
of the detection scores and the spatial dependencies between those
scores, e.g. the score dependency between neighbouring proposals
B and C.

general forms of unusualness, and has more complex backgrounds. Moreover, we adopt a more realistic “open world”
evaluation protocol. That is, we need to distinguish the unusual version of an object-of-interest not only from typical
examples from the same category but also from objects from
other categories.
Humans recognise unusual objects by identifying instances which share the key characteristics of the class, but
not all of the typical incidental characteristics. Images of
unusual objects are thus expected to be more similar to
those of other instances of the same class of objects, than to
those of other objects. Suppose we apply a detector trained
using images of typical examples of a class of object as the
positive data, and images of other objects as the negative
data. The detection scores of the ”unusual object” images
are expected to be less than those of the typical objects of
the same class, but greater than those of objects from other

1573

