What Sparse Light Field Coding Reveals about Scene Structure
Ole Johannsen, Antonin Sulc and Bastian Goldluecke
University of Konstanz

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel method for depth estimation in light fields which employs a specifically designed
sparse decomposition to leverage the depth-orientation relationship on its epipolar plane images. The proposed
method learns the structure of the central view and uses this
information to construct a light field dictionary for which
groups of atoms correspond to unique disparities. This dictionary is then used to code a sparse representation of the
light field. Analyzing the coefficients of this representation
with respect to the disparities of their corresponding atoms
yields an accurate and robust estimate of depth. In addition, if the light field has multiple depth layers, such as for
reflective or transparent surfaces, statistical analysis of the
coefficients can be employed to infer the respective depth of
the superimposed layers.

1. Introduction
In the scope of this work, light fields are dense collections of views of a scene with view point shifting parallel to
the image plane. Image plane coordinates are pairs (x, y),
view point coordinates are pairs (s, t), so a light field is
four-dimensional. Let us look at the structure of such a light
field and its epipolar plane images (EPIs), which are slices
in the (x, s) and (y, t) planes, see figure 1. One can immediately observe that the data exhibits a large amount of
redundancy, as patches in any of the views reappear slightly
shifted in multiple neighbouring views. For a light field
of a Lambertian scene, the amount of shift from one view
to the next depends linearly on the disparity of the patch,
which yields the well-known orientation-depth relationship
on epipolar plane images [2].
This inherently sparse structure of the light field has been
exploited in several lines of research. A natural application is light field compression [15] and compressive sensing [17], where the redundancy is used to generate an efficient light field coding scheme or reduce the amount of data
one has to record to capture one. Indeed, the key idea is that
This work was supported by the ERC Starting Grant “Light Field
Imaging and Analysis” (LIA 336978, FP7-2014).

Figure 1. Epipolar plane images (EPIs). The picture shows the
center view of a light field parametrized by image coordinates x
and y. On the bottom and right, the epipolar plane images for the
white lines in the center view are shown, where s and t describe
varying view point coordinates. As the camera moves, 3D scene
points trace straight lines on the EPIs, whose slope is inversely
proportional to the distance of the point [2]. Thus, orientation on
the EPI is related to local depth.

if one knows the depth (and thus disparity) for all of the
points in any of the 2D views, one can perfectly reconstruct
the light field except for occlusions. The latter work [17]
also employs patch dictionaries to learn the 4D structure
and improve reconstruction.
Just like traditional 2D image patch dictionaries [7],
4D light field dictionaries can also be used for regularizing
inverse problems. In particular, these have been employed
for light field denoising and deconvolution, inpainting, and
super-resolution [14]. In [18], they solve similar problems
by modeling light field patches as Gaussian random variables conditioned on disparity to construct a GMM prior.
Similarly to our work, they generate patches synthetically
based on disparity, but not to create dictionaries. In contrast,
the papers which also explicitly employ light field dictionaries [17, 14] learn structure directly on 4D light field patches.
While this allows sparse coding and construction of priors,
it can not be expected that the orientation-depth relationship
on the EPIs is preserved in the atoms.
However, the correspondence between depth and orientation is exactly what has been leveraged in a lot of work on
lightfield-based depth estimation, e.g. [13, 24, 26, 30]. We

3262

