Structure Inference Machines: Recurrent Neural Networks for Analyzing
Relations in Group Activity Recognition
Zhiwei Deng
Arash Vahdat
Hexiang Hu
Greg Mori
School of Computer Science, Simon Fraser University, Canada
{zhiweid, avahdat, hexiangh}@sfu.ca, mori@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract

Scene

CNN

Rich semantic relations are important in a variety of visual recognition problems. As a concrete example, group
activity recognition involves the interactions and relative
spatial relations of a set of people in a scene. State of the art
recognition methods center on deep learning approaches
for training highly effective, complex classifiers for interpreting images. However, bridging the relatively low-level
concepts output by these methods to interpret higher-level
compositional scenes remains a challenge. Graphical models are a standard tool for this task. In this paper, we
propose a method to integrate graphical models and deep
neural networks into a joint framework. Instead of using a
traditional inference method, we use a sequential inference
modeled by a recurrent neural network. Beyond this, the
appropriate structure for inference can be learned by imposing gates on edges between nodes. Empirical results on
group activity recognition demonstrate the potential of this
model to handle highly structured learning tasks.

1. Introduction
Relations between image entities are an important facet
of higher-level visual understanding. Building relationships, such as the spatial distance between people in a scene,
their relative motions, or concurrent actions can be used to
drive recognition of higher-level activities. Models for interpreting such scenes require the need to accurately interpret image cues, determine relevant relations between entities, and infer the properties of these relations.
In this paper we present a general-purpose method for
this task, illustrated in Fig. 1. The method builds upon deep
networks for image analysis, endowing these networks with
the ability to reason over structures and relationships. This
is accomplished by building higher-level recurrent networks
that equip the model with the ability to perform inference
over lower-level network outputs, including learning structures that are effective for higher-level tasks.
We ground the work by developing specific models for

Person
CNN

Structure
Inference Machine

Scene Person Relationship

Structure
Inference Machine

Waiting?

Walking?

Waiting

Waiting
Waiting

Waiting

Waiting

Walking

Structure
Inference Machine

Waiting

Walking

Waiting

Walking

Figure 1. Structure learning in a deep network. Analyzing group
activity requires reasoning about relations between the actions of
individual people. Our structure inference machine iteratively reasons about which people in a scene are interacting and which are
involved in a group activity.

group activity analysis. Group activity analysis involves
reasoning over individual people in a scene and considering
their relations. Multiple people in a scene could either be
performing the same action at the same time, or have varied
actions and interactions that compose a collective activity.
Effective models need to jointly consider the rich relations
between components of visual appearance.
Standard approaches to this problem utilize graphical
models to encode spatial relations and interactions. Recent
work in this vein includes Choi et al. [8], who discover subgroups of interacting people. Lan et al. [26] proposed a
hierarchical graphical model that considers the interactions
on the social role level. Hajimirsadeghi and Mori [16] proposed a gradient boosting training method. Amer et al. [1]
adopted a HiRF model to perform recognition and detection
simultaneously.
On another track, deep learning has proven successful
in many computer vision applications, such as image clas14772

