Principled Parallel Mean-Field Inference for Discrete Random Fields
Pierre Baqué1∗

Timur Bagautdinov1∗
François Fleuret1,2
1
CVLab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
2
IDIAP, Martigny, Switzerland

Pascal Fua1

{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Mean-field variational inference is one of the most popular approaches to inference in discrete random fields. Standard mean-field optimization is based on coordinate descent
and in many situations can be impractical. Thus, in practice, various parallel techniques are used, which either rely
on ad hoc smoothing with heuristically set parameters, or
put strong constraints on the type of models.
In this paper, we propose a novel proximal gradientbased approach to optimizing the variational objective. It
is naturally parallelizable and easy to implement.
We prove its convergence, and demonstrate that, in practice, it yields faster convergence and often finds better optima than more traditional mean-field optimization techniques. Moreover, our method is less sensitive to the choice
of parameters.

1. Introduction
Many Computer Vision problems, ranging from image
segmentation to depth estimation from stereo, can be naturally formulated in terms of Conditional Random Fields
(CRFs). Solving these problems then requires either estimating the most probable state of the CRF, or the marginal
distributions over the unobserved variables. Since there are
many such variables, it is usually impossible to get an exact
answer, and one must instead look for an approximation.
Mean-field variational inference [33] is one of the most
effective ways to do approximate inference and has become
increasingly popular in our field [29, 32, 24]. It involves
introducing a variational distribution that is a product of
terms, typically one per hidden variable. These terms are
then estimated by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence between the variational and the true posterior.
The standard scheme is to iteratively update each factor
of the distribution one-by-one. This is guaranteed to converge [5, 21], but is not very scalable, because all variables
have to be updated sequentially. It becomes impractical for
∗

The authors contributed equally.

input

baseline

ours

ground truth

Figure 1. First two rows: VOC2012 images in which we outperform a baseline by adding simple co-ocurrence terms, which
our optimization scheme, unlike earlier ones, can handle. Bottom
row: Our scheme also allows us to improve upon a baseline for
the purpose of recovering a character from its corrupted version.

realistically-sized problems when there are substantial interactions between the variables. This can be remedied by
replacing the sequential updates by parallel ones, often at
the cost of failing to converge.
It has nonetheless recently been shown that parallel updates could be done in a provably convergent way for pairwise CRFs, provided that the potentials are concave [24].
When they are not, an ad hoc heuristic designed to achieve
convergence, which essentially smooths steps by averaging between the next and current iterate, has been used
over the years. This heuristic is mentioned explicitly in
some works [30, 7, 14], or used implicitly in optimization
schemes [13, 32] by introducing an additional damping parameter.
However, a formal justification for such smoothing is
never provided, which we do in this paper. More specifically, we show that, by damping in the natural parameter
space instead of the mean-parameter one, we can reformulate the optimization scheme as a specific form of proximal gradient descent. This yields a theoretically sound
and practical way to chose the damping parameters, which
guarantees convergence, no matter the shape of the potentials. When they are attractive, we show that our approach is
equivalent to that of [24]. However, even when they are re-

5848

