Hedged Deep Tracking
Yuankai Qi† Shengping Zhang† Lei Qin♭ Hongxun Yao† Qingming Huang†,♮ Jongwoo Lim⋄ Ming-Hsuan Yang§
†
Harbin Institute of Technology ♭ Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
♮
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences ⋄ Hanyang University § University of California at Merced
qykshr@gmail.com

s.zhang@hit.edu.cn

qmhuang@jdl.ac.cn

qinlei@ict.ac.cn

jlim@hanyang.ac.kr

h.yao@hit.edu.cn

mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
In recent years, several methods have been developed to
utilize hierarchical features learned from a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) for visual tracking. However,
as features from a certain CNN layer characterize an object of interest from only one aspect or one level, the performance of such trackers trained with features from one
layer (usually the second to last layer) can be further improved. In this paper, we propose a novel CNN based tracking framework, which takes full advantage of features from
different CNN layers and uses an adaptive Hedge method
to hedge several CNN based trackers into a single stronger
one. Extensive experiments on a benchmark dataset of 100
challenging image sequences demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed algorithm compared to several state-of-theart trackers.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking has become a topic of increasing interest over the past couple of decades due to its importance
in numerous applications, such as intelligent video surveillance, vehicle navigation, and human-computer interaction.
Despite significant efforts put into developing algorithms [20, 22, 14, 36, 9, 38, 32, 37, 39, 35] and benchmark evaluations [34, 27] for visual tracking, it is still a challenging task due to complicated interfering factors like heavy
illumination changes, shape deformation, partial and full occlusion, large scale variations, in-plane and out-of-plane
rotations, and fast motion, to name a few.
Most existing tracking approaches focus on either designing effective decision models [13, 12, 16, 40] or extracting robust features [6, 24, 41, 1]. Recently, inspired by
the success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
in object recognition and detection [26, 15, 21, 11], several
CNN based trackers [30, 18, 9, 25] have been developed.
Empirical studies using a large object tracking benchmark
show that the performance of CNN based trackers surpasses

Figure 1. Tracking results of using CNN features from different
convolutional layers on a representative frame of four sequences
with diverse challenges. The best tracking results are obtained
using layers 12, 16, 10, and 10 on four sequences, respectively.

that of hand-crafted features such as HOG [6], SIFT [24],
and color histogram [28, 1].
Despite achieving state-of-the-art performance, existing
CNN based trackers still have some limitations. Most of
these methods represent target objects only using features
from very last layers (e.g., fully-connected layers) of CNNs, which capture rich category-level semantic information, and therefore are useful for object classification. However, features from last layers are not optimal for visual
tracking as they do not capture spatial details of the tracked
target. These details, captured by first layers, are crucial
to visual tracking, as they allow for accurate localization of
targets, as shown in the last two rows of Figure 1. On the
other hand, as features from first layers are more generic
than discriminative as ones from last layers, methods based
on features from first layers are likely to fail in challenging scenarios, as shown in the first two rows of Figure 1.
To achieve better tracking performances, it is imperative to
combine features from different layers to best represent and

4303

