Aggregating Image and Text Quantized Correlated Components
Thi Quynh Nhi Tran
CEA, LIST and CEDRIC-CNAM
thiquynhnhi.tran@cea.fr

Hervé Le Borgne
CEA, LIST
Gif-sur-Yvette, France

Michel Crucianu
CEDRIC-CNAM
Paris, France

herve.le-borgne@cea.fr

michel.crucianu@cnam.fr

Abstract
Cross-modal tasks occur naturally for multimedia content that can be described along two or more modalities like
visual content and text. Such tasks require to “translate” information from one modality to another. Methods like kernelized canonical correlation analysis (KCCA) attempt to
solve such tasks by finding aligned subspaces in the description spaces of different modalities. Since they favor correlations against modality-specific information, these methods
have shown some success in both cross-modal and bi-modal
tasks. However, we show that a direct use of the subspace
alignment obtained by KCCA only leads to coarse translation abilities. To address this problem, we first put forward a new representation method that aggregates information provided by the projections of both modalities on their
aligned subspaces. We further suggest a method relying on
neighborhoods in these subspaces to complete uni-modal
information. Our proposal exhibits state-of-the-art results
for bi-modal classification on Pascal VOC07 and improves
it by over 60% for cross-modal retrieval on FlickR 8K/30K.

1. Introduction
An increasing number of multimedia documents are described along two or more modalities that convey partly
common and partly complementary information. This gives
the opportunity to devise rich multimedia representations
that support both multi-modal and cross-modal tasks. For
example, images have a visual content but may also have
associated textual data (keywords or sentences). In bimodal image classification, visual and textual content are
employed together for solving the task. Cross-modal tasks
like text illustration or image annotation require instead to
“translate” information from one modality to another.
Simple fusion approaches such as early fusion (i.e. concatenation of visual and textual features) have been extensively employed, with some success, in bi-modal tasks.

document
img
txt
text feature
space

image feature
space
KCCA

space of correlated components, quantized

Figure 1. Visual and textual contents of a document are projected
onto a common space that has been previously quantized. Both
points, corresponding to the same document, are encoded according to a common vocabulary before their aggregation.

But to address cross-modal tasks it was necessary to devise methods that are able to link the two modalities more
closely. This is accomplished through the development of a
common, latent representation space resulting from a maximization of the relatedness between the different modalities. The methods typically rely on Canonical Correlation
Analysis or its kernel extension [10, 14, 5, 9] and on deep
learning [20, 26, 8, 7, 18, 27].
Given a set of documents described along two different
modalities like image and text, Kernel Canonical Correlation Analysis (KCCA) aims to find maximally correlated
manifolds in the feature spaces associated to the two modalities. These manifolds are seen as a common space, where
each multimedia document is represented by the two projections of its visual and respectively textual features. This approach was shown to be quite effective [10, 14, 12, 5, 9] and

2046

