Temporal Multimodal Learning in Audiovisual Speech Recognition
Di Hu∗ , Xuelong Li† , Xiaoqiang Lu†
∗
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, P. R. China
†
Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Xi’an 710119, P. R. China
hdui831@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, xuelong li@opt.ac.cn, luxiaoqiang@opt.ac.cn

Abstract
In view of the advantages of deep networks in producing useful representation, the generated features of different
modality data (such as image, audio) can be jointly learned
using Multimodal Restricted Boltzmann Machines (MRBM). Recently, audiovisual speech recognition based the MRBM has attracted much attention, and the MRBM shows
its effectiveness in learning the joint representation across
audiovisual modalities. However, the built networks have
weakness in modeling the multimodal sequence which is the
natural property of speech signal. In this paper, we will
introduce a novel temporal multimodal deep learning architecture, named as Recurrent Temporal Multimodal RBM (RTMRBM), that models multimodal sequences by transforming the sequence of connected MRBMs into a probabilistic series model. Compared with existing multimodal
networks, it’s simple and efficient in learning temporal joint representation. We evaluate our model on audiovisual
speech datasets, two public (AVLetters and AVLetters2) and
one self-build. The experimental results demonstrate that
our approach can obviously improve the accuracy of recognition compared with standard MRBM and the temporal
model based on conditional RBM. In addition, RTMRBM
still outperforms non-temporal multimodal deep networks
in the presence of the weakness of long-term dependencies.

1. Introduction
Robust Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) has been
the key to the natural human-computer interfaces in most
cases, but it’s challenged by the noisy environments. One
example of such an environment is street, where the traffic noise makes it very hard for recognizing the speech.
Considering that vision is free of audio noise and can provide complemental information to audio in the noisy condi-

Frame 1

Frame 2

Frame N

Mouth Lip

Mouth Lip

Mouth Lip

...
Joint Representation

Joint Representation

Sound Spectrogram

Sound Spectrogram

Joint Representation

...

Sound Spectrogram

Figure 1: The sequence of audio and visual frames, where
the joint representation across audiovisual modalities in current frame depends on the former. This directed graphical
model is proposed to model temporal multimodal sequences
in this paper.

tion [10], even clean environment, researchers have paid attention to the Audiovisual Speech Recognition (AVSR) that
makes use of the information from both audio and visual
modalities. And the proposed several types of AVSR models have shown that they indeed have certain improvement
over the ASR based on only audio [1, 10, 13].
In the past decades of years, several approaches have
been proposed to fuse the speech information from the audio and visual modalities [5, 6, 14]. However, on account
of the different statistical properties between the modalities [20], it’s difficult to capture patterns across them. Recent works on deep learning [9, 16, 17] have verified the
efficiency of deep networks in producing useful representations for various kinds of data, such as image, audio and
text. It can be expected to explore the highly correlated
representation across modalities after learning each channel
data with single deep network. Based on this, multimodal
deep networks have been proposed to jointly learn the generated features of different modalities and obtained state-of-

3574

