Anticipating Visual Representations from Unlabeled Video
Carl Vondrick Hamed Pirsiavash†
Antonio Torralba
Massachusetts Institute of Technology †University of Maryland, Baltimore County
{vondrick,torralba}@mit.edu hpirsiav@umbc.edu
Abstract
Anticipating actions and objects before they start or appear is a difficult problem in computer vision with several
real-world applications. This task is challenging partly
because it requires leveraging extensive knowledge of the
world that is difficult to write down. We believe that a
promising resource for efficiently learning this knowledge
is through readily available unlabeled video. We present a
framework that capitalizes on temporal structure in unlabeled video to learn to anticipate human actions and objects. The key idea behind our approach is that we can train
deep networks to predict the visual representation of images
in the future. Visual representations are a promising prediction target because they encode images at a higher semantic level than pixels yet are automatic to compute. We then
apply recognition algorithms on our predicted representation to anticipate objects and actions. We experimentally
validate this idea on two datasets, anticipating actions one
second in the future and objects five seconds in the future.

1. Introduction
What action will the man do next in Figure 1 (left)? A
key problem in computer vision is to create machines that
anticipate actions and objects in the future, before they appear or start. This predictive capability would enable several real-world applications. For example, robots can use
predictions of human actions to make better plans and interactions [18]. Recommendation systems can suggest products or services based on what they anticipate a person will
do. Predictive models can also find abnormal situations in
surveillance videos, and alert emergency responders.
Unfortunately, developing an algorithm to anticipate the
future is challenging. Humans can rely on extensive knowledge accumulated over their lifetime to infer that the man
will soon shake hands in Figure 1. How do we give machines access to this knowledge?
We believe that a promising resource to train predictive models are abundantly available unlabeled videos. Although lacking ground truth annotations, they are attractive

xt

Time

xt+1

a) Unlabeled
Video

φ(xt )
φ(xt+1 )
b) Feature
Space
(d dim)

Figure 1: Predicting Representations: In this paper, we
explore how to anticipate human actions and objects by
learning from unlabeled video. We propose to anticipate
the visual representation of frames in the future. We can
apply recognition algorithms on the predicted representation to forecast actions and objects.
for prediction because they are economical to obtain at massive scales yet still contain rich signals. Videos come with
the temporal ordering of frames “for free”, which is a valuable asset for forecasting.
However, how to leverage unlabeled video to anticipate high-level concepts is unclear. Pioneering work in
computer vision has capitalized on unlabeled videos before to visualize the future [31, 36, 39] and predict motions [28, 40, 43]. Unfortunately, these self-supervised
approaches are not straightforward to apply for anticipating semantics because, unlike pixels or motions, concepts
are not readily accessible in unlabeled video. Methods
that anticipate concepts have typically required supervision
[16, 21, 12], which is expensive to scale.
In this paper, we propose a method to anticipate concepts in the future by learning from unlabeled video. Recent
progress in computer vision has built rich visual representations [6, 32, 44]. Rather than predict pixels or depend on
supervision, our main idea is to forecast visual representations of future frames. Since these representations contain
1 98

