Estimating Correspondences of Deformable Objects “In-the-wild”
Yuxiang Zhou⋆

Epameinondas Antonakos⋆
Joan Alabort-i-Medina⋆
Anastasios Roussos⋆
Stefanos Zafeiriou⋆,†
⋆
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, U.K.
†
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Finland

{yuxiang.zhou10, e.antonakos, ja310, troussos, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
During the past few years we have witnessed the development of many methodologies for building and fitting Statistical Deformable Models (SDMs). The construction of
accurate SDMs requires careful annotation of images with
regards to a consistent set of landmarks. However, the manual annotation of a large amount of images is a tedious,
laborious and expensive procedure. Furthermore, for several deformable objects, e.g. human body, it is difficult to
define a consistent set of landmarks, and, thus, it becomes
impossible to train humans in order to accurately annotate
a collection of images. Nevertheless, for the majority of
objects, it is possible to extract the shape by object segmentation or even by shape drawing. In this paper, we show for
the first time, to the best of our knowledge, that it is possible to construct SDMs by putting object shapes in dense
correspondence. Such SDMs can be built with much less
effort for a large battery of objects. Additionally, we show
that, by sampling the dense model, a part-based SDM can
be learned with its parts being in correspondence. We employ our framework to develop SDMs of human arms and
legs, which can be used for the segmentation of the outline
of the human body, as well as to provide better and more
consistent annotations for body joints.

(a) MPII
(b) Fashion
(c) FLIC
Figure 1: Examples of inconsistent annotations of human
pose among different datasets. Blue markers denote the
original annotations. The arrows and green markers show
the correct location at which the points should be annotated.

1. Introduction
Statistical Deformable Models (SDMs) of various objects is a well-studied and popular area in the intersection
of computer vision and machine learning [26, 24, 43, 54,
14, 64, 60]. Recently, we have witnessed tremendous developments on SDMs of human faces and bodies trained
with images that are captured under unconstrained conditions, usually referred to as “in-the-wild” [14, 21, 64, 60,
11, 59, 12, 35, 2, 63, 8, 9, 3, 57]. This is attributed to:

Figure 2: Comparison of the standard landmark annotation
(red dots) with the curve annotation (blue lines) on arms,
ears and faces. It is evident that the curve annotations surpass the inevitable inconsistency of sparse annotations.

• The abundance of complex visual data, spread through
web services (e.g. Youtube, Flickr, Google Images),

which has led to the development of “in-the-wild”
databases of human faces and bodies [14, 37, 64, 20].

5791

