Scene Labeling Using Sparse Precision Matrix
Nasim Souly
Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision (CRCV), University of Central Florida (UCF)
nsouly@eecs.ucf.edu, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation, assigning a label to each
pixel of an image, is a classic and challenging task in computer vision, due to the efforts needed to simultaneously
segment and recognize the image regions. One of the
widely used approaches to address this problem is to exploit
MAP (maximum a posteriori) inference in a multi-class
conditional random field (CRF). This is the extension of the
binary CRF, which has been widely used to find foregroundbackground in images. Common CRF models are defined
over pixels, patches or super-pixels of the image. These
models generally comprise of the unary or association potential, which measures how likely a pixel (or a super-pixel)
can be assigned a particular label without taking into account the properties of other parts of the image, and the
smoothing or interaction potential, which assesses (evalu-

Classify
segments

Scene labeling task is to segment the image into meaningful regions and categorize them into classes of objects
which comprised the image. Commonly used methods typically find the local features for each segment and label them
using classifiers. Afterwards, labeling is smoothed in order
to make sure that neighboring regions receive similar labels. However, these methods ignore expressive connections
between labels and non-local dependencies among regions.
In this paper, we propose to use a sparse estimation of precision matrix (also called concentration matrix), which is
the inverse of covariance matrix of data obtained by graphical lasso to find interaction between labels and regions. To
do this, we formulate the problem as an energy minimization over a graph, whose structure is captured by applying
sparse constraint on the elements of the precision matrix.
This graph encodes (or represents) only significant interactions and avoids a fully connected graph, which is typically
used to reflect the long distance associations. We use local
and global information to achieve better labeling. We assess our approach on three datasets and obtained promising
results.

(b) Ground truth

(a) Sample image

(d) Labels via
Spatial smoothing

Applying Sparse
Graph Structure

c Classifier’s result

(e) Final labels

Figure 1. Given an image, we aim to improve the semantic labels
of the regions, originally miss-labeled by classifiers. (a) shows a
query image, (b) shows the human annotated image (ground truth),
(c) shows labels obtained by classifiers, (d) shows labels via spatial
smoothing and (e) shows our results.

ates) how the labels of the other connected nodes (pixels
or super-pixels) interact to maximize the assignment agreement.
Commonly, the structure of the CRF is specified manually; in images typically a 2D lattice is used to build an
adjacency CRF using the neighboring pixels. However, this
model has two important limitations. First, it is unable to incorporate long-range (long-distance) connections between
different regions of the image. Second, it may not be able
to model the contextual relationships among labels and may
not be capable of capturing the complexity in the labels.
One of the approaches to overcome this problem is to use a
fully connected CRF, in which pair-wise potentials are defined between all pairs of the nodes (pixels or super-pixels).
However, the main limitation of this method is the complexity of the inference. The overwhelming number of edges in

3650

