Patch-based Convolutional Neural Network for Whole Slide Tissue Image
Classification
Le Hou1 , Dimitris Samaras1 , Tahsin M. Kurc2,4 , Yi Gao2,1,3 , James E. Davis5 , and Joel H. Saltz2,1,5,6
1
Dept. of Computer Science, Stony Brook University
2
Dept. of Biomedical Informatics, Stony Brook University
3
Dept. of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Stony Brook University
4
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
5
Dept. of Pathology, Stony Brook Hospital
6
Cancer Center, Stony Brook Hospital
{lehhou,samaras}@cs.stonybrook.edu

{tahsin.kurc,joel.saltz}@stonybrook.edu

{yi.gao,james.davis}@stonybrookmedicine.edu

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are state-of-theart models for many image classification tasks. However, to
recognize cancer subtypes automatically, training a CNN
on gigapixel resolution Whole Slide Tissue Images (WSI)
is currently computationally impossible. The differentiation of cancer subtypes is based on cellular-level visual
features observed on image patch scale. Therefore, we argue that in this situation, training a patch-level classifier
on image patches will perform better than or similar to
an image-level classifier. The challenge becomes how to
intelligently combine patch-level classification results and
model the fact that not all patches will be discriminative.
We propose to train a decision fusion model to aggregate
patch-level predictions given by patch-level CNNs, which to
the best of our knowledge has not been shown before. Furthermore, we formulate a novel Expectation-Maximization
(EM) based method that automatically locates discriminative patches robustly by utilizing the spatial relationships
of patches. We apply our method to the classification of
glioma and non-small-cell lung carcinoma cases into subtypes. The classification accuracy of our method is similar to the inter-observer agreement between pathologists.
Although it is impossible to train CNNs on WSIs, we experimentally demonstrate using a comparable non-cancer
dataset of smaller images that a patch-based CNN can outperform an image-based CNN.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are currently
the state-of-the-art image classifiers [30, 29, 7, 23]. However, due to high computational cost, CNNs cannot be applied to very high resolution images, such as gigapixel

Whole Slide Tissue Images (WSI). Classification of cancer
WSIs into grades and subtypes is critical to the study of disease onset and progression and the development of targeted
therapies, because the effects of cancer can be observed in
WSIs at the cellular and sub-cellular levels (Fig. 1). Applying CNN directly for WSI classification has several drawbacks. First, extensive image downsampling is required by
which most of the discriminative details could be lost. Second, it is possible that a CNN might only learn from one of
the multiple discriminative patterns in an image, resulting
in data inefficiency. Discriminative information is encoded
in high resolution image patches. Therefore, one solution is
to train a CNN on high resolution image patches and predict
the label of a WSI based on patch-level predictions.

Figure 1: A gigapixel Whole Slide Tissue Image of a grade
IV tumor. Visual features that determine the subtype and
grade of a WSI are visible in high resolution. In this case,
patches framed in red are discriminative since they show
typical visual features of grade IV tumor. Patches framed in
blue are non-discriminative since they only contain visual
features from lower grade tumors. Discriminative patches
are dispersed throughout the image at multiple locations.
The ground truth labels of individual patches are un12424

