Joint Unsupervised Deformable Spatio-Temporal Alignment of Sequences
Epameinondas Antonakos⋆
Stefanos Zafeiriou⋆ ‡
Maja Pantic⋆ †
⋆
†
Imperial College London, UK
University of Twente, The Netherlands
‡
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Finland

Lazaros Zafeiriou⋆

⋆

{l.zafeiriou12, e.antonakos, s.zafeiriou, m.pantic}@imperial.ac.uk, † PanticM@cs.utwente.nl

Abstract

displaying objects that undergo non-rigid deformations, e.g.
a facial expression, is the following [34, 35, 19, 30, 17]:

Typically, the problems of spatial and temporal alignment of sequences are considered disjoint. That is, in order
to align two sequences, a methodology that (non)-rigidly
aligns the images is first applied, followed by temporal
alignment of the obtained aligned images. In this paper, we
propose the first, to the best of our knowledge, methodology that can jointly spatio-temporally align two sequences,
which display highly deformable texture-varying objects.
We show that by treating the problems of deformable spatial and temporal alignment jointly, we achieve better results than considering the problems independent. Furthermore, we show that deformable spatio-temporal alignment
of faces can be performed in an unsupervised manner (i.e.,
without employing face trackers or building person-specific
deformable models).

1. The first step is to apply a statistical facial deformable
model (generic or person-specific) which aligns the
images and/or localizes a consistent set of facial landmarks. Some examples of such state-of-the-art models are [28, 16]. Even though such deformable models demonstrate great capabilities, they require either thousands of manually annotated facial samples
captured under various recording conditions (generic
models) or the manual annotation of a set of frames in
each and every video that is analysed (person-specific
models). However, such extended manual annotation
is a laborious and labour intensive procedure [22, 2].
2. The second step is to use the acquired densely aligned
images or the localized landmarks to perform temporal alignment. However, one of the main challenges
in aligning such visual data is their high dimensionality. This is the reason why various recently proposed
methods perform temporal alignment by joint feature
extraction and dimensionality reduction [34, 30, 17].

1. Introduction
Temporal and spatial alignment are two very wellstudied fields in various disciplines, including computer vision and machine learning [34, 14, 35, 3, 16]. Temporal
alignment is the first step towards analysis and synthesis of
human and animal motion, temporal clustering of sequences
and behaviour segmentation [34, 14, 35, 19, 30, 17, 36].
Spatial image alignment is among the main computer vision topics [3, 16, 1]. It is usually the first step towards
many pattern matching applications such as face and facial expression recognition, object detection etc. [23, 24, 6].
It is also the first step towards temporal alignment of sequences [34, 35, 19, 30, 17].
Typically, temporal and spatial alignment are treated as
two disjoint problems. Thus, they are solved separately,
usually by employing very different methodologies. This is
more evident in the task of spatio-temporal alignment of sequences that contain deformable objects. For example, the
typical framework for temporal alignment of two sequences

Joint spatio-temporal alignment is more advantageous
than spatial alignment, since the spatial ambiguities that
may be present can be resolved. The alignment accuracy
can also be improved, because all the available information is exploited. Despite those advantages, joint spatiotemporal alignment has received limited attention, mainly
due to the difficulty in designing such frameworks [8, 12].
The methods that have been proposed typically assume rigid
spatial and temporal motion models (i.e., affine-like) [8].
Also, the video sequences display different views of the
same dynamic scene [8, 12]. Hence, such methods are
not suitable for the task of spatio-temporal alignment of sequences with deformable objects, such as faces.
To the best of our knowledge, no method has been
proposed that is able to perform deformable joint spatiotemporal alignment of sequences that contain texture13382

