A Benchmark Dataset and Evaluation for
Non-Lambertian and Uncalibrated Photometric Stereo
Boxin Shi1,2∗ Zhe Wu2,3 Zhipeng Mo2 Dinglong Duan3 Sai-Kit Yeung2 Ping Tan4
1
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Center, National Institute of AIST
2
Singapore University of Technology and Design
3
National University of Singapore 4 Simon Fraser University

Abstract

Photometric stereo computes surface normals from radiance variation due to illumination changes. The classic
algorithm [1] assumes the Lambertian surface, a ﬁxed orthographic camera with linear radiometric response, and
known directional illuminations to recover a per-pixel surface normal from at least three images. Many algorithms
have been developed to extend it to surfaces with general
reﬂectance [2], uncalibrated lighting [3], general environment illumination [4], nonlinear camera [5], multiple viewpoints [6], subpixel resolution [7], moving objects [8], and
so on. However, unlike the studies in binocular and multiview stereo [9], a standard taxonomy of photometric stereo
algorithms is not yet available; benchmark dataset and evaluation, which greatly inspire future research directions, are
available in binocular and multi-view stereo [9] but not in
photometric stereo community.

This paper aims to provide a taxonomy, a benchmark
dataset and evaluation for photometric stereo algorithms.
Unlike multi-view stereo, photometric stereo algorithms
have a huge diversity in model assumptions and imaging
conditions (e.g., single or multiple viewpoints, orthographic
or perspective camera, directional or environmental lighting, etc.). Therefore, benchmarking photometric stereo is
more feasible for a speciﬁc category of algorithms. We assume a ﬁxed orthographic camera and directional lighting
and focus on non-Lambertian and uncalibrated photometric stereo algorithms. Directional lighting and ﬁxed orthographic camera is the most classical data capture setting [1].
Many other extensions (e.g., multi-view, environment lighting) can be built upon this setup. Under this setup, nonLambertian reﬂectance and uncalibrated lighting directions
are the two major difﬁculties for photometric stereo.
We ﬁrst provide a taxonomy of photometric stereo methods, with an emphasis on recent non-Lambertian and uncalibrated algorithms, followed by a brief categorization
for other methods with different lighting models, different
numbers of input images, and several additional properties.
We then present the ‘DiLiGenT’ photometric stereo image
dataset which is captured under carefully calibrated directional lighting, with reference shapes for all objects from a
high-end laser scanner provided. Our dataset contains objects of various materials and shapes, from ideally diffuse to
highly reﬂective, from smooth to bristly. Finally, we quantitatively evaluate recently representative non-Lambertian
[2, 10–16] and uncalibrated [3, 17–20] photometric stereo
algorithms to understand their pros and cons and motivate
future research on unsolved issues.
Our main contributions are threefold:
• An up-to-date survey/taxonomy on recent photometric stereo techniques with a special focus on nonLambertian and uncalibrated methods1 ;
• The ﬁrst photometric stereo dataset with ‘ground truth’

∗ Part of this work was ﬁnished when B. Shi was working at Nanyang
Technological University.

1 We refer the readers to [21] and [22] for more comprehensive surveys
on earlier and recent photometric stereo techniques.

Recent progress on photometric stereo extends the technique to deal with general materials and unknown illumination conditions. However, due to the lack of suitable
benchmark data with ground truth shapes (normals), quantitative comparison and evaluation is difﬁcult to achieve.
In this paper, we ﬁrst survey and categorize existing methods using a photometric stereo taxonomy emphasizing on
non-Lambertian and uncalibrated methods. We then introduce the ‘DiLiGenT’ photometric stereo image dataset
with calibrated Directional Lightings, objects of General
reflectance, and ‘ground Truth’ shapes (normals). Based on
our dataset, we quantitatively evaluate state-of-the-art photometric stereo methods for general non-Lambertian materials and unknown lightings to analyze their strengths and
limitations.

1. Introduction

13707

