Shape Analysis with Hyperbolic Wasserstein Distance
Jie Shi, Wen Zhang, Yalin Wang
School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University
jshi28@asu.edu,wzhan139@asu.edu,ylwang@asu.edu

Abstract
Shape space is an active research field in computer vision study. The shape distance defined in a shape space may
provide a simple and refined index to represent a unique
shape. Wasserstein distance defines a Riemannian metric
for the Wasserstein space. It intrinsically measures the similarities between shapes and is robust to image noise. Thus
it has the potential for the 3D shape indexing and classification research. While the algorithms for computing
Wasserstein distance have been extensively studied, most
of them only work for genus-0 surfaces. This paper proposes a novel framework to compute Wasserstein distance
between general topological surfaces with hyperbolic metric. The computational algorithms are based on Ricci flow,
hyperbolic harmonic map, and hyperbolic power Voronoi
diagram and the method is general and robust. We apply
our method to study human facial expression, longitudinal
brain cortical morphometry with normal aging, and cortical shape classification in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Experimental results demonstrate that our method may be used
as an effective shape index, which outperforms some other
standard shape measures in our AD versus healthy control
classification study.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, exciting opportunities have
emerged in studying 3D imaging data thanks to the rapid
progress made in 3D image acquisition. There is a crucial need to develop effective 3D shape indexing and classification techniques. Shape space models, which usually
measure similarities between two shapes by the deformation between them, may provide a suitable mathematical
and computational description for shape analysis (as reviewed in [67]). In computer vision research, shape space
has been well studied for brain atlas estimation [19, 18],
shape analysis [33, 24, 56], morphometry study [69, 10],
etc. Recently, the Wasserstein space is attracting more attention. The Wasserstein space is the space consisting of all

the probability measures on a Riemannian manifold. The
Wasserstein distance defines a Riemannian metric for the
Wasserstein space and it intrinsically measures the similarities between shapes. The advantages of Wasserstein distance for 3D shape analysis research are: (1) the geodesic
distance between space points gives a continuous and refined shape difference measure, which is particularly useful
for brain imaging study, where higher accuracy is usually
expected; (2) it studies a transport between two probability
measures on a canonical image or manifold so it is robust
to noise. It holds the potential to quantitatively measure 3D
shapes reconstructed from images and provide a theoretical
foundation for 3D shape analysis.
Wasserstein distance has been widely studied and applied in image and shape analysis. In [45], the Wasserstein
distance was used to model local shape appearances and
shape variances for joint variational object segmentation
and shape matching. A linear optimal transportation (LOT)
framework was introduced in [61], where a linearized version of the Wasserstein distance was used to measure the
differences between images. Hong, et al. [28] used Wasserstein distance to encode the integral shape invariants computed at multiple scales and to measure the dissimilarities
between two shapes. However, these methods only work
with 2D images. In [5], the Wasserstein distance computation was generalized to Riemannian manifolds. Su, et al.
[56] computed the Wasserstein distance between genus-0
surfaces, where the spherical conformal domain was used
as the canonical space. On the other hand, a major limitation of Wasserstein distance is that its computational cost
increases as the sizes of the problems increase. Cuturi, et
al. [13] proposed to solve this problem with entropic regularization. In [51], the algorithm was extended to geometric
domains for shape interpolation, surface soft maps, etc. To
date, few studies have investigated Wasserstein distance defined on general topological surfaces.
In practice, most 3D shapes have complicated topology
(high-genus). In brain imaging research, to enforce the
alignment of the major anatomic features, one may slice
surface open along certain landmark curves [50]. This

5051

