Optical Flow with Semantic Segmentation and Localized Layers
Laura Sevilla-Lara1
1

Deqing Sun2,3

Varun Jampani1

MPI for Intelligent Systems

2

NVIDIA, 3 Harvard University

{laura.sevilla, varun.jampani, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de

(a) Initial segmentation [9]

(b) Our segmentation

Michael J. Black1

(c) DiscreteFlow [38]

deqings@nvidia.com

(d) Semantic Optical Flow

Figure 1: (a) Semantic segmentation breaks the image into regions such as road, bike, person, sky, etc. (c) Existing optical
flow algorithms do not have access to either the segmentations or the semantics of the classes. (d) Our semantic optical flow
algorithm computes motion differently in different regions, depending on the semantic class label, resulting in more precise
flow, particularly at object boundaries. (b) The flow also helps refine the segmentation of the foreground objects.

Abstract
Existing optical flow methods make generic, spatially
homogeneous, assumptions about the spatial structure of
the flow. In reality, optical flow varies across an image depending on object class. Simply put, different objects move
differently. Here we exploit recent advances in static semantic scene segmentation to segment the image into objects of
different types. We define different models of image motion
in these regions depending on the type of object. For example, we model the motion on roads with homographies, vegetation with spatially smooth flow, and independently moving objects like cars and planes with affine motion plus deviations. We then pose the flow estimation problem using
a novel formulation of localized layers, which addresses
limitations of traditional layered models for dealing with
complex scene motion. Our semantic flow method achieves
the lowest error of any published monocular method in the
KITTI-2015 flow benchmark and produces qualitatively better flow and segmentation than recent top methods on a wide
range of natural videos.

1. Introduction
The accuracy of optical flow methods is improving
steadily, as evidenced by results on several recent datasets
[8, 13]. However, even state-of-the-art optical flow meth-

ods still perform poorly with fast motions, in areas of low
texture, and around object (occlusion) boundaries (Fig. 1
(c)). Here we address these issues and improve the estimation of optical flow by using semantic image segmentation.
Like flow, the field of semantic segmentation is also making rapid progress, driven by convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and large amounts of labeled data. Here we use a
state-of-the-art method [9] (Fig. 1 (a)) and find that existing
semantic segmentation methods, while not perfect, are good
enough to significantly improve flow estimation.
We use semantic image segmentation in multiple ways.
First, it provides information about object boundaries. Second, different objects move differently; roads are flat, cars
move independently, and trees sway in the wind. This
means that our prior expectations about the image motion
should vary between regions with different class labels.
Third, the spatial relationships between objects provide information about the relative local depth ordering of regions.
Reasoning about depth order is typically challenging and
we use the semantics to simplify this, improving flow estimates at occlusion boundaries. Fourth, object identities
are constant over time, providing a cue that we exploit to
encourage temporal consistency of the optical flow.
To model complex scene motions and to deal well with
motion boundaries, we adopt a layered approach [4, 11, 18,
21, 24, 49, 54, 55, 56]. Layered models, however are typically global and cannot represent complex occlusion rela-

3889

