Learning Deep Feature Representations with Domain Guided Dropout for
Person Re-identification
Tong Xiao
Hongsheng Li
Wanli Ouyang
Xiaogang Wang
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{xiaotong,hsli,wlouyang,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Learning generic and robust feature representations with
data from multiple domains for the same problem is of
great value, especially for the problems that have multiple datasets but none of them are large enough to provide abundant data variations. In this work, we present a
pipeline for learning deep feature representations from multiple domains with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs).
When training a CNN with data from all the domains, some
neurons learn representations shared across several domains, while some others are effective only for a specific
one. Based on this important observation, we propose a
Domain Guided Dropout algorithm to improve the feature
learning procedure. Experiments show the effectiveness of
our pipeline and the proposed algorithm. Our methods
on the person re-identification problem outperform stateof-the-art methods on multiple datasets by large margins.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, a domain often refers to a dataset
where samples follow the same underlying data distribution. It is common that multiple datasets with different
data distributions are proposed to target the same or similar
problems. Multi-domain learning aims to solve the problem with datasets across different domains simultaneously
by using all the data they provide. As deep learning arises
in the recent years, learning good feature representations
achieves great success in many research fields and realworld applications. The success of deep learning is driven
by the emergence of large-scale training data, which makes
multi-domain learning an interesting problem. Many studies [3,10,31] have shown that fine-tuning a deep model pretrained on a large-scale dataset (e.g. ImageNet [8]) is effective for other related domains and tasks. However, in many
specific areas, there is no such large-scale dataset for learning robust and generic feature representations. Nonethe-

CUHK03

PRID

VIPeR

CUHK01

3DPeS

iLIDS

Figure 1. Examples of multiple person re-identification datasets.
Each dataset has its own bias. Our goal is to learn generic feature
representations that are effective on all of them simultaneously.

less, different research groups have proposed many smaller
datasets. It is necessary to develop an effective algorithm
that jointly utilizes all of them to learn generic feature representations.
Another interesting aspect of multi-domain learning is
that it enriches the data variety because of the domain discrepancies. Limited by various conditions, data collected by
a research group might only include certain types of variations. Take the person re-identification [2, 23] problem as
an example, pedestrian images are usually captured in different scenes (e.g., campus, markets, and streets), as shown
in Figure 1. Images in CUHK01 [21] and CUHK03 [23]
are captured on campus, where many students wear backpacks. PRID [15] contains pedestrians in street views,
where crosswalks appear frequently in the dataset. Images
in VIPeR [13] suffer from significant resolution changes
across different camera views. Each of such datasets is biased and contains only a subset of possible data variations,
which is not sufficient for learning generic feature representations. Combining them together can diversify the training
data, thus makes the learned features more robust.
In this paper, we present a pipeline for learning generic
feature representations from multiple domains that are ef-

1249

