Panoramic Stereo Videos with a Single Camera
Rajat Aggarwal∗
Amrisha Vohra*
Anoop M. Namboodiri
Kohli Center on Intelligent Systems,
International Institute of Information Technology- Hyderabad, India.
{rajat.aggarwal@research, amrisha.vohra@research, anoop@}.iiit.ac.in

Abstract
We present a practical solution for generating 360◦
stereo panoramic videos using a single camera. Current
approaches either use a moving camera that captures multiple images of a scene, which are then stitched together
to form the final panorama, or use multiple cameras that
are synchronized. A moving camera limits the solution to
static scenes, while multi-camera solutions require dedicated calibrated setups. Our approach improves upon the
existing solutions in two significant ways: It solves the problem using a single camera, thus minimizing the calibration
problem and providing us the ability to convert any digital
camera into a panoramic stereo capture device. It captures
all the light rays required for stereo panoramas in a single
frame using a compact custom designed mirror, thus making
the design practical to manufacture and easier to use. We
analyze several properties of the design as well as present
panoramic stereo and depth estimation results.

1. Introduction
The ability to capture and transmit high quality omnidirectional stereo videos enables several applications such
as virtual tourism, remote navigation, and immersive entertainment. However, accurate omnidirectional stereo requires the capture of a four-dimensional light-field. Peleg et
al. [17] showed that if we assume the two eyes are restricted
to move along a horizontal circle (panoramic stereo), one
can create independent 2D panoramic images for each eye
that closely reproduces the stereo views for a human. This
result theoretically enabled the capture of omnidirectional
stereo videos. However, practical systems for capturing
stereo panoramic videos are just emerging [1].
In recent years, display devices for stereo panoramas
have become ubiquitous with virtual reality (VR) headsets
that uses smart phone displays such as Google Cardboard
and Samsung GearVR c . Stereo panoramic videos allows

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) 3D printed model of the proposed coffee-filter mirror
(b) Image of the proposed mirror placed in a scene (POVRay) (c)
Stereoscopic panorama (red-cyan anaglyph) recovered from the
image in (b).

one to stand at any location in the world and look around
as if they were present in the real environment. However,
the capture of stereo panoramas currently requires a camera
that moves along a circle or a complex synchronized multicamera setup. We aim to develop a simple solution that
can capture 360◦ stereo panorama using an existing digital camera, thus making the creation process of immersive
VR content accessible to a much larger population. The
primary challenge here is to capture all the light rays corresponding two sets of cameras (left and right eye views)
arranged along the same circle to a single sensor without
causing blind spots or occlusions in the optical system. We
show for the first time that such an optical system is possible and practical using a set of custom designed reflective
surfaces that we refer to as the Coffee Filter Mirror (See
Fig. 1). We derive the surface equations of the mirror petals
and discuss the optimization of its parameters for maximizing the visual quality of the captured images.
As mentioned before, most of the existing approaches in-

∗ Equal Contribution

13755

