Longitudinal Face Modeling via
Temporal Deep Restricted Boltzmann Machines

1

Chi Nhan Duong 1 , Khoa Luu 2 , Kha Gia Quach 1 and Tien D. Bui 1
Computer Science and Software Engineering, Concordia University, Montréal, Québec, Canada
2
CyLab Biometrics Center and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
1

{c duon, k q, bui}@encs.concordia.ca, 2 kluu@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Modeling the face aging process is a challenging task
due to large and non-linear variations present in different stages of face development. This paper presents a
deep model approach for face age progression that can efficiently capture the non-linear aging process and automatically synthesize a series of age-progressed faces in various
age ranges. In this approach, we first decompose the longterm age progress into a sequence of short-term changes
and model it as a face sequence. The Temporal Deep Restricted Boltzmann Machines based age progression model
together with the prototype faces are then constructed to
learn the aging transformation between faces in the sequence. In addition, to enhance the wrinkles of faces in the
later age ranges, the wrinkle models are further constructed
using Restricted Boltzmann Machines to capture their variations in different facial regions. The geometry constraints
are also taken into account in the last step for more consistent age-progressed results. The proposed approach is
evaluated using various face aging databases, i.e. FGNET, Cross-Age Celebrity Dataset (CACD) and MORPH,
and our collected large-scale aging database named AginG
Faces in the Wild (AGFW). In addition, when ground-truth
age is not available for input image, our proposed system
is able to automatically estimate the age of the input face
before aging process is employed.

1. Introduction
Face age progression presents the capability to predict
future faces of an individual in input photos. In most cases,
there is only one photo of that individual and we have to predict the future faces, i.e. age progression, or construct the
former faces, i.e. age regression or deaging, of that subject
[2]. Face aging can find its origins from missing children
when police require age progressed pictures. This problem

Figure 1. Examples of age progression using our proposed approach. Each subject has three images: the input image (left),
the synthesized age-progressed face (middle), and the ground truth
(right). Our system also can predict the ages of input faces in case
these ground-truths are not available.

is also applicable in cases of wanted fugitives where face
age progression is also required. The predominant approach
to aging pictures involves the use of forensic artists [32].
Although forensic artists are trained in the anatomy and geometry of faces, they still can suffer from psycho-cognitive
bias that may affect their interpretation of the source face
data. In addition, an age-progressed image can differ significantly from one forensic artist to the next. Manual age
progression usually takes lots of time and requires the work
of numerous professional forensic artists. Therefore, automatic and computerized age-progression systems are important. Their applications range from very sensitive national security problems to tobacco or alcohol stores/bars to
control the patron’s age and cosmetic studies against aging.
Synthesizing plausible faces of individuals at different
stages in their life is an extremely challenging task, even for
human, due to several reasons. Firstly, human face aging is
15772

