Stacked Attention Networks for Image Question Answering
Zichao Yang1 , Xiaodong He2 , Jianfeng Gao2 , Li Deng2 , Alex Smola1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA 98052, USA
zichaoy@cs.cmu.edu, {xiaohe, jfgao, deng}@microsoft.com, alex@smola.org
Abstract

feature vectors of diﬀerent
parts of image

This paper presents stacked attention networks (SANs)
that learn to answer natural language questions from images. SANs use semantic representation of a question as
query to search for the regions in an image that are related
to the answer. We argue that image question answering
(QA) often requires multiple steps of reasoning. Thus, we
develop a multiple-layer SAN in which we query an image
multiple times to infer the answer progressively. Experiments conducted on four image QA data sets demonstrate
that the proposed SANs significantly outperform previous
state-of-the-art approaches. The visualization of the attention layers illustrates the progress that the SAN locates the
relevant visual clues that lead to the answer of the question
layer-by-layer.

CNN
Query
CNN/
LSTM
Attention layer 1

+

+

Softmax

Question:
What are sitting
in the basket on
a bicycle?

Answer:
dogs

Attention layer 2

(a) Stacked Attention Network for Image QA

1. Introduction
With the recent advancement in computer vision and
in natural language processing (NLP), image question answering (QA) becomes one of the most active research areas [7, 21, 18, 1, 19]. Unlike pure language based QA systems that have been studied extensively in the NLP community [28, 14, 4, 31, 3, 32], image QA systems are designed to
automatically answer natural language questions according
to the content of a reference image.
Most of the recently proposed image QA models are
based on neural networks [7, 21, 18, 1, 19]. A commonly
used approach was to extract a global image feature vector
using a convolution neural network (CNN) [15] and encode
the corresponding question as a feature vector using a long
short-term memory network (LSTM) [9] and then combine
them to infer the answer. Though impressive results have
been reported, these models often fail to give precise answers when such answers are related to a set of fine-grained
regions in an image.
By examining the image QA data sets, we find that it is
often that case that answering a question from an image requires multi-step reasoning. Take the question and image in
Fig. 1 as an example. There are several objects in the image: bicycles, window, street, baskets and

Original Image

First Attention Layer

Second Attention Layer

(b) Visualization of the learned multiple attention layers. The
stacked attention network first focuses on all referred concepts,
e.g., bicycle, basket and objects in the basket (dogs) in
the first attention layer and then further narrows down the focus in
the second layer and finds out the answer dog.

Figure 1: Model architecture and visualization
dogs. To answer the question what are sitting in
the basket on a bicycle, we need to first locate
those objects (e.g. basket, bicycle) and concepts
(e.g., sitting in) referred in the question, then gradually rule out irrelevant objects, and finally pinpoint to the region that are most indicative to infer the answer (i.e., dogs
in the example).
In this paper, we propose stacked attention networks
(SANs) that allow multi-step reasoning for image QA.
SANs can be viewed as an extension of the attention mechanism that has been successfully applied in image captioning [30] and machine translation [2]. The overall architecture of SAN is illustrated in Fig. 1a. The SAN consists of
three major components: (1) the image model, which uses
1 21

