Full Flow: Optical Flow Estimation By Global Optimization over Regular Grids
Qifeng Chen
Stanford University

Abstract
We present a global optimization approach to optical
flow estimation. The approach optimizes a classical optical
flow objective over the full space of mappings between discrete grids. No descriptor matching is used. The highly regular structure of the space of mappings enables optimizations that reduce the computational complexity of the algorithm’s inner loop from quadratic to linear and support efficient matching of tens of thousands of nodes to tens of thousands of displacements. We show that one-shot global optimization of a classical Horn-Schunck-type objective over
regular grids at a single resolution is sufficient to initialize
continuous interpolation and achieve state-of-the-art performance on challenging modern benchmarks.

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

to heuristically prune the space of flows using descriptor
matching.
In this work, we develop a global optimization approach
that optimizes the classical flow objective (1) over the
full space of mappings between discrete grids. Our work
demonstrates that a direct application of global optimization over full regular grids has significant benefits. Since
the highly regular structure of the space of mappings is preserved, we can employ optimizations that take advantage
of this structure to reduce the computational complexity of
the algorithm’s inner loop. The overall approach is simple
and does not involve separately-defined descriptor matching modules: simply optimizing the classical flow objective
over full grids is sufficient. We show that this minimalistic
approach yields state-of-the-art accuracy on both the Sintel [8] and the KITTI 2015 [29] optical flow benchmarks.

1. Introduction

2. Background

Optical flow is a vital source of information for visual
perception. Animals use optical flow to track and control self-motion, to estimate the spatial layout of the environment, and to perceive the shape and motion of objects [36, 43]. In computer vision, optical flow is used for
visual odometry, three-dimensional reconstruction, object
segmentation and tracking, and recognition.
The classical approach to dense optical flow estimation
is to optimize an objective of the form

The variational approach to optical flow originates with
Horn and Schunck [22]. This elegant approach posits a
clear global objective (1) and produces a dense flow field
connecting the two images. Since the space of flows is so
large, the variational objective has traditionally been optimized locally. Starting with a simple initialization, the flow
is iteratively updated by gradient-based steps [4, 6, 39].
Through these iterations, a single candidate flow is maintained. While this local refinement approach can be accurate when displacements are small [3, 39], it does not optimize the objective globally over the full space of flows and
is prone to local minima.
Recent methods have used descriptor matching and nearest neighbor search to initialize the continuous refinement
[7, 45, 11, 44, 32, 2]. This more sophisticated initialization
is known to significantly improve results in the presence
of large displacements. However, the descriptor matching
module is trained separately, does not optimize a coherent objective over the provided correspondence sets, and
can yield globally suboptimal initializations. We show that
state-of-the-art accuracy can be achieved by globally optimizing the classical objective (1), with no separately trained
or designed descriptors.
A number of approaches to global optimization for op-

E(f ) = Edata (f ) + λEreg (f ),

(1)

where f is the estimated flow field, Edata is a data term
that penalizes association of visually dissimilar areas, and
Ereg is a regularization term that penalizes incoherent motion [22]. Traditionally, this objective is optimized by iterative local refinement that maintains and updates a single
candidate flow [39]. This local refinement does not optimize the objective globally over the full space of flows and
is prone to local minima.
Global optimization of the flow objective has generally been considered intractable unless significant restrictions are imposed [38]. Menze et al. [30] achieved impressive results with a discrete optimization approach, but had

14706

