Layered Scene Decomposition via the Occlusion-CRF
Chen Liu1

Pushmeet Kohli2
1

Yasutaka Furukawa1

Washington University in St. Louis
2
Microsoft Research

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenging problem of perceiving the hidden or occluded geometry of the scene depicted in any given RGBD image. Unlike other image labeling problems such as image segmentation where each pixel
needs to be assigned a single label, layered decomposition
requires us to assign multiple labels to pixels. We propose a
novel “Occlusion-CRF” model that allows for the integration of sophisticated priors to regularize the solution space
and enables the automatic inference of the layer decomposition. We use a generalization of the Fusion Move algorithm
to perform Maximum a Posterior (MAP) inference on the
model that can handle the large label sets needed to represent multiple surface assignments to each pixel. We have
evaluated the proposed model and the inference algorithm
on many RGBD images of cluttered indoor scenes. Our experiments show that not only is our model able to explain
occlusions but it also enables automatic inpainting of occluded/invisible surfaces.

1. Introduction
The ability of humans to perceive and infer the geometry
of their environment goes beyond what is directly visible.
Given a scene with desks on a floor, we see desks in the
foreground, and naturally infer the floor and the walls as
a complete surface behind. However, this information is
not represented by commonly used data structures such as
a depth map or for that matter a RGBD image which only
explains visible surfaces.
Occlusions lie at the heart of this problem, and have
been a challenge for reconstruction algorithms since the
dawn of Computer Vision. For instance, partial occlusion
of objects makes it challenging for us to perform 3D reconstruction, and cause rendering artifacts such as holes
or texture-stretching. This has inspired the proposal of
many problem-specific techniques such as anisotropic diffusion [15], symmetric image matching [20] and segmenta-

tion based stereo [2].
One of the main challenges of handling occlusions emanates from the fact that to accurately model geometry in
the physical world, we need to go beyond the 2D image representation. One approach to alleviate the occlusion problem is to lift the domain from 2D to 3D, that is, from a
depthmap to a 3D voxel grid [24, 8]. However, the surface
geometry is inherently 2D, and the 3D voxel representation
does not efficiently use its modeling capacity. Injecting semantic information and representing a scene as a room layout and objects [7, 28] (or a block world for outdoors [8]) is
another effective solution to resolve the occlusion problem.
However, these approaches focus on scene understanding
rather than precise geometric description, severely limiting
their potential high-end applications in Computer Graphics
and Robotics.
This paper introduces a novel layered and segmented
depthmap representation, which can naturally handle occlusions and inpaint occluded surfaces. We use a generalization of the Fusion Move algorithm to perform Maximum a Posterior (MAP) inference on the model, that can
handle the large label sets needed to represent multiple surface assignments to each pixel. The optimization procedure
works by repeatedly proposing a sub-space defined by multiple plausible solutions and searches for the best configuration within it using tree-reweighted message passing (TRWS) [10]. Our experiments show that our Fusion Space algorithm for performing inference is computationally efficient
and finds lower energy states compared to competing methods such as Fusion Move and general message passing algorithms. Notice that this new representation and optimization
scheme are orthogonal to the active semantic reconstruction
research, and can be readily available for any other method
to use. The technical contributions of this paper are two
fold: 1) A novel layered and segmented depthmap representation that can naturally handle occlusions; and 2) A novel
Fusion Space optimization approach that is more efficient
and effective than the current state-of-the-art.
1165

