Video-Story Composition via Plot Analysis
Jinsoo Choi

Tae-Hyun Oh
KAIST, Republic of Korea

In So Kweon

jschoi@rcv.kaist.ac.kr, thoh.kaist.ac.kr@gmail.com, iskweon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We address the problem of composing a story out of multiple short video clips taken by a person during an activity
or experience. Inspired by plot analysis of written stories,
our method generates a sequence of video clips ordered in
such a way that it reflects plot dynamics and content coherency. That is, given a set of multiple video clips, our
method composes a video which we call a video-story. We
define metrics on scene dynamics and coherency by dense
optical flow features and a patch matching algorithm. Using these metrics, we define an objective function for the
video-story. To efficiently search for the best video-story,
we introduce a novel Branch-and-Bound algorithm which
guarantees the global optimum. We collect the dataset consisting of 23 video sets from the web, resulting in a total of
236 individual video clips. With the acquired dataset, we
perform extensive user studies involving 30 human subjects
by which the effectiveness of our approach is quantitatively
and qualitatively verified.

1. Introduction
People have the natural desire to capture and store personal experiences and memories. Today, we are able to
record our activities more easily with decreasing cost of
cameras and media storages. Moreover, with the success of
smart phones and applications, photos and videos have become omnipresent in our daily lives. Consequently, people
tend to capture photos and record videos without a limited
storage burden and process them later. Unfortunately, manual post-processing of these contents is usually tedious, and
thus a need for an automatic summarization of contents has
arisen leading to many research on this topic [11, 17, 20].
This need has arisen due to the people’s tendency to preserve only meaningful contents. More recently, rather than
simply extracting summaries, many people choose to generate meaningful stories out of photos [15] and videos [20],
and many applications (e.g. 1 Second Everyday, Roadmovies, Snapmovie) attempt to provide this type of media. Basically, works on photo story generation deal with

Figure 1: Story plot analysis. A written story consists of an exposition, rising action, climax, and resolution. Given a collection
of independently captured video clips, we aim to build a video sequence with a story plot. This figure shows our results with RiverSurfing short video clips. The sequence starts the exposition with
a clip showing a stationary scene of the environment. The following scenes portray consecutive rising action and eventually show
the actual river surfing at the climax leading to similar scenes until resolution. Notice the adjacent scenes are visually coherent as
well which do not interrupt the flow of the story.

aligning multiple photos supposedly into a temporal order.
Similar works such as photo sequencing [3, 7] take a photo
sequence input of the same scene or action and produce a
temporally ordered photo sequence. In video summarization, a long video is summarized into a shorter version while
maintaining the overall story [20]. Mobile applications recently gaining much popularity like 1 Second Everyday and
Roadmovies allow the user to capture short video clips with
a mobile camera and then concatenate the short video clips
taken one after another to produce a single video.
We address the problem of composing an ordered video
clip sequence which we call video-stories out of multiple
video clips taken by a person during an activity or experience. When a person captures separate video clips later to
be concatenated, that person may not be so much concerned
about the overall structure of the resulting video. For example, let’s say a person captures separate video clips while on
a surfing trip. The person may start off recording multiple
13122

