3D Part-Based Sparse Tracker with Automatic Synchronization and Registration
Adel Bibi, Tianzhu Zhang, and Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
adel.bibi@kaust.edu.sa, tianzhu.zhang@kaust.edu.sa, bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
In this paper, we present a part-based sparse tracker in
a particle filter framework where both the motion and appearance model are formulated in 3D. The motion model is
adaptive and directed according to a simple yet powerful
occlusion handling paradigm, which is intrinsically fused
in the motion model. Also, since 3D trackers are sensitive to synchronization and registration noise in the RGB
and depth streams, we propose automated methods to solve
these two issues. Extensive experiments are conducted on
a popular RGBD tracking benchmark, which demonstrate
that our tracker can achieve superior results, outperforming many other recent and state-of-the-art RGBD trackers.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is a classical and very popular
problem in computer vision with a plethora of applications
such as vehicle navigation, human computer interface, human motion analysis, surveillance, and many more. The
problem involves estimating the location of an initialized
visual target in each frame of a video. Despite numerous
object tracking methods that have been proposed in recent
years [31, 25, 29, 26], most of these trackers suffer a degradation in performance mainly because of several challenges
that include illumination changes, motion blur, complex
motion, out of plane rotation, and partial or full occlusion,
while occlusion is usually the most contributing factor in
degrading the majority of trackers, if not all of them.
Fortunately, there is a recent surge in the availability of
affordable and increasingly reliable RGBD sensors that provide image and depth data such as the Microsoft Kinect,
Asus Xtion, and PrimeSense. When depth data is available, there exist more visual cues that can help resolve the
nuisances of object tracking, especially occlusion. Recently, a relatively large RGBD dataset for visual tracking (100
videos) was compiled and released to the public [27] in the
form of an online competition, where the ground truth object tracks are mostly suppressed. Since then, much deserved attention has been brought towards developing robust RGBD visual trackers. Although only a few of these

Figure 1. Top: Shows the tracking results on the videos
“bear front”, “face occ 5”, and “new ex occ 4” respectively
comparing our method, DS-KCF [9], and Princeton RGBD tracker [27]. Bottom: Shows 3D cuboids and their parts for different
sequences as proposed in this paper.

trackers exist, they easily and with a big margin outperform
state-of-art RGB trackers on the same videos. This is clear
evidence of how depth information can be useful to visual tracking, especially regarding early and robust detection
of occlusion and proper model update, both of which can
significantly boost the performance of any tracker.
Along with providing an RGBD benchmark [27], Song
et al. proposed an RGBD tracker that performs quite
well on the benchmark. They adopt an exhaustive search
paradigm coupled with an SVM classifier trained on image/depth HOG and point cloud features, which reduces the
tracker’s runtime to only 0.26 FPS. An occlusion handling
method is also adopted, where the tracked object is assumed
to be contained in the plane closest to the camera. This

1439

