Rolling Shutter Camera Relative Pose: Generalized Epipolar Geometry
Yuchao Dai1 , Hongdong Li1,2 and Laurent Kneip1,2
1
Research School of Engineering, Australian National University
2
ARC Centre of Excellence for Robotic Vision (ACRV)

Abstract
The vast majority of modern consumer-grade cameras
employ a rolling shutter mechanism. In dynamic geometric computer vision applications such as visual SLAM, the
so-called rolling shutter effect therefore needs to be properly taken into account. A dedicated relative pose solver
appears to be the first problem to solve, as it is of eminent
importance to bootstrap any derivation of multi-view geometry. However, despite its significance, it has received
inadequate attention to date.
This paper presents a detailed investigation of the geometry of the rolling shutter relative pose problem. We introduce the rolling shutter essential matrix, and establish
its link to existing models such as the push-broom cameras,
summarized in a clean hierarchy of multi-perspective cameras. The generalization of well-established concepts from
epipolar geometry is completed by a definition of the Sampson distance in the rolling shutter case. The work is concluded with a careful investigation of the introduced epipolar geometry for rolling shutter cameras on several dedicated benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Rolling-Shutter (RS) CMOS cameras are getting more
and more popularly used in real-world computer vision applications due to their low cost and simplicity in design. To
use these cameras in 3D geometric computer vision tasks
(such as 3D reconstruction, object pose, visual SLAM), the
rolling shutter effect (e.g. wobbling) must be carefully accounted for. Simply ignoring this effect and relying on a
global-shutter method may lead to erroneous, undesirable
and distorted results (e.g. [11, 13, 3]).
Recently, many 3D vision algorithms have been adapted
to the rolling shutter case (e.g. absolute Pose [15] [3] [22],
Bundle Adjustment [9], and stereo rectification [21]). Quite
surprisingly, no previous attempt has been reported on solving the relative pose problem with a RS camera.
The complexity of this problem stems from the fact that
an RS camera does not satisfy the pinhole projection model,

(a) linear RS

(b) uniform RS

(c) linear PB

(d) uniform PB

Figure 1. Example epipolar curves for the camera models discussed in this paper. Groups of epipolar curves of identical color
originate from points on the same row in another image. For linear
rolling shutter (a) and linear push broom cameras (c), the epipolar
curves are conic. The epipolar curves for uniform rolling shutter
(b) and uniform push broom cameras (d) are cubic.

hence the conventional epipolar geometry defined by the
′
standard 3 × 3 essential matrix (in the form of x T Ex = 0)
is no longer applicable. This is mainly because of the timevarying line-by-line image capturing nature of an RS camera, rendering the imaging process a non-central one.
In this paper we show that similar epipolar relationships
do exist between two rolling-shutter images. Specifically,
in contrast to the conventional 3 × 3 essential matrix for
the pinhole camera, we derive a 7 × 7 generalized essential
matrix for a uniform rolling-shutter camera, and a 5×5 generalized essential matrix for a linear rolling-shutter camera.
Under the rolling-shutter epipolar geometry, the “epipolar
lines” are no longer straight lines, but become higher-order
“epipolar curves” (c.f . Fig. 1).
Armed with these novel generalized rolling-shutter essential matrices, we can easily develop efficient numerical
algorithms to solve the relative pose problem. Similar to
the 8-point linear algorithm in the perspective case, we derive a 20-point linear algorithm for linear RS cameras, and a

4132

