Moral Lineage Tracing
Florian Jug1,∗ , Evgeny Levinkov2,∗ , Corinna Blasse1 , Eugene W. Myers1 , Bjoern Andres2
1

Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken

Abstract
c
Lineage tracing, the tracking of living cells as they move
and divide, is a central problem in biological image analysis.
Solutions, called lineage forests, are key to understanding
how the structure of multicellular organisms emerges. We
propose an integer linear program (ILP) whose feasible solutions define, for every image in a sequence, a decomposition
into cells (segmentation) and, across images, a lineage forest
of cells (tracing). In this ILP, path-cut inequalities enforce
the morality of lineages, i.e., the constraint that cells do not
merge. To find feasible solutions of this NP-hard problem,
with certified bounds to the global optimum, we define efficient separation procedures and apply these as part of a
branch-and-cut algorithm. To show the effectiveness of this
approach, we analyze feasible solutions for real microscopy
data in terms of bounds and run-time, and by their weighted
edit distance to lineage forests traced by humans.

1. Introduction
Phenomenal progress in microscopy allows biologists to
image large numbers of living cells as they move and divide [30, 45]. Such observations are essential in developmental biology for studying embryogenesis and tissue formation [31, 33, 37]. Consequently, the tracing of cells and
their lineages in sequences of images has become a central
problem in biological image analysis [4, 5, 29].
The lineage tracing problem consists of two sub-problems.
The first sub-problem is to identify the cells in every individual image. The second sub-problem is to connect every
cell identified in an image to the same cell and descendant
cells identified in subsequent images. A joint solution of
both sub-problems is a set of pairwise disjoint lineage trees
(depicted in Fig. 1, in red and green) whose nodes are cells.
The first sub-problem is an image decomposition problem:
If every pixel shows a part of a cell and no pixel shows a
background, the objective is to decompose the pixel grid
graph of the image into precisely one component per cell.
If pixels potentially show background, the objective is to

d

e

a
b
time
Figure 1: Given a sequence of images, taken at consecutive points in
time, and given a decomposition of each image into cell fragments
(depicted above as nodes), the objective of lineage tracing is to join
fragments of the same cell within and across images, e.g. {a, b} and
{c, d}, and to join fragments of descendant cells across images, e.g.
{d, e}. Joins (cuts) are depicted as solid (dotted) lines. Fragments
of dividing cells are depicted as black nodes.

jointly select and decompose a subgraph of the pixel grid
graph such that there is precisely one component for each
cell and no component for the background.
The second sub-problem is a cell tracking problem: The
objective is to connect every cell detected in one image to
the same cell and descendant cells identified in subsequent
images. A joint solution of both sub-problems is constrained
by prior knowledge. In particular, every cell has at most one
direct progenitor cell, i.e., cells do not merge. Moreover,
no cell splits into more than two cells at once. Yet, a cell
can appear without a direct progenitor cell when entering
the field of view, and a cell can disappear when dying or
leaving the field of view. Finally, it can appear as if a cell
was dividing into more than two cells at once if the temporal
resolution is too low to separate consecutive divisions.
It is understood that errors in the image decomposition
make it harder to reconstruct the true lineage forest. Attempts at reconstructing the lineage forest can help to avoid
such errors. Thus, we state a joint optimization problem
whose feasible solutions define, for every image, a decomposition (segmentation) into cells and, across images, a lineage
forest. Unlike in prior work, we do not constrain the set of
decompositions, except by contracting pixels to superpixels.
15926

