Less is more: zero-shot learning from online textual documents
with noise suppression∗
Ruizhi Qiao, Lingqiao Liu, Chunhua Shen, Anton van den Hengel
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia
{ruizhi.qiao,lingqiao.liu,chunhua.shen,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Classifying a visual concept merely from its associated
online textual source, such as a Wikipedia article, is an
attractive research topic in zero-shot learning because it
alleviates the burden of manually collecting semantic attributes. Recent work has pursued this approach by exploring various ways of connecting the visual and text domains. In this paper, we revisit this idea by going further
to consider one important factor: the textual representation
is usually too noisy for the zero-shot learning application.
This observation motivates us to design a simple yet effective zero-shot learning method that is capable of suppressing noise in the text.
Specifically, we propose an l2,1 -norm based objective
function which can simultaneously suppress the noisy signal
in the text and learn a function to match the text document
and visual features. We also develop an optimization algorithm to efficiently solve the resulting problem. By conducting experiments on two large datasets, we demonstrate that
the proposed method significantly outperforms those competing methods which rely on online information sources
but with no explicit noise suppression. Furthermore, we
make an in-depth analysis of the proposed method and provide insight as to what kind of information in documents is
useful for zero-shot learning.

1. Introduction
Unlike traditional object classification tasks in which the
training and test categories are identical, zero-shot learning
aims to recognize objects from classes not seen at the training stage. It is recognized as an effective way for large scale
visual classification since it alleviates the burden of collecting sufficient training data for every possible class. The key
component ensuring the success of zero-shot learning is to
find an intermediate semantic representation to bridge the
∗ The first two authors contributed to this work equally. Correspondence
should be addressed to C. Shen.

gap between seen and unseen classes. In a nutshell, with
this semantic representation we can first learn its connection with image features and then transfer this connection
to unseen classes. So once the semantic representation of
an unseen class is given, one can easily classify the image
through the learned connection.
Attributes, which essentially represent the discriminative
properties shared among both seen and unseen categories,
have become the most popular semantic representation in
zero-shot learning [7, 8, 24, 12, 26]. Although the recent use
of attributes has led to exciting advances in zero-shot learning [10, 2, 27], the creation of attributes still relies on much
human labour. This is inevitably discouraging since the motivation for zero-shot learning is to free large-scale recognition tasks from cumbersome annotation requirements.
To remedy this drawback and move towards the goal
of fully automatic zero-shot learning, several recent works
[23, 9, 16] have explored the possibility of using the easily accessed online information sources to create the intermediate semantic representation. One possible choice is to
directly use online textual documents, e.g., those found in
Wikipedia, to build such a representation [6, 3]. This is
promising because online text documents can be easily obtained and contain rich information about the object. To
conduct zero-shot learning with textual documents, existing
works [2, 10] develop various ways to measure the similarity between text and visual features. Our work is also based
on this idea. We take a step further, however, to consider
one additional important factor: the document representation is much more noisy than the human specified semantic
representation and negligence of this fact would inevitably
lead to inferior performance. For example, when the bagof-words model is adopted as the document representation,
the occurrence of every word in a document will trigger
a signal in one dimension of the document representation.
However, it is clear that most words in a document are not
directly relevant for identifying the object category. Thus
it is necessary to design a noise suppression mechanism to
down weight the importance of those less relevant words
for zero-shot learning. This mechanism is closely related to

2249

