Multicamera calibration from visible and mirrored epipoles
Bodo Rosenhahn
Leibniz University Hannover
Appelstr 9A, 30169
Hannover, Germany

Andrey Bushnevskiy, Lorenzo Sorgi
Technicolor Research & Innovation
Karl-Wiechert Allee 74, 30625
Hannover, Germany

Abstract
Multicamera rigs are used in a large number of 3D Vision applications, such as 3D modeling, motion capture or
telepresence and a robust calibration is of utmost importance in order to achieve a high accuracy results. In many
practical configurations the cameras in a rig are arranged
in such a way, that they can observe each other, in other
words a number of epipoles correspond to the real image
points. In this paper we propose a solution for the automatic
recovery of the external calibration of a multicamera system by enforcing only simple geometrical constraints, arising from the epipole visibility, without using any calibration object, such as checkerboards, laser pointers or similar. Additionally, we introduce an extension of the method
that handles the case of epipoles being visible in the reflection of a planar mirror, which makes the algorithm suitable
for the calibration of any multicamera system, irrespective
of the number of cameras and their actual mutual visibility,
and furthermore we remark that it requires only one or a
few images per camera and therefore features a high speed
and usability. We produce an evidence of the algorithm effectiveness by presenting a wide set of tests performed on
synthetic as well as real datasets and we compare the results with those obtained using a traditional LED-based
algorithm. The real datasets have been captured using a
multicamera Virtual Reality (VR) rig and a spherical dome
configuration for 3D reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Camera calibration is the specification of a mathematical model describing the image formation process realized
by an imaging system. For a single camera it comprises
two steps, the photometric and the internal calibration that
specifically addresses the estimation of the camera response
function [6] and the system lens-sensor ( and optionally mirror ) geometry [18, 17]. When multiple cameras are used
simultaneously, an additional calibration step is required.
It copes with the estimation of the camera cluster geome-

try, namely the set of camera poses in a common reference
frame (rf.) [8, 4]; which is generally referred to as external calibration. In many calibration algorithms and tools
this task is blended in a joint process together with the internal calibration of the cameras, using a calibration object
[2]. This solution, however, requires a simultaneous visibility of the pattern in many or even in all calibration images,
which in practice is not always feasible and does not scale
well with the increasing number of cameras and complexity of the cluster geometry. Eventually, in the recent years
the advantage of decoupling these two operations into two
different calibration phases has become clear [10]. A different approach actually neglects the external calibration and
postpones it to the further operation of the system, that is
the video capture in an uncontrolled environment. In [5]
the multicamera geometry is extracted only enforcing the
rigidity constraint, which is the constraint of the cameras
having a fixed orientations and translations between each
other. The elegant formulation based on the definition of a
virtual camera makes the system suitable also for image sequences with non-overlapping content, however it requires
the multicamera system to undergo a consistent motion and
relies on the performance of the feature tracker, which is itself dependent on the image content. Therefore this is not
the optimal solution for the calibration of an indoor immovable systems. A more flexible alternative is provided by a
single-point calibration techniques, namely the algorithms
based on the projection of a single moving point in the parallel video sequences. The latter is usually provided by a
laser pointer, which can be easily detected in each image
[16, 1]. These techniques however, despite being very powerful, are still designed as a joint framework for external
and internal calibration which limits the flexibility in case
of variation of the cluster geometry, removal of cameras or
addition of the new ones.
In this paper we present a novel approach for the multicamera systems calibration, based only on the geometrical
constraints arising from the visible epipoles and featuring
important advantages. The size of the calibration dataset is
highly reduced, therefore is less error-prone and easy to col13373

