Closed-Form Training of Mahalanobis Distance for Supervised Clustering
Marc T. Law1

Yaoliang Yu2

Matthieu Cord1

Eric P. Xing2

1

2

Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, LIP6 UMR 7606, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris, France
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA

Abstract
Clustering is the task of grouping a set of objects so that
objects in the same cluster are more similar to each other
than to those in other clusters. The crucial step in most clustering algorithms is to find an appropriate similarity metric, which is both challenging and problem-dependent. Supervised clustering approaches, which can exploit labeled
clustered training data that share a common metric with the
test set, have thus been proposed. Unfortunately, current
metric learning approaches for supervised clustering do not
scale to large or even medium-sized datasets. In this paper,
we propose a new structured Mahalanobis Distance Metric Learning method for supervised clustering. We formulate our problem as an instance of large margin structured
prediction and prove that it can be solved very efficiently
in closed-form. The complexity of our method is (in most
cases) linear in the size of the training dataset. We further reveal a striking similarity between our approach and
multivariate linear regression. Experiments on both synthetic and real datasets confirm several orders of magnitude
speedup while still achieving state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Clustering, that is, grouping a set of objects so that “similar” objects are in the same cluster while “dissimilar” objects are in different clusters is an important task in computer vision, image processing, and machine learning. A
challenging key step in most clustering algorithms is to find
a similarity measure, or equivalently a distance metric, so
that “similar” and “dissimilar” objects can be easily identified. In some applications, experts with domain knowledge
can help determine an appropriate distance metric. However, in high dimensional problems with many noisy irrelevant features, it becomes increasingly difficult even for an
expert to determine an effective metric, and standard metrics such as the Euclidean distance can lead to very poor
results. See [20, Chapter 7] for an overview on clustering.
Approaches [1, 3, 11, 17, 36] that learn an appropri-

Learned
Metric

Figure 1. Our approach learns a metric in a supervised way so that
elements in the same category (here with the same color/shape) are
organized into the same cluster.

ate distance metric from data to produce a desirable clustering result have thus been proposed. These approaches
can be roughly divided into two groups: semi-supervised
and supervised. The semi-supervised approaches [3, 36]
take into account the side information provided by the user,
usually in the form of a few pairs of items that are expected to be in the same or different clusters. The supervised approaches [1, 11, 17] assume the availability of a
labeled training sample: {(Xi , Yi ) : i = 1, . . . , m}, where
Xi = {xi,1 , . . . , xi,ni } is a set of objects to be clustered
and Yi is the desired clustering of Xi . One then learns a
distance metric so that one’s favorite clustering algorithm,
exploiting the learned distance metric, will produce a clustering close to Yi on each Xi . Supervised clustering can
be seen as a “limit” of semi-supervised clustering when all
pairwise relations are given.
Supervised clustering and semi-supervised clustering
have proven successful in many applications such as foreground/background image segmentation [17], video segmentation [32], face recognition [3], natural language processing [11], audio alignment [12], detection of important
regions in webpages [18], etc. Fig. 1 illustrates an example
where each category is represented by a color/shape, and a
metric is learned so that elements in the same category are
grouped into the same cluster. Supervised clustering tries to
group similar objects together (i.e. in the same cluster) and
separate dissimilar objects. In this paper, supervised clustering can be seen as a classification problem where every
training object has to be closer to the centroid of its category
than to the centroids of other categories.
13909

