Efficiently Creating 3D Training Data for Fine Hand Pose Estimation
Markus Oberweger
Gernot Riegler
Paul Wohlhart
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision
Graz University of Technology, Austria

Vincent Lepetit

{oberweger,riegler,wohlhart,lepetit}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
While many recent hand pose estimation methods critically rely on a training set of labelled frames, the creation
of such a dataset is a challenging task that has been overlooked so far. As a result, existing datasets are limited to a
few sequences and individuals, with limited accuracy, and
this prevents these methods from delivering their full potential. We propose a semi-automated method for efficiently
and accurately labeling each frame of a hand depth video
with the corresponding 3D locations of the joints: The user
is asked to provide only an estimate of the 2D reprojections
of the visible joints in some reference frames, which are automatically selected to minimize the labeling work by efficiently optimizing a sub-modular loss function. We then
exploit spatial, temporal, and appearance constraints to retrieve the full 3D poses of the hand over the complete sequence. We show that this data can be used to train a recent
state-of-the-art hand pose estimation method, leading to increased accuracy.

1. Introduction
Recent work on articulated pose estimation [7, 16, 24,
26, 28] has shown that a large amount of accurate training
data makes reliable and precise estimation possible. For
human bodies, Motion Capture [7] can be used to generate
large datasets with sufficient accuracy. However, creating
accurate annotations for hand pose estimation is far more
difficult, and still an unsolved problem. Motion Capture is
not an option anymore, as it is not possible to use fiducials
to track the joints of a hand. Moreover, the human hand
has more degrees of freedom than are generally considered
for 3D body tracking, and an even larger amount of training
data is probably required.
The appearance of depth sensors has made 3D hand pose
estimation easier, but has not solved the problem of the creation of training data entirely. Despite its importance, the
creation of a training set has been overlooked so far, and
authors have had to rely on ad hoc ways that are prone

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Recent hand pose datasets exhibit significant errors in
the 3D locations of the joints. (a) is from the ICVL dataset [26],
and (b) from the MSRA dataset [24]. Both datasets were annotated
by fitting a 3D hand model, which is prone to converge to a local
minimum. In contrast, (c) shows the annotations acquired with
our proposed method for the same frame as in (b). (Best viewed in
color)

to errors, as shown in Fig. 1. Complex multi-camera setups [2, 23, 28, 29] together with tracking algorithms have
typically been used to create annotations. For example,
Tompson et al. [28] used a complex camera setup with
three RGBD cameras to fit a predefined 3D hand model.
Looking closely at the resulting data, it seems that the 3D
model was often manually adjusted to fit the sequences better and in between these manually adjusted frames the fit
can be poor. Further, the dataset of [26] contains many
misplaced annotations, as discussed by [15, 25]. Although
recent datasets [24] have paid more attention to high quality annotations, they still contain annotation errors, such as
multiple annotations on a single finger, or mixing fingers.
These errors result in noisy training and test data, and make
training and evaluating uncertain. This issue was addressed
recently by [3], which shows that using a robust loss function for training rather than a least-squares one results in
better performance.
These problems can be circumvented via using synthetic
training data [19, 21, 34]. Unfortunately, this does not capture the sensor characteristics, such as noise and missing
data typical of depth sensors, nor the physical constraints
that limit the range of possible hand poses [33]. Another
common approach to creating training data is using crowd
14957

