Image Question Answering using Convolutional Neural Network
with Dynamic Parameter Prediction
Hyeonwoo Noh

Paul Hongsuck Seo

Bohyung Han

{shgusdngogo, hsseo, bhhan}@postech.ac.kr

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Korea

Abstract
We tackle image question answering (ImageQA) problem by learning a convolutional neural network (CNN) with
a dynamic parameter layer whose weights are determined
adaptively based on questions. For the adaptive parameter
prediction, we employ a separate parameter prediction network, which consists of gated recurrent unit (GRU) taking
a question as its input and a fully-connected layer generating a set of candidate weights as its output. However, it
is challenging to construct a parameter prediction network
for a large number of parameters in the fully-connected dynamic parameter layer of the CNN. We reduce the complexity of this problem by incorporating a hashing technique,
where the candidate weights given by the parameter prediction network are selected using a predefined hash function to determine individual weights in the dynamic parameter layer. The proposed network—joint network with the
CNN for ImageQA and the parameter prediction network—
is trained end-to-end through back-propagation, where its
weights are initialized using a pre-trained CNN and GRU.
The proposed algorithm illustrates the state-of-the-art performance on all available public ImageQA benchmarks.

1. Introduction
One of the ultimate goals in computer vision is holistic
scene understanding [30], which requires a system to capture various kinds of information such as objects, actions,
events, scene, atmosphere, and their relations in many different levels of semantics. Although significant progress
on various recognition tasks [5, 8, 21, 24, 26, 27, 31] has
been made in recent years, these works focus only on solving relatively simple recognition problems in controlled settings, where each dataset consists of concepts with similar
level of understanding (e.g. object, scene, bird species, face
identity, action, texture etc.). There have been less efforts
made on solving various recognition problems simultaneously, which is more complex and realistic, even though this
is a crucial step toward holistic scene understanding.

Figure 1. Sample images and questions in VQA dataset [1]. Each
question requires different type and/or level of understanding of
the corresponding input image to find correct answers.

Image question answering (ImageQA) [1, 17, 23] aims to
solve the holistic scene understanding problem by proposing a task unifying various recognition problems. ImageQA
is a task automatically answering the questions about an input image as illustrated in Figure 1. The critical challenge
of this problem is that different questions require different
types and levels of understanding of an image to find correct
answers. For example, to answer the question like “how is
the weather?” we need to perform classification on multiple
choices related to weather, while we should decide between
yes and no for the question like “is this picture taken during the day?” For this reason, not only the performance on
a single recognition task but also the capability to select a
proper task is important to solve ImageQA problem.
ImageQA problem has a short history in computer vision and machine learning community, but there already exist several approaches [10, 16, 17, 18, 23]. Among these
methods, simple deep learning based approaches that perform classification on a combination of features extracted
from image and question currently demonstrate the state-of1 30

