Efficient Temporal Sequence Comparison and Classification using Gram Matrix
Embeddings On a Riemannian Manifold∗
Xikang Zhang, Yin Wang, Mengran Gou, Mario Sznaier, Octavia Camps
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, US
zhangxk@ece.neu.edu, wang.yin@husky.neu.edu, {mengran,msznaier,camps}@coe.neu.edu

Abstract
In this paper we propose a new framework to compare
and classify temporal sequences. The proposed approach
captures the underlying dynamics of the data while avoiding
expensive estimation procedures, making it suitable to process large numbers of sequences. The main idea is to first
embed the sequences into a Riemannian manifold by using
positive definite regularized Gram matrices of their Hankelets. The advantages of the this approach are: 1) it allows
for using non-Euclidean similarity functions on the Positive
Definite matrix manifold, which capture better the underlying geometry than directly comparing the sequences or
their Hankel matrices; and 2) Gram matrices inherit desirable properties from the underlying Hankel matrices: their
rank measure the complexity of the underlying dynamics,
and the order and coefficients of the associated regressive
models are invariant to affine transformations and varying initial conditions. The benefits of this approach are
illustrated with extensive experiments in 3D action recognition using 3D joints sequences. In spite of its simplicity,
the performance of this approach is competitive or better
than using state-of-art approaches for this problem. Further, these results hold across a variety of metrics, supporting the idea that the improvement stems from the embedding
itself, rather than from using one of these metrics.

1. Introduction
Comparison and classification of temporal sequences is
a key problem in action recognition (Figure 1), event detection and abnormal activity detection. Approaches to this
problem may be divided into two categories: model-based
and data-driven. Model-based methods assume that each
sequence is generated by an implicit dynamic model or Hid∗ This work was supported in part by NSF grants IIS–1318145 and
ECCS–1404163; AFOSR grant FA9550-15-1-0392; and the Alert DHS
Center of Excellence under Award Number 2013-ST-061-ED0001.

Figure 1: 3D action recognition is an example of the class
of problems requiring efficient, robust comparison and classification of temporal sequences.

den Markov Model (HMM) with some added measurement
noise. Query sequences are classified based on whether they
fit this model or not. The main disadvantages of these approaches are that the model parameters need to be estimated
(or learned) from training data and that the learning and inference are usually time consuming, especially for high order models.
On the other hand, data-driven methods, rather than assuming an implicit model, postulate that data close to each
other, using a suitable metric, should be in the same class.
Then, query data is classified with its nearest neighbor class
label. While data-driven methods enjoy efficiency and do
not require parameter estimation, their success critically
hinges on choosing a metric that reflects well the data structure, a task that is far from trivial.
It is well known that the Euclidean distance is unsuitable
for comparing temporal sequences: sequences may have
large Euclidean distances within class but small distances
between classes. Several methods attempt to circumvent
this issue by projecting the sequences to Euclidean space.
Examples include Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [24],
specialized kernels [39], Fourier hierarchical pyramid [39],
14498

