CNN-RNN: A Unified Framework for Multi-label Image Classification
Jiang Wang1 Yi Yang1 Junhua Mao2 Zhiheng Huang3∗ Chang Huang4∗ Wei Xu1
1
Baidu Research 2 University of California at Los Angles 3 Facebook Speech 4 Horizon Robotics

Abstract
While deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
shown a great success in single-label image classification,
it is important to note that real world images generally contain multiple labels, which could correspond to different
objects, scenes, actions and attributes in an image. Traditional approaches to multi-label image classification learn
independent classifiers for each category and employ ranking or thresholding on the classification results. These techniques, although working well, fail to explicitly exploit the
label dependencies in an image. In this paper, we utilize
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to address this problem.
Combined with CNNs, the proposed CNN-RNN framework
learns a joint image-label embedding to characterize the
semantic label dependency as well as the image-label relevance, and it can be trained end-to-end from scratch to
integrate both information in a unified framework. Experimental results on public benchmark datasets demonstrate
that the proposed architecture achieves better performance
than the state-of-the-art multi-label classification models.

1. Introduction
Every real-world image can be annotated with multiple
labels, because an image normally abounds with rich semantic information, such as objects, parts, scenes, actions,
and their interactions or attributes. Modeling the rich semantic information and their dependencies is essential for
image understanding. As a result, multi-label classification
task is receiving increasing attention [12, 9, 24, 36]. Inspired by the great success from deep convolutional neural
networks in single-label image classification in the past few
years [17, 29, 32], which demonstrates the effectiveness of
end-to-end frameworks, we explore to learn a unified framework for multi-label image classification.
A common approach that extends CNNs to multi-label
classification is to transform it into multiple single-label
classification problems, which can be trained with the ranking loss [9] or the cross-entropy loss [12]. However, when
treating labels independently, these methods fail to model
∗ This work was done when the authors are at Baidu Research.

Airplane

Great Pyrenees

Archery

Sky, Grass, Runway Dog, Person, Room Person, Hat, Nike
Figure 1. We show three images randomly selected from ImageNet
2012 classification dataset. The second row shows their corresponding label annotations. For each image, there is only one label (i.e. Airplane, Great Pyrenees, Archery) annotated in the ImageNet dataset. However, every image actually contains multiple
labels, as suggested in the third row.

the dependency between multiple labels. Previous works
have shown that multi-label classification problems exhibit
strong label co-occurrence dependencies [39]. For instance,
sky and cloud usually appear together, while water and cars
almost never co-occur.
To model label dependency, most existing works are
based on graphical models [39], among which a common
approach is to model the co-occurrence dependencies with
pairwise compatibility probabilities or co-occurrence probabilities and use Markov random fields [13] to infer the final joint label probability. However, when dealing with a
large set of labels, the parameters of these pairwise probabilities can be prohibitively large while lots of the parameters are redundant if the labels have highly overlapping
meanings. Moreover, most of these methods either can not
model higher-order correlations [39], or sacrifice computational complexity to model more complicated label relationships [20]. In this paper, we explicitly model the label dependencies with recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to
capture higher-order label relationships while keeping the
computational complexity tractable. We find that RNN significantly improves classification accuracy.
For the CNN part, to avoid problems like overfitting,
previous methods normally assume all classifiers share the
same image features [36]. However, when using the same
image features to predict multiple labels, objects that are
small in the images are easily get ignored or hard to recognize independently. In this work, we design the RNNs
12285

