Seeing Behind the Camera: Identifying the Authorship of a Photograph
Christopher Thomas
Adriana Kovashka
Department of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
{chris, kovashka}@cs.pitt.edu

Abstract
We introduce the novel problem of identifying the photographer behind a photograph. To explore the feasibility of
current computer vision techniques to address this problem,
we created a new dataset of over 180,000 images taken by
41 well-known photographers. Using this dataset, we examined the effectiveness of a variety of features (low and
high-level, including CNN features) at identifying the photographer. We also trained a new deep convolutional neural network for this task. Our results show that high-level
features greatly outperform low-level features. We provide
qualitative results using these learned models that give insight into our method’s ability to distinguish between photographers, and allow us to draw interesting conclusions
about what specific photographers shoot. We also demonstrate two applications of our method.

1. Introduction
“Motif Number 1”, a simple red fishing shack on the
river, is considered the most frequently painted building
in America. Despite its simplicity, artists’ renderings of it
vary wildly from minimalistic paintings of the building focusing on the sunset behind it to more abstract portrayals
of its reflection in the water. This example demonstrates
the great creative license artists have in their trade, resulting in each artist producing works of art reflective of their
personal style. Though the differences may be more subtle, even artists practicing within the same movement will
produce distinct works, owing to different brush strokes,
choice of focus and objects portrayed, use of color, portrayal of space, and other features emblematic of the individual artist. While predicting authorship in paintings and
classifying painterly style are challenging problems, there
have been attempts in computer vision to automate these
tasks [32, 21, 19, 33, 2, 9, 5].
While researchers have made progress towards matchings the human ability to categorize paintings by style and
authorship [32, 5, 2], no attempts have been made to rec-

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Three sample photographs from our dataset
taken by Hine, Lange, and Wolcott, respectively. Our topperforming feature is able to correctly determine the author
of all three photographs, despite the very similar content
and appearance of the photos.
ognize the authorship of photographs. This is surprising
because the average person is exposed to many more photographs daily than to paintings.
Consider again the situation posed in the first paragraph,
in which multiple artists are about to depict the same scene.
However this time instead of painters, imagine that the
artists are photographers. In this case, the stylistic differences previously discussed are not immediately apparent.
The stylistic cues (such as brush stroke) available for identifying a particular artist are greatly reduced in the photographic domain due to the lessened authorial control in that
medium (we do not consider photomontaged or edited images in this study). This makes the problem of identifying
the author of a photograph significantly more challenging
than that of identifying the author of a painting.
Fig. 1 shows photographs taken by Lewis Hine,
Dorothea Lange, and Marion Wolcott, three iconic American photographers.1 All three images depict child poverty
and there are no obvious differences in style, yet our method
is able to correctly predict the author of each.
The ability to accurately extract stylistic and authorship
information from artwork computationally enables a wide
array of useful applications in the age of massive online image databases. For example, a user who wants to retrieve
1 Both Lange and Wolcott worked for the Farm Security Administration (FSA) documenting the hardship of the Great Depression, while Hine
worked to address a number of labor rights issues.

3494

