Neural Module Networks
Jacob Andreas

Marcus Rohrbach Trevor Darrell
University of California, Berkeley

Dan Klein

{jda,rohrbach,trevor,klein}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Visual question answering is fundamentally compositional in nature—a question like where is the dog? shares
substructure with questions like what color is the dog? and
where is the cat? This paper seeks to simultaneously exploit
the representational capacity of deep networks and the compositional linguistic structure of questions. We describe a
procedure for constructing and learning neural module networks, which compose collections of jointly-trained neural
“modules” into deep networks for question answering. Our
approach decomposes questions into their linguistic substructures, and uses these structures to dynamically instantiate modular networks (with reusable components for recognizing dogs, classifying colors, etc.). The resulting compound networks are jointly trained. We evaluate our approach on two challenging datasets for visual question answering, achieving state-of-the-art results on both the VQA
natural image dataset and a new dataset of complex questions about abstract shapes.

1. Introduction
This paper describes an approach to visual question answering based on a new model architecture that we call a
neural module network (NMN). This architecture makes it
possible to answer natural language questions about images
using collections of jointly-trained neural “modules”, dynamically composed into deep networks based on linguistic
structure.
Concretely, given an image and an associated question
(e.g. where is the dog?), we wish to predict a corresponding answer (e.g. on the couch, or perhaps just couch) (Figure 1). The visual question answering task has significant
significant applications to human-robot interaction, search,
and accessibility, and has been the subject of a great deal of
recent research attention [3, 10, 26, 28, 33, 40]. The task
requires sophisticated understanding of both visual scenes
and natural language. Recent successful approaches represent questions as bags of words, or encode the question using a recurrent neural network [28] and train a simple clas-

Where is
the dog?

Parser

couch

LSTM

Layout

count

dog

where

cat

color

standing

...

...

CNN

Figure 1: A schematic representation of our proposed model—the
shaded gray area is a neural module network of the kind introduced
in this paper. Our approach uses a natural language parser to dynamically lay out a deep network composed of reusable modules.
For visual question answering tasks, an additional sequence model
provides sentence context and learns common-sense knowledge.

sifier on the encoded question and image. In contrast to
these monolithic approaches, another line of work for textual QA [23] and image QA [27] uses semantic parsers to
decompose questions into logical expressions. These logical expressions are evaluated against a purely logical representation of the world, which may be provided directly or
extracted from an image [21].
In this paper we draw from both lines of research,
presenting a technique for integrating the representational
power of neural networks with the flexible compositional
structure afforded by symbolic approaches to semantics.
Rather than relying on a monolithic network structure to
answer all questions, our approach assembles a network on
the fly from a collection of specialized, jointly-learned modules (Figure 1). Rather than using logic to reason over truth
values, the representations computed by our model remain
entirely in the domain of visual features and attentions.
Our approach first analyzes each question with a semantic parser, and uses this analysis to determine the basic computational units (attention, classification, etc.) needed to answer the question, as well as the relationships between these

39

