Staple: Complementary Learners for Real-Time Tracking
Luca Bertinetto

Jack Valmadre

Stuart Golodetz Ondrej Miksik
University of Oxford

Philip H.S. Torr

{name.surname}@eng.ox.ac.uk

DSST

#1

#10

#20

#50

DAT
Staple

#1

colour histogram scores

#50

HOG

#90

#100

Figure 1: Sometimes colour distributions are not enough to discriminate the target from the background. Conversely, template
models (like HOG) depend on the spatial configuration of the object and perform poorly when this changes rapidly. Our
tracker Staple can rely on the strengths of both template and colour-based models. Like DSST [10], its performance is not
affected by non-distinctive colours (top). Like DAT [33], it is robust to fast deformations (bottom).

Abstract
Correlation Filter-based trackers have recently achieved
excellent performance, showing great robustness to challenging situations exhibiting motion blur and illumination
changes. However, since the model that they learn depends
strongly on the spatial layout of the tracked object, they
are notoriously sensitive to deformation. Models based on
colour statistics have complementary traits: they cope well
with variation in shape, but suffer when illumination is not
consistent throughout a sequence. Moreover, colour distributions alone can be insufficiently discriminative. In this
paper, we show that a simple tracker combining complementary cues in a ridge regression framework can operate
faster than 80 FPS and outperform not only all entries in the
popular VOT14 competition, but also recent and far more
sophisticated trackers according to multiple benchmarks.

1. Introduction
We consider the widely-adopted scenario of short-term,
single-object tracking, in which the target is only specified
in the first frame (using a rectangle). Short-term implies
that re-detection should not be necessary. The key challenge
of tracking an unfamiliar object in video is to be robust to
changes in its appearance. The task of tracking unfamiliar objects, for which training examples are not available in
advance, is interesting because in many situations it is not
feasible to obtain such a dataset. It is advantageous for the

algorithm to perform above real-time for computationally
intensive applications such as robotics, surveillance, video
processing and augmented reality.
Since an object’s appearance can vary significantly during a video, it is not generally effective to estimate its model
from the first frame alone and use this single, fixed model
to locate the object in all other frames. Most state-of-theart algorithms therefore employ model adaptation to take
advantage of information present in later frames. The simplest, most widespread approach is to treat the tracker’s predictions in new frames as training data with which to update
the model. The danger of learning from predictions is that
small errors can accumulate and cause model drift. This
is particularly likely to happen when the appearance of the
object changes.
In this paper, we propose Staple (Sum of Template And
Pixel-wise LEarners), a tracker that combines two image
patch representations that are sensitive to complementary
factors to learn a model that is inherently robust to both
colour changes and deformations. To maintain real-time
speed, we solve two independent ridge-regression problems, exploiting the inherent structure of each representation. Compared to other algorithms that fuse the predictions
of multiple models, our tracker combines the scores of two
models in a dense translation search, enabling greater accuracy. A critical property of the two models is that their
scores are similar in magnitude and indicative of their reliability, so that the prediction is dominated by the more

1401

