Learnt Quasi-Transitive Similarity for Retrieval from Large Collections of Faces
Ognjen Arandjelović
University of St Andrews, United Kingdom
ognjen.arandjelovic@gmail.com

Abstract
We are interested in identity-based retrieval of face sets
from large unlabelled collections acquired in uncontrolled
environments. Given a baseline algorithm for measuring
the similarity of two face sets, the meta-algorithm introduced in this paper seeks to leverage the structure of the
data corpus to make the best use of the available baseline. In particular, we show how partial transitivity of
inter-personal similarity can be exploited to improve the retrieval of particularly challenging sets which poorly match
the query under the baseline measure. We: (i) describe the
use of proxy sets as a means of computing the similarity
between two sets, (ii) introduce transitivity meta-features
based on the similarity of salient modes of appearance variation between sets, (iii) show how quasi-transitivity can be
learnt from such features without any labelling or manual
intervention, and (iv) demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed methodology through experiments on the notoriously challenging YouTube database.

1. Introduction
The dramatic increase in the capability for large amounts
of visual information to be acquired and stored witnessed in
the last 10–15 years has effected a profound change on the
context in which face recognition algorithms are expected
to operate. While the early work on face recognition focused on recognition from a single image using verification and identification protocols on small databases (usually
a few dozen people), and at least partly controlled conditions [34, 46, 48], more recent efforts have been directed towards video or image set-based recognition [10, 8, 25, 30],
and large databases acquired in highly uncontrolled environments [9, 29, 45].
Early work on face recognition in the context of large
data collections primarily sought to extend existing methods and adapt them for use on low quality images. This
includes pose normalization by affine warps [14] or simplified 3D head models [21], illumination normalization by
filtering [1, 2] and illumination invariance through the use
of local gradient-based features [4]. Later work has been

increasingly oriented towards challenges associated with
learning problems which emerge in large data sets [16, 45].
Another popular direction involves the use of text information and natural language processing to extract and associate names with detected faces [20, 36]. Concurrently with
the research on face recognition in the context of large data
collections, there has been much progress in video and setbased recognition[3, 15]. Influential contributions include
advances in the representation of face sets [17, 40], and in
particular manifold-based representations [32, 44], illumination models [11], and similarity measures [5, 13, 28, 44].
The broad topic of the present paper is that of face set
retrieval and its contribution relates both to the previous
work on set-based recognition and the work concerned with
recognition in the context of large data collections. In contrast to most work in the literature our key interest is neither
in the representation of face sets nor the associated similarity measures per se. Rather, given a baseline algorithm for
measuring the similarity of two face sets, our work seeks
to leverage the structure of the data at the large scale, that
of the entire database, to make the best use of the available
baseline. In the sense that our method has as an input both
data (face image sets) and an algorithm (the baseline), it can
be accurately described as a meta-algorithm.
Problem specification Given a query face set our aim is
to retrieve from a large database (gallery), sets of the same
person. More specifically, we wish to order the gallery
sets in decreasing order of confidence that they match the
query in identity. Thus the ideal retrieval has all sets of the
query person first (‘matches’) followed by all others (’nonmatches’). We assume that the gallery is entirely unlabelled
and may contain multiple sets of the same person.

2. Learnt transitive similarity
In this section we introduce the main contribution of
the present paper. In particular, we describe a general
framework for face retrieval especially well suited for large
collections of face images acquired ‘in the wild’ i.e. in
largely unconstrained imaging conditions, and characterized by highly unbalanced amounts of training data per class
(person). We start by motivating the intuition behind our
method in the section which follows, and subsequently ex14883

