Marr Revisited: 2D-3D Alignment via Surface Normal Prediction
Aayush Bansal1
Bryan Russell2
Abhinav Gupta1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Adobe Research
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/˜aayushb/marrRevisited/

Input&Image&

Predicted&Surface&Normal&

CAD&Model&Library&

Aligned&Models&

Figure 1. Given a single 2D image, we predict surface normals that capture detailed object surfaces. We use the image and predicted surface
normals to retrieve a 3D model from a large library of object CAD models.

Abstract
We introduce an approach that leverages surface normal predictions, along with appearance cues, to retrieve 3D
models for objects depicted in 2D still images from a large
CAD object library. Critical to the success of our approach
is the ability to recover accurate surface normals for objects
in the depicted scene. We introduce a skip-network model
built on the pre-trained Oxford VGG convolutional neural
network (CNN) for surface normal prediction. Our model
achieves state-of-the-art accuracy on the NYUv2 RGB-D
dataset for surface normal prediction, and recovers fine object detail compared to previous methods. Furthermore, we
develop a two-stream network over the input image and predicted surface normals that jointly learns pose and style
for CAD model retrieval. When using the predicted surface
normals, our two-stream network matches prior work using
surface normals computed from RGB-D images on the task
of pose prediction, and achieves state of the art when using
RGB-D input. Finally, our two-stream network allows us to
retrieve CAD models that better match the style and pose of
a depicted object compared with baseline approaches.

1. Introduction
Consider the images depicting objects shown in Figure 1.
When we humans see the objects, we can not only recognize the semantic category they belong to, e.g., “chair”, we
can also predict the underlying 3D structure, such as the occluded legs and surfaces of the chair. How do we predict
the underlying geometry? How do we even reason about
invisible surfaces? These questions have been the core area
of research in computer vision community from the beginning of the field. One of the most promising theories in
the 1970-80’s was provided by David Marr at MIT [30].
Marr believed in a feed-forward sequential pipeline for object recognition. Specifically, he proposed that recognition
involved several intermediate representations and steps. His
hypothesis was that from a 2D image, humans infer the surface layout of visible pixels, a 2.5D representation. This
2.5D representation is then processed to generate a 3D volumetric representation of the object and finally, this volumetric representation is used to categorize the object into
the semantic category.
While Marr’s theory was very popular and gained a lot
of attention, it never materialized computationally because
of three reasons: (a) estimating the surface normals for vis15965

