When VLAD met Hilbert
Mehrtash Harandi1 , Mathieu Salzmann2 , and Fatih Porikli1
1

2

NICTA∗ and Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
CVLab, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland

Abstract
In many challenging visual recognition tasks where
training data is limited, Vectors of Locally Aggregated Descriptors (VLAD) have emerged as powerful image/video
representations that compete with or outperform state-ofthe-art approaches. In this paper, we address two fundamental limitations of VLAD: its requirement for the local
descriptors to have vector form and its restriction to linear classifiers due to its high-dimensionality. To this end,
we introduce a kernelized version of VLAD. This not only
lets us inherently exploit more sophisticated classification
schemes, but also enables us to efficiently aggregate nonvector descriptors (e.g., manifold-valued data) in the VLAD
framework. Furthermore, we propose an approximate formulation that allows us to accelerate the coding process
while still benefiting from the properties of kernel VLAD.
Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach at handling manifold-valued data, such as covariance descriptors, on several classification tasks. Our results also evidence the benefits of our nonlinear VLAD descriptors against the linear ones in Euclidean space using
several standard benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
This paper introduces a nonlinear formulation of Vectors of Locally Aggregated Descriptors (VLAD) that generalizes their use to manifold-valued local descriptors, such
as symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices, and allows
them to inherently exploit more sophisticated classification
algorithms. Modern visual recognition techniques typically
represent images by aggregating local descriptors, which,
compared to image intensity, provide robustness to varying imaging conditions. From a historical point of view,
∗ NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as represented by the
Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy and
the ARC through the ICT Centre of Excellence program.

this trend gained momentum since the introduction of the
Bag-of-Words (BoW) model [38, 14, 24], which had a significant impact on recognition performance. Notable recent
developments include dictionary-based solutions [50, 51],
Fisher Vectors (FV) [30, 32], VLAD [21, 1] and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [23].
Among the aforementioned techniques, VLAD stands
out for the following reasons:
• VLAD is computed via primitive operations. This
makes VLAD extremely attractive when computational complexity is a concern, and requires virtually
no parameter-tuning, except the size of the codebook.
• In contrast to CNNs, training a VLAD encoder is
straightforward and not contingent on having a large
training set.
• VLAD can be considered as a special case of FVs and
hence inherits several of their properties. The most
eminent one is its theoretical connection to the Fisher
kernel [19].
• From an empirical point of view, VLAD has been
shown to either deliver state-of-the-art accuracy, or
compete with the state-of-the-art methods when training data is limited. For instance, for scene classification on the MIT Indoor dataset, multi-scale VLAD,
with only 4096 features, comfortably outperforms
the mixture of FV and bag-of-parts, which relies on
221550 features [13].
Despite its unique properties, VLAD comes with its own
limitations. In particular, VLAD is designed to work with
local descriptors in the form of vectors. Yet, several recent
studies in computer vision suggest that structural data (e.g.,
SPD matrices [42, 40, 15, 20], graphs [46], orthogonal matrices [11, 16]) have the potential to provide more robust descriptors. Furthermore, since VLAD typically yields a highdimensional image representation, it is mostly restricted to
be employed with linear classifiers. The effectiveness of
kernel-based methods, however, has been proven many a
time in visual recognition [12, 4, 31, 45].
4321
5185

