Slicing Convolutional Neural Network for Crowd Video Understanding
Jing Shao1
1
2

Chen Change Loy2

Kai Kang1

Xiaogang Wang1

Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

jshao@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, ccloy@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, kkang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Learning and capturing both appearance and dynamic
representations are pivotal for crowd video understanding.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have shown its remarkable potential in learning appearance representations
from images. However, the learning of dynamic representation, and how it can be effectively combined with appearance features for video analysis, remains an open problem. In this study, we propose a novel spatio-temporal CNN,
named Slicing CNN (S-CNN), based on the decomposition
of 3D feature maps into 2D spatio- and 2D temporal-slices
representations. The decomposition brings unique advantages: (1) the model is capable of capturing dynamics of
different semantic units such as groups and objects, (2) it
learns separated appearance and dynamic representations
while keeping proper interactions between them, and (3)
it exploits the selectiveness of spatial filters to discard irrelevant background clutter for crowd understanding. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed S-CNN model
on the WWW crowd video dataset for attribute recognition
and observe significant performance improvements to the
state-of-the-art methods (62.55% from 51.84% [21]).

1. Introduction
Understanding crowd behaviours and dynamic properties is a crucial task that has drawn remarkable attentions
in video surveillance research [2, 4, 8, 10, 11, 13, 17–20, 28,
29, 32]. Despite the many efforts, capturing appearance and
dynamic information from a crowd remains non-trivial. Ideally, as in most activity analysis studies, objects (i.e. groups
or individuals) of interests should be segmented from the
background, they should be further detected into different
categories, and tracking should be performed to capture the
movements of objects separately. One can then jointly consider the extracted dynamics for global understanding. Unfortunately, this typical pipeline is deemed too challenging
for crowd videos.
Can deep learning offers us a tool to address the aforementioned challenges? Contemporary CNNs are capable

Filter # 502

Filter # 106

Filter # 218

Filter # 394

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. From a crowd video volume ice ballet performance in
(b), several representative semantic feature cuboids and their temporal slices (xt and yt) are shown in (a) and (c). The temporal
slices in the ﬁrst row of (a) and (c) represent the dynamic patterns
of dancers. Slices for the background visual patterns are visualized in the second row, where the pattern in (a) corresponds to
background scene and that in (c) is audience.

of learning strong generic appearance representations from
static image sets such as ImageNet. Nevertheless, they lack
of the critical capability for learning dynamic representation. In existing approaches, a video is treated as a 3D
volume and 2D CNN is simply extended to 3D CNN [5],
mixing the appearance and dynamic feature representations
in the learned 3D ﬁlters. Instead, appearance and dynamic
features should be extracted separately, since they are encoded in different ways in videos and convey different information. Alternative solutions include sampling frames
along the temporal direction and fusing their 2D CNN feature maps at different levels [7], or feeding motion maps obtained by existing tracking or optical ﬂow methods [21, 27].
While computationally more feasible than 3D CNN, these
methods lose critical dynamic information at the input layer.
In this study, we wish to show that with innovative model
design, appearance and dynamic information can be effectively extracted at a deeper layer of CNN that conveys richer
semantical notion (i.e. groups and individuals). In our new
model design, appearance and dynamics have separate representations yet they interact seamlessly at semantic level.
We name our model as Slicing CNN (S-CNN). It consists
of three CNN branches each of which adopts different 2D
spatio- or temporal-ﬁlters. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst S-CNN
branch applies 2D spatio-slice ﬁlters on video volume (xy15620

