Predicting When Saliency Maps are Accurate and Eye Fixations Consistent
Anna Volokitin1
Michael Gygli1
Xavier Boix2,3
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
3
CBMM, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA

Abstract
Many computational models of visual attention use image features and machine learning techniques to predict
eye fixation locations as saliency maps. Recently, the success of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) for
object recognition has opened a new avenue for computational models of visual attention due to the tight link between visual attention and object recognition. In this paper, we show that using features from DCNNs for object
recognition we can make predictions that enrich the information provided by saliency models. Namely, we can estimate the reliability of a saliency model from the raw image,
which serves as a meta-saliency measure that may be used
to select the best saliency algorithm for an image. Analogously, the consistency of the eye fixations among subjects,
i.e. the agreement between the eye fixation locations of different subjects, can also be predicted and used by a designer
to assess whether subjects reach a consensus about salient
image locations.

1. Introduction
Gaze shifting allocates computational resources by selecting a subset of the visual input to be processed, c.f . [33].
Computational models of visual attention provide a reductionist view on the principles guiding attention. These
models are used both to articulate new hypotheses and to
challenge the existing ones. Machine learning techniques
that can make predictions directly from the image have
facilitated the study of visual attention in natural images.
Also, these models have found numerous applications in visual design, image compression, and some computer vision
tasks such as object tracking.
Many computational models of attention predict the image location of eye fixations, which is represented with
the so called saliency map. The seminal paper by Koch
and Ullman introduced the first computational model for
saliency prediction [21]. This model is rooted in the feature integration theory, that pioneered the characterisation

of many of the behavioural and physiological observed phenomena of visual attention [32]. Since then, a rich variety of models have been introduced to extract the saliency
map, e.g. [11, 14, 17, 18, 35].
Some authors stressed the need to predict properties of
the eye fixations beyond the saliency map to study different
phenomena of visual attention and to allow for new applications, e.g. [15, 24, 27]. Since visual attention is strongly
linked to object recognition, the advent of near-human performing object recognition techniques based on DCNNs
opens a new set of possibilities for models of visual attention. In this paper, we analyze two ways to augment the eye
fixation location information delivered by saliency models
by using features extracted from DCNNs trained for object
recognition.
Firstly, inspired by machine learning techniques that provide an estimate of their own accuracy, we show that the
accuracy of a saliency model for a given image can be predicted directly from image features. Our results show that
whether predicting the location of the human eye fixations
is possible depends on the object categories present in the
image.
Secondly, we show that the consistency of eye fixation
locations among subjects can also be predicted from features based on object recognition. In Fig. 1 we show images with different degrees of consistency among subjects,
that illustrate that eye fixation consistency varies depending
on the image. There is a plethora of results in the literature
showing that consistency varies depending on the group the
subjects belong to. There are marked differences between
subjects with autism spectrum disorders and those without [6, 20], between subjects from different cultures [5],
and between fast and slow readers [19]. Yet, the causes
of eye fixation inconsistencies among individual subjects
rather than for groups may be difficult to explain in natural
images, especially because natural images are not designed
to isolate a specific effect.
The model we introduce to predict the eye fixation consistency substantially improves the performance of a previous attempt [24], and it shows that the eye fixation consis1544

