Logistic Boosting Regression for Label Distribution Learning∗
Chao Xing, Xin Geng†, Hui Xue
Key Lab of Computer Network and Information Integration (Ministry of Education)
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China.
{xingchao, xgeng, hxue}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Label Distribution Learning (LDL) is a general learning
framework which includes both single label and multi-label
learning as its special cases. One of the main assumptions
made in traditional LDL algorithms is the derivation of the
parametric model as the maximum entropy model. While it
is a reasonable assumption without additional information,
there is no particular evidence supporting it in the problem
of LDL. Alternatively, using a general LDL model family to
approximate this parametric model can avoid the potential
influence of the specific model. In order to learn this general model family, this paper uses a method called Logistic Boosting Regression (LogitBoost) which can be seen as
an additive weighted function regression from the statistical viewpoint. For each step, we can fit individual weighted
regression function (base learner) to realize the optimization gradually. The base learners are chosen as weighted
regression tree and vector tree, which constitute two algorithms named LDLogitBoost and AOSO-LDLogitBoost in
this paper. Experiments on facial expression recognition,
crowd opinion prediction on movies and apparent age estimation show that LDLogitBoost and AOSO-LDLogitBoost
can achieve better performance than traditional LDL algorithms as well as other LogitBoost algorithms.

label case (a), the label y2 fully describes the instance, so
dyx2 = 1. For the multi-label case (b), each of the two
positive labels y2 and y4 by default describes 50% of the
instance, so dyx2 = dyx4 = 0.5. Finally, (c) represents a general case of labelP
distribution, which satisfies the constraints
dyx ∈ [0, 1] and y dyx = 1. dyx of the label distribution is
neither the label confidence nor label population. It actually represents the description degree that the corresponding label y describes the instance x. In other words, label
distribution can not only model the ambiguity of “what describes the instance”, but also deal with the more general
ambiguity of “how to describe the instance”. This example
illustrates that label distribution is more general than both
the single-label and multi-label cases, and thus can provide
more flexibility in the learning process. Inspired by this
observation, Geng and Ji [9, 7] proposed a general method
named Label Distribution Learning (LDL) which learning a
mapping from the instance to its label distribution.
y

dx
1.0

dx

y

dx

1.0

1.0

y

0.5

y1

y2

y3

y4

(a) Single-label

y5

y1

y2

y3

(b) Multi-label

y4

y5

y1

y2 y3 y4 y 5
(c) General Case

Figure 1. Three ways to label an instance

1. Introduction
Learning with ambiguity is a hot topic in recent machine
learning and computer vision research. A learning method
is essentially building a mapping from the instances to the
label space. We can use a description degree dyx as a numerical indicator to measure the relationship of the label y to
the instance x and indicate the relative label intensity. As
can be seen from Fig.1, there are mainly three ways to label
an instance in existing learning paradigms: For the single∗ This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (61273300, 61232007, 61375057) and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20140022, BK20131298).
† X. Geng is the corresponding author.

There are a lot of LDL algorithms which can fit some
real applications well. For example, Geng et al. [12] proposed two algorithms named IIS-LDL and CPNN to deal
with facial age estimation problems by constructing the age
distribution, because the faces at close ages look quite similar. Geng and Ji [9, 7] proposed BFGS-LDL algorithm by
using the effective quasi-Newton optimization to further improve IIS-LDL. Geng et al. [14, 13] proposed the AGES
algorithm based on the subspace trained on a data structure
called aging pattern vector. This algorithm was further extended to Adaptive Label Distribution Learning (ALDL) by
Geng et al. [10]. Yang et al. [22] tried to combine the LDL
with deep learning methods called Deeply Label Distribu-

4489

