A Hierarchical Pose-Based Approach to Complex Action Understanding Using
Dictionaries of Actionlets and Motion Poselets
Ivan Lillo

Juan Carlos Niebles

Alvaro Soto

P. Universidad Catolica de Chile
Santiago, Chile

Stanford University, USA
Universidad del Norte, Colombia

P. Universidad Catolica de Chile
Santiago, Chile

ialillo@uc.cl

jniebles@cs.stanford.edu

asoto@ing.uc.cl

Abstract

1. Introduction
Human action recognition in video is a key technology
for a wide variety of applications, such as smart surveillance, human-robot interaction, and video search. Consequently, it has received wide attention in the computer vision community with a strong focus on recognition of single actions in short video sequences [1, 21, 29, 36]. As
this area evolves, there has been an increasing interest to
develop more flexible models that can extract useful knowledge from longer video sequences, featuring multiple concurrent or sequential actions, which we refer to as complex
actions. Furthermore, to facilitate tasks such as video tagging or retrieval, it is important to design models that can
identify the spatial and temporal spans of each relevant ac-

Generated labels
Complex
action
Actions

In this paper, we introduce a new hierarchical model for
human action recognition using body joint locations. Our
model can categorize complex actions in videos, and perform spatio-temporal annotations of the atomic actions that
compose the complex action being performed. That is, for
each atomic action, the model generates temporal action
annotations by estimating its starting and ending times, as
well as, spatial annotations by inferring the human body
parts that are involved in executing the action. Our model
includes three key novel properties: (i) it can be trained
with no spatial supervision, as it can automatically discover
active body parts from temporal action annotations only;
(ii) it jointly learns flexible representations for motion poselets and actionlets that encode the visual variability of body
parts and atomic actions; (iii) a mechanism to discard idle
or non-informative body parts which increases its robustness to common pose estimation errors. We evaluate the
performance of our method using multiple action recognition benchmarks. Our model consistently outperforms baselines and state-of-the-art action recognition methods.

Complex
video

Performing a reading session

Right arm
Left arm
Right leg

sitting down

being sitted

Left leg

picking object
sitting down

reading

being seated
walking

standing up

putting object

Figure 1. Sample frames from a video sequence featuring a complex action. Our method is able to identify the global complex action, as well as,
the temporal and spatial span of meaningful actions (related to actionlets)
and local body part configurations (related to motion poselets).

tion. As an example, Figure 1 illustrates a potential usage scenario, where an input video featuring a complex action is automatically annotated by identifying its underlying
atomic actions and corresponding spatio-temporal spans.
A promising research direction for reasoning about complex human actions is to explicitly incorporate body pose
representations. In effect, as noticed long ago, body poses
are highly informative to discriminate among human actions [13]. Similarly, recent works have also demonstrated
the relevance of explicitly incorporating body pose information in action recognition models [11, 30]. While human
body pose estimation from color images remains elusive,
the emergence of accurate and cost-effective RGBD cameras has enabled the development of robust techniques to
identify body joint locations and to infer body poses [25].
In this work, we present a new pose-based approach to
recognizing and provide detailed information about complex human actions in RGBD videos. Specifically, given
a video featuring a complex action, our model can identify the complex action occurring in the video, as well as,
the set of atomic actions that compose this complex action.
Furthermore, for each atomic action, the model is also able
to generate temporal annotations by estimating its starting
11981

