DeepFashion: Powering Robust Clothes Recognition and Retrieval
with Rich Annotations
Ziwei Liu1
1

Ping Luo3,1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

2

Shi Qiu2

Xiaogang Wang1,3

SenseTime Group Limited

3

Xiaoou Tang1,3

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS

{lz013,pluo,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, sqiu@sensetime.com, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Recent advances in clothes recognition have been driven
by the construction of clothes datasets. Existing datasets
are limited in the amount of annotations and are difficult to cope with the various challenges in real-world
applications. In this work, we introduce DeepFashion1 ,
a large-scale clothes dataset with comprehensive annotations. It contains over 800,000 images, which are richly
annotated with massive attributes, clothing landmarks, and
correspondence of images taken under different scenarios
including store, street snapshot, and consumer. Such rich
annotations enable the development of powerful algorithms
in clothes recognition and facilitating future researches. To
demonstrate the advantages of DeepFashion, we propose a
new deep model, namely FashionNet, which learns clothing
features by jointly predicting clothing attributes and landmarks. The estimated landmarks are then employed to pool
or gate the learned features. It is optimized in an iterative
manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of FashionNet and the usefulness of DeepFashion.

1. Introduction
Recently, extensive research efforts have been devoted
to clothes classification [11, 1, 29], attribute prediction
[3, 13, 4, 24], and clothing item retrieval [17, 6, 10, 27, 15],
because of their potential values to the industry. However, clothes recognition algorithms are often confronted
with three fundamental challenges when adopted in realworld applications [12]. First, clothes often have large
variations in style, texture, and cutting, which confuse
existing systems. Second, clothing items are frequently
subject to deformation and occlusion. Third, clothing
images often exhibit serious variations when they are taken
under different scenarios, such as selfies vs. online shopping
photos.
Previous studies tried to handle the above challenges by
annotating clothes datasets either with semantic attributes
1 The dataset is available at: http://mmlab.ie.cuhk.edu.hk/
projects/DeepFashion.html

(a)

(b)
Top

Dress

Skirt

Tee

Sweater
Hoodie

Cutoffs
Jeans

Kimono
Chinos

Blazer

Figure 1. (a) Additional landmark locations improve clothes recognition.
(b) Massive attributes lead to better partition of the clothing feature space.

(e.g. color, category, texture) [1, 3, 6], clothing locations
(e.g. masks of clothes) [20, 12], or cross-domain image
correspondences [10, 12]. However, different datasets are
annotated with different information. A unified dataset
with all the above annotations is desired. This work fills
in this gap. As illustrated in Fig.1, we show that clothes
recognition can benefit from learning these annotations
jointly. In Fig.1 (a), given the additional landmark locations
may improve recognition. As shown in Fig.1 (b), massive
attributes lead to better partition of the clothing feature
space, facilitating the recognition and retrieval of crossdomain clothes images.
To facilitate future researches, we introduce DeepFashion, a comprehensively annotated clothes dataset that contains massive attributes, clothing landmarks, as well as
cross-pose/cross-domain correspondences of clothing pairs.
This dataset enjoys several distinct advantages over its
precedents. (1) Comprehensiveness - images of DeepFashion are richly annotated with categories, attributes, land-

1096

