Recurrent Attentional Networks for Saliency Detection
Jason Kuen, Zhenhua Wang, Gang Wang∗
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University.
{jkuen001,wzh,wanggang}@ntu.edu.sg

input image

Abstract
Convolutional-deconvolution networks can be adopted
to perform end-to-end saliency detection. But, they do not
work well with objects of multiple scales. To overcome
such a limitation, in this work, we propose a recurrent attentional convolutional-deconvolution network (RACDNN).
Using spatial transformer and recurrent network units,
RACDNN is able to iteratively attend to selected image
sub-regions to perform saliency refinement progressively.
Besides tackling the scale problem, RACDNN can also
learn context-aware features from past iterations to enhance saliency refinement in future iterations. Experiments
on several challenging saliency detection datasets validate
the effectiveness of RACDNN, and show that RACDNN outperforms state-of-the-art saliency detection methods.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection refers to the challenging computer vision task of identifying salient objects in imagery and segmenting their object boundaries. Despite that it has been
studied for years, saliency detection still remains an unsolved research problem due to its tough goal to model
high-level subjective human perceptions. Recently, saliency
detection methods have received considerable amount of attention, as there is a wide and growing range of applications facilitated by it. Some of the notable applications of
saliency detection are object recognition [40], visual tracking [5], and image retrieval [7].
Traditionally, methods in saliency detection leverage
low-level saliency priors such as contrast prior and center
prior to model and approximate human saliency. However,
such low-level priors can hardly capture high-level information about the objects and its surroundings: the traditional
methods are still very far away from how saliency works in
the context of human perceptions. To incorporate high-level
visual concepts into a saliency detection framework, it is
∗ Corresponding author

initial saliency map

re ned saliency map

Figure 1. An example of applying recurrent attention-based
saliency refinement to an initial saliency map produced by
convolutional-deconvolutional network. Compared to the initial
saliency map, the refined saliency map has significantly sharper
edges and preserves more object details.

natural to consider convolutional neural networks (CNN).
For a lot of computer vision tasks [15], CNNs have shown
to be remarkably effective. It is also the first learning algorithm to achieve human-competitive performances [18] in
large-scale image classification task, which is a high-level
vision task like saliency detection. Although there have
been works on developing CNNs for visual saliency modeling, they either focus on predicting eye fixations [31], or
applying CNNs to predict just the saliency value of visual
sub-units (e.g. superpixels) independently [49]. Besides,
conventional CNNs downsize feature maps over multiple
convolutional and pooling layers and lose detailed information for our problem of densely segmenting salient objects.
Inspired by the success of convolutionaldeconvolutional network (CNN-DecNN) in semantic
segmentation [36], in this paper, we adapt the network
to detect salient objects in an end-to-end fashion. For
this framework, the input is an image, and the output
is its corresponding saliency map. A deconvolutional
network (DecNN) is a variant of CNN that performs
convolution and unpooling to produce dense pixel-precise
outputs. However, CNN-DecNN works poorly for objects
of multiple scales [33, 36] due to the fixed-size receptive
fields. To overcome this limitation, we propose a recurrent
attentional convolutional-deconvolutional network
(RACDNN) to refine the saliency maps generated by CNNDeCNN. RACDNN uses spatial transformer and recurrent

3668

