Structured Feature Learning for Pose Estimation
Xiao Chu Wanli Ouyang Hongsheng Li Xiaogang Wang
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
xchu@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

wlouyang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

In this paper, we propose a structured feature learning
framework to reason the correlations among body joints
at the feature level in human pose estimation. Different
from existing approaches of modeling structures on score
maps or predicted labels, feature maps preserve substantially richer descriptions of body joints. The relationships
between feature maps of joints are captured with the introduced geometrical transform kernels, which can be easily
implemented with a convolution layer. Features and their
relationships are jointly learned in an end-to-end learning
system. A bi-directional tree structured model is proposed,
so that the feature channels at a body joint can well receive
information from other joints. The proposed framework improves feature learning substantially. With very simple post
processing, it reaches the best mean PCP on the LSP and
FLIC datasets. Compared with the baseline of learning features at each joint separately with ConvNet, the mean PCP
has been improved by 18% on FLIC. The code is released
to the public. 1

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation is to estimate the locations of
body joints from images. It can assist a variety of vision
tasks such as action recognition [29, 33], tracking [6], person re-identification [32], and human computer interaction.
Despite the long history of efforts, it is still a challenging
problem. The large variation in limb orientation, clothing,
viewpoints, background clutters, truncation, and occlusion
make localization of body joints difficult.
Independent prediction of body joint locations from appearance score maps can be refined by modeling the spatial relationship among correlated body joints [35, 5, 19].
On score maps, the information at a location is summarized
1 The

code can be found at http://www.ee.cuhk.edu.hk/
˜xgwang/projectpage_structured_feature_pose.html.
For more technical details, please contact the corresponding authors Wanli
Ouyang and Xiaogang Wang

Input2image

ConvNet

…

(1)

(2)

Structured2feature

Score2maps

Abstract

a

b

I1
e5

I2
e4

c
e1
e2
e3
e4
e5
e6
e7
e1
e2
e3
e4
e5
e6
e7

e

d

h2

h6

h1
h2
h3
h4
h5
h6
h7
h1
h2
h3
h4
h5
h6
h7

Figure 1. (1) Our approach jointly learns feature maps at different body joints and the spatial and co-occurrence relationships between feature maps. The information from different joints passes
at the feature level. (a) Two input images (I1 and I2) with different
poses. (c) Responses of feature channels for elbow (e1-e7). (I1,
b) is the response map of e5 for image I1. (I2, b) is the response
map of e4 for image I2. Similarly, (d) and (e) show the response
maps and responses of different feature channels for lower arm.

into a single probability value, indicating the likelihood of
the existence of the corresponding body joint. For example,
if a location on the score map of elbow has a large response,
we can only reach the conclusion that this location may belong to elbow, but cannot tell the in-plane and out-plane
rotation of the elbow, the orientations of the upper arm and
the lower arm associated with it, whether it is covered with
clothes, and its occlusion status. Such detailed information
is valuable for predicting the locations of other body joints,
but is missed from the score maps, which makes structural
learning among body joints much less effective.
We observe that these types of information are well preserved at the feature level, where hierarchical feature representations are learned with Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) [16, 36, 22, 23, 24]. Fig. 1 shows the responses of
feature maps of elbow and lower arm for different input images. Given the V-shaped elbow covered with clothes in I1,
14715

