Object Contour Detection with a Fully Convolutional Encoder-Decoder Network
Jimei Yang
Adobe Research

Brian Price
Adobe Research

Scott Cohen
Adobe Research

jimyang@adobe.com

bprice@adobe.com

scohen@adobe.com

Honglak Lee
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Ming-Hsuan Yang
UC Merced

honglak@umich.edu

mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
We develop a deep learning algorithm for contour detection with a fully convolutional encoder-decoder network.
Different from previous low-level edge detection, our algorithm focuses on detecting higher-level object contours.
Our network is trained end-to-end on PASCAL VOC with
refined ground truth from inaccurate polygon annotations,
yielding much higher precision in object contour detection
than previous methods. We find that the learned model generalizes well to unseen object classes from the same supercategories on MS COCO and can match state-of-the-art
edge detection on BSDS500 with fine-tuning. By combining
with the multiscale combinatorial grouping algorithm, our
method can generate high-quality segmented object proposals, which significantly advance the state-of-the-art on PASCAL VOC (improving average recall from 0.62 to 0.67) with
a relatively small amount of candidates (∼1660 per image).

1. Introduction
Object contour detection is fundamental for numerous
vision tasks. For example, it can be used for image segmentation [44, 3], for object detection [16, 19], and for occlusion and depth reasoning [22, 2]. Given its axiomatic importance, however, we find that object contour detection is
relatively under-explored in the literature [49]. At the same
time, many works have been devoted to edge detection that
responds to both foreground objects and background boundaries (Figure 1 (b)). In this paper, we address “object-only”
contour detection that is expected to suppress background
boundaries (Figure 1(c)).
Edge detection has a long history. Early research focused on designing simple filters to detect pixels with highest gradients in their local neighborhood, e.g. Sobel [17]
and Canny [9]. The main problem with filter based methods

(a) Image

(b) [13]

Ours

Figure 1. Object contour detection. Given input images (a), our
model can effectively learn to detect contours of foreground objects (c) in contrast to traditional edge detection (b).

is that they only look at the color or brightness differences
between adjacent pixels but cannot tell the texture differences in a larger receptive field. With the advance of texture
descriptors [37], Martin et al. [39] combined color, brightness and texture gradients in their probabilistic boundary
detector. Arbelaez et al. [3] further improved upon this
by computing local cues from multiscale and spectral clustering, known as gPb, which yields state-of-the-art accuracy. However, the globalization step of gPb significantly
increases the computational load. Lim and Dollar [32, 13]
analyzed the clustering structure of local contour maps and
developed efficient supervised learning algorithms for fast
edge detection [13]. These efforts lift edge detection to a
higher abstract level, but still fall below human perception
due to their lack of object-level knowledge.
Recently deep convolutional networks [31] have demonstrated remarkable ability of learning high-level representations for object recognition [19, 11]. These learned features have been adopted to detect natural image edges [27,
6, 46, 51] and yield a new state-of-the-art performance [51].
All these methods require training on ground truth contour
annotations. However, since it is very challenging to collect high-quality contour annotations, the available datasets
1193

