Volumetric and Multi-View CNNs for Object Classification on 3D Data
Charles R. Qi∗

Hao Su∗

Matthias Nießner Angela Dai
Stanford University

Abstract
3D shape models are becoming widely available and
easier to capture, making available 3D information crucial
for progress in object classification. Current state-of-theart methods rely on CNNs to address this problem. Recently,
we witness two types of CNNs being developed: CNNs
based upon volumetric representations versus CNNs based
upon multi-view representations. Empirical results from
these two types of CNNs exhibit a large gap, indicating
that existing volumetric CNN architectures and approaches
are unable to fully exploit the power of 3D representations.
In this paper, we aim to improve both volumetric CNNs
and multi-view CNNs according to extensive analysis of
existing approaches. To this end, we introduce two distinct
network architectures of volumetric CNNs. In addition,
we examine multi-view CNNs, where we introduce multiresolution filtering in 3D. Overall, we are able to outperform current state-of-the-art methods for both volumetric
CNNs and multi-view CNNs. We provide extensive experiments designed to evaluate underlying design choices, thus
providing a better understanding of the space of methods
available for object classification on 3D data.

1. Introduction
Understanding 3D environments is a vital element of
modern computer vision research due to paramount relevance in many vision systems, spanning a wide field of
application scenarios from self-driving cars to autonomous
robots. Recent advancements in real-time SLAM techniques and crowd-sourcing of virtual 3D models have additionally facilitated the availability of 3D data. [26, 31, 28,
30, 2]. This development has encouraged the lifting of 2D to
3D for deep learning, opening up new opportunities with the
additional information of 3D data; e.g., aligning models is
easier in 3D Euclidean space. In this paper, we specifically
focus on the object classification task on 3D data obtained
from both CAD models and commodity RGB-D sensors. In
* indicates equal contributions.

Mengyuan Yan

Leonidas J. Guibas

addition, we demonstrate retrieval results in the supplemental material.
While the extension of 2D convolutional neural networks
to 3D seems natural, the additional computational complexity (volumetric domain) and data sparsity introduces
significant challenges; for instance, in an image, every pixel
contains observed information, whereas in 3D, a shape is
only defined on its surface. Seminal work by Wu et al.
[30] propose volumetric CNN architectures on volumetric
grids for object classification and retrieval. While these
approaches achieve good results, it turns out that training a
CNN on multiple 2D views achieves a significantly higher
performance, as shown by Su et al. [29], who augment their
2D CNN with pre-training from ImageNet RGB data [6].
These results indicate that existing 3D CNN architectures
and approaches are unable to fully exploit the power of 3D
representations. In this work, we analyze these observations
and evaluate the design choices. Moreover, we show how to
reduce the gap between volumetric CNNs and multi-view
CNNs by efficiently augmenting training data, introducing
new CNN architectures in 3D. Finally, we examine multiview CNNs; our experiments show that we are able to
improve upon state of the art with improved training data
augmentation and a new multi-resolution component.
Problem Statement We consider volumetric representations of 3D point clouds or meshes as input to the 3D
object classification problem. This is primarily inspired
by recent advances in real-time scanning technology, which
use volumetric data representations. We further assume that
the input data is already pre-segmented by 3D bounding
boxes. In practice, these bounding boxes can be extracted
using the sliding windows, object proposals, or background
subtraction. The output of the method is the category label
of the volumetric data instance.
Approach We provide a detailed analysis over factors that
influence the performance of volumetric CNNs, including
network architecture and volumn resolution. Based upon
our analysis, we strive to improve the performance of volumetric CNNs. We propose two volumetric CNN network
architectures that signficantly improve state-of-the-art of

5648

