Minimizing the Maximal Rank
Erik Bylow1
Carl Olsson1
1
Centre for Mathematical Sciences
Lund University, Sweden

Fredrik Kahl1,2
Mikael Nilsson1
2
Department of Signals and Systems
Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden

{erikb,calle,micken}@maths.lth.se

Abstract
In computer vision, many problems can be formulated as
finding a low rank approximation of a given matrix. Ideally,
if all elements of the measurement matrix are available, this
is easily solved in the L2 -norm using factorization. However, in practice this is rarely the case. Lately, this problem has been addressed using different approaches, one is
to replace the rank term by the convex nuclear norm, another is to derive the convex envelope of the rank term plus
a data term. In the latter case, matrices are divided into
sub-matrices and the envelope is computed for each subblock individually. In this paper a new convex envelope is
derived which takes all sub-matrices into account simultaneously. This leads to a simpler formulation, using only one
parameter to control the trade-of between rank and data fit,
for applications where one seeks low rank approximations
of multiple matrices with the same rank. We show in this
paper how our general framework can be used for manifold denoising of several images at once, as well as just
denoising one image. Experimental comparisons show that
our method achieves results similar to state-of-the-art approaches while being applicable for other problems such as
linear shape model estimation.

1. Introduction
Low rank approximation and PCA type procedures are
important in many disciplines, for example, statistics, bioinformatics, compression and prediction. In computer vision it has been proven useful for applications such as nonrigid and articulated structure from motion [5, 23, 12], photometric stereo [3], optical flow [13] and linear shape models [8, 22]. The rank of the approximating matrix typically
describes the complexity of the solution. Therefore one
seeks to find a low rank factorization U V T ≈ M . If the
measurement matrix M is complete and the rank of the appoximating matrix is known, then the best approximation,
in a least squares sense, can be computed in closed form

fredrik.kahl@chalmers.se

using the singular value decomposition (SVD) [10].
Alternatively the problem can be formulated as minimization of the objective function
f (X) = µ rank(X) + kX − M k2F .

(1)

Here µ is a parameter that controls the trade-off between
data fit and rank. While the solution is easy to compute
using SVD the optimization problem itself is non-convex
and non-differentiable. As a consequence it is difficult to
modify the formulation without having to resort to heuristic optimization approaches. For example, in case there are
missing entries and/or outliers the optimization problem is
substantially more difficult. In structure from motion, recent approaches [11, 20] attack these problems by optimizing jointly over fixed size U and V matrices. As a consequence the rank has to be predetermined and the quality of
the result is dependent on initialization.
To achieve flexible formulations that are independent of
initialization, researchers have instead started to consider
convex surrogates of the rank function. Most commonly the
convex nuclear norm, or sum-of-singular-values penalty is
used [18, 6, 17, 2, 7]. One reason for its popularity is that it
can be shown that if the locations of the missing entries are
random the approach gives the best low rank approximation
[6]. In many computer vision applications missing entry
locations are highly correlated which makes the approach
break down.
An additional downside of using the nuclear norm is that
it has a bias to small solutions. Due to its definition it penalizes both small and large singular values equally. Indeed its
proximal operator corresponds to soft thresholding [6]. In
contrast, the desirable operation of hard thresholding, which
is performed when solving (1) with SVD, leaves the larger
singular values unchanged.
A convex formulation that only penalizes the small singular values was recently proposed in [16]. It is shown that
the convex envelope of (1) is given by
f ∗∗ (X) =

n
X
i=1

15887


√
µ − [ µ − σi (X)]2+ + kX − M k2F , (2)

