Improving the Robustness of Deep Neural Networks via Stability Training
Stephan Zheng
Google, Caltech

Yang Song
Google

Thomas Leung
Google

Ian Goodfellow
Google

stzheng@caltech.edu

yangsong@google.com

leungt@google.com

goodfellow@google.com

Abstract
In this paper we address the issue of output instability
of deep neural networks: small perturbations in the visual
input can significantly distort the feature embeddings and
output of a neural network. Such instability affects many
deep architectures with state-of-the-art performance on a
wide range of computer vision tasks. We present a general
stability training method to stabilize deep networks against
small input distortions that result from various types of common image processing, such as compression, rescaling, and
cropping. We validate our method by stabilizing the stateof-the-art Inception architecture [11] against these types of
distortions. In addition, we demonstrate that our stabilized
model gives robust state-of-the-art performance on largescale near-duplicate detection, similar-image ranking, and
classification on noisy datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks learn feature embeddings of the
input data that enable state-of-the-art performance in a wide
range of computer vision tasks, such as visual recognition
[3, 11] and similar-image ranking [13]. Due to this success, neural networks are now routinely applied to vision
tasks on large-scale un-curated visual datasets that, for instance, can be obtained from the Internet. Such un-curated
visual datasets often contain small distortions that are undetectable to the human eye, due to the large diversity in
formats, compression, and manual post-processing that are
commonly applied to visual data in the wild. These lossy
image processes do not change the correct ground truth labels and semantic content of the visual data, but can significantly confuse feature extractors, including deep neural
networks. Namely, when presented with a pair of indistinguishable images, state-of-the-art feature extractors can
produce two significantly different outputs.
In fact, current feature embeddings and class labels are
not robust to a large class of small perturbations. Recently,
it has become known that intentionally engineered imperceptible perturbations of the input can change the class label

Figure 1: Near-duplicate images can confuse state-of-the-art neural networks due to feature embedding instability. Left and middle
columns: near-duplicates with small (left) and large (middle) feature distance. Image A is the original, image B is a JPEG version
at quality factor 50. Right column: a pair of dissimilar images. In
each column we display the pixel-wise difference of image A and
image B, and the feature distance D [13]. Because the feature distances of the middle near-duplicate pair and the dissimilar image
pair are comparable, near-duplicate detection using a threshold on
the feature distance will confuse the two pairs.

output by the model [1, 12]. A scientific contribution of this
paper is the demonstration that these imperceptible perturbations can also occur without being contrived and widely
occur due to compression, resizing, and cropping corruptions in visual input.
As such, output instability poses a significant challenge
for the large-scale application of neural networks because
high performance at large scale requires robust performance
on noisy visual inputs. Feature instability complicates
tasks such as near-duplicate detection, which is essential for
large-scale image retrieval and other applications. In nearduplicate detection, the goal is to detect whether two given
images are visually similar or not. When neural networks
14480

