RAW Image Reconstruction using
a Self-Contained sRGB-JPEG Image with only 64 KB Overhead
Rang M. H. Nguyen
Michael S. Brown
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
nguyenho@comp.nus.edu.sg | brown@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Most camera images are saved as 8-bit standard RGB
(sRGB) compressed JPEGs. Even when JPEG compression is set to its highest quality, the encoded sRGB image
has been significantly processed in terms of color and tone
manipulation. This makes sRGB-JPEG images undesirable
for many computer vision tasks that assume a direct relationship between pixel values and incoming light. For such
applications, the RAW image format is preferred, as RAW
represents a minimally processed, sensor-specific RGB image with higher dynamic range that is linear with respect
to scene radiance. The drawback with RAW images, however, is that they require large amounts of storage and are
not well-supported by many imaging applications. To address this issue, we present a method to encode the necessary metadata within an sRGB image to reconstruct a
high-quality RAW image. Our approach requires no calibration of the camera and can reconstruct the original RAW
to within 0.3% error with only a 64 KB overhead for the additional data. More importantly, our output is a fully selfcontained 100% complainant sRGB-JPEG file that can be
used as-is, not affecting any existing image workflow - the
RAW image can be extracted when needed, or ignored otherwise. We detail our approach and show its effectiveness
against competing strategies.

1. Introduction
The vast majority of images used in computer vision
and image processing applications are 8-bit standard RGB
(sRGB) images, typically saved using the JPEG compression standard. Virtually all image processing application
workflows support sRGB and JPEG images. There are
many drawbacks, however, when working with sRGB images, e.g. it is well known that sRGB images have a number
of non-linear operations applied that makes it difficult to relate the sRGB values back to scene radiance [3, 8, 13, 17,
22, 24].

(a) sRGB JPEG (9,788KB + 64KB)

(b) Groundtruth RAW (25,947KB)
0.10
0.075
0.05
0.025

(c) Reconstructed RAW

(d) Error Map (RMSE: 0.002)

Figure 1. (a) A 5616 × 3744 resolution high-quality sRGB-JPEG
with our metadata embedded (original JPEG size of 9,788 KB,
new size of 9,852 KB). (b) Original RAW image is 25,947 KB. (c)
Our reconstructed RAW image using the data in the self-contained
JPEG. (d) Error map between (b) and (c). Overall reconstruction
error is 0.2%.

Most cameras now allow images to be saved in a RAW
image format that is an uncompressed, minimally processed
image representing the response from the camera sensor.
RAW has many advantages over sRGB, including linear response to scene radiance, wider color gamut, and higher
dynamic range (generally 12 − 14 bits). Not surprisingly,
RAW is desirable for many computer vision applications,
such as photometric stereo, image restoration (e.g. deblurring), white-balance, and more. RAW is also preferred
by photographers as it allows the most flexility in postprocessing image manipulation. One of the major drawbacks is that RAW files takes up significantly more space
than their sRGB counterpart. In addition, the vast majority of all existing image-based applications are designed
to work with 8-bit sRGB images. Images saved in RAW
must typically undergo some intermediate process to convert them into sRGB to be useful for many existing tasks.
Given the utility of RAW image data, there has been a
number of approaches to map sRGB images back to the

1655

