3D Reconstruction of Transparent Objects with Position-Normal Consistency
Yiming Qian
University of Alberta

Minglun Gong
Memorial University of Newfoundland

Yee-Hong Yang
University of Alberta

yqian3@ualberta.ca

gong@cs.mun.ca

yang@cs.ualberta.ca

Abstract
Estimating the shape of transparent and refractive objects is one of the few open problems in 3D reconstruction.
Under the assumption that the rays refract only twice when
traveling through the object, we present the first approach
to simultaneously reconstructing the 3D positions and normals of the object’s surface at both refraction locations.
Our acquisition setup requires only two cameras and one
monitor, which serves as the light source. After acquiring
the ray-ray correspondences between each camera and the
monitor, we solve an optimization function which enforces
a new position-normal consistency constraint. That is, the
3D positions of surface points shall agree with the normals
required to refract the rays under Snell’s law. Experimental
results using both synthetic and real data demonstrate the
robustness and accuracy of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction of real objects is an important topic
in both computer vision and graphics. Many techniques
have been proposed for capturing the shapes of opaque objects using either active [36] or passive [5] manners. However, accurately reconstructing transparent objects, made of
glass and crystal, remains an open and challenging problem. The difficulties are caused by several factors. Firstly,
these objects do not have their own colors but acquire their
appearances from surrounding diffuse objects. Hence, conventional color/texture matching based approaches cannot
be applied. Secondly, transparent objects interact with light
in complex manners including reflection, refraction, scattering and absorption. Tracing the poly-linear light paths
is very difficult, if not impossible. Thirdly, the behavior of
refraction depends on the object’s refractive index, which is
usually unknown.
Previous approaches of 3D transparent object reconstruction can be roughly classified into three groups [17,
18]: reflection-based, refraction-based, and intrusive methods. The first group attempts to reconstruct the objects
by utilizing the specular highlights on the object surface

[21, 25]. By analyzing only the surface reflection properties, such approaches can reconstruct transparent objects
with complex and inhomogeneous interior. However, unlike opaque objects, only a small amount of light is reflected from the transparent object’s surface. To measure
the weak reflection, precise controlling and adjusting the
light positions are usually required. The second group exploits the refraction characteristics of transparent objects.
Many methods simplify the problem by considering only
one-refraction events, either assuming that the surface facing away from the camera is planar [29] or that the object
is thin [34]. As well, the refractive index is required to be
known for surface normal estimation. Although the problem of two-refraction events has been investigated theoretically [20], the setup requires high precision movements of
both the object and the light source, making the approach
hard to use and the results difficult, if not impossible, to reproduce. Finally, intrusive methods either rely on special
devices (e.g. light field probes [34], diffuse coating [12])
or by immersing the object in special liquids [14, 15, 31],
which are often impractical and may even damage the objects. Hence, there is a need for a practical approach that can
accurately reconstruct transparent objects using a portable
setup.
This paper presents a new refraction-based approach for
reconstructing homogeneous transparent objects, through
which light is redirected twice. As is commonly done, interreflections within the object are assumed to be negligible.
By introducing a novel position-normal consistency constraint, an optimization procedure is designed, which jointly
reconstructs the 3D positions and normals at two refraction
locations. The refractive index of the object can also be reliably estimated by minimizing a new reconstruction error
metric. Further, our acquisition setup is simple and inexpensive, which consists of two cameras and one monitor,
all of which do not require precise positioning.

2. Related Work
Although the problems of reconstructing dynamic wavefronts [9, 24] and gas flows [4, 19, 22] are also related to
our work, here we focus our review on recent works for
14369

