Saliency Unified: A Deep Architecture for simultaneous Eye Fixation Prediction
and Salient Object Segmentation
Srinivas S S Kruthiventi, Vennela Gudisa, Jaley H Dholakiya and R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Department of Computational and Data Sciences,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

Abstract
Human eye fixations often correlate with locations of
salient objects in the scene. However, only a handful of
approaches have attempted to simultaneously address the
related aspects of eye fixations and object saliency. In
this work, we propose a deep convolutional neural network
(CNN) capable of predicting eye fixations and segmenting
salient objects in a unified framework. We design the initial network layers, shared between both the tasks, such
that they capture the object level semantics and the global
contextual aspects of saliency, while the deeper layers of
the network address task specific aspects. In addition, our
network captures saliency at multiple scales via inceptionstyle convolution blocks. Our network shows a significant
improvement over the current state-of-the-art for both eye
fixation prediction and salient object segmentation across a
number of challenging datasets.

1. Introduction
Among the various striking features of the human visual
system, the ability to discriminate and selectively pay attention to a few regions in the scene over others, distinctly
sets it apart. This phenomenon of selective visual attention has been a topic of interest for researchers in the fields
of both neuroscience and computer vision over the past
few decades [1, 2]. Modelling this focus of attention, also
termed as visual saliency, not only gives an insight into human vision, but also has various applications such as image
retargetting [3], object recognition [4], visual tracking [5],
foveated video compression [6] etc.
Computational models for visual saliency often aim to
solve one of the two problems - Predict the locations where
an observer will fixate while free-viewing an image; Detect
and segment the objects in a scene which grab our immediate attention. Eye fixation locations are considered to be
indicative of the bottom-up visual attentional mechanism
in humans. Models to predict fixation locations output a

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Illustrative images (a) with their corresponding eye fixation predictions (b), groundtruth (c) and salient object segmentation predictions (d), groundtruth (e).

saliency map - ‘a topographical map representing the conspicuity of each pixel in the image’ [7]. The second task
of salient object segmentation requires the generation of a
pixel-accurate binary map indicating the presence of striking objects in the image. An example image with eye fixation and salient object segmentation maps generated by our
model along with the ground-truth maps are shown in Fig. 1.
Recent studies have shown that the two tasks of eye fixation prediction and salient object segmentation are correlated [8, 9]. Human eye fixations are often found to be
guided by the locations of salient objects in the scene. This
hypothesis of task correlation is bolstered by the work of Li
et al. [9] who used a simple eye fixation based model for
segmenting salient objects in an image and achieved stateof-the-art results. Nevertheless, only a handful of the works
in visual saliency attempt to solve these two problems together [9]. In this work, we propose a deep network model
which performs both these tasks simultaneously.
Early approaches for modeling saliency were driven
by manually crafting features [10, 11] for over-segmented
image regions and estimating their saliency using machine learning or optimization methods. However, recent
advances in deep learning and the availability of large
datasets have enabled models to perform end-to-end learning. Specifically, the success of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for various computer vision tasks, has led to
a shift in focus from a paradigm of devising innovative features and techniques of combining them, to that of learning
complex representations from data directly.

5781

