Latent Factor Guided Convolutional Neural Networks for Age-Invariant Face
Recognition
Yandong Wen1,2 , Zhifeng Li2∗, Yu Qiao2
1
2

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology

Shenzhen Key Lab of Comp. Vis. & Pat. Rec., Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China
yd.wen@siat.ac.cn, zhifeng.li@siat.ac.cn, yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
While considerable progresses have been made on face
recognition, age-invariant face recognition (AIFR) still remains a major challenge in real world applications of face
recognition systems. The major difficulty of AIFR arises
from the fact that the facial appearance is subject to significant intra-personal changes caused by the aging process
over time. In order to address this problem, we propose
a novel deep face recognition framework to learn the ageinvariant deep face features through a carefully designed
CNN model. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
attempt to show the effectiveness of deep CNNs in advancing the state-of-the-art of AIFR. Extensive experiments are
conducted on several public domain face aging datasets
(MORPH Album2, FGNET, and CACD-VS) to demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed model over the state-ofthe-art. We also verify the excellent generalization of our
new model on the famous LFW dataset.

1. Introduction
Face recognition is one of the most active areas in computer vision community. It has been studied for several
decades with substantial progresses. Most of the existing
research focuses on general face recognition. There are
very limited work directly on age-invariant face recognition
(AIFR), which aims to address the face matching problem
in the presence of remarkable aging variations [26].
AIFR has many useful and practical applications. For
instance, it can be applied in finding missing children after
years or checking whether the same person has been issued
multiple government documents in different ages. However,
it still remains a challenging problem in real world applications of face recognition systems. The major challenge of
AIFR is mostly attributed to the great changes in face appearance caused by aging process over time. Figure 1 is a
∗ Corresponding author.

Age 02

05

07

11

14

17

20

30

40

42

Figure 1. Cross-age face images for one of the subjects in the FGNET
dataset [1]. One can see the significant intra-personal variation therein.

typical example, in which the cross-age face images from
the same person have significant intra-personal changes.
The previous research on AIFR falls into two categories:
generative approaches and discriminative approaches. The
generative approaches [6, 15, 24] first synthesis face that
matches target age and then perform recognition. Due to the
strong parametric assumptions and the complexity in modeling aging process, these methods are computationally expensive and the results are often unstable in real-world face
recognition scenarios. Recently discriminative approaches [13, 18, 19, 22, 4, 16, 17] draw increasing attentions.
However, the features they use still contain age information, which is detrimental to the subsequent classification.
To separate the age and the identity information, [7] proposes the hidden factor analysis (HFA) method. It formulates face feature as the linear combination of an identity
component and an age component. Then the identity component is used for face recognition. [8] reports a more effective maximum entropy feature descriptor for AIFR, and
proposes a more robust identity matching framework. However, most of the existing methods in AIFR rely heavily on
the hand-crafted feature descriptors to extract the dense features for age-invariant face recognition, which may limit
the performance of these methods. Designing an effective
age-invariant face features still remains an open problem in
AIFR.
As one of the most promising feature learning tools

4893

