Constructing Canonical Regions for Fast and Effective View Selection ∗
Wencheng Wang1,2
Tianhao Gao1,2
1 State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{whn, gaoth}@ios.ac.cn

Abstract
In view selection, little work has been done for optimizing the search process; views must be densely distributed and checked individually. Thus, evaluating poor views
wastes much time, and a poor view may even be misidentified as a best one. In this paper, we propose a search strategy by identifying the regions that are very likely to contain
best views, referred to as canonical regions. It is by decomposing the model under investigation into meaningful parts, and using the canonical views of these parts to generate
canonical regions. Applying existing view selection methods in the canonical regions can not only accelerate the search
process but also guarantee the quality of obtained views. As
a result, when our canonical regions are used for searching
N-best views during comprehensive model analysis, we can
attain greater search speed and reduce the number of views
required. Experimental results show the effectiveness of our
method.

1. Introduction
View selection aims at finding the best views that can
watch much information about the model, and so promoting model understanding. The pipeline is by first sampling
some viewpoints around the model, generally on a sphere
enclosing the model, called a viewing sphere, and then evaluating the views of the sampled viewpoints to get the best
ones. Although many methods have been proposed to improve view evaluation significantly, not many works study
the sampling strategy [23, 27] and their shortcoming of very
possibly missing real best views prevents their use, to be
discussed in detail in Section 2. As a popular strategy, viewpoints are evenly and densely sampled. Obviously, this is
inefficient, because many regions on the viewing sphere are
∗ Corresponding author: Wencheng Wang. This work is supported in
part by National Natural Science Foundation of China (61379087),the
Knowledge Innovation Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and
the European Unions Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013)
under grant agreement (612627).

unlikely to contain best viewpoints. More seriously, poor
views may even be mis-evaluated as high-quality views due
to the unsuitable preference on view evaluation by existing
methods, which is also a main reason why it is still a hot
topic to study more effective view evaluation methods.
In this paper, we address the challenge of obtaining the
regions on the viewing sphere that are very likely to contain best views. Sampling views in these regions can avoid
distributing poor candidate views, and so preventing existing methods from producing pseudo best views. Besides,
the reduced search space for the best views can speed up
view selection. We call these regions as canonical regions,
as they are related to canonical views for model investigation, to be discussed in the following. Our motivation is
based on the study of human representation and processing of visual information, and its role in recognizing models [1, 31, 33]. According to the study, a model is understood by investigating its individual parts and the relations
between the parts. Thus, if many parts can be well watched
from a viewpoint, the viewpoint is very possible to be a
best one. As for watching a part, its canonical views are
most preferred because these views are stable and capable
of producing more meaningful and understandable images
for the viewer [3, 15, 22, 32, 36]. However, due to occlusions between the parts, the canonical views of the part may
be hidden. Considering this, we sample some views around
the part to approximate the observability of the part from the
viewing sphere. Therefore, clustering the sampled views of
the parts, we can find the regions that each contain many
good views of the parts. Clearly, any a viewpoint in these
regions can well watch many parts, because a part can be
well watched by the viewpoints in the neighborhood of its
good views. These regions are our canonical regions. By
the similar reasoning, the viewpoints in the other regions
are not very possible to well watch many parts, and so they
can be excluded from the best view search.
In constructing canonical regions, it is necessary to divide the model into parts. For this, we resort to the study
on semantic segmentation for model understanding. By the
study, it is known that human beings prefer to watch a hand-

4114

