Supervised Quantization for Similarity Search
Xiaojuan Wang1 Ting Zhang2 ∗ Guo-Jun Qi3 Jinhui Tang4 Jingdong Wang5
1
Sun Yat-sen University, China 2 University of Science and Technology of China, China
3
University of Central Florida, USA 4 Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
5
Microsoft Research, China

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of searching for
semantically similar images from a large database. We
present a compact coding approach, supervised quantization. Our approach simultaneously learns feature selection that linearly transforms the database points into
a low-dimensional discriminative subspace, and quantizes
the data points in the transformed space. The optimization
criterion is that the quantized points not only approximate
the transformed points accurately, but also are semantically
separable: the points belonging to a class lie in a cluster
that is not overlapped with other clusters corresponding to
other classes, which is formulated as a classification problem. The experiments on several standard datasets show the
superiority of our approach over the state-of-the art supervised hashing and unsupervised quantization algorithms.

1. Introduction
Similarity search has been a fundamental research topic
in machine learning, computer vision, and information retrieval. The goal, given a query, is to find the most similar
item from a database, e.g., composed of N d-dimensional
vectors. The recent study shows that the compact coding approach, including hashing and quantization, is advantageous in terms of memory cost, search efficiency, and
search accuracy.
The compact coding approach converts the database
items into short codes in which the distance is efficiently
computed. The objective is that the similarity computed
in the coding space is well aligned with the similarity that
is computed based on the Euclidean distance in the input space, or that comes from the given semantic similarity (e.g., the data items from the same class should
be similar). The solution to the former kind of similarity search is unsupervised compact coding, such as hash∗ This work was partly done when Xiaojuan Wang and Ting Zhang were
interns at MSR. They contributed equally to this work.

ing [1, 5–7, 9–12, 16, 20, 22, 28, 29, 34, 36–38] and quantization [8, 26, 39]. The solution to the latter problem is supervised compact coding, which is our interest in this paper.
Almost all research efforts in supervised compact coding focus on developing hashing algorithms to preserve semantic similarities, such as LDA Hashing [30], minimal
loss hashing [24], supervised hashing with kernels [21],
FastHash [18], triplet loss hashing [25], and supervised discrete hashing [27]. In contrast, there is less study in quantization, which however already shows the superior performance for Euclidean distance and cosine-based similarity
search. This paper makes a study on the quantization solution to semantic similarity search.
Our main contributions are as follows: (i) We propose
a supervised composite quantization approach. To the best
of our knowledge, our method is the first attempt to explore
quantization for semantic similarity search. The advantage
of quantization over hashing is that the number of possible distances is significantly higher, and hence the distance
approximation, accordingly the similarity search accuracy,
is more accurate. (ii) Our approach jointly optimizes the
quantization and learns the discriminative subspace where
the quantization is performed. The criterion is the semantic
separability: the points belonging to a class lie in a cluster
that is not overlapped with other clusters corresponding to
other classes, which is formulated as a classification problem. (iii) Our method significantly outperforms many stateof-the-art methods in terms of search accuracy and search
efficiency under the same code length.

2. Related work
There are two main research issues in supervised hashing: how to design hash functions and how to preserve semantic similarity. In essence, most algorithms can adopt
various hash functions, e.g., an algorithm using a linear hash
function usually can also use a kernel hash function. Our
review of the supervised hashing algorithms focuses on the
semantic similarity preserving manners. We roughly divide
them into three categories: pairwise similarity preserving,
multiwise similarity preserving, and classification.

2018

