Just look at the image: viewpoint-specific surface normal prediction
for improved multi-view reconstruction
Silvano Galliani

Konrad Schindler

Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, ETH Zurich
{firstname.lastname@geod.baug.ethz.ch}

Abstract
We present a multi-view reconstruction method that
combines conventional multi-view stereo (MVS) with
appearance-based normal prediction, to obtain dense and
accurate 3D surface models. Reliable surface normals
reconstructed from multi-view correspondence serve as
training data for a convolutional neural network (CNN),
which predicts continuous normal vectors from raw image
patches. By training from known points in the same image, the prediction is specifically tailored to the materials
and lighting conditions of the particular scene, as well as
to the precise camera viewpoint. It is therefore a lot easier
to learn than generic single-view normal estimation. The
estimated normal maps, together with the known depth values from MVS, are integrated to dense depth maps, which
in turn are fused into a 3D model. Experiments on the
DTU dataset show that our method delivers 3D reconstructions with the same accuracy as MVS, but with significantly
higher completeness.

Figure 1. Illustration of our reconstruction method. Given an input
image (top left) and an incomplete normal map from multi-view
stereo (top right), we reconstruct the missing normals by CNN regression on the image (bottom left). The normal maps are then integrated to dense 3D models (not shown). Bottom right: Ground
truth.

1. Introduction
The reconstruction of 3D surfaces from images is a central problem of computer vision. The dominant approach
is multi-view stereo (MVS): densely match image points
in multiple views with known camera poses, then triangulate the corresponding rays to 3D points. MVS algorithms
have greatly improved over the past decades and nowadays
deliver high-quality point clouds, respectively surfaces derived from those point clouds [23, 34]. Yet MVS, being
based on point correspondences between different images,
only works in areas with sufficient texture. If no correspondence can be established, the methods fails. Most commonly this happens in surface regions with uniform albedo
and on specular highlights, where matching is ambiguous
due to a lack of high-frequency brightness/color variations.
A further recurrent problem are occlusions, where many

viewing rays are blocked and do not reach the surface point.
In such regions the only options are to either not reconstruct
3D points, leaving holes in the surface; or to interpolate,
which can lead to inaccurate or even totally wrong results.
We propose to fill in the missing regions with the help
of shading information. It is well-known that, complementary to MVS, shape reconstruction from shading requires
only a single view, and works best for uniform albedo. Yet,
recovering 3D surface normals from shading has proved remarkably difficult in practice, mainly because a number of
important influence factors are hard to model. In real data
the illumination can be quite complex and the illumination
direction(s) are not exactly known. Most importantly, the
reflectance properties (the bi-directional reflectance distribution function, or BRDF) of the surfaces in the scene are
15479

