Semantic 3D Reconstruction with Continuous Regularization and Ray Potentials
Using a Visibility Consistency Constraint
Nikolay Savinov, Christian Häne, L’ubor Ladický and Marc Pollefeys
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
{nikolay.savinov,christian.haene,lubor.ladicky,marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We propose an approach for dense semantic 3D reconstruction which uses a data term that is defined as potentials over viewing rays, combined with continuous surface area penalization. Our formulation is a convex relaxation which we augment with a crucial non-convex constraint that ensures exact handling of visibility. To tackle the
non-convex minimization problem, we propose a majorizeminimize type strategy which converges to a critical point.
We demonstrate the benefits of using the non-convex constraint experimentally. For the geometry-only case, we set
a new state of the art on two datasets of the commonly used
Middlebury multi-view stereo benchmark. Moreover, our
general-purpose formulation directly reconstructs thin objects, which are usually treated with specialized algorithms.
A qualitative evaluation on the dense semantic 3D reconstruction task shows that we improve significantly over previous methods.

1. Introduction
One of the major goals in computer vision is to compute
dense 3D geometry from images. Recently, also approaches
that jointly reason about the geometry and semantic segmentation have emerged [10]. Due to the noise in the input
data often strong regularization has to be performed. Optimizing jointly over 3D geometry and semantics has the
advantage that the smoothness for a surface can be chosen
depending on the involved semantic labels and the normal
direction to the surface. Eventually, this leads to more faithful reconstructions that directly include a semantic labeling.
Posing the reconstruction task as a volumetric segmentation problem [4] is a widely used approach. A volume
gets segmented into occupied and free space. In case of
dense semantic 3D reconstruction, the occupied space label
is replaced by a set of semantic labels [10]. To get smooth,
noise-free reconstructions, the final labeling is normally determined by energy minimization. The formulation of the
energy comes with the challenge that the observations are
given in the image space but the reconstruction is volumet-

Figure 1: Left to right: example image, close-ups of [10],
[26] and our proposed approach.
ric. Therefore each pixel of an image contains information
about a ray composed out of voxels. This naturally leads
to energy formulations with potential functions that depend
on the configuration of a whole ray. Including such potentials in a naive way leads to (on current hardware) infeasible optimization problems. Hence, many approaches try to
approximate such a potential. One often utilized strategy
is to derive a per-voxel unary potential (cost for assigning a
specific label to a specific voxel). However, this is only possible in a restricted setting and under a set of assumptions
that often do not hold in practice. By modeling the true ray
potential, more faithful reconstructions are obtained [26].
Thus, efficient ways to minimize energies with ray potentials, while at the same time being able to benefit from the
joint formulation of 3D modeling and semantic segmentation, are desired.
In this work, we propose an energy minimization strategy for ray potentials that can be directly used together with
continuously inspired surface regularization approaches and
hence does not suffer from metrication artifacts [12], common to discrete formulations on grid graphs. When using
our ray potential formulation for dense semantic 3D reconstruction, it additionally allows for the usage of classspecific anisotropic smoothness priors. Continuously inspired surface regularization approaches are formulated as
convex optimization problems. We identify that a convex
relaxation for the ray potential is weak and unusable in
practice. We propose to add a non-convex term that handles visibility exactly and optimize the resulting energy by

5460

