Deep Reflectance Maps
Konstantinos Rematas
KU Leuven

Tobias Ritschel
University College London

Mario Fritz
MPI Informatics

krematas@esat.kuleuven.be

t.ritschel@ucl.ac.uk

mfritz@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Efstratios Gavves
University of Amsterdam

Tinne Tuytelaars
KU Leuven

E.Gavves@uva.nl

Tinne.Tuytelaars@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Undoing the image formation process and therefore decomposing appearance into its intrinsic properties is a challenging task due to the under-constrained nature of this
inverse problem. While significant progress has been made
on inferring shape, materials and illumination from images
only, progress in an unconstrained setting is still limited.
We propose a convolutional neural architecture to estimate
reflectance maps of specular materials in natural lighting
conditions. We achieve this in an end-to-end learning formulation that directly predicts a reflectance map from the image
itself. We show how to improve estimates by facilitating additional supervision in an indirect scheme that first predicts
surface orientation and afterwards predicts the reflectance
map by a learning-based sparse data interpolation.
In order to analyze performance on this difficult task, we
propose a new challenge of Specular MAterials on SHapes
with complex IllumiNation (SMASHINg) using both synthetic
and real images. Furthermore, we show the application of
our method to a range of image editing tasks on real images.

1. Introduction
A classic computer vision task is the decomposition of
an image into its intrinsic shape, material and illumination.
The physics of image formation are well-understood: the
light hits a scene surface with specific orientation and material properties and is reflected to the camera. Factoring an
image into its intrinsic properties, however, is very difficult,
as the same visual result might be due to many different
combinations of intrinsic object properties.
For the estimation of those properties, a common practice
is to assume one or more properties as known or simplified and try to estimate the others. For example, traditional
Project: http://homes.cs.washington.edu/˜krematas/
DRM/

Figure 1. Top: Input 2D image with three cars of unknown shape
and material under unknown natural illumination. Right: Our
automatically extracted reflectance map and the reference. Bottom:
Transfer of reflectance maps between the objects.

approaches to intrinsic images or shape-from-shading assume lambertian materials, or point lights. Furthermore, to
simplify the problem, shape is often either assumed to be
known in the form of a 3D model, or it is restricted to simple
geometry such as spheres.
In this work, we extract reflectance maps [14] from images of objects with complex shapes and specular material,
under complex natural illumination. A reflectance map holds
the orientation-dependent appearance of a fixed material under a fixed illumination. It does not attempt to factor out
material and/or illuminant and should not be confused with a
reflection map that contains illumination [6] or with surface
reflectance [5].
Under the assumptions of a constant material, no shadows,
a distant light source and a distant viewer, the relation of
surface orientation and appearance is fully described by the
reflectance map. It can represent all illuminants and all materials, in particular specular materials under high-frequency
natural illumination. Therefore, besides allowing for a better understanding and analysis of 2D imagery, the ability

4508

