High-quality Depth from Uncalibrated Small Motion Clip
Hyowon Ha†
Sunghoon Im†
Jaesik Park‡
Hae-Gon Jeon†
In So Kweon†
†
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology ‡ Intel Labs

Abstract
We propose a novel approach that generates a highquality depth map from a set of images captured with a
small viewpoint variation, namely small motion clip. As
opposed to prior methods that recover scene geometry and
camera motions using pre-calibrated cameras, we introduce a self-calibrating bundle adjustment tailored for small
motion. This allows our dense stereo algorithm to produce
a high-quality depth map for the user without the need for
camera calibration. In the dense matching, the distributions
of intensity profiles are analyzed to leverage the benefit of
having negligible intensity changes within the scene due to
the minuscule variation in viewpoint. The depth maps obtained by the proposed framework show accurate and extremely fine structures that are unmatched by previous literature under the same small motion configuration.

1. Introduction
Small motion in a hand-held camera commonly happens
when a user moves the device slightly to ﬁnd a better photographic composition, or even when the user tries to hold the
camera steady before pressing the shutter. If we were able
to restore the geometry of the scene using the small motion
clip captured at that moment, it could be useful for a variety
of applications, such as synthetic refocusing or view synthesis. Figure 1 shows an example of the small motion clip.
The averaged image of the entire sequence gives a sense of
how small the camera motion is.
In this paper, we propose an effective pipeline for depth
acquisition from a small motion clip. At the core of our
approach is the novel bundle adjustment scheme that is specially devised to be applied to the small motion case. Unlike
to prior approaches, our algorithm can jointly estimate the
intrinsic parameters and poses of the camera from a small
motion footage, which imbues the proposed method with
practicality and severs the need for camera calibration.
By virtue of reliably estimating the intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters, a plane sweeping based dense stereo
matching algorithm can be directly applied to produce a
dense depth map in a uniﬁed framework. A notable beneﬁt

(a) An averaged image of
small motion clip

(c) Depth map

(b) Front and top view of
recovered 3D scene and camera poses

(d) Synthetic refocusing

Figure 1. A small motion clip is our sole input. (a) An averaged
image showing the overall camera motion. (b) Visualization of
recovered 3D scene points and camera poses. (c) Our depth map
result. (d) A synthetic refocusing result as an application example.
Please note that our method does not require camera calibration.

to the small motion clip is that the observed image intensities for a given point in the scene are almost identical along
the sequence due to the low variation in viewpoint. The
dozens of intensity observations also give a better chance in
ﬁnding reliable matchings. In order to leverage this beneﬁt,
our dense stereo matching algorithm utilizes the variance of
the intensity proﬁle as the cost measure for plane sweeping,
which is less likely to be affected by the noise of the reference image compared to other pair-wise intensity difference
based methods.
As opposed to previous approaches [9, 10, 27] that target
the same goal for small motion, the distinctive points of our
approach can be summarized as follows:
• A uniﬁed framework for depth from an uncalibrated
small motion clip is proposed, which can allow the
user to acquire a high-quality depth map from a single instance of capture.
• Our bundle adjustment can even jointly estimate the
camera intrinsic parameters (i.e. focal length and radial

5413

