Video Segmentation via Object Flow
Yi-Hsuan Tsai
UC Merced

Ming-Hsuan Yang
UC Merced

Michael J. Black
MPI for Intelligent Systems

ytsai2@ucmerced.edu

mhyang@ucmerced.edu

black@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
Video object segmentation is challenging due to fast
moving objects, deforming shapes, and cluttered backgrounds. Optical flow can be used to propagate an object segmentation over time but, unfortunately, flow is often
inaccurate, particularly around object boundaries. Such
boundaries are precisely where we want our segmentation
to be accurate. To obtain accurate segmentation across
time, we propose an efficient algorithm that considers video
segmentation and optical flow estimation simultaneously.
For video segmentation, we formulate a principled, multiscale, spatio-temporal objective function that uses optical
flow to propagate information between frames. For optical flow estimation, particularly at object boundaries, we
compute the flow independently in the segmented regions
and recompose the results. We call the process object
flow and demonstrate the effectiveness of jointly optimizing optical flow and video segmentation using an iterative
scheme. Experiments on the SegTrack v2 and YoutubeObjects datasets show that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against the other state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Our goal is to segment video sequences, classifying each
pixel as corresponding to a foreground object or the background in every frame. Critical to solving this task is the
integration of information over time to maintain a consistent segmentation across the entire video. Numerous
methods have been proposed to enforce temporal consistency in videos by tracking pixels, superpixels or object
proposals [5, 10, 12, 19, 26, 35, 38, 40]. Another line of
research formulates this problem with a graphical model
and propagates the foreground regions throughout an image sequence [1, 11, 14, 35, 36]. In addition, several algorithms [18, 19, 21, 24, 45] focus on object-level segmentations that favor temporal consistency. Such object-level
methods, however, may not be accurate on the pixel level,
generating inaccurate object boundaries.
Optical flow estimation has been extensively studied
[2, 6, 30] and it is widely used for video segmentation and

(a) frame t − 1

(b) frame t

(c) initial optical flow

(d) updated optical flow

Figure 1. Object flow. (a)-(b) two consecutive frames. (c) optical
flow computed by [30] from frame t − 1 to t. (d) optical flow
that is updated using the segmentation marked by the red contour.
The motions within the object are more consistent and the motion
boundaries are more precise compared with the initial flow.

related problems [8, 13, 23, 42]. For instance, graph-based
video segmentation methods [14, 35] use optical flow in
the formulation of pairwise potentials that ensure frame-toframe segmentation consistency. However, estimated optical flow may contain significant errors, particularly due to
large displacements or occlusions [6, 9, 29, 39]. To compute accurate optical flow fields, it is common to segment
images or extract edges to preserve motion details around
object boundaries [3, 43, 44, 47]. However, most methods
do not consider both flow estimation and video segmentation together.
In contrast, we estimate object segmentation and optical flow synergistically such that the combination improves
both. Figure 1 summarizes the main ideas of this work.
If the segmentation of the object is known, optical flow
within the same object should be smooth but flow across the
boundary need not be smooth. Similarly if an object moves
differently from the background, then the motion boundary
will correspond to the object boundary. Hence, accurate optical flow facilitates detecting precise object boundaries and
13899

