Estimating Sparse Signals with Smooth Support
via Convex Programming and Block Sparsity

1

Sohil Shah1 , Tom Goldstein1 , and Christoph Studer2
University of Maryland, College Park; 2 Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
sohilas@umd.edu, tomg@cs.umd.edu, studer@cornell.edu

Abstract
Conventional algorithms for sparse signal recovery and
sparse representation rely on ℓ1 -norm regularized variational methods. However, when applied to the reconstruction of sparse images, i.e., images where only a few pixels
are non-zero, simple ℓ1 -norm-based methods ignore potential correlations in the support between adjacent pixels. In
a number of applications, one is interested in images that
are not only sparse, but also have a support with smooth
(or contiguous) boundaries. Existing algorithms that take
into account such a support structure mostly rely on nonconvex methods and—as a consequence—do not scale well
to high-dimensional problems and/or do not converge to
global optima. In this paper, we explore the use of new block
ℓ1 -norm regularizers, which enforce image sparsity while
simultaneously promoting smooth support structure. By exploiting the convexity of our regularizers, we develop new
computationally-efficient recovery algorithms that guarantee
global optimality. We demonstrate the efficacy of our regularizers on a variety of imaging tasks including compressive
image recovery, image restoration, and robust PCA.

sparsity wherein each variable is treated independently, disregarding correlation among neighboring variables. For example, smooth support structure is relevant to compressive
background subtraction [10, 9] which detects contiguous
regions of movement against a stationary background.
For imaging applications, ℓ1 -norm regularization may result in regions with spurious active (or isolated) pixels or
non-smooth boundaries in the support set. This issue is addressed by the image-segmentation literature, where spatially
correlated priors (such as total variation or normalized cuts)
are used to enforce smooth support boundaries [5, 14, 34, 12].
An important hallmark of existing image-segmentation methods is that they are able to enforce spatially contiguous support. However, the concept of correlated support has yet to
be ported to more complex reconstruction tasks, including
(but not limited to) robust PCA and compressive background
subtraction. The development of such structured sparsity
models has been an active research topic [9, 2, 19, 21, 1, 20],
with new models and applications still emerging [23, 22].
In this paper, we develop a class of convex priors based on
overlapping block/group sparsity, which are able to enforce
sparsity of the support set and promote spatial smoothness.

1.1. Relevant Previous Work

1. Introduction
A large number of existing models used in sparse signal
processing and machine learning rely on ℓ1 -norm regularization in order to recover sparse signals or to identify sparse
features for classification tasks. Sparse ℓ1 -norm regularization is also prominently used in the image-processing and
computer vision domain, where it is used for segmentation,
tracking, and background subtraction tasks. In computer
vision and image processing, we are often interested in regions that are not only sparse, but also spatially smooth, i.e.,
regions with contiguous support structure. In such situations,
it is desirable to have regularizers that promote the selection of large, contiguous regions rather than merely sparse
(and potentially isolated) pixels. In contrast, simple ℓ1 -norm
regularization adopts an unstructured approach that induces

Existing work on spatially-smooth support-set regularization can be divided into two main categories: (i) non-convex
models that rely on graphs and trees, and (ii) convex models that rely on group-sparsity inducing norms. Cevher et
al. [9] promote sparsity using Markov random fields (MRFs)
in combination with compressive-sensing signal recovery,
which is referred to as lattice matching pursuit (LaMP).
LaMP recovers structured sparse signals using fewer noisy
measurements than methods that ignore spatially correlated
support sets. Baraniuk et al. [2] prove theoretical guarantees on robust recovery of structured sparse signals using
a non-convex algorithm; their approach has been validated
using wavelet-tree-based hierarchical group structure, as
well as signals with non-overlapping blocks in the support
set. Huang et al. [19] developed a theory of greedy approximation methods for general non-convex structured sparse

5906

