Visual Tracking Using Attention-Modulated Disintegration and Integration
Jongwon Choi1 Hyung Jin Chang2 Jiyeoup Jeong1 Yiannis Demiris2 Jin Young Choi1
1
ASRI, Dept. of Electrical and Computer Eng., Seoul National University, South Korea
2
Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Eng., Imperial College London, UK
jwchoi.pil@gmail.com {jy.jeong, jychoi}@snu.ac.kr {hj.chang, y.demiris}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

Disintegration
Various Features

In this paper, we present a novel attention-modulated visual tracking algorithm that decomposes an object into multiple cognitive units, and trains multiple elementary trackers in order to modulate the distribution of attention according to various feature and kernel types. In the integration stage it recombines the units to memorize and recognize
the target object effectively. With respect to the elementary
trackers, we present a novel attentional feature-based correlation filter (AtCF) that focuses on distinctive attentional
features. The effectiveness of the proposed algorithm is validated through experimental comparison with state-of-theart methods on widely-used tracking benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
When tracking objects, humans readily find useful features to distinguish the tracking target from background
clutter. The ability to find useful features is one of the most
powerful aspects of the human visual system. With this robust visual system, humans are capable of adapting stably
and rapidly to complex environments, even when encountering background clutter or drastic changes of the target.
Over the last 10 years, remarkable advances have been
achieved in visual tracking research, as surveyed in [28,29].
However, even with the advances in performance, the technical level of the current visual tracking cannot achieve the
performance of the human visual system. Hence, current visual tracking algorithms have much room for improvement
via a human-mimetic approach.
In this paper, we propose a structuralist cognitive model
for visual tracking (SCT). As shown in Fig. 1, the SCT
is composed of two separate stages: disintegration and integration. In the disintegration stage, the target is divided
into a number of small cognitive structural units, which are
memorized separately. Each unit includes a specific color or
a distinguishable target shape, and is trained by elementary
trackers with different types of kernel.
In the integration stage, an adequate combination of the

Integration

Memory

Memory

Updating
Cognitive unit 1

Combination 1
Combination 2

Cognitive unit 2

Combination 3

Color

Cognitive unit 3

Combine

Cognitive unit 4

Testing
Cognitive unit 5

Shape

Cognitive unit 6

Tiger

Figure 1. Structuralist cognitive model for tracking (SCT). Our
SCT model works with two stages: disintegration and integration.
By cooperating between the two stages, the target can be trained
and found from the input image patch.

structural units is created and memorized to express the target’s appearance. When encountering a target with changing appearance in diverse environments, the SCT utilizes all
the responses from the cognitive units memorized in the disintegration stage and then recognizes the target through the
best combination of cognitive units, referring to the memorized combinations.
Through disintegration and integration synergies, the
SCT produces robust responses to complex inputs. When
background clutter appears, the disintegration stage trains
the cognitive units to effectively distinguish the target from
the clutter. In addition, the best combination of the cognitive units is learned and memorized in the integration stage,
which enlarges the discriminability between the clutter and
target. If the target is deformed into a sudden change of appearance, the integration reduces the influence of the previously influential cognitive units and enlarges the influence
of new appropriate units, which helps the SCT to adapt itself rapidly to the change.
With respect to the elementary trackers, we propose
an attentional feature-based correlation filter (AtCF). The
AtCF focuses on the attentional features discriminated from
the background, which is motivated by the concentration
cognition model of human [46]. Each AtCF consists of an
14321

