Highway Vehicle Counting in Compressed Domain
Xu Liu1 , Zilei Wang2 , Jiashi Feng3 , Hongsheng Xi2
1,2
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230027, China
3
Department of ECE, National University of Singapore, Singapore
1

liuxu91@mail.ustc.edu.cn, 2 {zlwang, xihs}@ustc.edu.cn, 3 elefjia@nus.edu.sg

first-layer

Abstract

second-layer
H

H

This paper presents a highway vehicle counting method
in compressed domain, aiming at achieving acceptable estimation performance approaching the pixel-domain methods. Such a task essentially is challenging because the available information (e.g. motion vector) to describe vehicles
in videos is quite limited and inaccurate, and the vehicle
count in realistic traffic scenes always varies greatly. To
tackle this issue, we first develop a batch of low-level features, which can be extracted from the encoding metadata
of videos, to mitigate the informational insufficiency of compressed videos. Then we propose a Hierarchical Classification based Regression (HCR) model to estimate the vehicle
count from features. HCR hierarchically divides the traffic
scenes into different cases according to vehicle density, such
that the broad-variation characteristics of traffic scenes can
be better approximated. Finally, we evaluated the proposed
method on the real highway surveillance videos. The results show that our method is very competitive to the pixeldomain methods, which can reach similar performance along with its lower complexity.

1. Introduction
Estimating the number of on-road vehicles is one of the
important tasks in intelligent transportation system (ITS),
which can be used to monitor the traffic status and then
guide the traffic control and optimization, e.g. programing better driving routes through bypassing the congested
roads [2]. In this paper, we particularly consider the vehicle
counting issue by the means of video analysis. Compared
with employing specialized sensors (e.g. infrared or inductive loop detector), the visual counting system is more easy
to deploy by reusing the roadside cameras, and thus pays
lower cost [16].
In a typical traffic surveillance system, the central subsystem connects all terminal cameras through a private network and is expected to constantly receive the surveillance
videos. In practice, however, only part of video streams can

features multi-class
classifier

M

L

binary
classifier1
binary
classifier2

B1
M

B2 L

regression
models
݂ு ሺ‫ݔ‬ሻ
݂஻ଵ ሺ‫ݔ‬ሻ estimated
count
݂ெ ሺ‫ݔ‬ሻ
݂஻ଶ ሺ‫ݔ‬ሻ
݂௅ ሺ‫ݔ‬ሻ

hierarchical classification based regression (HCR)

Figure 1. The Hierarchical Classification based Regression (HCR)
model. The traffic scenes are firstly classified into three categories:
H (heavy), M (medium), and L (light). To tackle the boundary
cases produced by the first-layer classifier, i.e. samples around the
boundary area of two categories are more likely to be misclassified, the second layer classifiers are introduced to distinguish the
samples whether located in the boundary area (i.e. B1 or B2). Afterwards, regression models are applied to each category.

be simultaneously accessed due to the limitation of network
bandwidth [12]. Such partial acquisition is rather tolerable
for the purpose of monitoring with the help of free stream
switch. But it is inapplicable to the video analysis that needs to process almost all of video streams for fully capturing
the traffic status of a wide range. Thus it is naturally considered to conduct the analysis function in the terminal devices (e.g. surveillance workstations). These devices are
usually equipped with lower configurations than the central
servers considering the overall costs. Therefore, the video
analysis algorithms are expected to have low computational
complexity for fulfilling the real-time requirements.
The video analysis can be conducted in the pixel or compressed domain. Particularly, the pixel-domain methods are
to first decode the surveillance videos into huge volume
of frame pixels and then operate on the pixels to complete
some specific target. Due to involving such decoding procedure and massiveness of processed pixels, the high computational complexity is usually possessed [13]. On the contrary, the compressed-domain methods are to directly operate on the video data of compressed format, which is exactly the original form of storing and transmitting videos [1].

3016

