Latent Embeddings for Zero-shot Classification
Yongqin Xian1 , Zeynep Akata1 , Gaurav Sharma1,2,∗, Quynh Nguyen3 , Matthias Hein3 and Bernt Schiele1
1

MPI for Informatics

2

IIT Kanpur

1. Introduction
Zero-shot classification [14, 20, 21, 30, 41] is a challenging problem. The task is generally set as follows: training
images are provided for certain visual classes and the classifier is expected to predict the presence or absence of novel
classes at test time. The training and test classes are connected via some auxiliary, non visual source of information
e.g. attributes.
Combining visual information with attributes [7, 8, 11,
17, 20, 28, 27] has also supported fine grained classification. In fine grained image collections, images that belong to different classes are visually similar to each other,
e.g. different bird species. Image labeling for such collections is a costly process, as it requires either expert opinion
or a large number of attributes. To overcome this limitation, recent works have explored distributed text representations [23, 29, 24] which are learned from general (or domain specific) text corpora.
∗ Currently with CSE, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur. Majority
of this work was done at Max Planck Institute for Informatics.

Saarland University

Image space

Abstract
We present a novel latent embedding model for learning
a compatibility function between image and class embeddings, in the context of zero-shot classification. The proposed method augments the state-of-the-art bilinear compatibility model by incorporating latent variables. Instead
of learning a single bilinear map, it learns a collection of
maps with the selection, of which map to use, being a latent variable for the current image-class pair. We train the
model with a ranking based objective function which penalizes incorrect rankings of the true class for a given image. We empirically demonstrate that our model improves
the state-of-the-art for various class embeddings consistently on three challenging publicly available datasets for
the zero-shot setting. Moreover, our method leads to visually highly interpretable results with clear clusters of different fine-grained object properties that correspond to different latent variable maps.

3

W2
pine
grosbeak

W1
W3

cardinal

cerulean
warbler

Label space
Text space

Figure 1: LatEm learns multiple Wi ’s that maximize the
compatibility between the input embedding (image, text
space) and the output embedding (label space) of all training examples. The different Wi ’s may capture different visual characteristics of objects, i.e. color, beak shape etc. and
allow distribution of the complexity among them, enabling
the model to do better classification.
Substantial progress has been made for image classification problem in the zero-shot setting on fine-grained image
collections [2]. This progress can be attributed to (i) strong
deep learning based image features [19, 36] and (ii) learning
a discriminative compatibility function between the structured image and class embeddings [1, 2, 12, 32]. The focus
of this work is on the latter, i.e. on improving the compatibility learning framework, in particular via unsupervised
auxiliary information.
The main idea of structured embedding frameworks [1,
2, 12, 32] is to first represent both the images and the
classes in some multi-dimensional vector spaces. Image
embeddings are obtained from state-of-the-art image representations e.g. those from convolutional neural networks
[19, 36]. Class embeddings can either (i) be obtained using
manually specified side information e.g. attributes [20], or
(ii) extracted automatically [23, 29] from an unlabeled large
text corpora. A discriminative bilinear compatibility function is then learned that pulls images from the same class
close to each other and pushes images from different classes
away from each other. Once learned, such a compatibility
1 69

