Mnemonic Descent Method:
A recurrent process applied for end-to-end face alignment
Patrick Snape⋆
Mihalis A. Nicolaou†
Epameinondas Antonakos⋆
⋆,∗
Stefanos Zafeiriou
⋆
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
†
Department of Computing, Goldsmiths, University of London, UK
∗
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Finland

George Trigeorgis⋆

⋆

{g.trigeorgis, p.snape, e.antonakos, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk, † m.nicolaou@gold.ac.uk

Abstract
Cascaded regression has recently become the method of
choice for solving non-linear least squares problems such
as deformable image alignment. Given a sizeable training
set, cascaded regression learns a set of generic rules that
are sequentially applied to minimise the least squares problem. Despite the success of cascaded regression for problems such as face alignment and head pose estimation, there
are several shortcomings arising in the strategies proposed
thus far. Specifically, (a) the regressors are learnt independently, (b) the descent directions may cancel one another
out and (c) handcrafted features (e.g., HoGs, SIFT etc.) are
mainly used to drive the cascade, which may be sub-optimal
for the task at hand. In this paper, we propose a combined
and jointly trained convolutional recurrent neural network
architecture that allows the training of an end-to-end to
system that attempts to alleviate the aforementioned drawbacks. The recurrent module facilitates the joint optimisation of the regressors by assuming the cascades form a nonlinear dynamical system, in effect fully utilising the information between all cascade levels by introducing a memory
unit that shares information across all levels. The convolutional module allows the network to extract features that
are specialised for the task at hand and are experimentally
shown to outperform hand-crafted features. We show that
the application of the proposed architecture for the problem
of face alignment results in a strong improvement over the
current state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Non-linear least squares optimisation problems often
arise in computer vision, including but not limited to
Structure-from-Motion [9, 23], rigid and deformable image
alignment [33, 35], optical flow estimation [33, 66, 46, 45],

CNN

Input image
aligned with the mean face

RNN

Final shape estimate

Figure 1: Mnemonic Descent Method learns to align a
shape estimate to a facial image1 in an end-to-end manner
using a jointly learnt convolutional recurrent network architecture.

and estimation of camera parameters for calibration [44].
The application of standard Newton-type methods for retrieving the optimal parameters is challenging due to the
highly non-convex nature of the cost functions and the lack
of differentiability of commonly used image operators (such
as HoGs [17], SIFT [32], etc.). Recently, in order to address the drawbacks of Newton/Gauss-Newton methods
a set of generic “descent directions” is learnt through the
application of a cascade of regressors [56, 11]. Generally, these directions are learnt independently per cascade
via simulation. That is, in the case of deformable face
alignment, the ground-truth facial shapes of the training
images are randomly perturbed (according to a fixed variance). The descent directions are then estimated independently and seek to progress from the perturbed shapes to
the ground-truth. In their simplest form, these rules can
be learnt through the application of successive stages of
linear regression, each minimising the average error over
all training samples. The use of regression/learning basedmethods for solving non-linear optimisation problems has a
1 Depicted is the muse Mnemosene which was the personification of
memory in Greek mythology. The painting is an interpretation of the muse
by the the father of the Pre-Raphaelite brotherhood Dante Gabriel Rossetti.

14177

