Active Learning for Delineation of Curvilinear Structures
Agata Mosinska-Domanska1

Raphael Sznitman2

Przemysław Głowacki1

Pascal Fua1

EPFL1 , University of Bern2
{agata.mosinska, przemyslaw.glowacki, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch raphael.sznitman@artorg.unibe.ch

Abstract
Many recent delineation techniques owe much of their
increased effectiveness to path classification algorithms
that make it possible to distinguish promising paths from
others. The downside of this development is that they require annotated training data, which is tedious to produce.
In this paper, we propose an Active Learning approach
that considerably speeds up the annotation process. Unlike
standard ones, it takes advantage of the specificities of the
delineation problem. It operates on a graph and can reduce
the training set size by up to 80% without compromising the
reconstruction quality.
We will show that our approach outperforms conventional ones on various biomedical and natural image
datasets, thus showing that it is broadly applicable.

1. Introduction
Complex curvilinear structures are widespread in nature.
They range in size from solar filaments as seen through
telescopes to road networks in aerial images, blood vessels
in medical imagery, and neural structures in micrographs.
These very diverse structures have different appearances
and it has recently been shown that training classifiers to
assess whether an image path is likely to be a structure of
interest is key to improving the performance of automated
delineation algorithms [29, 28, 3, 22, 19, 30].
However, while such Machine-Learning based algorithms are effective, they still require significant amounts
of manual annotation for training purposes. For everyday
scenes, this can be done by crowd-sourcing [17, 15]. In
more specialized areas such as neuroscience or medicine,
this is impractical because only experts whose time is scarce
and precious can do this reliably. This problem is particularly acute when dealing with 3D image stacks, which are
much more difficult to interact with than regular 2D images and require special expertise. It is further compounded
by the fact that data preparation processes tend to be complicated and not easily repeatable leading the curvilinear

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Images of two different neural structures obtained
using confocal microscopy. The enormous variety of curvilinear structures requires problem-specific training datasets
even in case of the same modality.

structures to exhibit very different appearances as shown in
Fig. 1. This means that a classifier trained on one acquisition will not perform very well on a new one, even when
using the same modality.
In this paper, we propose an Active Learning (AL) approach that exploits the specificities of delineation algorithms to massively reduce the effort and drudgery involved
in collecting sufficient amounts of training data. At the heart
of all AL methods is a query mechanism that enables the
system to ask a user to label a few well chosen data samples,
which it has selected based on how informative the answers
are likely to be. AL has been successfully deployed in areas such as Natural Language Processing [27], Computer
Vision [11], and Bioinformatics [16]. While it has made it
possible to train classifiers with less of human intervention,
none of the algorithms can exploit the fact that, for delineation purposes, the paths to be annotated form a graph in
which neighborhood and geometric relationships can and
should be considered.
In our approach, we explicitly use these relationships
to derive multi-sample entropy estimates, which are better surrogates of informativeness than the entropy of individual samples that is typically used [13]. As a result, our
15231

