WELDON: Weakly Supervised Learning of Deep Convolutional Neural
Networks
Thibaut Durand, Nicolas Thome, Matthieu Cord
Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, LIP6 UMR 7606, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris
{thibaut.durand, nicolas.thome, matthieu.cord}@lip6.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel framework for
WEakly supervised Learning of Deep cOnvolutional neural Networks (WELDON). Our method is dedicated to automatically selecting relevant image regions from weak annotations, e.g. global image labels, and encompasses the
following contributions. Firstly, WELDON leverages recent
improvements on the Multiple Instance Learning paradigm,
i.e. negative evidence scoring and top instance selection.
Secondly, the deep CNN is trained to optimize Average Precision, and fine-tuned on the target dataset with efficient
computations due to convolutional feature sharing. A thorough experimental validation shows that WELDON outperforms state-of-the-art results on six different datasets.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, deep learning and Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) [22] have become state-of-the-art
methods for various visual recognition tasks, e.g. image
classification or object detection. To overcome the limited
invariance capacity of CNN, bounding box annotations are
often used [33, 16]. However, these rich annotations rapidly
become costly to obtain [6], making the development of
Weakly Supervised Learning (WSL) models appealing.
Recently, there have been some attempts for WSL training of deep CNNs [34, 36]. In this context, image annotations consist in global labels, and the training objective is to localize image regions which are the most relevant for classification. In computer vision, the dominant approach for WSL is the Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) paradigm [9]: an image is considered as a bag
of regions, and the model seeks the max scoring instance
in each bag [35, 41, 37, 5, 47, 44, 11]. Recently, relaxations of standard MIL assumptions have been introduced
in the context of Latent SVM models and shallow architectures [27, 38, 10], showing improved recognition performances on various object and scene datasets.

Figure 1. The WELDON model is a deep CNN trained in a weakly
supervised manner. To perform image prediction, e.g. classification or ranking, WELDON automatically selects multiple positive
(green) + negative (red) evidences on several regions in the image.

In this paper, we propose a new model for WEakly supervised Learning of Deep cOnvolutional neural Networks
(WELDON), which is illustrated in Figure 1. WELDON
is trained to automatically select relevant regions from images annotated with a global label, and to perform end-toend learning of a deep CNN from the selected regions. The
ultimate goal is image classification (or ranking). We call
this setting weakly-supervised, because the localization step
only exploits global labels.
Regarding WSL, WELDON is dedicated to selecting two
types of regions, adapted from [27, 10, 38] to deep networks: green regions in Figure 1 correspond to areas with
top scores, i.e. regions which best support the presence of
the global label. On the contrary, red regions incorporate
negative evidence for the class, i.e. are the lowest scoring
areas. Our deep WSL model is detailed in section 3.
Regarding training, the model parameters are optimized
using back-propagation with standard classification losses,
but we also adapt the learning to structured output ranking.
We design a network architecture which enables fast region
feature computation by convolutional sharing. The network
is initialized from deep features trained on ImageNet, and
the parameters are fine-tuned on the target dataset.

2. Related Works & Contributions
The computer vision community is currently witnessing
a revolutionary change, essentially caused by Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) and deep learning. Beyond the
14743

