Actions ⇠ Transformations

1

Xiaolong Wang1∗
Ali Farhadi2,3
Abhinav Gupta1,3
2
Carnegie Mellon University
University of Washington 3 The Allen Institute for AI

Abstract
What defines an action like “kicking ball”? We argue
that the true meaning of an action lies in the change or
transformation an action brings to the environment. In
this paper, we propose a novel representation for actions
by modeling an action as a transformation which changes
the state of the environment before the action happens (precondition) to the state after the action (effect). Motivated
by recent advancements of video representation using deep
learning, we design a Siamese network which models the
action as a transformation on a high-level feature space. We
show that our model gives improvements on standard action recognition datasets including UCF101 and HMDB51.
More importantly, our approach is able to generalize beyond learned action categories and shows significant performance improvement on cross-category generalization on
our new ACT dataset.

PRECON. × ACTION = EFFECT
× Kick =

Training:

× Jump =
Testing:
×

⇤ Work was done while Xiaolong Wang was an intern at AI2.

=

(b) Recognition

×

1. Introduction
Consider the “soccer kicking” action shown in Figure 1.
What is the right representation for the recognition of such
an action? Traditionally, most research in action recognition has focused on learning discriminative classifiers on
hand-designed features such as HOG3D [22] and IDT [51].
Recently, with the success of deep learning approaches, the
focus has moved from hand-designed features to building
end-to-end learning systems. However, the basic philosophy remains the same: representing action implies encoding the appearance and motion of the actor. But are actions
all about appearance and motion?
We argue that the true essence of an action lies in the
change or the transformation an action brings to the environment and most often these changes can be encoded visually. For example, the essence of “soccer kicking” lies in
the state change of the ball (acceleration) caused by the leg
of the player. What if we try to represent actions based on
these changes rather than appearance and motion?
In this paper, we propose representing actions as transformations in the visual world. We argue that current action
recognition approaches tend to overfit by focusing on scene
context and hence do not generalize well. This is partly because of the lack of diversity in action recognition datasets

(a) Representation

=

(c) Cross category generalization

× Dive =
(d) Action prediction

Figure 1: We represent actions as the transformations from precondition to effect. (a) For example, the precondition of kicking is the player
running towards the ball and the effect is the ball flies away. By using this
representation, we can (b) perform action recognition given the training
data on long jump, and (c) generalize the classifier to high jump in testing.
(d) Moreover, we can perform visual prediction given the precondition.

compared to object recognition counterparts. In this paper,
we overcome this problem by forcing a representation to
explicitly encode the change in the environment: the inherent reason that convinced the agent to perform the action.
Specifically, each action is represented as a transformation
that changes the state of the environment from what it was
before the action to what it will be after it. Borrowing the
terminology from NLP, we refer to the state before the action as the precondition state and the state after the action as
the effect state, as Fig. 1 illustrates. We build a discriminative model of transformation by using a Siamese network architecture (similar to [2, 1]) where the action is represented
as a linear transformation between the final fully connected
12658

