Motion from Structure (MfS):
Searching for 3D Objects in Cluttered Point Trajectories
Jayakorn Vongkulbhisal†,‡ , Ricardo Cabral†,‡ , Fernando De la Torre‡ , João P. Costeira†
†
ISR - Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisboa, Portugal
‡
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
jvongkul@andrew.cmu.edu, rcabral@cmu.edu, ftorre@cs.cmu.edu, jpc@isr.ist.utl.pt

Abstract
Object detection has been a long standing problem in
computer vision, and state-of-the-art approaches rely on
the use of sophisticated features and/or classifiers. However, these learning-based approaches heavily depend on
the quality and quantity of labeled data, and do not generalize well to extreme poses or textureless objects.
In this work, we explore the use of 3D shape models to
detect objects in videos in an unsupervised manner. We call
this problem Motion from Structure (MfS): given a set of
point trajectories and a 3D model of the object of interest,
find a subset of trajectories that correspond to the 3D model
and estimate its alignment (i.e., compute the motion matrix).
MfS is related to Structure from Motion (SfM) and motion
segmentation problems: unlike SfM, the structure of the object is known but the correspondence between the trajectories and the object is unknown; unlike motion segmentation,
the MfS problem incorporates 3D structure, providing robustness to tracking mismatches and outliers. Experiments
illustrate how our MfS algorithm outperforms alternative
approaches in both synthetic data and real videos extracted
from YouTube.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the most common tasks that
humans perform. We are constantly looking and detecting
people, roads, chairs or automobiles. Yet, much of how we
perceive objects so accurately and with so little apparent effort remains a mystery. Although much progress has been
done in the last few years, we are still far away from developing algorithms that can match human performance. Most
previous efforts in the area of object detection have emphasized 2D approaches on different types of features and classifiers. Features have included shape (e.g. contours) and/or
appearance descriptors (e.g., SIFT, deep learning features).
Classifiers have included Support Vector Machines (SVM),

Figure 1. Motion from Structure (MfS) problem: Given a set of
point trajectories (a) and a 3D model of an object (b), find a subset
of trajectories that are aligned with the model. Our approach splits
this combinatorial problem in two parts. First, we reduce potential
candidate matching points by finding trajectories that compose the
convex hull of objects (red squares in (c)). Second, a subset of the
remaining trajectories are aligned with the 3D model (d).

Boosting or Gaussian Processes. While 2D approaches are
fast and have been shown to scale well to a large number
of objects, they typically depend heavily on texture regions,
lack robustness to viewpoints and incorporate video information in a heuristic manner. Surprisingly, little attention
has been paid to the problem of 3D object detection, especially since acquiring 3D models has become more accessible due to the ubiquity of RGBD cameras and crowdsourced repositories such as 3D Warehouse [21, 29].
To address the limitations of 2D approaches for detection, this paper proposes a new problem that we call Motion
from Structure (MfS). Given a set of point trajectories containing multiple objects and a 3D model of an object (i.e., a
point cloud), MfS finds a subset of trajectories that are wellaligned (i.e., via motion matrix) with the 3D model. Con-

15639

