Learning Deep Representation for Imbalanced Classification
Chen Huang1,2
1

Yining Li1

Chen Change Loy1,3

Xiaoou Tang1,3

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
3

SenseTime Group Limited

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{chuang,ly015,ccloy,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Data in vision domain often exhibit highly-skewed class
distribution, i.e., most data belong to a few majority classes,
while the minority classes only contain a scarce amount
of instances. To mitigate this issue, contemporary classification methods based on deep convolutional neural network (CNN) typically follow classic strategies such as class
re-sampling or cost-sensitive training. In this paper, we
conduct extensive and systematic experiments to validate
the effectiveness of these classic schemes for representation learning on class-imbalanced data. We further demonstrate that more discriminative deep representation can be
learned by enforcing a deep network to maintain both intercluster and inter-class margins. This tighter constraint effectively reduces the class imbalance inherent in the local data neighborhood. We show that the margins can
be easily deployed in standard deep learning framework
through quintuplet instance sampling and the associated
triple-header hinge loss. The representation learned by our
approach, when combined with a simple k-nearest neighbor (kNN) algorithm, shows significant improvements over
existing methods on both high- and low-level vision classification tasks that exhibit imbalanced class distribution.

1. Introduction
Many data in computer vision domain naturally exhibit
imbalance in their class distribution. For instance, the number of positive and negative face pairs in face verification is
highly skewed since it is easier to obtain face images of different identities (negative) than faces with matched identity
(positive) during data collection. In face attribute recognition [25], it is comparatively easier to find persons with
“normal-sized nose” attribute on web images than that of
“big-nose”. For image edge detection, the image edge structures intrinsically follow a power-law distribution, e.g., horizontal and vertical edges outnumber those with “Y” shape.
Without handling the imbalance issue conventional meth-

ods tend to be biased toward the majority class with poor
accuracy for the minority class [18].
Deep representation learning has recently achieved great
success due to its high learning capacity, but still cannot
escape from such negative impact of imbalanced data. To
counter the negative effects, one often chooses from a few
available options, which have been extensively studied in
the past [7, 9, 11, 17, 18, 30, 40, 41, 46, 48]. The first option is re-sampling, which aims to balance the class priors
by under-sampling the majority class or over-sampling the
minority class (or both). For instance, Oquab et al. [32]
resample the number of foreground and background image
patches for learning a convolutional neural network (CNN)
for object classification. The second option is cost-sensitive
learning, which assigns higher misclassification costs to the
minority class than to the majority. In image edge detection,
for example, Shen et al. [35] regularize the softmax loss to
cope with the imbalanced edge class distribution. Other alternatives exist, e.g., learning rate adaptation [18].
Are these methods the most effective way to deal with
imbalance data in the context of deep representation learning? The aforementioned options are well studied for the
so called ‘shallow’ model [12] but their implications have
not yet been systematically studied for deep representation learning. Importantly, such schemes are well-known
for some inherent limitations. For instance, over-sampling
can easily introduce undesirable noise with overfitting risks,
and under-sampling is often preferred [11] but may remove
valuable information. Such nuisance factors can be equally
applicable to deep representation learning.
In this paper, we wish to investigate a better approach for
learning a deep representation given class-imbalanced data.
Our method is motivated by the observation that the minority class often contains very few instances with high degree
of visual variability. The scarcity and high variability make
the genuine neighborhood of these instances easy to be invaded by other imposter nearest neighbors1 . To this end,
1 An imposter neighbor of a data point x is another data point x with
i
j
a different class label, yi 6= yj .

15375

