WIDER FACE: A Face Detection Benchmark
Shuo Yang1
1
2

Ping Luo2,1

Chen Change Loy1,2

Xiaoou Tang1,2

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Shenzhen Key Lab of Comp. Vis. & Pat. Rec., Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China
{ys014, pluo, ccloy, xtang}@ie.cuhk,edu.hk

Abstract
Face detection is one of the most studied topics in the
computer vision community. Much of the progresses have
been made by the availability of face detection benchmark
datasets. We show that there is a gap between current face
detection performance and the real world requirements. To
facilitate future face detection research, we introduce the
WIDER FACE dataset1 , which is 10 times larger than existing datasets. The dataset contains rich annotations, including occlusions, poses, event categories, and face bounding
boxes. Faces in the proposed dataset are extremely challenging due to large variations in scale, pose and occlusion,
as shown in Fig. 1. Furthermore, we show that WIDER
FACE dataset is an effective training source for face detection. We benchmark several representative detection systems, providing an overview of state-of-the-art performance
and propose a solution to deal with large scale variation.
Finally, we discuss common failure cases that worth to be
further investigated.

1. Introduction
Face detection is a critical step to all facial analysis algorithms, including face alignment, face recognition, face
verification, and face parsing. Given an arbitrary image, the
goal of face detection is to determine the presence of faces
in the image and, if present, return the image location and
extent of each face [27]. While this appears as an effortless task for human, it is a very difficult task for computers. The challenges associated with face detection can be
attributed to variations in pose, scale, facial expression, occlusion, and lighting condition, as shown in Fig. 1. Face detection has made significant progress after the seminal work
by Viola and Jones [21]. Modern face detectors can easily
detect near frontal faces and are widely used in real world
applications, such as digital camera and electronic photo al1 WIDER FACE dataset, protocol files, and benchmark leader boards
are available at: http://mmlab.ie.cuhk.edu.hk/projects/
WIDERFace/.

Figure 1. We propose a WIDER FACE dataset for face detection, which has a high degree of variability in scale, pose, occlusion, expression, appearance and illumination. We show example
images (cropped) and annotations. The annotated face bounding
box is denoted in green color. The WIDER FACE dataset consists
of 393, 703 labeled face bounding boxes in 32, 203 images (Best
view in color).

bum. Recent research [2, 14, 17, 24, 28] in this area focuses
on the unconstrained scenario, where a number of intricate
factors such as extreme pose, exaggerated expressions, and
large portion of occlusion can lead to large visual variations
in face appearance.
Publicly available benchmarks such as FDDB [11],

5525

