The Solution Path Algorithm for Identity-Aware Multi-Object Tracking
Shoou-I Yu1 , Deyu Meng2 , Wangmeng Zuo3 , Alexander Hauptmann1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University, 3 Harbin Institute of Technology
iyu@cs.cmu.edu, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn, alex@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose an identity-aware multi-object tracker based
on the solution path algorithm. Our tracker not only produces identity-coherent trajectories based on cues such as
face recognition, but also has the ability to pinpoint potential
tracking errors. The tracker is formulated as a quadratic
optimization problem with ℓ0 norm constraints, which we
propose to solve with the solution path algorithm. The algorithm successively solves the same optimization problem
but under different ℓp norm constraints, where p gradually
decreases from 1 to 0. Inspired by the success of the solution path algorithm in various machine learning tasks, this
strategy is expected to converge to a better local minimum
than directly minimizing the hardly solvable ℓ0 norm or the
roughly approximated ℓ1 norm constraints. Furthermore,
the acquired solution path complies with the “decision making process” of the tracker, which provides more insight to
locating potential tracking errors. Experiments show that
not only is our proposed tracker effective, but also the solution path enables automatic pinpointing of potential tracking
failures, which can be readily utilized in an active learning
framework to improve identity-aware multi-object tracking.

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking in a multi-camera environment
serves as a fundamental building block to the analysis of
surveillance video. Furthermore, if real-world identity information such as recognized faces can be assigned to each
trajectory, this enables subsequent person-specific behavior
analysis. Unfortunately, in long-term surveillance scenarios,
it is inevitable for multi-object trackers to make errors, such
as confusing the identity of two people. Therefore, if we
could automatically pinpoint potential tracking errors, then
humans can efficiently provide crucial information to guide
the tracker to the correct tracking results.
Though many multi-object tracking algorithms have been
proposed, most trackers 1) cannot perform identity-aware
tracking and 2) cannot identify uncertainty in final tracking
output. To this end, we propose an identity-aware multi-

(a) Stable solution path: easy observation. It is clearly ID 2.

(b) Turbulent solution path: more confusing observation. Could be
ID 2 or ID 3 as they are close together.

Figure 1: Visualization of the solution path of identity (ID)
assignments w.r.t. p for two observations. One can identify
uncertain observations from the shape of the solution path.
object tracking algorithm based on the solution path algorithm, which has been extensively used in multiple tasks such
as Lasso [34] and Support Vector Machines [19]. Our tracker
is formulated as a quadratic optimization problem with ℓ0
norm constraints, which enforce the mutual exclusion and
the spatial locality constraints, i.e. a person detection can
only belong to a single physical individual and a physical
individual cannot be at two locations at the same time. Unfortunately, directly solving the optimization problem with
ℓ0 norm constraints effectively is very difficult. An alternative is to solve its ℓ1 norm convex relaxation, but the results
will not be accurate. Therefore, we propose to utilize the
solution path algorithm to “bridge” the two solutions under
ℓ1 and ℓ0 norm constraints. Starting from the solution under
the convex ℓ1 norm constraints, the algorithm successively
solves the same optimization problem but under different
ℓp norm constraints, where p gradually decreases from 1 to
0. The solution path ends as p approaches to 0, and a better
solution to our original problem can be obtained.
The solution path algorithm has two key benefits. First, it
can optimize loss functions with ℓ0 norm constraints, which
is a common but difficult-to-optimize constraint in sparsity
and relaxed combinatorial problems. Second, the solution
13871

