Automatic Fence Segmentation in Videos of Dynamic Scenes
Renjiao Yi1,2 , Jue Wang3 , and Ping Tan1
1

2

Simon Fraser University
National University of Defence Technology
3
Adobe Research

Abstract
We present a fully automatic approach to detect and segment fence-like occluders from a video clip. Unlike previous approaches that usually assume either static scenes or
cameras, our method is capable of handling both dynamic scenes and moving cameras. Under a bottom-up framework, it first clusters pixels into coherent groups using color
and motion features. These pixel groups are then analyzed
in a fully connected graph, and labeled as either fence or
non-fence using graph-cut optimization. Finally, we solve
a dense Conditional Random Filed (CRF) constructed from
multiple frames to enhance both spatial accuracy and temporal coherence of the segmentation. Once segmented, one
can use existing hole-filling methods to generate a fencefree output. Extensive evaluation suggests that our method
outperforms previous automatic and interactive approaches
on complex examples captured by mobile devices.

1. Introduction
It is a common case that one has to shoot an interesting
scene through fences or wires. For instance, capturing a
video of a walking tiger behind an enclosing fence in a zoo,
or a building through wires or tree branches. Such videos
are usually unpleasant to watch due to the strong distraction
caused by the occluders. A common photography trick to
alleviate this problem is to adjust the focus length and aperture of the camera to make the fence out-of-focus, thus less
distracting when watching the video. However its effectiveness is limited and is only applicable to relatively advanced
cameras, excluding most mobile phone cameras. Removing
fence from videos at the postprocessing stage is thus highly
desirable.
Despite a few recent attempts [22, 14, 7], removing fence
from videos with unconstrained scene dynamics and camera movement is largely an open problem. In particular, it
is hard to automatically detect and segment fence in videos.

Fences contain very thin structures, which are difficult to
segment even for interactive tools such as GrabCut[19] or
Rotobrush[1]. Furthermore, there is usually no distinctive
colors or strong textures on a fence, making it hard to track,
Their repetitive structure patterns often lead to tracking and
motion estimation errors. A recent work [21] successfully removes fence from videos, but only for static scenes.
For videos capturing dynamic scenes, the commonly used
two-layer motion model breaks out due to the existence of
large dynamic objects, rendering methods that rely on static scene reconstruction insufficient, as we will show in the
experimental section.
In this paper, we present a new method for automatic
fence segmentation from casual videos capturing dynamic
scenes or objects. By allowing dynamic scenes, our approach has a much wider application range than previous
work that are constrained to static ones. Our approach can
also deal with videos shot with a moving camera, which
is quite common for novice users capturing with hand-held
mobile devices. We show that, while introducing object and
camera motion brings new challenges to the task, they in
turn provide additional information that can facilitate fence
detection and segmentation. Specifically, the camera motion gives the fence a rigid motion in the video that is usually quite distinctive from the object motion behind it, allowing better segmentation using local motion contrast.
Our method takes a bottom-up approach. It begins by
computing optical flow between neighboring frames, and
grouping pixels in each frame according to color and motion. In the first round, we treat each group as a super-pixel
and consider labeling each one as either fence or non-fence.
Each group’s probability of being fence is evaluated according to its structural and appearance features. The compatibility between two neighboring groups are computed from
their color, motion, and structural similarities. We then
solve a graph-cut optimization to produce initial labeling.
The initial labeling, done on a per-frame basis, suffers from
imprecise fence localization and poor temporal coherence.
1705

