Traffic-Sign Detection and Classification in the Wild
Zhe Zhu
TNList, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Dun Liang
TNList, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Songhai Zhang
TNList, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

ajex1988@gmail.com

randonlang@gmail.com

shz@tsinghua.edu.cn

Xiaolei Huang
Lehigh University
Bethlehem, PA, USA

Baoli Li
Tencent
Beijing, China

Shimin Hu
TNList, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

huang@cse.lehigh.edu

barneyli@tencent.com

shimin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Although promising results have been achieved in the areas of traffic-sign detection and classification, few works
have provided simultaneous solutions to these two tasks for
realistic real world images. We make two contributions to
this problem. Firstly, we have created a large traffic-sign
benchmark from 100000 Tencent Street View panoramas,
going beyond previous benchmarks. It provides 100000 images containing 30000 traffic-sign instances. These images
cover large variations in illuminance and weather conditions. Each traffic-sign in the benchmark is annotated with
a class label, its bounding box and pixel mask. We call this
benchmark Tsinghua-Tencent 100K. Secondly, we demonstrate how a robust end-to-end convolutional neural network (CNN) can simultaneously detect and classify trafficsigns. Most previous CNN image processing solutions target objects that occupy a large proportion of an image, and
such networks do not work well for target objects occupying only a small fraction of an image like the traffic-signs
here. Experimental results show the robustness of our network and its superiority to alternatives. The benchmark,
source code and the CNN model introduced in this paper is
publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Scene understanding is the ultimate goal of computer vision; detecting and classifying objects of various sizes in
the scene is an important sub-task. Recently, deep learning methods have shown superior performance for many
tasks such as image classification and speech recognition.
One particular variant of deep neural networks, convolu1 http://cg.cs.tsinghua.edu.cn/traffic-sign/

tional neural networks (CNNs), have shown their strengths
for tasks including image classification, localization and detection. Two benchmarks widely used to evaluate detection
performance are PASCAL VOC [7] and ImageNet ILSVRC [20]. In these datasets, target objects typically occupy a
large proportion of each image (the bounding box of each
object of interest fills on average about 20% of the image).
However, for some tasks, objects of interest may only occupy a small fraction of an image, such as traffic-signs in
images captured while driving. A typical traffic-sign might
be say 80 × 80 pixels, in a 2000 × 2000 pixel image, or
just 0.2% of the image. In fact, many tasks require detection and classification of small but significant objects, so it
is important to devise and evaluate methods which perform
well when the object of interest is not the main, or even a
major, scene item.
Traffic signs may be divided into different categories according to function, and in each category they may be further divided into subclasses with similar generic shape and
appearance but different details. This suggests traffic-sign
recognition should be carried out as a two-phase task: detection followed by classification. The detection step uses shared information to suggest bounding boxes that may
contain traffic-signs in a specific category, while the classification step uses differences to determine which specific
kind of sign is present (if any). (We note that the words
‘detection’ and ‘classification’ have different meanings in
the general object recognition community where, as exemplified by the ImageNet competition, classification means
giving an image a label rather than an object, and detection
means finding the bounding box of an object in a specific
category.)
Since the launch of the German traffic-sign detection
and classification benchmark data[24, 25], various research
groups have made progress in both the detection bench-

2110

