Deep Contrast Learning for Salient Object Detection
Guanbin Li
Yizhou Yu
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
{gbli, yzyu}@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Salient object detection has recently witnessed substantial progress due to powerful features extracted using deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, existing
CNN-based methods operate at the patch level instead of
the pixel level. Resulting saliency maps are typically blurry,
especially near the boundary of salient objects. Furthermore, image patches are treated as independent samples
even when they are overlapping, giving rise to significant
redundancy in computation and storage. In this paper, we
propose an end-to-end deep contrast network to overcome
the aforementioned limitations. Our deep network consists of two complementary components, a pixel-level fully
convolutional stream and a segment-wise spatial pooling
stream. The first stream directly produces a saliency map
with pixel-level accuracy from an input image. The second
stream extracts segment-wise features very efficiently, and
better models saliency discontinuities along object boundaries. Finally, a fully connected CRF model can be optionally incorporated to improve spatial coherence and contour
localization in the fused result from these two streams. Experimental results demonstrate that our deep model significantly improves the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Visual saliency aims at identifying the most visually distinctive parts in an image, and has received increasing interest in recent years. Though early work primarily focused
on predicting eye-fixations in images, research has shown
that salient object detection, which emphasizes object-level
integrity of saliency prediction results, is more useful and
can serve as a pre-processing step for a variety of computer
vision and image processing tasks including content-aware
image editing [3], object detection [37], image classification [46], person re-identification [4] and video summarization [33]. Despite recent progress, salient object detection
remains a challenging problem that calls for more accurate
solutions.
Results from perceptual research [12, 38] indicate that

visual contrast is the most important factor in visual
saliency. Various conventional saliency detection algorithms based on local or global contrast cues [8, 49] have
been successfully developed. In previous work, visual contrast is exemplified by contrast in various types of handcrafted low-level features (e.g., color, intensity and texture)
at the pixel or segment level. Though handcrafted features tend to perform well in standard scenarios, they are
not sufficiently robust for all challenging cases. For example, local contrast features may fail to detect homogenous regions inside salient objects while global contrast suffers from complex background. Although machine learning
based saliency models have been developed [32, 21, 30, 34],
they are primarily for integrating different handcrafted features [21] or fusing multiple saliency maps generated from
different methods [34].
To obtain more robust features than handcrafted ones for
salient object detection, deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have recently been employed, achieving substantially better results than previous state of the art [26, 50, 44].
In addition to improved robustness, features extracted using
CNNs contain more high-level semantic information since
those CNNs were typically pre-trained on datasets for visual
recognition tasks. However, in all these methods, CNNs are
all operated at the patch level instead of the pixel level, and
each pixel is simply assigned the saliency value of its enclosing patch. As a result, saliency maps are typically blurry
without fine details, especially near the boundary of salient
objects. Furthermore, all image patches are treated as independent data samples for classification or regression even
when they are overlapping. As a result, these methods usually have to run a CNN at least thousands of times (once for
every patch) to obtain a complete saliency map. This gives
rise to significant redundancy in computation and storage,
and makes both training and testing very space and time
consuming. For example, training a patch-oriented CNN
model for saliency detection takes over 2 GPU days and requires hundreds of gigabytes of storage for the 5000 images
in the MSRA-B dataset.
In this paper, inspired by a recent trend of developing
fully convolutional neural networks for pixel labeling prob1478

