DeepFool: a simple and accurate method to fool deep neural networks
Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, Pascal Frossard
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
{seyed.moosavi,alhussein.fawzi,pascal.frossard} at epfl.ch

Abstract
State-of-the-art deep neural networks have achieved impressive results on many image classification tasks. However, these same architectures have been shown to be unstable to small, well sought, perturbations of the images.
Despite the importance of this phenomenon, no effective
methods have been proposed to accurately compute the robustness of state-of-the-art deep classifiers to such perturbations on large-scale datasets. In this paper, we fill this
gap and propose the DeepFool algorithm to efficiently compute perturbations that fool deep networks, and thus reliably quantify the robustness of these classifiers. Extensive
experimental results show that our approach outperforms
recent methods in the task of computing adversarial perturbations and making classifiers more robust.1

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are powerful learning models that
achieve state-of-the-art pattern recognition performance in
many research areas such as bioinformatics [1, 16], speech
[12, 6], and computer vision [10, 8]. Though deep networks have exhibited very good performance in classification tasks, they have recently been shown to be particularly
unstable to adversarial perturbations of the data [18]. In
fact, very small and often imperceptible perturbations of the
data samples are sufficient to fool state-of-the-art classifiers
and result in incorrect classification. (e.g., Figure 1). Formally, for a given classifier, we define an adversarial perturbation as the minimal perturbation r that is sufficient to
change the estimated label k̂(x):
∆(x; k̂) := min krk2 subject to k̂(x + r) 6= k̂(x),

(1)

r

where x is an image and k̂(x) is the estimated label. We
call ∆(x; k̂) the robustness of k̂ at point x. The robustness
of classifier k̂ is then defined as

Figure 1: An example of adversarial perturbations.
First row: the original image x that is classified as
k̂(x)=“whale”. Second row: the image x + r classified
as k̂(x + r)=“turtle” and the corresponding perturbation r
computed by DeepFool. Third row: the image classified
as “turtle” and the corresponding perturbation computed
by the fast gradient sign method [4]. DeepFool leads to a
smaller perturbation.

1 To encourage reproducible research, the code of DeepFool is made
available at http://github.com/lts4/deepfool

2574

