A Dual-Source Approach for 3D Pose Estimation from a Single Image
Hashim Yasin∗1 , Umar Iqbal∗2 , Björn Krüger3 , Andreas Weber1 , and Juergen Gall2
1

Multimedia, Simulation, Virtual Reality Group, University of Bonn, Germany
2
Computer Vision Group, University of Bonn, Germany
3
Gokhale Method Institute, Stanford, USA
Abstract

One major challenge for 3D pose estimation from a single RGB image is the acquisition of sufficient training data.
In particular, collecting large amounts of training data that
contain unconstrained images and are annotated with accurate 3D poses is infeasible. We therefore propose to use
two independent training sources. The first source consists of images with annotated 2D poses and the second
source consists of accurate 3D motion capture data. To integrate both sources, we propose a dual-source approach
that combines 2D pose estimation with efficient and robust
3D pose retrieval. In our experiments, we show that our
approach achieves state-of-the-art results and is even competitive when the skeleton structure of the two sources differ
substantially.

1. Introduction
Human 3D pose estimation from a single RGB image
is a very challenging task. One approach to solve this
task is to collect training data, where each image is annotated with the 3D pose. A regression model, for instance,
can then be learned to predict the 3D pose from the image [6, 14, 12, 2, 7, 16, 17]. In contrast to 2D pose estimation, however, acquiring accurate 3D poses for an image
is very elaborate. Popular datasets like HumanEva [23] or
Human3.6M [13] synchronized cameras with a commercial
marker-based system to obtain 3D poses for images. This
requires a very expensive hardware setup and the requirements for marker-based system like studio environment and
attached markers prevent the capturing of realistic images.
Instead of training a model on pairs consisting of an image and a 3D pose, we propose an approach that is able
to incorporate 2D and 3D information from two different
training sources. The first source consists of images with
annotated 2D pose. Since 2D poses in images can be manually annotated, they do not impose any constraints regarding
the environment from where the images are taken. Indeed
any image from the Internet can be annotated and used. The
∗ authors contributed equally

second source is accurate 3D motion capture data captured
in a lab, e.g., as in the CMU motion capture dataset [8] or
the Human3.6M dataset [13]. We consider both sources
as independent, i.e., we do not know the 3D pose for any
training image. To integrate both sources, we propose a
dual-source approach as illustrated in Fig. 1. To this end,
we first convert the motion capture data into a normalized
2D pose space, and separately learn a regressor for 2D pose
estimation from the image data. During inference, we estimate the 2D pose and retrieve the nearest 3D poses using
an approach that is robust to 2D pose estimation errors. We
then jointly estimate a mapping from the 3D pose space to
the image, identify wrongly estimated 2D joints, and estimate the 3D pose. During this process, the 2D pose can
also be refined and the approach can be iterated to update
the estimated 3D and 2D pose. We evaluate our approach
on two popular datasets for 3D pose estimation. On both
datasets, our approach achieves state-of-the-art results and
we provide a thorough evaluation of the approach. In particular, we analyze the impact of differences of the skeleton
structure between the two training sources, the impact of the
accuracy of the used 2D pose estimator, and the impact of
the similarity of the training and test poses.

2. Related Work
A common approach for 3D human pose estimation is
to utilize multiple images captured by synchronized cameras [5, 24, 32]. The requirement of a multi-camera system
in a controlled environment, however, limits the applicability of these methods. Since 3D human pose estimation
from a single image is very difficult due to missing depth
information, depth cameras have been utilized for human
pose estimation [4, 22, 11]. However, current depth sensors
are limited to indoor environments and cannot be used in
unconstrained scenarios. Earlier approaches for monocular
3D human pose estimation [6, 1, 27, 2, 7, 18] utilize discriminative methods to learn a mapping from local image
features (e.g. HOG, SIFT, etc.) to 3D human pose or use a
CNN [16, 17]. Since local features are sensitive to noise,
these methods often assume that the location and scale of
the human is given, e.g., in the form of an accurate bounding
14948

