Virtual Worlds as Proxy for Multi-Object Tracking Analysis
Adrien Gaidon1∗
1
2

Qiao Wang2∗

Yohann Cabon1

Eleonora Vig1†

Computer Vision group, Xerox Research Center Europe, France

School of Electrical, Computer, and Energy Engineering and School of Arts, Media, and Engineering, Arizona State University, USA
{adrien.gaidon,yohann.cabon}@xrce.xerox.com

qiao.wang@asu.edu

eleonora.vig@dlr.de

http://www.xrce.xerox.com/Research-Development/Computer-Vision/Proxy-Virtual-Worlds

Abstract
Modern computer vision algorithms typically require expensive data acquisition and accurate manual labeling.
In this work, we instead leverage the recent progress in
computer graphics to generate fully labeled, dynamic, and
photo-realistic proxy virtual worlds. We propose an efficient real-to-virtual world cloning method, and validate our
approach by building and publicly releasing a new video
dataset, called “Virtual KITTI” 1 , automatically labeled
with accurate ground truth for object detection, tracking,
scene and instance segmentation, depth, and optical flow.
We provide quantitative experimental evidence suggesting
that (i) modern deep learning algorithms pre-trained on
real data behave similarly in real and virtual worlds, and
(ii) pre-training on virtual data improves performance. As
the gap between real and virtual worlds is small, virtual
worlds enable measuring the impact of various weather and
imaging conditions on recognition performance, all other
things being equal. We show these factors may affect drastically otherwise high-performing deep models for tracking.

1. Introduction
Although cheap or even no annotations might be used
at training time via weakly-supervised (resp. unsupervised)
learning, experimentally evaluating the generalization performance and robustness of a visual recognition model requires accurate full labeling of large representative datasets.
This is, however, challenging in practice for video understanding tasks like multi-object tracking (MOT), because of
the high data acquisition and labeling costs that limit the
quantity and variety of existing video benchmarks. For instance, the KITTI [1] multi-object tracking benchmark contains only 29 test sequences captured in similar good con∗ AG and QW have contributed equally
† EV is currently at the German Aerospace Center
1 http://www.xrce.xerox.com/
Research-Development/Computer-Vision/
Proxy-Virtual-Worlds

Figure 1: Top: a frame of a video from the KITTI multi-object
tracking benchmark [1]. Middle: the corresponding rendered
frame of the synthetic clone from our Virtual KITTI dataset with
automatic tracking ground truth bounding boxes. Bottom: automatically generated ground truth for optical flow (left), scene- and
instance-level segmentation (middle), and depth (right).

ditions and from a single source. To the best of our knowledge, none of the existing benchmarks in computer vision
contain the minimum variety required to properly assess the
performance of video analysis algorithms: varying conditions (day, night, sun, rain, . . . ), multiple detailed object
class annotations (persons, cars, license plates, . . . ), and different camera settings, among many others factors.
Using synthetic data should in theory enable full control
of the data generation pipeline, hence ensuring lower costs,
greater flexibility, and limitless variety and quantity. In this
work, we leverage the recent progress in computer graphics (especially off-the-shelf tools like game engines) and
commodity hardware (especially GPUs) to generate photorealistic virtual worlds used as proxies to assess the performance of video analysis algorithms.
14340

