Robust Scene Text Recognition with Automatic Rectification
Baoguang Shi, Xinggang Wang, Pengyuan Lyu, Cong Yao, Xiang Bai∗
School of Electronic Information and Communications
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
shibaoguang@gmail.com, xbai@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Recognizing text in natural images is a challenging task
with many unsolved problems. Different from those in
documents, words in natural images often possess irregular shapes, which are caused by perspective distortion,
curved character placement, etc. We propose RARE (Robust
text recognizer with Automatic REctification), a recognition
model that is robust to irregular text. RARE is a speciallydesigned deep neural network, which consists of a Spatial
Transformer Network (STN) and a Sequence Recognition
Network (SRN). In testing, an image is firstly rectified via
a predicted Thin-Plate-Spline (TPS) transformation, into a
more “readable” image for the following SRN, which recognizes text through a sequence recognition approach. We
show that the model is able to recognize several types of
irregular text, including perspective text and curved text.
RARE is end-to-end trainable, requiring only images and
associated text labels, making it convenient to train and
deploy the model in practical systems. State-of-the-art or
highly-competitive performance achieved on several benchmarks well demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed
model.

1. Introduction
In natural scenes, text appears on various kinds of objects, e.g. road signs, billboards, and product packaging. It
carries rich and high-level semantic information that is important for image understanding. Recognizing text in images facilitates many real-world applications, such as geolocation, driverless car, and image-based machine translation. For these reasons, scene text recognition has attracted
great interest from the community [28, 37, 15]. Despite the
maturity of the research on Optical Character Recognition
(OCR) [26], recognizing text in natural images, rather than
scanned documents, is still challenging. Scene text images
exhibit large variations in the aspects of illumination, mo∗ Corresponding author

Input Image

Rectiﬁed Image
Spatial
Transformer
Network

Sequence
Recognition
Network

"MOON"

Figure 1. Schematic overview of RARE, which consists a spatial
transformer network (STN) and a sequence recognition network
(SRN). The STN transforms an input image to a rectified image, while the SRN recognizes text. The two networks are jointly
trained by the back-propagation algorithm [22]. The dashed lines
represent the flows of the back-propagated gradients.

tion blur, text font, color, etc. Moreover, text in the wild
may have irregular shape. For example, some scene text is
perspective text [29], which is caused by side-view camera
angles; some has curved shapes, meaning that its characters
are placed along curves rather than straight lines. We call
such text irregular text, in contrast to regular text which is
horizontal and frontal.
Usually, a text recognizer works best when its input images contain tightly-bounded regular text. This motivates
us to apply a spatial transformation prior to recognition, in
order to rectify input images into ones that are more “readable” by recognizers. In this paper, we propose a recognition method that is robust to irregular text. Specifically,
we construct a deep neural network that combines a Spatial
Transformer Network [18] (STN) and a Sequence Recognition Network (SRN). An overview of the model is given in
Fig. 1.
In the STN, an input image is spatially transformed into
a rectified image. Ideally, the STN produces an image that
contains regular text, which is a more appropriate input for
the SRN than the original one. The transformation is a thinplate-spline [6] (TPS) transformation, whose nonlinearity
allows us to rectify various types of irregular text, including perspective and curved text. The TPS transformation is
configured by a set of fiducial points, whose coordinates are
regressed by a convolutional neural network.
In an image that contains regular text, characters are arranged along a horizontal line. It bares some resemblance

4168

