Camera Calibration from Dynamic Silhouettes Using Motion Barcodes
Gil Ben-Artzi

Yoni Kasten
Shmuel Peleg
Michael Werman
School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel

Abstract
Computing the epipolar geometry between cameras with
very different viewpoints is often problematic as matching
points are hard to find. In these cases, it has been proposed
to use information from dynamic objects in the scene for
suggesting point and line correspondences.
We propose a speed up of about two orders of magnitude,
as well as an increase in robustness and accuracy, to methods computing epipolar geometry from dynamic silhouettes.
This improvement is based on a new temporal signature:
motion barcode for lines. Motion barcode is a binary temporal sequence for lines, indicating for each frame the existence of at least one foreground pixel on that line. The
motion barcodes of two corresponding epipolar lines are
very similar, so the search for corresponding epipolar lines
can be limited only to lines having similar barcodes. The
use of motion barcodes leads to increased speed, accuracy,
and robustness in computing the epipolar geometry.

1. Introduction
Calibration of multi-camera systems is normally computed by finding corresponding feature points between images taken by these cameras. When not enough feature
points can be found, e.g. when the camera viewpoints vary
greatly, the epipolar geometry can be computed from silhouettes of moving objects that are visible in videos captured by the two cameras. The silhouettes at one time instance are used to suggest matching epipolar lines which
are used to propose a fundamental matrix that is verified
over all frames.
The best methods for computing the fundamental matrix use tangents to the dynamic silhouette as candidates
for epipolar lines [27]. Our approach presents a speedup of
about two orders of magnitude for these methods, and significantly improves accuracy and robustness. This speedup
is obtained by requiring candidates for matching epipolar
lines to share a temporal signature (motion barcode).
Motion barcodes were first introduced for points in [5].
The motion barcode of a line is a binary temporal sequence,

Figure 1. When two cameras have very different viewpoints as in
this example, appearance can not be used for calibration. Instead,
calibration is possible from matching pairs of epipolar lines that
can be extracted efficiently from moving silhouettes. The yellow
lines are the epipolar lines proposed by our method, while the red
lines are the ground truth epipolar lines. The corresponding silhouettes are displayed at the bottom.

indicating for each frame the existence of at least one foreground pixel on that line. We show that correlation between
the motion barcodes of corresponding epipolar lines is high.
By testing as possible matches only pairs of lines whose
motion barcode correlation is high, a speedup by about two
orders of magnitude is obtained. Figure 1 shows matching
epipolar lines extracted using our approach. Following [27],
we use a RANSAC approach to test possible matching pairs
of epipolar lines, and compute the epipolar geometry.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 1.1 describes
relevant prior work. Section 2 introduces the theoretical
background. Section 3 presents the motion barcodes of
lines. Section 4 shows how to match epipolar lines based on
dynamic silhouettes. Section 5 presents an iterative computation of the fundamental matrix based on the motion barcode. Section 6 shows our results on both synthetic and real
sequences.

4095

