Actionness Estimation Using Hybrid Fully Convolutional Networks
Limin Wang1,3
1

Yu Qiao1

Xiaoou Tang1,2

Luc Van Gool3

Shenzhen key lab of Comp. Vis. & Pat. Rec., Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China
2

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
3

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Actionness [3] was introduced to quantify the likelihood
of containing a generic action instance at a specific location. Accurate and efficient estimation of actionness is
important in video analysis and may benefit other relevant tasks such as action recognition and action detection.
This paper presents a new deep architecture for actionness
estimation, called hybrid fully convolutional network (HFCN), which is composed of appearance FCN (A-FCN)
and motion FCN (M-FCN). These two FCNs leverage the
strong capacity of deep models to estimate actionness maps
from the perspectives of static appearance and dynamic motion, respectively. In addition, the fully convolutional nature of H-FCN allows it to efficiently process videos with
arbitrary sizes. Experiments are conducted on the challenging datasets of Stanford40, UCF Sports, and JHMDB
to verify the effectiveness of H-FCN on actionness estimation, which demonstrate that our method achieves superior
performance to previous ones. Moreover, we apply the estimated actionness maps on action proposal generation and
action detection. Our actionness maps advance the current
state-of-the-art performance of these tasks substantially.

1. Introduction
Action understanding in videos is an important problem in computer vision and has received extensive research
attention in this community rencently. Most of the research works focused on the problem of action classification [7, 9, 22, 37, 38, 41], which aims at predicting an action label given a video. State-of-the-art classification methods [30, 36, 40, 42] have achieved relatively good performance on several challenging datasets, such as HMDB51
[20] and UCF101 [32]. However, these classification methods are only able to answer “is there an action of certain
type present in the video”, but fail to provide the information about “where is it if there is an action in the video”. To
overcome this limitation, the problem of action detection
has been studied by several recent works [11, 13, 34, 39],

(a) RGB

(b) Flow-x

(c) Flow-y

(d) A-FCN Result

(e) M-FCN Result

(f) H-FCN Result

Figure 1. An example of actionness maps. Our Hybrid-FCN
(H-FCN) is composed of Appearance-FCN (A-FCN) and MotionFCN (M-FCN). A-FCN captures appearance information from
static RGB image, while M-FCN extract motion cues from optical flow fields. The two FCNs are complementary to each other
for the task of actionness estimation.

but these methods still perform relatively poorly on the realistic datasets, such as UCF Sports [26] and JHMDB [14].
For action detection in videos, we need to estimate
bounding boxes of the action of interest at each frame,
which together form a spatio-temporal tube in the input video. Sliding window becomes computationally prohibitive due to the huge numbers of candidate windows
in the video space. For example, give a video of size
W × H × T , the number of possible boxes for each frame
is around O((W H)2 ) and the number of possible tubes for
the video is as large as O((W H)2T ). Motivated by fast
object detection using proposals [10], the idea of “action
proposal” [25, 46] has been introduced for efficient action
detection [11, 13]. Like object proposal algorithms, most of
these methods depend on low-level visual cues, such as spatial edges and motion boundaries, and generate action candidates by hierarchically merging super-voxels [44]. Therefore, these methods usually require heuristic designs and
sophisticated merging algorithms, which are difficult to be
optimized for action detection and may be sensitive to input

2708

