Recognizing Micro-Actions and Reactions from Paired Egocentric Videos
Ryo Yonetani
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan

Kris M. Kitani
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Yoichi Sato
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan

yonetani@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

kkitani@cs.cmu.edu

ysato@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

(1) Pointing and shift in attention
Person B

We aim to understand the dynamics of social interactions
between two people by recognizing their actions and reactions using a head-mounted camera. Our work will impact
several first-person vision tasks that need the detailed understanding of social interactions, such as automatic video
summarization of group events and assistive systems. To
recognize micro-level actions and reactions, such as slight
shifts in attention, subtle nodding, or small hand actions,
where only subtle body motion is apparent, we propose to
use paired egocentric videos recorded by two interacting
people. We show that the first-person and second-person
points-of-view features of two people, enabled by paired
egocentric videos, are complementary and essential for reliably recognizing micro-actions and reactions. We also
build a new dataset of dyadic (two-persons) interactions
that comprises more than 1000 pairs of egocentric videos
to enable systematic evaluations on the task of micro-action
and reaction recognition.

1. Introduction
The dynamics of social interactions between two people
can be decomposed into a sequence of action and reaction
pairs (such as pointing and sharing a point of attention, gesturing and nodding in agreement, or laughing and gesturing
disagreement) to convey to each other a sense of their internal states. Our everyday interactions even include microactions and micro-reactions in which only subtle body motion is apparent, such as slight changes in focus of attention
(small movement of the head in response to pointing), subtle nodding, or small hand actions. The ability to understand
interaction dynamics with such micro-behaviors is important for human-to-human communications, as this mode of
non-verbal communication is perhaps our primary means
of understanding and expressing our internal state. Towards
understanding the deeper complexities of social interaction
dynamics, this work attempts to take the first step by developing a method to recognize micro-actions and reactions.

Person A

(2) Gesture and positive response
Person B
Person A

(3) Passing and receiving an item
Person B

Person A’s points-of-view

Person A

Person B’s points-of-view

Figure 1. Challenges of recognizing micro-actions. Slight head
motion of person B induces only slight local motion in the person
A’s points-of-view in (1) and (2). Hand motion by person A is
difficult to observe from the A’s points-of-view in (2) and (3).

To enable such recognition ability, we show in this work
that it is critical to have access to a pair of egocentric
videos taken by two interacting parties. Particularly, we
focus exclusively on dyadic (i.e., two-person) interactions
and assume that both people are equipped with a headmounted camera. In this setting, each person always has
a first-person point-of-view (POV) observation of one’s self
in one’s own video and a second-person POV observation
of the self in another video. For example, Figure 1(1)
shows person A pointing from both his own POV (left)
and the POV of person B (right). In this way, egocentric
videos are advantageous from a sensing perspective since
the head motion and hand motion of camera wearers are
often observed clearly in such videos, making it possible
to perform various forms of first-person action recognition
[7, 9, 13, 18, 25, 27, 30]. They can also be used to see the
behavior of other people up-close from the second-person
POV [1, 2, 3, 8, 29, 44, 45].
One key observation to use a pair of egocentric videos
is that a head-worn camera naturally amplifies subtle head
motion and hand motion needed to recognize micro-actions
12629

