Primary Object Segmentation in Videos via Alternate Convex Optimization
of Foreground and Background Distributions
Won-Dong Jang
Korea University

Chulwoo Lee
Northumbria University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

wdjang@mcl.korea.ac.kr

chulwoo.lee@northumbria.ac.uk

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
An unsupervised video object segmentation algorithm,
which discovers a primary object in a video sequence automatically, is proposed in this work. We introduce three
energies in terms of foreground and background probability distributions: Markov, spatiotemporal, and antagonistic
energies. Then, we minimize a hybrid of the three energies
to separate a primary object from its background. However,
the hybrid energy is nonconvex. Therefore, we develop the
alternate convex optimization (ACO) scheme, which decomposes the nonconvex optimization into two quadratic programs. Moreover, we propose the forward-backward strategy, which performs the segmentation sequentially from the
first to the last frames and then vice versa, to exploit temporal correlations. Experimental results on extensive datasets
demonstrate that the proposed ACO algorithm outperforms
the state-of-the-art techniques significantly.

In this work, we propose a novel unsupervised algorithm
for video object segmentation. To segment a primary foreground object from the background, we define three energies in terms of foreground and background probability distributions: Markov energy, spatiotemporal energy, and antagonistic energy. Then, we minimize the hybrid energy of
the three energy terms to achieve the segmentation. More
specifically, since the hybrid energy is nonconvex, we develop the alternate convex optimization (ACO) scheme that
converts the nonconvex problem into two quadratic programs. We perform the segmentation forwardly from the
first to the last frames, and then backwardly from the last
to the first frames. Experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed ACO algorithm outperforms the state-of-theart conventional algorithms in [29,37] on the SegTrack [33],
SegTrack v2 [23], and VidSeg datasets. To summarize, this
paper has three main contributions.
• Introduction of the hybrid energy of foreground and
background distributions and its ACO to segment a primary object from the background.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation is the process to separate a
primary object from the background in a video sequence. It
is applicable as a preliminary to various vision applications,
such as action recognition, content-based video retrieval,
targeted content replacement, and video summarization. It
is hence important to develop robust video object segmentation techniques. However, video object segmentation is
challenging due to a variety of difficulties, e.g., cluttered
background, occlusion, and non-rigid object deformation.
To overcome these issues, many attempts have been made.
Video object segmentation methods can be categorized
into supervised or unsupervised approaches. Supervised
methods [3, 11, 30, 33] address the problem by employing
user annotations on a few selected frames. In contrast, unsupervised methods [25, 29, 34, 37] identify an object automatically. Without the prior information about the object,
the unsupervised segmentation is more difficult than the supervised one.

• The forward-backward strategy, to transfer object information sequentially from the first frame to the last
frame and vice versa, for accurate object segmentation.
• Remarkable performance achievement on the three
datasets, including the proposed VidSeg dataset that
consists of challenging sequences.

2. Related Work
Supervised methods for video object segmentation, requiring user annotations about a primary object, include
non-rigid object tracking and interactive video segmentation. In non-rigid object tracking, a primary object is manually delineated at the first frame and then tracked at subsequent frames [11, 33]. In interactive video segmentation,
user annotations on a few selected frames are utilized to
separate an object from its background [3, 30]. However,
the manual delineation or annotation is exhausting. Hence,
in this work, we focus on unsupervised methods.

696

