DeepCAMP: Deep Convolutional Action & Attribute Mid-Level Patterns
Ali Diba1∗, Ali Mohammad Pazandeh2∗, Hamed Pirsiavash3 , Luc Van Gool1,4
1

ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven
1

2

SUT

3

University of Maryland Baltimore County

firstname.lastname@esat.kuleuven.be

2

pazandeh@ee.sharif.edu

3

4

CVL, ETH Zurich

hpirsiav@umbc.edu

Abstract
The recognition of human actions and the determination
of human attributes are two tasks that call for fine-grained
classification. Indeed, often rather small and inconspicuous
objects and features have to be detected to tell their classes
apart. In order to deal with this challenge, we propose
a novel convolutional neural network that mines mid-level
image patches that are sufficiently dedicated to resolve the
corresponding subtleties. In particular, we train a newly designed CNN (DeepPattern) that learns discriminative patch
groups. There are two innovative aspects to this. On the one
hand we pay attention to contextual information in an original fashion. On the other hand, we let an iteration of feature
learning and patch clustering purify the set of dedicated
patches that we use. We validate our method for action classification on two challenging datasets: PASCAL VOC 2012
Action and Stanford 40 Actions, and for attribute recognition we use the Berkeley Attributes of People dataset. Our
discriminative mid-level mining CNN obtains state-of-theart results on these datasets, without a need for annotations
about parts and poses.

1. Introduction
Mimicking the human capability to understand the actions and attributes of people is very challenging. Lately,
deep neural networks have strongly increased the capacity
of computers to recognize objects, yet the analysis of human
actions and attributes is lagging behind in terms of performance. These are a kind of fine-grained classification problems, where on the one hand possibly small patches that
correspond to crucial appearance features of objects interacted with as well as, on the other hand, the global context
of the surrounding scene contain crucial cues. The paper
presents a newly designed CNN to extract such information
by identifying informative image patches.
The idea of focusing on patches or parts definitely is not
∗ A. Diba and A.M.Pazandeh contributed equally to this work

Phoning

(a)

Has hat
Has shirt
Has glasses

(b)

Figure 1. Mid-level visual elements: discriminative descriptors of
human actions and attributes. Our method discovers visual elements which make discrimination between human body parts or
attributes or interacted objects . (a) shows the scores and classification results in the action classification task (b) shows discrimination scores of elements in the attributes classification task by
color and shows final results of classification.

new in computer vision, also not when it comes to human
actions or attributes [28, 35]. [28] show that a good solution to human action classification can be achieved without
trying to obtain a perfect pose estimation and without using body part detectors. Indeed, an alternative is to capture
discriminative image patches. Mining such patches for the
cases of actions and attributes is the very topic of this paper.
After deriving some initial discriminative patch clusters for
each category of action or attribute, our deep pattern CNN
puts them into an iterative process that further optimizes the
discriminative power of these clusters. Fig. 2 sketches our
CNN and will be explained further in the upcoming sec13557

