Semantic Segmentation with Boundary Neural Fields
Gedas Bertasius
University of Pennsylvania

Jianbo Shi
University of Pennsylvania

Lorenzo Torresani
Dartmouth College

gberta@seas.upenn.edu

jshi@seas.upenn.edu

lt@dartmouth.edu

Abstract
The state-of-the-art in semantic segmentation is currently represented by fully convolutional networks (FCNs).
However, FCNs use large receptive fields and many pooling layers, both of which cause blurring and low spatial
resolution in the deep layers. As a result FCNs tend to produce segmentations that are poorly localized around object
boundaries. Prior work has attempted to address this issue
in post-processing steps, for example using a color-based
CRF on top of the FCN predictions. However, these approaches require additional parameters and low-level features that are difficult to tune and integrate into the original
network architecture. Additionally, most CRFs use colorbased pixel affinities, which are not well suited for semantic
segmentation and lead to spatially disjoint predictions.
To overcome these problems, we introduce a Boundary
Neural Field (BNF), which is a global energy model integrating FCN predictions with boundary cues. The boundary information is used to enhance semantic segment coherence and to improve object localization. Specifically, we
first show that the convolutional filters of semantic FCNs
provide good features for boundary detection. We then employ the predicted boundaries to define pairwise potentials
in our energy. Finally, we show that our energy decomposes semantic segmentation into multiple binary problems,
which can be relaxed for efficient global optimization. We
report extensive experiments demonstrating that minimization of our global boundary-based energy yields results superior to prior globalization methods, both quantitatively
as well as qualitatively.

1. Introduction
The recent introduction of fully convolutional networks
(FCNs) [22] has led to significant quantitative improvements on the task of semantic segmentation. However, despite their empirical success, FCNs suffer from some limitations. Large receptive fields in the convolutional layers and
the presence of pooling layers lead to blurring and segmentation predictions at a significantly lower resolution than the

Figure 1: Examples illustrating shortcomings of prior semantic segmentation methods: the second column shows
results obtained with a FCN [22], while the third column
shows the output of a Dense-CRF applied to FCN predictions [19, 7]. Segments produced by FCN are blob-like and
are poorly localized around object boundaries. Dense-CRF
produces spatially disjoint object segments due to the use of
a color-based pixel affinity function that is unable to measure semantic similarity between pixels.
original image. As a result, their predicted segments tend to
be blobby and lack fine object boundary details. We report
in Fig. 1 some examples illustrating typical poor localization of objects in the outputs of FCNs.
Recently, Chen at al. [7] addressed this issue by applying a Dense-CRF post-processing step [19] on top of coarse
FCN segmentations. However, such an approach introduces
several problems of its own. First, the Dense-CRF adds new
parameters that are difficult to tune and integrate into the
original network architecture. Additionally, most methods
based on CRFs or MRFs use low-level pixel affinity functions, such as those based on color. These low-level affinities often fail to capture semantic relationships between objects and lead to poor segmentation results (see last column
in Fig. 1).
We propose to address these shortcomings by means of
a Boundary Neural Field (BNF), an architecture that employs a single semantic segmentation FCN to predict semantic boundaries and then use them to produce semantic
segmentation maps via a global optimization. We demonstrate that even though the semantic segmentation FCN has
not been optimized to detect boundaries, it provides good
13602

