Efficient 3D Room Shape Recovery from a Single Panorama
Hao Yang
Hui Zhang
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
yanghao14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, huizhang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

corridor

We propose a method to recover the shape of a 3D room
from a full-view indoor panorama. Our algorithm can automatically infer a 3D shape from a collection of partially
oriented superpixel facets and line segments. The core part
of the algorithm is a constraint graph, which includes lines
and superpixels as vertices, and encodes their geometric
relations as edges. A novel approach is proposed to perform 3D reconstruction based on the constraint graph by
solving all the geometric constraints as constrained linear
least-squares. The selected constraints used for reconstruction are identified using an occlusion detection method with
a Markov random field. Experiments show that our method
can recover room shapes that can not be addressed by previous approaches. Our method is also efficient, that is, the
inference time for each panorama is less than 1 minute.

(a) Input indoor panorama

(b) Line segments

(c) Superpixels

(d) Recovered depths

(e) Reconstructed 3D room model

1. Introduction
A 360˝ full-view indoor panorama is shown in Fig.
1a. We intend to recover the 3D room shape from this
panorama. Several methods are available to solve this problem, either by adopting the Indoor World model, which consists of a single floor, a single ceiling, and vertical walls
[3, 10], or by estimating a cuboid shape that fits the room
layout [6, 17, 7, 11, 2, 15, 16, 14, 20] 1 . Intrinsically, most
of these approaches work in a discretized manner, that is,
the results are selected from a set of candidates based on
certain scoring functions. The generation rules of the candidates limit the scope of these algorithms. For example,
the corridor of the room in Fig. 1a cannot be modeled either as part of a cuboid or within an Indoor World because
the ceiling of the corridor is lower than that of the room.
A method is proposed to address this problem in a geometric manner. We extract lines and superpixels from the
panorama and estimate their orientation information under
1 Most of these methods deal with normal photographs, however, modifying these methods to cope with panoramas is a straightforward process.

Figure 1: (a) Input indoor panorama, with detected lines shown
in (b). Red, green, and blue indicate Manhattan directions that
are assigned on lines in the preprocessing stage. (c) Superpixels
generated by over segmentation. Pure colors (except white) indicate that the surface normals are restricted to certain Manhattan
directions, striped colors suggest that the surface plane should be
parallel with a Manhattan direction in 3D space. In particular, red
regions in (c) represent horizontal faces such as floors or ceilings,
whereas the striped red regions represent vertical faces such as
walls. White indicates that no orientation restriction is imposed.
(d) Automatically recovered layout depths and (e) reconstructed
3D lines (in black) and superpixel facets (all textured) from different views. Face culling is applied to better illustrate the inside
model in each view.

Manhattan world assumption, as shown in Figs. 1b and
1c. A constraint graph, which includes all the lines and
superpixels as vertices is then constructed; and geometric
relations are encoded among them. A 3D reconstruction
is performed in an iterative manner, which can solve constraints as constrained linear least squares (CLLS). We propose an occlusion detection method using a Markov random

5422

