HyperDepth: Learning Depth from Structured Light Without Matching
Sean Ryan Fanello∗ Christoph Rhemann∗ Vladimir Tankovich
Adarsh Kowdle Sergio Orts Escolano David Kim Shahram Izadi
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Structured light sensors are popular due to their robustness to untextured scenes and multipath. These systems
triangulate depth by solving a correspondence problem between each camera and projector pixel. This is often framed
as a local stereo matching task, correlating patches of pixels
in the observed and reference image. However, this is computationally intensive, leading to reduced depth accuracy
and framerate. We contribute an algorithm for solving this
correspondence problem efficiently, without compromising
depth accuracy. For the first time, this problem is cast as
a classification-regression task, which we solve extremely
efficiently using an ensemble of cascaded random forests.
Our algorithm scales in number of disparities, and each
pixel can be processed independently, and in parallel. No
matching or even access to the corresponding reference pattern is required at runtime, and regressed labels are directly
mapped to depth. Our GPU-based algorithm runs at a 1KHz
for 1.3MP input/output images, with disparity error of 0.1
subpixels. We show a prototype high framerate depth camera running at 375Hz, useful for solving tracking-related
problems. We demonstrate our algorithmic performance,
creating high resolution real-time depth maps that surpass
the quality of current state of the art depth technologies,
highlighting quantization-free results with reduced holes,
edge fattening and other stereo-based depth artifacts.

1. Introduction
Consumer depth cameras have revolutionized many aspects of computer vision. With over 24 million Microsoft
Kinects sold alone, structured light sensors are still the most
widespread depth camera technology. This ubiquity is both
due to their affordability, and well-behaved noise characteristics, particularly compared with time-of-flight cameras
that suffer from multipath errors [17]; or passive stereo techniques which can fail in textureless regions [43, 5].
Structured light systems date back many decades; see
∗ Authors equally contributed to this work.

[39, 16]. Almost all follow a similar principle: A calibrated
camera and projector (typically both near infrared-based)
are placed at a fixed, known baseline. The structured light
pattern helps establish correspondence between observed
and projected pixels. Depth is derived for each corresponding pixel through triangulation. The process is akin to two
camera stereo [43], but with the projector system replacing
the second camera, and aiding the correspondence problem.
Broadly, structured light systems fall into two categories:
spatial or temporal. The former uses a single spatially varying pattern, e.g. [14, 45], and algorithms akin to stereo
matching to correlate a patch of pixels from the observed
image to the reference pattern, given epipolar constraints.
Conversely, the latter uses a varying pattern over time to
encode a unique temporal signature that can be decoded at
each observed pixel, directly establishing correspondence.
Temporal techniques are highly efficient computationally,
allowing for a simple, fast lookup to map from observed to
projected pixels, and estimate depth. However, they require
complex optical systems e.g. MEMS based projectors and
fast sensors, suffer from motion artifacts even with higher
framerate imagers, and are range limited given the precision
of the coding scheme. Therefore many consumer depth
cameras are based on spatially varying patterns, typically
using a cheap diffractive optical element (DOE) to produce
a pseudo-random pattern, such as in Kinect.
However, spatial structured light systems carry a fundamental algorithmic challenge: high computational cost
associated with matching pixels between camera and projector, analogous to stereo matching. This computational
barrier has also motivated many local stereo methods; see
[43, 5]. Whilst progress has been made on efficient stereo
methods, especially so called O(1) or constant time methods
[5], these often trade accuracy or precision for performance,
and even then very high framerates cannot be achieved.
Just a single disparity hypothesis often requires two local patches (in left and right images) to be compared, with
many pixel lookups and operations. Spatial structured light
algorithms e.g. in Kinect [14, 26], attempt to reduce these
comparisons, but even then ∼20 patch comparisons are re15441

