From Noise Modeling to Blind Image Denoising
Fengyuan Zhu1 , Guangyong Chen1 , and Pheng Ann Heng1,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Traditional image denoising algorithms always assume
the noise to be homogeneous white Gaussian distributed.
However, the noise on real images can be much more complex empirically. This paper addresses this problem and
proposes a novel blind image denoising algorithm which
can cope with real-world noisy images even when the noise
model is not provided. It is realized by modeling image
noise with mixture of Gaussian distribution (MoG) which
can approximate large varieties of continuous distributions.
As the number of components for MoG is unknown practically, this work adopts Bayesian nonparametric technique
and proposes a novel Low-rank MoG filter (LR-MoG) to
recover clean signals (patches) from noisy ones contaminated by MoG noise. Based on LR-MoG, a novel blind image denoising approach is developed. To test the proposed
method, this study conducts extensive experiments on synthesis and real images. Our method achieves the state-ofthe-art performance consistently.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is an important problem in the area of
computer vision and image processing. It is not only a useful low-level image processing tool to provide high-quality
image, but also an important pre-processing step for many
high-level visual problems including digital entertainment,
object recognition, image segmentation and remote sensing
imaging. It aims to recover the clean image X̂ from its noisy
observation X which is contaminated by noise E with
X = X̂ + E.

(1)

Estimating X̂ from X is an inverse problem. Many algorithms [11, 31, 36, 29, 30, 4, 8, 14, 9, 34, 18, 38] were proposed in recent years to solve this problem with good performance. Most of these approaches assume that the noise
E follows homogeneous white Gaussian distribution. This

assumption seems reasonable as some other noise can be
converted into Gaussian noise (e.g., Poisson noise can be
converted to white Gaussian noise via Anscombe transform [1]). However, in real camera systems, the noise has various sources (e.g., dark current noise, short noise, thermal
noise, quantization noise) and can be much more complex.
For example, Tsin [32], Liu [17] and Lebrun [15] stated
that the noise model of empirical noisy images captured by
CCD camera system can be spatial, signal and frequency
dependent, and even non-Gaussian empirically. As a result,
the noise model in real images can be much more complex
than the one-parameter homogeneous white Gaussian distribution. To cope with noisy images contaminated by noise
with various unknown noise models, it is important to develop a robust “blind image denoising” algorithm which can
adaptively estimate the noise model from a noisy observation, as well as recover the clean image.
However, to our best knowledge, only a few approaches were proposed to address the blind image denoising.
Portilla [24, 25] generated the classical BLS-GSM denoising method [26] which models patches at each scale in
the wavelet domain with a Gaussian scale mixture (GSM).
Instead of assuming that the noise is homogeneous white
Gaussian distributed, this method estimates the noise on
each wavelet subband with a zero-mean correlated Gaussian
model. Portilla proposed a method to estimate the covariance matrix of noise and applied Bayesian least square to
recover the clean image. Liu [17] proposed a segmentationbased blind image denoising algorithm for JPEG images.
This method assumes the noise to be intensity dependent Gaussian distributed. Taking the advantage that natural
image is piecewise-constant, this approach first segments
an input noisy image into small piecewise-constant areas,
then introduces a so-called “noise level function” (NLF)
to model the relation between the intensity of a pixel and
the noise level associated with it. After the noise model is estimated, the method recovers the clean image with
a conditional random field. Recently, Lebrun [15] introduced a new approach called “multiscale image blind de1420

