A Large Dataset to Train Convolutional Networks
for Disparity, Optical Flow, and Scene Flow Estimation
Nikolaus Mayer∗1 , Eddy Ilg∗1 , Philip Häusser∗2 , Philipp Fischer∗1†
1
2
University of Freiburg
Technical University of Munich
1

{mayern,ilg,fischer}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

2

haeusser@cs.tum.edu

Daniel Cremers
Technical University of Munich

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Thomas Brox
University of Freiburg

cremers@tum.de

{dosovits,brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Recent work has shown that optical flow estimation can
be formulated as a supervised learning task and can be successfully solved with convolutional networks. Training of
the so-called FlowNet was enabled by a large synthetically
generated dataset. The present paper extends the concept
of optical flow estimation via convolutional networks to disparity and scene flow estimation. To this end, we propose
three synthetic stereo video datasets with sufficient realism,
variation, and size to successfully train large networks. Our
datasets are the first large-scale datasets to enable training
and evaluation of scene flow methods. Besides the datasets,
we present a convolutional network for real-time disparity
estimation that provides state-of-the-art results. By combining a flow and disparity estimation network and training it
jointly, we demonstrate the first scene flow estimation with
a convolutional network.

1. Introduction
Estimating scene flow means providing the depth and 3D
motion vectors of all visible points in a stereo video. It is
the “royal league” task when it comes to reconstruction and
motion estimation and provides an important basis for numerous higher-level challenges such as advanced driver assistance and autonomous systems. Research over the last
decades has focused on its subtasks, namely disparity estimation and optical flow estimation, with considerable success. The full scene flow problem has not been explored
to the same extent. While partial scene flow can be simply
assembled from the subtask results, it is expected that the
joint estimation of all components would be advantageous
∗ These authors contributed equally
† Supported by the Deutsche Telekom Stiftung

Figure 1. Our datasets provide over 35000 stereo frames with
dense ground truth for optical flow, disparity and disparity change,
as well as other data such as object segmentation.

with regard to both efficiency and accuracy. One reason for
scene flow being less explored than its subtasks seems to be
a shortage of fully annotated ground truth data.
The availability of such data has become even more important in the era of convolutional networks. Dosovitskiy
et al. [4] showed that optical flow estimation can be posed
as a supervised learning problem and can be solved with a
large network. For training their network, they created a
simple synthetic 2D dataset of flying chairs, which proved
to be sufficient to predict accurate optical flow in general
videos. These results suggest that also disparities and scene
flow can be estimated via a convolutional network, ideally
jointly, efficiently, and in real-time. What is missing to implement this idea is a large dataset with sufficient realism
and variability to train such a network and to evaluate its
performance.

4040

