Newtonian Image Understanding:
Unfolding the Dynamics of Objects in Static Images
Roozbeh Mottaghi1

Hessam Bagherinezhad2
Mohammad Rastegari1
1
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence (AI2)
2
University of Washington

Abstract
In this paper, we study the challenging problem of predicting the dynamics of objects in static images. Given a
query object in an image, our goal is to provide a physical understanding of the object in terms of the forces acting
upon it and its long term motion as response to those forces.
Direct and explicit estimation of the forces and the motion
of objects from a single image is extremely challenging. We
define intermediate physical abstractions called Newtonian
scenarios and introduce Newtonian Neural Network (N 3 )
that learns to map a single image to a state in a Newtonian scenario. Our evaluations show that our method can
reliably predict dynamics of a query object from a single
image. In addition, our approach can provide physical reasoning that supports the predicted dynamics in terms of velocity and force vectors. To spur research in this direction
we compiled Visual Newtonian Dynamics (VIND) dataset
that includes more than 6000 videos aligned with Newtonian scenarios represented using game engines, and more
than 4500 still images with their ground truth dynamics.

1. Introduction
A key capability in human perception is the ability to
proactively predict what happens next in a scene [4]. Humans reliably use these predictions for planning their actions, making everyday decisions, and even correcting visual interpretations [15]. Examples include predictions involved in passing a busy street, catching a frisbee, or hitting
a tennis ball with a racket. Performing these tasks require
a rich understanding of the dynamics of objects moving in
a scene. For example, hitting a tennis ball with a racket requires knowing the dynamics of the ball, when it hits the
ground, how it bounces back from the ground, and what
form of motion it follows.
Rich physical understanding of human perception even
allows predictions of dynamics on only a single image.
Most people, for example, can reliably predict the dynam-

Ali Farhadi1,2

query
object

V
F

Figure 1. Given a static image, our goal is to infer the dynamics
of a query object (forces that are acting upon the object and the
expected motion of the object as a response to those forces). In
this paper, we show an algorithm that learns to map an image to
a state in a physical abstraction called a Newtonian scenario. Our
method provides a rich physical understanding of an object in an
image that allows prediction of long term motion of the object and
reasoning about the direction of net force and velocity vectors.

ics of the volleyball shown in Figure 1. Theories in perception and cognition attribute this capability, among many
explanations, to previous experience [9] and existence of an
underlying physical abstraction [14].
In this paper, we address the problem of physical understanding of objects in images in terms of the forces actioning upon them and their long term motions as their responses to those forces. Our goal is to unfold the dynamics
of objects in still images. Figure 1 shows an example of a
long term motion predicted by our approach along with the
physical reasoning that supports the predicted dynamics.
Motion of objects and its relations to various physical
quantities (mass, friction, external forces, geometry, etc.)
has been extensively studied in Mechanics. In schools, classical mechanics is taught using basic Newtonian scenarios
that explain a large number of simple motions in real world:
inclined surfaces, falling, swinging, external forces, projectiles, etc. To infer the dynamics of an object, students need
to figure out the Newtonian scenario that explains the situ-

3521

