Patches, Planes and Probabilities:
A Non-local Prior for Volumetric 3D Reconstruction
Ali Osman Ulusoy
Michael J. Black
Andreas Geiger
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{osman.ulusoy,michael.black,andreas.geiger}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a non-local structured prior
for volumetric multi-view 3D reconstruction. Towards this
goal, we present a novel Markov random field model based
on ray potentials in which assumptions about large 3D surface patches such as planarity or Manhattan world constraints can be efficiently encoded as probabilistic priors. We further derive an inference algorithm that reasons
jointly about voxels, pixels and image segments, and estimates marginal distributions of appearance, occupancy,
depth, normals and planarity. Key to tractable inference
is a novel hybrid representation that spans both voxel and
pixel space and that integrates non-local information from
2D image segmentations in a principled way. We compare
our non-local prior to commonly employed local smoothness assumptions and a variety of state-of-the-art volumetric reconstruction baselines on challenging outdoor scenes
with textureless and reflective surfaces. Our experiments
indicate that regularizing over larger distances has the potential to resolve ambiguities where local regularizers fail.

1. Introduction
Dense 3D reconstruction from multiple RGB images is
a long-standing problem in computer vision with numerous
practical applications. Unfortunately, it is also a highly illposed problem. Ambiguities arise in textureless areas or
when photo-consistency assumptions are violated, e.g., at
reflecting surfaces. For instance, consider the grass region
in Fig. 1a. The surface contains little texture, thus multiple
reconstructions satisfy the input images equally well.
Most previous work on multi-view stereo does not address such ambiguities and outputs a 3D model with no uncertainty information. In contrast, probabilistic approaches
model and expose the uncertainty in the reconstruction [1,
5, 7, 8, 37, 50, 55]. Fig. 1b shows the result of a recent probabilistic method [50] that is able to expose the ambiguity

(a) Input Image

(c) [50]+Pairwise Smoothness

(b) Occupancy Probability [50]

(d) Our Result

Figure 1: Motivation: (a) The grass surface contains little texture, leading to reconstruction ambiguity. (b) Voxel
occupancy probabilities reveal this ambiguity where lighter
colors encode higher uncertainty [50]. (c) Pairwise smoothness priors cannot resolve the ambiguity and lead to a biased
3D model. (d) Our planarity prior regularizes over large distances and helps reconstruct the correct surface.
caused by the textureless region. Ulusoy et al. [50] formulate 3D reconstruction as inference in a Markov random
field defined over the 3D voxel grid. Image evidence (input pixels) is modeled using ray potentials that accurately
incorporate visibility and free-space constraints.
While their method exposes reconstruction ambiguity,
it is not able to resolve this ambiguity to recover the correct surface because their model does not incorporate any
prior information; it models only image evidence. Luckily,
the 3D world we live in is not completely random but exhibits geometric structure. Previous works impose smoothness constraints via pairwise potentials that encourage adjacent voxels to take on the same occupancy state [18, 31] or
condition surface orientations on semantic information [40].
13280

