Adaptive 3D Face Reconstruction from Unconstrained Photo Collections
Joseph Roth, Yiying Tong, and Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
{rothjos1, ytong, liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract
Given a collection of “in-the-wild” face images captured
under a variety of unknown pose, expression, and illumination conditions, this paper presents a method for reconstructing a 3D face surface model of an individual along
with albedo information. Motivated by the success of recent face reconstruction techniques on large photo collections, we extend prior work to adapt to low quality photo
collections with fewer images. We achieve this by fitting a
3D Morphable Model to form a personalized template and
developing a novel photometric stereo formulation, under
a coarse-to-fine scheme. Superior experimental results are
reported on synthetic and real-world photo collections.

1. Introduction
Computer vision has had much interest in the longstanding problem of 3D surface reconstruction, expanding
from constrained desktop objects to in-the-wild images of
large outdoor objects [1]. Face reconstruction [23, 28], the
process of creating a detailed 3D model of a person’s face,
is important with applications in face recognition, video
editing, avatar puppeteering, and more. For instance, accurate face models have been shown to significantly improve
face recognition by allowing the rendering of a frontal-view
face image with neutral expression [43], thereby suppressing intra-person variability. The face presents additional
challenges than general surface reconstruction due to nonrigid deformations caused by expression variation.
For some, usually graphics, applications a highly detailed model may be reconstructed in a constrained scenario
using depth scanners [26, 12], calibrated stereo images [6],
stereo videos [7, 34] or even high-definition monocular
videos [13, 9]. However, for other applications such as biometrics, it is important to work on unconstrained photos like
those typical of online image searches or from surveillance
cameras. These photo collections present additional challenges since no temporal information may be used, images
are of low resolution and quality, and occlusions may exist.
Photometric stereo-based reconstruction methods have
proven effective for unconstrained photo collections.

Figure 1. The proposed system reconstructs a detailed 3D face
model of the individual, adapting to the number and quality of
photos provided.

Beginning with Kemelmacher-Shlizerman and Seitz’s
work [23] which reconstructs a 2.5D depth map and extended by Roth et al. [28] to a full 3D mesh, photometric
stereo-based approaches jointly estimate the surface normals, albedo, lighting conditions, and pose angles. Both
techniques aim to identify a single representative face from
the entire collection, which is challenging given the expression variation among images. By selecting a different consistent subset of images for each vertex on the face, the typical expression of the individual is used to drive the face
reconstruction. However, there are still major limitations in
photometric stereo-based reconstruction. One is that they
require a sufficiently large collection of photos fo reconstruction. Theoretically, only four images are necessary if
they are in perfect correspondence, but in practice the approaches use over one hundred images. Another is that the
subset selection is binary and only makes use of ∼10% of
the images for each vertex on the face.
Motivated by the success of the state of the art, we propose a novel adaptive photometric stereo-based reconstruction method from an unconstrained photo collection. Here,
“adaptive” refers to the fact that our algorithm can handle
a much wider range of photo collections, in terms of the
number, resolution, and ethnicity of face images. Specifically, given a collection of unconstrained face images, we
automatically detect faces and estimate 2D landmarks [37].
We then fit a 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) jointly to the
14197

