Globally Optimal Manhattan Frame Estimation in Real-time
Kyungdon Joo∗
Tae-Hyun Oh∗
Junsik Kim
In So Kweon
Robotics and Computer Vision Lab., KAIST, South Korea
{kdjoo369, thoh.kaist.ac.kr, mibastro}@gmail.com, iskweon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Given a set of surface normals, we pose a Manhattan
Frame (MF) estimation problem as a consensus set maximization that maximizes the number of inliers over the rotation search space. We solve this problem through a branchand-bound framework, which mathematically guarantees
a globally optimal solution. However, the computational
time of conventional branch-and-bound algorithms are intractable for real-time performance. In this paper, we propose a novel bound computation method within an efficient
measurement domain for MF estimation, i.e., the extended
Gaussian image (EGI). By relaxing the original problem,
we can compute the bounds in real-time, while preserving global optimality. Furthermore, we quantitatively and
qualitatively demonstrate the performance of the proposed
method for synthetic and real-world data. We also show the
versatility of our approach through two applications: extension to multiple MF estimation and video stabilization.

1. Introduction
Most man-made structures, such as urban and indoor
scenes, consist of a set of parallel and orthogonal planes.
These structures are commonly approximated by the Manhattan World (MW) assumption [5] in the fields of computer vision and robotics. Under the MW assumption, three
orthogonal directions are used to represent a scene structure, which are referred to as the Manhattan Frame (MF)
in previous studies [27, 9]. Recent studies have proposed
a variety of MF estimation methods for scene representation [8, 25, 13, 21]. In addition to scene representation,
an accurate estimation of MF is important as a key module for many computer vision applications, such as scene
understanding [24, 4, 11], SLAM [6, 30], focal length estimation [27, 2], and 3D reconstruction [8]. Since MF estimation is typically used as an early phase module in such a
wide range of applications, its overall performance is critical for the viability of the application as a whole.
∗ The first and the second authors provided equal contributions.

In order to ensure the versatile applicability to a broad
range of applications, a given MF estimation method requires two properties: stability and efficiency. For stability,
the robustness against noise and outliers is essential, as well
as the estimation method’s insensitivity to its initialization.
As for efficiency, the computational complexity of the MF
estimation has to remain reasonable. Even when its stability
is guaranteed, an MF estimation with a high order complexity is undesirable for time critical applications, e.g., SLAM.
In this research, we propose a robust and real-time Manhattan Frame (MF) estimation approach that guarantees a
globally optimal solution with high stability and efficiency.
We pose the MF estimation problem as that of a consensus set maximization, and solve it through a branch-andbound (BnB) framework [15]. Typically, the bound computation is the most time-consuming part in a conventional
BnB framework [19, 12]. To combat this, we suggest a relaxation of the original problem and a new bound definition that can be efficiently computed on a 2D domain (i.e.,
EGI). This allows the bounds to be computed using a few
simple arithmetic operations with linear complexity, while
still preserving the global optimality and the convergence
property of the BnB framework. The proposed framework
is illustrated in Fig. 1. Our method is quantitatively and
qualitatively validated with real and synthetic data. We also
demonstrate the flexibility of our method by using it in two
applications: multiple MF estimation (a mixture of Manhattan Frames) of a scene and video stabilization. In summary,
the contributions of this work are as follows:
• We propose a branch-and-bound based, real-time MF
estimation. Our approach can process around 300, 000
measurements in real-time.
• We relax the problem and present a new and efficient
bound computation with linear-time complexity, while
guaranteeing a globally optimal solution.
• Our method has been validated through systematic experiments and real world data. To show extensibility, we
present multiple MF estimation and video stabilization
as possible applications.
• We make the source code of the proposed method available for future use.
11763

