Image Style Transfer Using Convolutional Neural Networks
Leon A. Gatys
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany
Graduate School of Neural Information Processing, University of Tübingen, Germany
leon.gatys@bethgelab.org

Alexander S. Ecker
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
Matthias Bethge
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
Rendering the semantic content of an image in different
styles is a difficult image processing task. Arguably, a major
limiting factor for previous approaches has been the lack of
image representations that explicitly represent semantic information and, thus, allow to separate image content from
style. Here we use image representations derived from Convolutional Neural Networks optimised for object recognition, which make high level image information explicit. We
introduce A Neural Algorithm of Artistic Style that can separate and recombine the image content and style of natural
images. The algorithm allows us to produce new images of
high perceptual quality that combine the content of an arbitrary photograph with the appearance of numerous wellknown artworks. Our results provide new insights into the
deep image representations learned by Convolutional Neural Networks and demonstrate their potential for high level
image synthesis and manipulation.

1. Introduction
Transferring the style from one image onto another can
be considered a problem of texture transfer. In texture transfer the goal is to synthesise a texture from a source image
while constraining the texture synthesis in order to preserve
the semantic content of a target image. For texture synthesis

there exist a large range of powerful non-parametric algorithms that can synthesise photorealistic natural textures by
resampling the pixels of a given source texture [7, 30, 8, 20].
Most previous texture transfer algorithms rely on these nonparametric methods for texture synthesis while using different ways to preserve the structure of the target image. For
instance, Efros and Freeman introduce a correspondence
map that includes features of the target image such as image intensity to constrain the texture synthesis procedure
[8]. Hertzman et al. use image analogies to transfer the texture from an already stylised image onto a target image[13].
Ashikhmin focuses on transferring the high-frequency texture information while preserving the coarse scale of the
target image [1]. Lee et al. improve this algorithm by additionally informing the texture transfer with edge orientation
information [22].
Although these algorithms achieve remarkable results,
they all suffer from the same fundamental limitation: they
use only low-level image features of the target image to inform the texture transfer. Ideally, however, a style transfer
algorithm should be able to extract the semantic image content from the target image (e.g. the objects and the general
scenery) and then inform a texture transfer procedure to render the semantic content of the target image in the style of
the source image. Therefore, a fundamental prerequisite is
to find image representations that independently model variations in the semantic image content and the style in which
12414

