GOGMA: Globally-Optimal Gaussian Mixture Alignment
Dylan Campbell and Lars Petersson
Australian National University
National ICT Australia (NICTA)∗
{dylan.campbell,lars.petersson}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Gaussian mixture alignment is a family of approaches
that are frequently used for robustly solving the point-set
registration problem. However, since they use local optimisation, they are susceptible to local minima and can only
guarantee local optimality. Consequently, their accuracy
is strongly dependent on the quality of the initialisation.
This paper presents the first globally-optimal solution to
the 3D rigid Gaussian mixture alignment problem under
the L2 distance between mixtures. The algorithm, named
GOGMA, employs a branch-and-bound approach to search
the space of 3D rigid motions SE(3), guaranteeing global
optimality regardless of the initialisation. The geometry of
SE(3) was used to find novel upper and lower bounds for
the objective function and local optimisation was integrated
into the scheme to accelerate convergence without voiding
the optimality guarantee. The evaluation empirically supported the optimality proof and showed that the method
performed much more robustly on two challenging datasets
than an existing globally-optimal registration solution.

1. Introduction
Gaussian Mixture Alignment (GMA), the problem of
finding the transformation that best aligns one Gaussian
mixture with another, has been investigated extensively in
computer vision and robotics. It has a natural application to point-set registration, which endeavours to solve the
same problem as GMA for discrete point-sets in Rn . Indeed, the Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm [4, 56] and
several other local registration algorithms [11, 10, 47, 33]
can be interpreted as special cases of GMA [25]. Applications include merging multiple partial scans into a complete
model [5, 24]; using registration results as fitness scores for
object recognition [26, 3]; registering a view into a global
coordinate system for sensor localisation [34, 37]; and finding relative poses between sensors [52, 20].
The dominant solution for 2D and 3D rigid registration
is the ICP algorithm [4, 56] and variants, due to its conceptual simplicity, ease of use and good performance. How∗

NICTA is funded by the Australian Government through the Department of Communications and the Australian
Research Council through the ICT Centre of Excellence Program.

ever, ICP is limited by its assumption that closest point
pairs should correspond, which fails when the point-sets
are not coarsely aligned, or the moving ‘model’ point-set is
not a proper subset of the static ‘scene’ point-set. The former means that, without a good initialisation, ICP is very
susceptible to local minima, producing erroneous estimates
without a reliable means of detecting failure. The latter
regularly occurs, since differing sensor viewpoints and dynamic objects lead to occlusion and partial-overlap.
Gaussian mixture alignment [10, 47, 25, 8] was introduced to address these shortcomings. By aligning point-sets
without establishing explicit point correspondences, GMA
is less sensitive to missing correspondences from partial
overlap or occlusion and mitigate the problem of local minima by widening the basin of convergence. Robust objective functions can also be applied, such as the L2 distance
between mixtures [25, 8]. However, GMA still requires a
good initialisation and cannot guarantee global optimality.
Go-ICP [54, 53] was the first globally-optimal algorithm
for the 3D rigid registration problem defined by ICP. Specifically, it used a branch-and-bound approach to find the
global minimum of the ICP error metric, the L2 norm of
closest-point residuals. Despite solving the problem of local
minima, Go-ICP inherits the non-robust ICP cost function
that is susceptible to occlusion and partial overlap. Yang
et al. [54] proposed a trimming strategy to handle outlier
correspondences. However, this increased the runtime and
required an additional trimming parameter to be set.
This work is the first to propose a globally-optimal solution to the 3D Gaussian mixture alignment problem under Euclidean (rigid) transformations. It inherits the robust L2 density distance objective function of L2 GMA
while avoiding the problem of local minima. The method,
named GOGMA, employs the branch-and-bound algorithm
to guarantee global optimality regardless of initialisation,
using a parametrisation of SE(3) space that facilitates
branching. The pivotal contribution is the derivation of the
objective function bounds using the geometry of SE(3). In
addition, local GMA optimisation is applied whenever the
algorithm finds a better transformation, to accelerate convergence without voiding the optimality guarantee.
15685

