Stereo Matching with Color and Monochrome Cameras in Low-light Conditions
Hae-Gon Jeon1

Joon-Young Lee2

Sunghoon Im1

Hyowon Ha1

In So Kweon1

hgjeon@rcv.kaist.ac.kr

jolee@adobe.com

shim@rcv.kaist.ac.kr

hwha@rcv.kaist.ac.kr

iskweon@kaist.ac.kr

1

Robotics and Computer Vision Lab., KAIST

2

Adobe Research

Abstract
Consumer devices with stereo cameras have become
popular because of their low-cost depth sensing capability.
However, those systems usually suffer from low imaging
quality and inaccurate depth acquisition under low-light
conditions. To address the problem, we present a new
stereo matching method with a color and monochrome
camera pair. We focus on the fundamental trade-off that
monochrome cameras have much better light-efficiency
than color-filtered cameras. Our key ideas involve compensating for the radiometric difference between two crossspectral images and taking full advantage of complementary data. Consequently, our method produces both an
accurate depth map and high-quality images, which are
applicable for various depth-aware image processing. Our
method is evaluated using various datasets and the performance of our depth estimation consistently outperforms
state-of-the-art methods.

(a) A pair of color and monochrome images

(b) Estimated disparity map

(c) Recovered color image

1. Introduction

(d) Image refocusing
(e) Image stylization
Figure 1. Given the pair of images (a), we estimate the accurate
disparity map (b) and recover the high-quality color image (c). Our
result is applicable to various depth-aware image processing (d, e).

Stereo camera systems allow us to estimate depth information and have many advantages over active range sensors
such as ToF (time-of-flight) cameras and laser scanners.
Stereo cameras are cost-effective and can work in both
indoor and outdoor environments. This is why they have
been widely used in the computer vision and robotics fields
for several decades. Recently, consumer devices having a
stereo camera [2, 4] have been released for depth-aware
image editing applications.
Despite the advantages, estimating accurate depth map
in low-light conditions leads to severe image noise; thus is
still challenging and limits the usefulness of stereo systems.
Although a long exposure time or a flash light may alleviate
the problem, they can induce other imaging problems such
as motion blur or specular reflections [19]. To overcome
these issues, multi-modal and multi-spectral imaging approaches such as a color and infrared camera pair [16] and
cross-channel matching [26] have been proposed. However,

these approaches require high manufacturing cost and
specialized hardware.
In this paper, we present a stereo matching framework
with a color and monochrome image pair (Fig. 1(a)). Our
system is designed to estimate an accurate depth map
under low-light conditions without additional light sources
(Fig. 1(b)). In order to obtain reliable correspondence,
we exploit the fundamental trade-off between color sensing capability and light efficiency of color cameras and
monochrome cameras, respectively. Because monochrome
cameras respond to all colors of light, they have much better
light efficiency than Bayer-filtered color cameras [7, 3].
In general, image luminance recorded from a color
camera is not consistent with that from a monochrome
camera due to spatially-varying illumination and different
spectral sensitivities of the cameras. This degrades the
performance of stereo matching. To solve this problem,
14086

