A Hierarchical Deep Temporal Model for Group Activity Recognition
Mostafa S. Ibrahim∗, Srikanth Muralidharan∗, Zhiwei Deng, Arash Vahdat, Greg Mori
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada
{msibrahi, smuralid, zhiweid, avahdat}@sfu.ca, mori@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract
In group activity recognition, the temporal dynamics of
the whole activity can be inferred based on the dynamics
of the individual people representing the activity. We build
a deep model to capture these dynamics based on LSTM
(long short-term memory) models. To make use of these observations, we present a 2-stage deep temporal model for
the group activity recognition problem. In our model, a
LSTM model is designed to represent action dynamics of
individual people in a sequence and another LSTM model
is designed to aggregate person-level information for whole
activity understanding. We evaluate our model over two
datasets: the Collective Activity Dataset and a new volleyball dataset. Experimental results demonstrate that our
proposed model improves group activity recognition performance compared to baseline methods.

1. Introduction
What are the people in Figure 1 doing? This question
can be answered at numerous levels of detail – in this paper
we focus on the group activity, a high-level answer such
as “team spiking acivity”. We develop a novel hierarchical
deep model for group activity recognition.
A key cue for group activity recognition is the spatiotemporal relations among the people in the scene. Determining where individual people are in a scene, analyzing
their image appearance, and aggregating these features and
their relations can discern which group activity is present.
A volume of research has explored models for this type
of reasoning [4, 21, 27, 1]. However, these approaches
have focused on probabilistic or discriminative models built
upon hand-crafted features. Since they rely on shallow
hand crafted feature representations, they are limited by
their representational abilities to model a complex learning
task. Deep representations have overcome this limitation
and yielded state of the art results in several computer vision benchmarks [18, 33, 16].
∗ Equal Contribution

Figure 1: Group activity recognition via a hierarchical
model. Each person in a scene is modeled using a temporal
model that captures his/her dynamics, these models are integrated into a higher-level model that captures scene-level
activity.

A naive approach to group activity recognition with a
deep model would be to simply treat an image as an holistic input. One could train a model to classify this image
according to the group activity taking place. However, it
isn’t clear if this will work given the redundancy in the
training data: with a dataset of volleyball videos, frames
will be dominated by features of volleyball courts. The
differences between the different classes of group activities
are about spatio-temporal relations between people, beyond
just global appearance. Forcing a deep model to learn invariance to translation, to focus on the relations between
people, presents a significant challenge to the learning algorithm. Similar challenges exist in the object recognition
literature, and research often focuses on designing pooling
operators for deep networks (e.g. [36]) that enable the network to learn effective classifiers.
Group activity recognition presents a similar challenge
– appropriate networks need to be designed that allow the
learning algorithm to focus on differentiating higher-level

1971

