A New Finsler Minimal Path Model with Curvature Penalization for Image
Segmentation and Closed Contour Detection
Da Chen1

Jean-Marie Mirebeau2

Laurent D. Cohen1

1

CEREMADE, CNRS
University Paris Dauphine, PSL Research University, UMR 7534, 75016 PARIS, FRANCE
{chenda, cohen}@ceremade.dauphine.fr
2

Laboratoire de mathématiques d’Orsay, CNRS
Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, 91405 ORSAY, FRANCE
jean-marie.mirebeau@math.u-psud.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new curvature penalized minimal path model for image segmentation via closed contour detection based on the weighted Euler elastica curves,
firstly introduced to the field of computer vision in [22]. Our
image segmentation method extracts a collection of curvature penalized minimal geodesics, concatenated to form a
closed contour, by connecting a set of user-specified points.
Globally optimal minimal paths can be computed by solving
an Eikonal equation. This first order PDE is traditionally
regarded as unable to penalize curvature, which is related
to the path acceleration in active contour models. We introduce here a new approach that enables finding a global
minimum of the geodesic energy including a curvature term.
We achieve this through the use of a novel Finsler metric adding to the image domain the orientation as an extra
space dimension. This metric is non-Riemannian and asymmetric, defined on an orientation lifted space, incorporating
the curvature penalty in the geodesic energy. Experiments
show that the proposed Finsler minimal path model indeed
outperforms state-of-the-art minimal path models in both
synthetic and real images.

1. Introduction
Active contours models have been considerably studied
and used for object segmentation and feature extraction during almost three decades, since the pioneering work of the
snakes model proposed by Kass et al. [15]. This approach
models contours as closed curves locally minimizing an objective functional consisting of an internal and an external
force. The internal force terms depend on the first and sec-

ond order derivatives of the curves (snakes), and respectively account for a prior of small length and of low curvature of the contours. The external force is derived from a
Potential, depending on image data such as gradient magnitudes [15], and designed to attracting the curves or snakes
to image features of interest such as object boundaries.
The drawbacks of the snakes model [15] are its sensitivity to initialization, the difficulty of handling topological
changes, and of minimizing the strongly non-convex path
energy [13]. Regarding initialization, the snakes model requires an initial guess close to the desired images features,
and preferably enclosing them because energy minimization tends to shorten the snakes. The introduction of an expanding balloon force allows the initial curve to be inside
the objective region [11]. The issue of topology changes
led, on the other hand, to the development of active contour
methods which represent object boundaries as the zero level
set of the solution to a PDE [9, 10, 17, 23, 30].
The difficulty of minimizing the non-convex snakes energy [15] leads to important practical problems, since the
curve optimization procedure is often stuck at local minima of the energy functional, making the results sensitive
to curve initialization and image noise. In order to find the
global minimum of the active contours energy, Cohen and
Kimmel proposed a geodesic or minimal path model [13]
by removing the penalty associated to the second derivative
of the curve from the snakes energy [15]. In contrast with
snakes energy, this first order geodesic model [13] does not
penalize curvature, despite its relevance for the applications.
Thanks to this simplification, a fast, reliable and globally
optimal numerical method allows to find the energy minimizing curve with prescribed endpoints; namely the fast
marching method [27], based on the formalism of viscos-

355

