Information Bottleneck Learning Using Privileged Information for Visual
Recognition
Saeid Motiian

Marco Piccirilli Donald A. Adjeroh
West Virginia University
Morgantown, WV 26508

Gianfranco Doretto

{samotiian, mpiccir1, daadjeroh, gidoretto}@mix.wvu.edu

Abstract
We explore the visual recognition problem from a main
data view when an auxiliary data view is available during
training. This is important because it allows improving the
training of visual classifiers when paired additional data
is cheaply available, and it improves the recognition from
multi-view data when there is a missing view at testing time.
The problem is challenging because of the intrinsic asymmetry caused by the missing auxiliary view during testing.
We account for such view during training by extending the
information bottleneck method, and by combining it with
risk minimization. In this way, we establish an information
theoretic principle for leaning any type of visual classifier
under this particular setting. We use this principle to design
a large-margin classifier with an efficient optimization in
the primal space. We extensively compare our method with
the state-of-the-art on different visual recognition datasets,
and with different types of auxiliary data, and show that the
proposed framework has a very promising potential.

1. Introduction
Large amounts of good quality labeled data for training
visual classifiers are hard to obtain because they might be
expensive, or require too much time to be collected, or because of other reasons. Typically, this problem is addressed
by injecting domain, or prior knowledge, into the modeling framework to regularize the learning, and obtain a better classifier [22]. On the other hand, there are situations
where training labeled samples might be easily augmented
with extra information. For instance, in object recognition,
a labeled image sample, representing the main data view,
might have been annotated also with attributes describing
semantic properties of depicted objects, or with a bounding
box that specifies the location of the target object, or with
image tags describing the context of the image. This extra information can be seen as an auxiliary data view of the
image sample. In this work, we aim at improving visual

x : Motion

x* : Color

x : Image

x* : Attributes
Black: No
White: Yes
Brown: No
.
.
.
Water: Yes

x : Video

x* : Skeleton

x : Image

x* : Bounding Box

Figure 1. Visual recognition with auxiliary data. Visual recognition entails learning classifiers based on a main data view (e.g.,
motion information for recognizing actions, or image information
for recognizing animals and objects, or video information for gesture recognition). We extend the information bottleneck method to
leverage an auxiliary data view during training (e.g., color for actions, skeleton data for gestures, attributes for animals, and bounding boxes for objects), for learning a better visual classifier.

recognition based on a main data view, by leveraging the
auxiliary view available only during training, thus mitigating the lack of good quality labeled data. See Figure 1.
The problem outlined above has received limited attention. It is different from domain adaptation and transfer
learning [1, 48, 32], where the source and target domains
are closely related but statistically different. Here instead,
the main view used for testing is present also in training,
along with the paired auxiliary view to form the source domain. Indeed, our problem is more related to multi-view
and multi-task learning [9, 40, 14, 28, 45]. However, rather
than having all views or task labels available or predicted
during testing, here one view is missing and a single task label is predicted. The fact that the auxiliary view is missing
is what makes this problem challenging, because it cannot
be combined like the others in multi-view learning.
We address the auxiliary view problem from an information theoretic perspective, where we learn how to extract
information from the main data view, in a way that is optimal for visual recognition, and that speaks also on behalf of
the missing auxiliary view. The information bottleneck (IB)

1496

