Structured Prediction of Unobserved Voxels From a Single Depth Image
Michael Firman

Oisin Mac Aodha
Simon Julier
Gabriel J. Brostow
University College London
http://visual.cs.ucl.ac.uk/pubs/depthPrediction

Abstract
Building a complete 3D model of a scene, given only a
single depth image, is underconstrained. To gain a full volumetric model, one needs either multiple views, or a single
view together with a library of unambiguous 3D models that
will fit the shape of each individual object in the scene.
We hypothesize that objects of dissimilar semantic
classes often share similar 3D shape components, enabling
a limited dataset to model the shape of a wide range of objects, and hence estimate their hidden geometry. Exploring
this hypothesis, we propose an algorithm that can complete
the unobserved geometry of tabletop-sized objects, based on
a supervised model trained on already available volumetric
elements. Our model maps from a local observation in a
single depth image to an estimate of the surface shape in
the surrounding neighborhood. We validate our approach
both qualitatively and quantitatively on a range of indoor
object collections and challenging real scenes.

1. Introduction
We broadly categorize space in our world as being ‘occupied’ and opaque, or ‘empty’ and transparent. Depth cameras such as the Microsoft Kinect are able to give an estimate of which regions of a scene are composed of free,
empty space. However, each pixel in a depth image only
makes an estimate of occupancy in front of the first solid
surface encountered along that camera ray. Occlusion prevents any information from being measured about the occupancy of space beyond that first surface.
There are many applications, however, which critically
require a complete representation of the world geometry.
When a robot hand or autonomous vehicle interacts with
an unknown object in an unknown environment, a full 3D
understanding is required to navigate and prevent collisions.
In photo-editing, the full geometry would enable realistic
shadows from a new light source to be automatically added
to an image or stereo pair after capture.
A large amount of computer vision research has been devoted to reconstructing a full 3D world model from RGB or

Figure 1. Our volumetric completion. (a) Intensity image, for illustration only. (b) (Input) 3D projection of the depth image, captured from the red arrow’s perspective, where occlusions induce
large empty spaces. (c) Ground truth occupancy captured using
KinectFusion with multiple views. (d) (Output) Our Voxlets algorithm predicts a plausible completion of the occluded geometry.

depth images of a scene captured from multiple viewpoints,
thus coping with the effects of occlusion (e.g. [45, 28, 26]).
Instead, we focus on the task of classifying each voxel in a
local 3D scene as being either ‘occupied’ or ‘empty,’ given
just a single depth image from one viewpoint. An example
result of our algorithm is displayed in Figure 1.
In effect, we strive to predict the voxelized output of
KinectFusion [28], but without moving around. We achieve
this by learning a mapping from features on a depth image to a structured prediction of geometry in the region of a
query point. We take inspiration from recent work that segments objects from images using silhouettes learned from
different object classes [34]. They showed that shape can
transcend class categories, enabling shape predictions to be
made without requiring semantic understanding. As we
care about shape, independent of semantic understanding,
we are free to use training objects that are different from
15431

