Deep Exemplar 2D-3D Detection by Adapting from Real to Rendered Views
Francisco Massa 1
1

Bryan C. Russell 2

École des Ponts ParisTech ∗

2

Abstract
This paper presents an end-to-end convolutional neural
network (CNN) for 2D-3D exemplar detection. We demonstrate that the ability to adapt the features of natural images
to better align with those of CAD rendered views is critical
to the success of our technique. We show that the adaptation
can be learned by compositing rendered views of textured
object models on natural images. Our approach can be
naturally incorporated into a CNN detection pipeline and extends the accuracy and speed benefits from recent advances
in deep learning to 2D-3D exemplar detection. We applied
our method to two tasks: instance detection, where we evaluated on the IKEA dataset [36], and object category detection,
where we out-perform Aubry et al. [3] for “chair” detection
on a subset of the Pascal VOC dataset.

1. Introduction
Recently, Aubry et al. [3] performed object category detection by exemplar alignment with a large library of 3D
object models. The aligned models often approximately
matched the style of the depicted objects and allowed 3D
information, such as hidden object surfaces and object pose,
to be propagated to the 2D images. Such a result is useful for 3D scene reasoning and may potentially be used
in applications such as object manipulation in robotics and
model-based object image editing in computer graphics [30].
Despite recent progress on 2D-3D matching and retrieval [27, 35, 48], detection by 2D-3D alignment lags
behind state-of-the-art object detection systems based on
annotated images, e.g., R-CNN [18], in terms of accuracy
and speed. We see two primary reasons for this gap in performance: (i) there is a large appearance gap between views
rendered from CAD models and real images; and (ii) 2Dbased object detection has benefited from recent successes of
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [31, 32]. This work
∗ Université Paris-Est, LIGM (UMR CNRS 8049), ENPC, F-77455

Marne-la-Valle. This work was carried out in IMAGINE, a joint research
project between Ecole des Ponts ParisTech (ENPC) and the Centre Scientifique et Technique du Bâtiment (CSTB).

Mathieu Aubry1,3

Adobe Research

3

UC Berkeley

addresses both issues.
The appearance gap across two different domains encountered in 2D-3D alignment is not unique to our problem
and can be found in other tasks, e.g., when learning on one
dataset and testing on another [53]. To bridge such appearance gaps, a number of cross-domain adaptation algorithms
have been developed, e.g. [54]. Building on the successes of
these methods, we present an approach that learns to adapt
natural image features for the task of 2D-3D exemplar detection. We hypothesize that, given the features of a natural
image depicting an object, it is possible to infer the features
of a corresponding rendered view of an object CAD model
with similar style and pose. Note that similar reasoning has
been explored in recent work to predict CAD object features
for a different view [50].
To achieve our adaptation learning goal, we need a large
training set of aligned natural image and rendered view pairs
depicting a similar object. While there are existing datasets
with aligned pairs, e.g., IKEA [36] and Pascal3D [57], such
datasets are either relatively small or have aligned models
that coarsely approximates the object style. To overcome
these challenges, we make use of the ability to render views
from CAD models and composite with natural images, which
allows us to create a large training set. The composite image
and rendered view pairs form training data with which to
learn the feature adaptation, and have been similarly employed in prior work to train 2D object detectors over CAD
renders [40, 41] and predict object pose [49].
In learning the adaptation, we adopt a formulation similar
to Lenc and Vedaldi [33], which studied the equivariance
of image features under geometric deformations of the image. Our work can be seen as an extension of their approach
beyond geometric transformations. We show that the adaptation can be incorporated as a module in a CNN-based
object detection pipeline. Furthermore, we show that precomputed features of the rendered views can be added as a
fully-connected layer in a CNN, which brings the benefits of
accuracy and speed from recent advances in deep learning
to 2D-3D exemplar detection.
Contributions. Our contributions are twofold:
16024

