Reinforcement Learning for Visual Object Detection
Stefan Mathe2,3 Aleksis Pirinen1 Cristian Sminchisescu1,2
1
Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, Lund University
2
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
stefan.mathe@imar.ro, aleksis.pirinen@math.lth.se, cristian.sminchisescu@math.lth.se

Abstract
One of the most widely used strategies for visual object
detection is based on exhaustive spatial hypothesis search.
While methods like sliding windows have been successful
and effective for many years, they are still brute-force, independent of the image content and the visual category being searched. In this paper we present principled sequential
models that accumulate evidence collected at a small set of
image locations in order to detect visual objects effectively.
By formulating sequential search as reinforcement learning
of the search policy (including the stopping condition), our
fully trainable model can explicitly balance for each class,
specifically, the conflicting goals of exploration – sampling
more image regions for better accuracy –, and exploitation – stopping the search efficiently when sufficiently confident about the target’s location. The methodology is general and applicable to any detector response function. We
report encouraging results in the PASCAL VOC 2012 object detection test set showing that the proposed methodology achieves almost two orders of magnitude speed-up over
sliding window methods.

1. Introduction
Classically, detection has been formulated as the problem of maximizing a confidence function over a set of hypothesized target locations, where the confidence can be
learned in a fully supervised[12] or weakly supervised[34]
setup. In the sliding window formulation, the hypothesis set
consists of a large set of rectangular windows, and the maximization problem is solved by exhaustive search. Since this
process is generally too expensive in practice, many methods have been proposed to accelerate it, from methodologies that leverage properties of the confidence function, to
proposal methods or cascade techniques. All these methods retain the exhaustive search property over the hypothesis space, aiming either to reduce the number of hypotheses
to start with, or search these efficiently.

In contrast, biological systems have a pattern of search
that can be characterized as ‘saccade and fixate’[17], where
a small set of scene locations are investigated sequentially,
in order to accumulate sufficient evidence on the target location. Set aside efficiency (only a few regions of an image
are explored) and biological plausibility, it appears still interesting to formally derive mathematical models that could
optimally balance efficiency and accuracy, by integrating
evidence, sequentially, in a principled way. The challenge
is to be able to operate with delayed rewards, which rule
out supervision at each step. At the same time, avoid the
need to completely pre-specify the environment, which for
visual scenes would be impossible – given the complexity
of images and visual object categories, the models should
be effectively trained.
By formulating sequential search as reinforcement learning of the category and the image-dependent search policy including the stopping conditions, in this work we develop fully trainable methods that can explicitly balance the
conflicting goals of exploration – sampling more image regions for better accuracy –, and exploitation – stopping the
search efficiently when sufficiently confident in the target’s
location. The methodology is general, applicable to any
detector response function, and can learn search strategies
and stopping conditions that are image and visual category
specific. Two orders of magnitude speed-ups over sliding
window methods are achieved in the challenging PASCAL
VOC 2012 object detection benchmark.

2. Related Work
One class of efficient detectors focuses on the use of
branch-and-bound heuristics[23] to prioritize exploration of
the search space towards promising image regions. Unlike the present work, such techniques are only applicable to confidence function classes for which strong bounds
are available. Additionally, in the absence of the target in
the image, methods in this class degenerate to exhaustive
search. Motivated by these limitations, other authors have
proposed to use cascades of classifiers[39, 11, 15, 30], to

2894

