Learning Weight Uncertainty with Stochastic Gradient MCMC for
Shape Classification
Chunyuan Li, Andrew Stevens, Changyou Chen, Yunchen Pu, Zhe Gan, Lawrence Carin
Duke University
{cl319, ajs104, cc448, yp42, zg27, lcarin}@duke.edu

Abstract
Learning the representation of shape cues in 2D & 3D
objects for recognition is a fundamental task in computer
vision. Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown promising performance on this task. Due to the large variability
of shapes, accurate recognition relies on good estimates of
model uncertainty, ignored in traditional training of DNNs,
typically learned via stochastic optimization. This paper
leverages recent advances in stochastic gradient Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (SG-MCMC) to learn weight uncertainty in DNNs. It yields principled Bayesian interpretations for the commonly used Dropout/DropConnect techniques and incorporates them into the SG-MCMC framework. Extensive experiments on 2D & 3D shape datasets
and various DNN models demonstrate the superiority of
the proposed approach over stochastic optimization. Our
approach yields higher recognition accuracy when used in
conjunction with Dropout and Batch-Normalization.

1. Introduction
Shape is an important representation in visual object
recognition. Shape characterizes the boundary/surface of
objects, as opposed to other properties such as color, illumination or texture. In computer vision, shapes exist primarily as 2D binary image silhouettes and 3D models of external surfaces. Fig. 1 shows examples of shape data. The
availability of large public-domain databases of 2D image
and 3D models (e.g. ImageNet [61] and ShapeNet [11])
has generated demand for leveraging shape information to
find semantic categories of objects. The success of recognition hinges on the geometric and topological representation of shape properties. Traditional recognition methods
use hand-crafted features to maintain representation invariance under certain classes of transformations. This has lead
to excellent performance in specific domains, e.g., spectral
geometry and topological persistence methods for non-rigid
shapes [8, 45].

Figure 1. Variability in 2D shapes (top row) and 3D shapes (bottom
row). 3D shapes are visualized as projected 2D views. Object
articulation can be seen in the horse examples. Change of view
is shown in the dog examples for 2D data, and the two rightmost
human body shapes show modeling error in 3D data.

Shapes in the real-world, however, manifest rich withinclass variability. This variability is due to, for example, object articulation, change of viewpoint in 2D, and modeling
error in 3D (see examples in Fig. 1). Shape variability inhibits “shallow” engineered representations from generalizing to a broad range of domains and tasks. Recently, deep
neural networks (DNNs) have gained popularity in computer vision and pattern recognition [12, 63]. They can learn
“deep” representations from either raw data or traditional
features to achieve higher discriminative power.
DNNs are usually trained using stochastic optimization
methods such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [60]. A
regularizer imposed on the model parameters can be viewed
as the log of a prior on the distribution of the parameters,
with such a prior connected to a Bayesian perspective. From
this standpoint optimizing the cost function may be viewed
as a maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate of model parameters. The MAP solution is a single point estimate, ignoring model uncertainty [6, 26]. Such a point estimation
often makes over-confident predictions on test data [34, 78],
especially when the data has significant variability.
A principled way to incorporate uncertainty during
learning is to use Bayesian inference [51, 55]. Unfortunately, exact Bayesian learning of DNNs is generally intractable. One approximate learning procedure is Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), which can produce samplebased approximations to the posterior [55]. An advantage
of MCMC is its asymptotic consistency with the true pos15666

