End-to-End Saliency Mapping via Probability Distribution Prediction
Saumya Jetley
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom

Naila Murray
XRCE
Meylan, France

Eleonora Vig
XRCE∗
Meylan, France

sjetley@robots.ox.ac.uk

naila.murray@xrce.xerox.com

eleonora.vig@dlr.de

Abstract
Most saliency estimation methods aim to explicitly model
low-level conspicuity cues such as edges or blobs and may
additionally incorporate top-down cues using face or text
detection. Data-driven methods for training saliency models using eye-fixation data are increasingly popular, particularly with the introduction of large-scale datasets and
deep architectures. However, current methods in this latter paradigm use loss functions designed for classification
or regression tasks whereas saliency estimation is evaluated on topographical maps. In this work, we introduce
a new saliency map model which formulates a map as a
generalized Bernoulli distribution. We then train a deep architecture to predict such maps using novel loss functions
which pair the softmax activation function with measures
designed to compute distances between probability distributions. We show in extensive experiments the effectiveness of such loss functions over standard ones on four public benchmark datasets, and demonstrate improved performance over state-of-the-art saliency methods.

1. Introduction
This work is concerned with visual attention prediction,
specifically, predicting a topographical visual saliency map
when given an input image. Visual attention has been traditionally used in computer vision as a pre-processing step
in order to focus subsequent processing on regions of interest in images, an ever-more important step as vision models and datasets increase in size. Saliency map prediction
has found useful applications in tasks such as automatic image cropping [39], content aware image resizing [1], image thumb-nailing [29], object recognition [7], and finegrained scene, and human action classification [36]. Traditional saliency models, such as the seminal work of Itti et al.
[14], have focused on designing mechanisms to explicitly
model biological systems. Another popular attention mod-

Figure 1. Sample image (left) with ground-truth saliency map
(middle) and map predicted by our PDP approach (right).

elling paradigm involves using data-driven approaches to
learn patch-level classifiers which give a local image patch
a “saliency score” [19, 18], using eye-fixation data to derive
training labels. A recent trend has emerged which intersects
with both of these paradigms: to use hierarchical models to
extract saliency maps, with model weights being learned in
a supervised manner. In particular, end-to-end or “deep” architectures, which have been successfully used in semantic
labelling tasks such as categorization or object localization,
have been re-purposed as attention models [23, 33]. This
trend has been facilitated by the introduction of large visual
attention datasets created using novel eye movement collection paradigms [16, 43]. However, while these deep methods have focused on designing appropriate architectures for
extracting saliency maps, they continue to use loss functions adapted for semantic tasks, such as classification or
regression losses.
In this work, we propose a novel formulation of saliency
map prediction as a probability distribution prediction task.
The map is formulated as a generalized Bernoulli distribution, and several novel loss functions are proposed based on
probability distance measures. We show that training a deep
architecture with such loss functions results in superior performance with respect to standard regression loss functions
such as the Euclidean and Huber loss. We also perform a
comparison among our proposed loss functions and show
that our loss function, based on the Bhattacharyya distance
for multinomial distributions, gives top performance.
Our contributions are therefore the following:
• a novel formulation which represents a saliency map
as a generalized Bernoulli distribution;

∗ EV is now at the German Aerospace Center.

15753

