Structured Receptive Fields in CNNs
Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen1 , Jan van Gemert1,2 , Zhongyou Lou1 , Arnold W. M. Smeulders1
1
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2
TU Delft, The Netherlands
{j.jacobsen,z.lou,a.w.m.smeulders}@uva.nl, j.c.vangemert@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Learning powerful feature representations with CNNs is
hard when training data are limited. Pre-training is one
way to overcome this, but it requires large datasets sufficiently similar to the target domain. Another option is to design priors into the model, which can range from tuned hyperparameters to fully engineered representations like Scattering Networks. We combine these ideas into structured
receptive field networks, a model which has a fixed filter
basis and yet retains the flexibility of CNNs. This flexibility is achieved by expressing receptive fields in CNNs as a
weighted sum over a fixed basis which is similar in spirit
to Scattering Networks. The key difference is that we learn
arbitrary effective filter sets from the basis rather than modeling the filters. This approach explicitly connects classical multiscale image analysis with general CNNs. With
structured receptive field networks, we improve considerably over unstructured CNNs for small and medium dataset
scenarios as well as over Scattering for large datasets. We
validate our findings on ILSVRC2012, Cifar-10, Cifar-100
and MNIST. As a realistic small dataset example, we show
state-of-the-art classification results on popular 3D MRI
brain-disease datasets where pre-training is difficult due to
a lack of large public datasets in a similar domain.

1. Introduction
Where convolutional networks have appeared enormously powerful in the classification of images when ample
data are available [14], we focus on smaller image datasets.
We propose structuring receptive fields in CNNs as linear
combinations of basis functions to train them with fewer
image data.
The common approach to smaller datasets is to perform pre-training on a large dataset, usually ImageNet [29].
Where CNNs generalize well to domains similar to the domain where the pre-training came from [27, 40], the performance decreases significantly when moving away from
the pre-training domain [40, 37]. We aim to make learning
more effective for smaller sets by restricting CNNs param-

Figure 1: A subset of filters of the first structured receptive field CNN layer as trained on 100-class ILSVRC2012
and the Gaussian derivative basis they are learned from. The
network learns scaled and rotated versions of zero, first, second and third order filters. Furthermore, the filters learn to
recombine the different input color channels which is a crucial property of CNNs.

eter spaces. Since all images are spatially coherent and human observers are considered to only cast local variations
up to a certain order as meaningful [11, 18] our key assumption is that it is unnecessary to learn these properties
in the network. When visualizing the intermediate layers
of a trained network, see e.g. [39] and Figure 2, it becomes
evident that the filters as learned in a CNN are locally coherent and as a consequence can be decomposed into a smooth
compact filter basis [12].
We aim to maintain the CNN’s capacity to learn general
variances and invariances in arbitrary images. Following
from our assumptions, the demand is posed on the filter set
that i) a linear combination of a finite basis set is capable of
forming any arbitrary filter necessary for the task at hand,
as illustrated in Figure 1 and ii) that we preserve the full
learning capacity of the network. For i) we choose the family of Gaussian filters and its smooth derivatives for which
it has been proven [12] that 3-rd or 4-th order is sufficient
to capture all local image variation perceivable by humans.
According to scale-space theory [11, 35], the Gaussian family constitutes the Taylor expansion of the image function
which guarantees completeness. For ii) we maintain backpropagation parameter optimization in the network, now
applied to learning the weights by which the filters are
summed into the effective filter set.

2610

