They Are Not Equally Reliable: Semantic Event Search
using Differentiated Concept Classifiers

1

Xiaojun Chang1 , Yao-Liang Yu2 , Yi Yang1 and Eric P. Xing2
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology Sydney
2
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
cxj273@gmail.com, yaoliang@cs.cmu.edu, yi.yang@uts.edu.au, epxing@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Complex event detection on unconstrained Internet
videos has seen much progress in recent years. However,
state-of-the-art performance degrades dramatically when
the number of positive training exemplars falls short. Since
label acquisition is costly, laborious, and time-consuming,
there is a real need to consider the much more challenging semantic event search problem, where no example video
is given. In this paper, we present a state-of-the-art event
search system without any example videos. Relying on
the key observation that events (e.g. dog show) are usually
compositions of multiple mid-level concepts (e.g. “dog,”
“theater,” and “dog jumping”), we first train a skip-gram
model to measure the relevance of each concept with the
event of interest. The relevant concept classifiers then cast
votes on the test videos but their reliability, due to lack
of labeled training videos, has been largely unaddressed.
We propose to combine the concept classifiers based on
a principled estimate of their accuracy on the unlabeled
test videos. A novel warping technique is proposed to
improve the performance and an efficient highly-scalable
algorithm is provided to quickly solve the resulting optimization. We conduct extensive experiments on the latest TRECVID MEDTest 2014, MEDTest 2013 and CCV
datasets, and achieve state-of-the-art performances.

1. Introduction
Multimedia event detection (MED) refers to the task of
ranking a sequence of unseen videos according to their likelihood of containing a certain event, e.g. birthday party. Unlike concept/attribute (e.g. actions, scenes, objects) recognition, an event is a high level abstraction, possibly consisting of multiple concepts and spreading over the entire
duration of long videos. For example, the marriage proposal event can be described by multiple objects (e.g. ring,
faces), scene (e.g. in a restaurant), actions (e.g. talking,
kneeling down) and acoustic concepts (e.g. music, cheer-

ing). Due to its apparent complexity and enormous utility
in retrieval tasks, MED has drawn a lot of research attention in the computer vision and multimedia communities
[14, 15, 29, 31, 9, 54, 12, 13].
A usual MED system first extracts low-level features
from videos of interest to capture salient gradient [34, 5],
color [51] or motion [52] patterns, and then encode these
with a pre-trained codebook to get a succinct representation. With labeled training data, sophisticated statistical
classifiers, such as support vector machines (SVM), are then
applied on top to yield predictions. With enough labeled
training examples, these systems have achieved remarkable
performance in the past [29, 47, 31]. However, it is observed that performance decreases rapidly when the number
of positive training exemplars falls short. Since in practice
label acquisition is costly, laborious, and time-consuming,
and also because of the constant need to handle new unseen
events, the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) initiated the zero-example search (0Ex for short)
in TRECVID 2013 [1] and 2014 [2]. Promising progress
[43, 53, 16, 21, 20, 11] has been made in this direction, but
further improvement is still anticipated.
In this work we mainly focus on the semantic event
search problem, where no example videos are provided for
training whatsoever. Our system is built on the observation
that an event is a composition of multiple mid-level concepts [30, 39, 10]. These concepts are shared among events
and can be collected from other sources (not necessarily related to the event search task). We then train a skip-gram
language model [37] to automatically identify the most relevant concepts to a particular event of interest. For example, the most relevant concepts for the marriage proposal
event might be “face,” “ring,” “kissing,” “kneeling down,”
etc. Such concept bundle view of event also aligns with
the cognitive science literature, where humans are found to
conceive objects as bundles of attributes [45]. The concept
scores on the test videos are combined to yield a final ranking of the presence of the event of interest. However, this
approach, as well as most existing works on semantic event
11884

