A Robust Multilinear Model Learning Framework for 3D Faces∗
Timo Bolkart
Saarland University, Germany

Stefanie Wuhrer
Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, France

tbolkart@mmci.uni-saarland.de

stefanie.wuhrer@inria.fr

Abstract
Multilinear models are widely used to represent the statistical variations of 3D human faces as they decouple
shape changes due to identity and expression. Existing
methods to learn a multilinear face model degrade if not
every person is captured in every expression, if face scans
are noisy or partially occluded, if expressions are erroneously labeled, or if the vertex correspondence is inaccurate. These limitations impose requirements on the training data that disqualify large amounts of available 3D
face data from being usable to learn a multilinear model.
To overcome this, we introduce the first framework to robustly learn a multilinear model from 3D face databases
with missing data, corrupt data, wrong semantic correspondence, and inaccurate vertex correspondence. To achieve
this robustness to erroneous training data, our framework
jointly learns a multilinear model and fixes the data. We
evaluate our framework on two publicly available 3D face
databases, and show that our framework achieves a data
completion accuracy that is comparable to state-of-the-art
tensor completion methods. Our method reconstructs corrupt data more accurately than state-of-the-art methods,
and improves the quality of the learned model significantly
for erroneously labeled expressions.

1. Introduction
The human face plays an essential role in all kinds of social interactions as it provides a rich source of nonverbal
communication. Within the last 20 years there has been
a great increase in investigating the facial shape with its
richness of variations within multiple fields ranging from
computer vision and graphics to psychology, medicine and
ergonomics. Depending on the application this requires
a model that precisely describes the facial variations and
achieves a high level of realism.
The facial shape is highly variable as it is affected by e.g.
∗ This work has been partially funded by the German Research Foundation (WU 786/1-1, Cluster of Excellence MMCI, Saarbrücken Graduate
School of Computer Science).

ethnicity, sex, age or facial expression. This makes it difficult to model the human face by hand; instead data driven
methods are applied to learn a model. For 3D facial shape,
data driven methods are supported by the increasing number
of publicly available 3D face databases that were acquired
within the last decade (e.g. [35, 31]).
Multilinear models are widely used to represent the statistical variations of 3D faces as they successfully decouple
shape changes due to identity and expression (e.g. [33, 14,
34]). We focus on these two types of shape changes here,
but multilinear models allow other factors to be included.
To compute statistics of a class of shapes requires all
shapes to be in correspondence [15, Chapter 1]. Multilinear
models further require the full Cartesian product of all facial
attributes (i.e. all identities need to be present in all expressions), and for the data to be in semantic correspondence
specified by labels for the different expressions. While multilinear face models have been shown to be a powerful tool,
acquiring a 3D face database that suits the needs of a multilinear model is difficult.
There is a wealth of static 3D face data that has been captured, where problems in a small percentage of the data prevent learning an effective multilinear model. For instance,
the Bosphorus database [31] would allow to learn information on action units, but not every person was captured in
every action unit and some scans are corrupt. New tools are
needed to leverage such data.
In particular, tools are needed to cope with missing data,
corrupt data, or wrong semantic correspondences. Missing
data occur if not all available identities are present in all expressions, i.e. some identities are only captured in a subset
of the expressions. Missing data are caused if some subjects
are unable to perform certain expressions spontaneously, or
if an existing database should be extended by additional expressions with some subjects being unavailable for further
scanning. Corrupt data arise if the facial geometry is noisy
or partially occluded. If the data are corrupt, frequently used
registration methods (e.g. [29, 27, 17]) fail, and establishing a full vertex correspondence without prior knowledge
becomes infeasible. Wrong semantic correspondences arise
if a subject has difficulties in performing specific expres14911

