Convolutional Networks for Shape from Light Field
Stefan Heber1
1
Graz University of Technology

Thomas Pock1,2
2
Austrian Institute of Technology

stefan.heber@icg.tugraz.at

pock@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have recently
been successfully applied to various Computer Vision (CV)
applications. In this paper we utilize CNNs to predict depth
information for given Light Field (LF) data. The proposed
method learns an end-to-end mapping between the 4D light
field and a representation of the corresponding 4D depth
field in terms of 2D hyperplane orientations. The obtained
prediction is then further refined in a post processing step
by applying a higher-order regularization.
Existing LF datasets are not sufficient for the purpose of
the training scheme tackled in this paper. This is mainly due
to the fact that the ground truth depth of existing datasets is
inaccurate and/or the datasets are limited to a small number of LFs. This made it necessary to generate a new synthetic LF dataset, which is based on the raytracing software
POV-Ray. This new dataset provides floating point accurate ground truth depth fields, and due to a random scene
generator the dataset can be scaled as required.

1. Introduction
A 4D light field [23, 14] provides information of all light
rays, that are emitted from a scene and hit a predefined surface. Contrary to a traditional image, a LF contains not only
intensity information, but also directional information. This
additional directional information inherent in the LF implicitly defines the geometry of the observed scene.
It is common practice to use the so-called two-plane or
light slab parametrization to describe the LF. This type of
parametrization defines a ray by its intersection points with
two planes, that are usually referred to as image plane Ω ⊆
R2 and lens plane Π ⊆ R2 . Hence the LF can be defined in
mathematical terms as the mapping
L : Ω × Π → R,

(p, q) 7→ L(p, q) ,

η

x
y

y

(1)

where p = (x, y)⊤ ∈ Ω and q = (ξ, η)⊤ ∈ Π represent the
spatial and directional coordinates.
There are different ways to visualize the 4D LF. One
way of visualizing the LF is as a flat 2D array of 2D ar-

η

x
y

y

x

x

ξ

ξ

(a) LF

(b) depth field

Figure 1. Illustration of LF data. (a) shows a sub-aperture image with vertical and horizontal EPIs. The EPIs correspond to
the positions indicated with dashed lines in the sub-aperture image. (b) shows the corresponding depth field, where red regions
are close to the camera and blue regions are further away. In the
EPIs a set of 2D hyperplanes is indicated with yellow lines, where
corresponding scene points are highlighted with the same color in
the sub-aperture representation in (b).

rays, which can be arranged position major or direction
major. The direction major representation can be interpreted as a set of pinhole views, where the viewpoints are
arranged on a regular grid parallel to a common image
plane (c.f . Figure 2). Those pinhole views are called subaperture images, and they clearly show that the LF provides
information about the scene geometry. When considering
Equation (1) a sub-aperture image is obtained by holding
q fixed and by varying over all spatial coordinates p. Another visualization of LF data is called Epipolar Plane Image (EPI) representation, which is a more abstract visualization, where one spatial coordinate and one directional coordinate is held constant. For example if we fix y and η, then
we restricts the LF to a 2D function
Σy,η : R2 → R,

(x, ξ) 7→ L(x, y, ξ, η) ,

(2)

that defines a 2D EPI. The EPI represents a 2D slice through
the LF and it also shows that the LF space is largely linear,
i.e. that a 3D scene point always maps to a 2D hyperplane
in the LF space (c.f . Figure 1).
There are basically two ways of capturing a dynamic LF.
First, there are camera arrays [34], that are bulky and ex-

3746

