Track and Segment: An Iterative Unsupervised
Approach for Video Object Proposals
Fanyi Xiao and Yong Jae Lee
University of California, Davis
{fanyix, yjlee}@cs.ucdavis.edu

Abstract
We present an unsupervised approach that generates a
diverse, ranked set of bounding box and segmentation video
object proposals—spatio-temporal tubes that localize the
foreground objects—in an unannotated video. In contrast
to previous unsupervised methods that either track regions
initialized in an arbitrary frame or train a ﬁxed model over
a cluster of regions, we instead discover a set of easy-togroup instances of an object and then iteratively update its
appearance model to gradually detect harder instances in
temporally-adjacent frames. Our method ﬁrst generates a
set of spatio-temporal bounding box proposals, and then
reﬁnes them to obtain pixel-wise segmentation proposals.
We demonstrate state-of-the-art segmentation results on the
SegTrack v2 dataset, and bounding box tracking results that
perform competitively to state-of-the-art supervised tracking methods.

1. Introduction
Generating object proposals—a set of candidate objectlike regions in an image that may contain the object-ofinterest—from static images has been extensively studied
in recent years [1, 50, 2, 60, 27, 41]. The success of these
methods now serves as a keystone to many state-of-theart object detection [49, 22, 18] and semantic segmentation [21, 10] algorithms. Object proposals are beneﬁcial
in two main aspects: (1) Computation: compared to sliding window detection, they greatly reduce the number of
regions in an image that must be considered (from potentially millions to thousands); and (2) Recognition accuracy:
they tend to reduce non-object regions that would otherwise
result in false-positive detections [23].
Compared with static images, video provides rich spatiotemporal information that can greatly beneﬁt learning algorithms. Object proposals are equally, if not more, needed
in the video domain since the number of regions in a video
is much larger than that of a single image. Furthermore,
many video applications including summarization, activity
recognition, and retrieval would beneﬁt tremendously from
a robust video object proposals method that can reduce the

Input video:

Output:
(Box tube)

Output:
(Mask tube)

Figure 1. Given an unannotated video, our algorithm produces a
set of spatio-temporal bounding box proposals and segmentation
proposals that localize the foreground objects. Here we show one
proposal (out of multiple) for each type.

complexity of a video by focusing on its main objects. For
example, by reducing a long video down to a small set of
spatio-temporal tubes consisting of the main objects, more
accurate video summaries could be produced.
Existing approaches for video object proposals [32, 45,
40, 38, 15] (and more generally, video object segmentation [46, 6, 19, 51, 7, 11]) employ bottom-up or learned
top-down appearance and motion cues to group pixels into
spatio-temporal tubes that may belong to the same object.
However, most methods either attempt to group pixels from
all frames [19, 57, 11] or track regions that are initialized
from arbitrary frames (e.g., the 1st frame) [6, 8, 33]. Consequently, these methods are susceptible to well-known challenges associated with clustering and tracking (model selection and computational complexity for the former, and
initialization, drifting, and occlusion for the latter).
Inspired by the key-segments approach of [32], we instead sample a group of easy instances for each candidate
object in the video to initialize an appearance model, and
use that model to detect other “harder” instances of the object in the remaining frames. An object’s easy instances
are the regions that are object-like in appearance and have
distinct motion against their immediate surrounding background. These regions are likely to span a single object,
and therefore exhibit more appearance regularity, making
them easier to group.

933

