Recovering the Missing Link: Predicting Class-Attribute Associations
for Unsupervised Zero-Shot Learning
Ziad Al-Halah
Makarand Tapaswi
Rainer Stiefelhagen
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
{ziad.al-halah, makarand.tapaswi, rainer.stiefelhagen}@kit.edu

Abstract
Collecting training images for all visual categories is
not only expensive but also impractical. Zero-shot learning
(ZSL), especially using attributes, offers a pragmatic solution to this problem. However, at test time most attributebased methods require a full description of attribute associations for each unseen class. Providing these associations is time consuming and often requires domain specific
knowledge. In this work, we aim to carry out attributebased zero-shot classification in an unsupervised manner. We propose an approach to learn relations that couples class embeddings with their corresponding attributes.
Given only the name of an unseen class, the learned relationship model is used to automatically predict the classattribute associations. Furthermore, our model facilitates
transferring attributes across data sets without additional
effort. Integrating knowledge from multiple sources results
in a significant additional improvement in performance. We
evaluate on two public data sets: Animals with Attributes
and aPascal/aYahoo. Our approach outperforms state-ofthe-art methods in both predicting class-attribute associations and unsupervised ZSL by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Large-scale object classification and visual recognition
have seen rising interest in the recent years. Data sets
such as ImageNet [10] have helped scale up the number
of classes represented in tasks such as object classification
or detection. Many methods based on deep convolutional
neural networks [22, 39] have been developed recently to
leverage the power of millions of training images distributed
among thousands of classes. However, building a large data
set, especially collecting large number of training images is
very challenging and nevertheless this ends up representing
only a fraction of the real visual world [7].
Transfer learning is a practical solution to bridge this gap
as it allows to leverage knowledge and experience obtained
from existing data to new domains. Specifically for object
classification, knowledge from object categories which have
labeled image samples can be transferred to new unseen cat-

brown

yellow

? color

hunter

stripes

spots

grazer

flippers

arctic

paws

jungle

Figure 1: Given only the name of an unseen category, here
Leopard, our method automatically predicts the list of attributes
(e.g. yellow, spots) associated with the class through relationships (e.g. has color, has pattern). These predicted associations
are leveraged to build category classifiers for zero-shot learning.

egories which do not have training images. This task is referred to as zero-shot learning (ZSL).
There exist many directions in the literature to perform
ZSL. These primarily differ in the type of knowledge source
they tap in order to establish the connection between the unseen classes and the available visual information [6, 23, 33].
Among these directions, attribute-based knowledge transfer shows impressive performance [4, 23, 25]. By learning an intermediate layer of semantic attributes (e.g. colors or shapes), a novel class is then described with a subset
of these attributes and its model is constructed accordingly
based on the respective attribute classifiers.
A major drawback of attribute-based approaches is that
user supervision is needed to provide the description for
each novel class. For example, for the new class “leopard”
the user needs to describe it with a set of visual attributes
in order to establish the semantic link with the learned visual vocabulary (e.g. the leopard has part paws, it exhibits
15975

