Coupled Harmonic Bases for Longitudinal Characterization of Brain Networks
Seong Jae Hwang1 Nagesh Adluru4 Maxwell D. Collins1 Sathya N. Ravi1
Barbara B. Bendlin3 Sterling C. Johnson3 Vikas Singh2,1
1

Dept. of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin – Madison
Dept. of Biostatistics and Med. Informatics, University of Wisconsin – Madison
3
William S. Middleton VA Hospital, Madison, WI 4 Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin – Madison
2

Abstract
There is a great deal of interest in using large scale
brain imaging studies to understand how brain connectivity
evolves over time for an individual and how it varies over
different levels/quantiles of cognitive function. To do so,
one typically performs so-called tractography procedures
on diffusion MR brain images and derives measures of brain
connectivity expressed as graphs. The nodes correspond to
distinct brain regions and the edges encode the strength of
the connection. The scientific interest is in characterizing
the evolution of these graphs over time or from healthy individuals to diseased. We pose this important question in
terms of the Laplacian of the connectivity graphs derived
from various longitudinal or disease time points — quantifying its progression is then expressed in terms of coupling
the harmonic bases of a full set of Laplacians. We derive
a coupled system of generalized eigenvalue problems (and
corresponding numerical optimization schemes) whose solution helps characterize the full life cycle of brain connectivity evolution in a given dataset. Finally, we show a set
of results on a diffusion MR imaging dataset of middle aged
people at risk for Alzheimer’s disease (AD), who are cognitively healthy. In such asymptomatic adults, we find that
a framework for characterizing brain connectivity evolution
provides the ability to predict cognitive scores for individual
subjects, and for estimating the progression of participant’s
brain connectivity into the future.

1. Introduction
Large scale scientific initiatives such as the Human Connectome Project (HCP) are beginning to provide exquisite
imaging data that may eventually enable a full structural
connectivity mapping of the human brain [28]. For instance,
diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (dMRI), an imaging
modality central to the aforementioned studies, captures in
a spatially localized (voxel-wise) manner, water diffusion

properties that can be used to infer the arrangement of network pathways in the brain [23, 27]. After suitable preprocessing, e.g., via so-called tractography procedures, we
obtain a unique view of the fiber bundle layout that connects
distinct brain regions [10] (see Fig. 1). From an analysis
perspective, once the spatial organization of these fiber bundles is expressed as a graph whose nodes represent separate
brain regions and the edges denote the “strength” of connection (e.g., number) of the connecting inter-region fibers,
a variety of analyses can be conducted [12, 13, 24, 34]. For
example, we may ask whether a specific edge of the graph
exhibits statistically different connectivity measurements
across clinically disparate groups: diseased and healthy. If
the results of this hypothesis test are statistically significant,
we can conclude that the corresponding fiber bundle (pertaining to the edge) is possibly affected by the disease.
But more recently, there is increasing interest in identifying not just imaging based or structural connectivity
based biomarkers, rather to quantitatively characterize disease progression [3, 18, 31]. For example, studies may recruit subjects for multiple visits over a period of time (which
varies from months to years) and acquire diffusion imaging
data at several time points. In such longitudinal datasets,
each subject (or sample) corresponds to multiple images
(or the corresponding brain connectivities) at different time
points. The scientific goal then is to identify the entire life
cycle of brain connectivity evolution — from when a middle aged participant was healthy to a stage where the individual’s cognitive function has become much worse.
The standard approach to answering the question above
is to characterize change in brain connectivity at the level
of individual edges in the graph. There are two problems
with this proposal. First, treating individual edges as primitives neglects the local context in which the edge exists in
the actual object of interest — i.e., the entire connectivity
graph of the individual. But from a technical perspective, a
second issue is perhaps more important. For n regions, we
obtain O(n2 ) edges. After learning a model (e.g., associa12517

