Image Deblurring using Smartphone Inertial Sensors
Zhe Hu1 , Lu Yuan2 , Stephen Lin2 , Ming-Hsuan Yang1
1
University of California, Merced 2 Microsoft Research
https://eng.ucmerced.edu/people/zhu/CVPR16_sensordeblur.html/

Abstract
Removing image blur caused by camera shake is an
ill-posed problem, as both the latent image and the point
spread function (PSF) are unknown. A recent approach to
address this problem is to record camera motion through
inertial sensors, i.e., gyroscopes and accelerometers, and
then reconstruct spatially-variant PSFs from these readings. While this approach has been effective for highquality inertial sensors, it has been infeasible for the inertial sensors in smartphones, which are of relatively low
quality and present a number of challenging issues, including varying sensor parameters, high sensor noise, and calibration error. In this paper, we identify the issues that
plague smartphone inertial sensors and propose a solution
that successfully utilizes the sensor readings for image deblurring. With both the sensor data and the image itself,
the proposed method is able to accurately estimate the sensor parameters online and also the spatially-variant PSFs
for enhanced deblurring performance. The effectiveness of
this technique is demonstrated in experiments on a popular
mobile phone. With this approach, the quality of image deblurring can be appreciably raised on the most common of
imaging devices.

1. Introduction
A tremendous number of photographs are captured each
day using smartphones. Unfortunately, camera shake on
these light, hand-held devices is a common occurrence that
results in blurry images. To remove the motion blur, both its
point spread function (PSF), i.e., blur kernel, and the latent
image need to be estimated from the blurred photograph,
which is an ill-posed problem. Complicating this problem
further is the fact that motion blur often varies spatially
across the image in practice. Although there exist many
algorithms for removing spatially-invariant motion blur, the
spatially-variant deblurring problem remains unsolved, and
it is difficult to remove such blur without additional information about the camera motion.
Unlike priors commonly used for latent images (e.g.,

those derived from natural image statistics), the distribution
of camera motions is difficult to model due to its large diversity and inherent randomness. To gain additional information on such motion, inertial sensors such as gyroscopes and
accelerometers have recently been exploited [15, 24, 19],
with blur kernels estimated directly from the recorded camera motions and then used together with non-blind deconvolution techniques to recover the sharp latent image. These
previous techniques assume the inertial sensor readings to
be reliable enough for accurate blur kernel recovery. However, the inertial sensors in smartphones are far from ideal,
as they are designed for tasks such as gaming that do not
require high-level accuracy. Among the issues common to
smartphone inertial sensors are a time delay between sensor and image measurements, and significant sensor noise
that cannot be fully addressed through offline calibration.
In addition, the rotational center of camera motion can vary
with each photograph, and inaccurate accelerometer readings can accumulate into substantial errors in measured
camera translation. These practical issues lead to a considerable challenge in using inertial sensors for deblurring
smartphone photos.
In this paper, we present a solution that both manages
these individual problems and compensates for the shortcomings in sensor data quality. Techniques are proposed for
dynamically recovering the time delay between the inertial
and camera sensors, calibrating the rotational center of camera motion online, and refining the blur kernels initially reconstructed from noisy sensor readings. Equally important,
our method utilizes inertial sensor readings only as guidance for kernel estimation, rather than directly computing
camera motion from the sensors as done in previous inertial sensor-based deblurring systems [15, 24, 19]. Our work
jointly leverages the inertial sensor data and the captured
image itself to overcome the limitations each may have in
solving for spatially-variant PSFs. The experiments show
that, even with smartphone inertial sensors, this approach
can produce high-quality deblurring results, as exemplified
for an Apple iPhone 6 in Figure 1.
This work presents a significant step towards the practical use of image deblurring. Existing deblurring algorithms

11855

