Efﬁcient Intersection of Three Quadrics and Applications in Computer Vision
Zuzana Kukelova1

Jan Heller2∗

Andrew Fitzgibbon1

2

1

Microsoft Research Ltd,
21 Station Road,
Cambridge CB1 2FB, UK

Czech Technical University
in Prague, 166 27 Praha 6,
Technická 2, Czech Republic

{zukuke,awf}@microsoft.com

{hellej1}@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract
In this paper, we present a new algorithm for finding
all intersections of three quadrics. The proposed method
is algebraic in nature and it is considerably more efficient
than the Gröbner basis and resultant-based solutions previously used in computer vision applications. We identify several computer vision problems that are formulated
and solved as systems of three quadratic equations and for
which our algorithm readily delivers considerably faster results. Also, we propose new formulations of three important
vision problems: absolute camera pose with unknown focal
length, generalized pose-and-scale, and hand-eye calibration with known translation. These new formulations allow
our algorithm to significantly outperform the state-of-theart in speed.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision and robotics problems can be formulated as problems of finding solutions to systems of polynomial equations. Examples include minimal problems of
estimating relative and absolute camera poses [26, 34, 3],
problems of calibrating radial distortion from point corespondences [7, 19], as well as minimization problems with
polynomial cost functions [35, 6, 22]. Fast solvers of
minimal computer vision problems are often used inside
RANSAC-style loops [12] and, consequently, are parts
of large systems like 3D reconstruction and recognition
pipelines. Maximizing the efficiency of the solvers for these
problems is of high importance.
A popular approach to dealing with polynomial problems is to design efficient specific solvers of the polynomial systems for given problem classes. Such a solver can
be used to solve instances of a specific problem class only,
however, it can do it much more efficiently than any general
∗ The author was supported by Czech Ministry of Education under
Project RVO37000.

solver could. The design of these specific solvers is usually
based on the Gröbner basis method or on the resultant-based
method [9]. Several tools to aid the design of the specific
solvers based on the Gröbner basis method exist, e.g. the
automatic generator by Kukelova et al. [20].
However, not every problem needs or admits a specifically designed solver. In fact, many vision problems lead,
if appropriately formulated, to the same polynomial problem: the problem of solving three quadratic equations in
three unknowns. In this paper, we propose a new algorithm
for solving this problem. Our solution is algebraic in nature
and is more efficient than current solutions, which are based
on Gröbner bases or resultants. For the sake of brevity, we
will denote the problem of solving three quadrics in three
unknowns as 3Q3 and the proposed solver as the efficient
3Q3 solver—E3Q3—throughout the rest of the paper.
In §2, we discuss the development of 3Q3, and in §3,
we formally introduce the 3Q3 problem and present the
E3Q3 solver. Further, we provide a discussion of the problem degeneracies (§3.1) as well as its computational complexity (§3.2). In §4 we discuss several computer vision
problems that have been previously formulated and solved
as 3Q3 and where our algorithm readily delivers considerably more efficient solutions. Finally, we present novel
3Q3 formulations for three important computer vision problems: absolute camera pose with unknown focal length
(§5.1), generalized pose-and-scale (§5.2), hand-eye calibration with known translation (§5.3). Using the E3Q3 solver,
we provide new efficient solutions that are significantly
faster than the state-of-the-art algorithm for these problems.
The speedups gained by these new solutions are summarized in §6.

2. The 3Q3 problem
The problem of finding the intersection of quadrics has been
studied in mathematics [31, 18], computational physics,
computer graphics, robotics, kinematics [32], and computer
vision. Early algorithms for this special class of polyno-

1799

