Hierarchical Recurrent Neural Encoder for Video Representation with
Application to Captioning
Pingbo Pan§ Zhongwen Xu†
§
Zhejiang University

†

Yi Yang† Fei Wu§ Yueting Zhuang§
University of Technology Sydney

{lighnt001,zhongwen.s.xu}@gmail.com yi.yang@uts.edu.au
{wufei,yzhuang}@cs.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, deep learning approach, especially deep Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets), have achieved
overwhelming accuracy with fast processing speed for image classification. Incorporating temporal structure with
deep ConvNets for video representation becomes a fundamental problem for video content analysis. In this paper,
we propose a new approach, namely Hierarchical Recurrent
Neural Encoder (HRNE), to exploit temporal information of
videos. Compared to recent video representation inference
approaches, this paper makes the following three contributions. First, our HRNE is able to efficiently exploit video
temporal structure in a longer range by reducing the length
of input information flow, and compositing multiple consecutive inputs at a higher level. Second, computation operations are significantly lessened while attaining more nonlinearity. Third, HRNE is able to uncover temporal transitions between frame chunks with different granularities,
i.e. it can model the temporal transitions between frames
as well as the transitions between segments. We apply the
new method to video captioning where temporal information plays a crucial role. Experiments demonstrate that our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art on video captioning
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Incorporating temporal information into video representation has long been a fundamental problem in computer
vision. Earlier works such as Dense Trajectories [39] and
improved Dense Trajectories (iDT) [40] typically utilize optical flow to extract temporal information and hand-crafted
features to model appearances and motions. With the recent success of deep Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) both in efficiency and efficacy, we have witnessed a
new trend in leveraging ConvNets to infer video representation. Xu et al. [41] propose to utilize Vector of Locally Ag-

gregated Descriptors (VLAD) [13] to aggregate frame level
ConvNet for video representation, which is unable to capture temporal structure. Simonyan and Zisserman [26] combine stacked optical flow frames and RGB streams to train
ConvNets for video classification, which achieves comparable performance to iDT in action recognition. A limitation
of two-stream ConvNets [26] and iDT [40] is that both algorithms require optical flow as input, which is expensive to
extract (it takes usually 0.06 seconds to extract optical flow
between a pair of frames [26]), but is only able to capture
temporal information in video clips of short duration.
To avoid extracting optical flow, 3D ConvNets are proposed in [35] to generate a video representation, with emphasis on efficiency improvement. This approach, however,
can only cope with 16 frames or so each time [35]. Very
recently, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [11] has been
applied to video analysis [20], inspired by the general recurrent encoder-decoder framework [31]. A plausible feature of LSTM is that LSTM is capable of modeling data
sequences. However, as this paper tries to cope with, there
are still a few challenges remain unaddressed.
First, a large number of long-range dependencies are
usually difficult to capture. Even though LSTM can deal
with long video clips in principal, it has been reported that
the favorable length of video clips to be feed into LSTM
falls in the range of 30 to 80 frames [20, 37]. In order
to model longer video clips while attaining similar good
performance as in [20, 37], we propose to divide a long
video clip into a few short frame chunks, feed the chunks
into LSTM, and composite the LSTM outputs of the frame
chunks into one vector, which can then be fed into another
LSTM at a higher level to uncover the temporal information
among the composited vectors over a longer duration. Such
a hierarchical structure significantly reduces the length of
input information flow but is still capable of exploiting temporal information over longer time afterwards at a higher
level.
Second, additional non-linearity has been demonstrated
helpful for improving model training for visual tasks such

1029

