Affinity CNN: Learning Pixel-Centric Pairwise Relations for Figure/Ground Embedding
Michael Maire
TTI Chicago

Takuya Narihira
Sony Corp.

Stella X. Yu
UC Berkeley / ICSI

mmaire@ttic.edu

takuya.narihira@jp.sony.com

stellayu@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Spectral embedding provides a framework for solving
perceptual organization problems, including image segmentation and figure/ground organization. From an affinity
matrix describing pairwise relationships between pixels, it
clusters pixels into regions, and, using a complex-valued extension, orders pixels according to layer. We train a convolutional neural network (CNN) to directly predict the pairwise relationships that define this affinity matrix. Spectral
embedding then resolves these predictions into a globallyconsistent segmentation and figure/ground organization of
the scene. Experiments demonstrate significant benefit to
this direct coupling compared to prior works which use explicit intermediate stages, such as edge detection, on the
pathway from image to affinities. Our results suggest spectral embedding as a powerful alternative to the conditional
random field (CRF)-based globalization schemes typically
coupled to deep neural networks.

1. Introduction
Systems for perceptual organization of scenes are commonly architected around a pipeline of intermediate stages.
For example, image segmentation follows from edge detection [12, 1, 2, 7, 4]; figure/ground, occlusion, or depth
layering follows from reasoning over discrete contours or
regions [27, 16, 21, 36, 18] with some systems also reliant on motion cues [30, 15, 32, 31]. This trend holds
even in light of rapid advancements from designs centered
on convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Rather than directly focus on image segmentation, recent CNN architectures [14, 3, 28, 4] target edge detection. Turaga et al. [33]
make the connection between affinity learning and segmentation, yet restrict affinities to be precisely local edge
strengths. Pure CNN approaches for depth from a single
image do focus on directly constructing the desired output [9, 8]. However, these works do not address the problem
of perceptual grouping without fixed semantic classes.
We engineer a system for simultaneous segmentation and
figure/ground organization by directly connecting a CNN to

n×3

n×k

···

n×k

···

affinity
CNN

image

pixel-centric grouping/ordering

assemble
figure-ground

pairwise complex affinity

n×1

angular
embedding

n×n
+i·

Figure 1. System architecture. We send an image through a CNN
which is trained to predict the grouping and ordering relations between each of the n pixels and its neighbors at k displacements
laid out in a fixed stencil pattern. We assemble these n×2k pixelcentric relations into a sparse n×n complex affinity matrix between
pixels, each row indicating a pixel’s affinity with others. Shown
above is the row for the pixel at the center of a log-polar sampling
pattern; its positive/negative relations with neighbors are marked
by red/cyan squares overlaid on the image. We feed the pairwise affinity matrix into Angular Embedding for global integration, producing an eigenvector representation that reveals figureground organization: we know not only which pixels go together,
but also which pixels go in front.

an inference algorithm which produces a globally consistent scene interpretation. Training the CNN with a target
appropriate for the inference procedure eliminates the need
for hand-designed intermediate stages such as edge detection. Our strategy parallels recent work connecting CNNs
and conditional random fields (CRFs) for semantic segmentation [6, 20, 35]. A crucial difference, however, is that we
handle the generic, or class independent, image partitioning
problem. In this context, spectral embedding, and specifically Angular Embedding (AE) [37, 38], is a more natural
inference algorithm. Figure 1 illustrates our architecture.
Angular Embedding, an extension of the spectral relaxation of Normalized Cuts [29] to complex-valued affinities,
provides a mathematical framework for solving joint group-

174

