A Deeper Look at Saliency:
Feature Contrast, Semantics, and Beyond
Neil D. B. Bruce, Christopher Catton, Sasa Janjic
University of Manitoba
Winnipeg, MB
bruce@cs.umanitoba.ca

Abstract
In this paper we consider the problem of visual saliency
modeling, including both human gaze prediction and salient
object segmentation. The overarching goal of the paper
is to identify high level considerations relevant to deriving
more sophisticated visual saliency models. A deep learning model based on fully convolutional networks (FCNs) is
presented, which shows very favorable performance across
a wide variety of benchmarks relative to existing proposals.
We also demonstrate that the manner in which training data
is selected, and ground truth treated is critical to resulting
model behaviour. Recent efforts have explored the relationship between human gaze and salient objects, and we also
examine this point further in the context of FCNs. Close examination of the proposed and alternative models serves as
a vehicle for identifying problems important to developing
more comprehensive models going forward.

1. Introduction
The past decade has seen numerous developments in
modeling visual saliency, including introduction of a wide
variety of models, many new and larger datasets, and a better understanding of metrics that are most appropriate for
measuring model performance. Additionally, the notion of
saliency has broadened such that several distinct problems
are treated as problems of modeling saliency, including gaze
prediction, salient object segmentation, and objectness measures [2] respectively. Many domains of computer vision
have benefitted from deep learning, and it is natural to consider that value of deep learning models in saliency prediction. Preliminary efforts of this variety suggest that there
may also be significant benefits to deep learning for visual
saliency prediction [19]. One contribution of this paper is
a deep learning model for visual saliency prediction based
on fully convolutional networks [23]. While the principal
focus of this work is on gaze prediction, we also consider

the problem of salient object segmentation and further explore the relationship between salient objects and human
gaze patterns.
Given the vast array of developments in visual saliency
prediction of late, there is value in taking account of where
models currently stand in their capabilities, and where improvements might be made. This consideration is especially
timely given that the choice of data is critical to how deep
learning models will ultimately behave, and their capabilities will be determined in part by the relative balance of different types of patterns and concepts expressed in the data.
Aside from the proposed deep learning model that is proposed, in our view this paper carries two additional and important contributions:
1. Data and ground truth: The manner in which data is
selected, ground truth created, and performance assessed
(e.g. loss function) are critical to the problem. We therefore place a heavy emphasis on examining this issue, and
reveal nuances of the problem critical to treating gaze prediction using neural networks. This problem is introduced
in section 2 and explored in detail in section 3. Supporting
benchmark results are presented in section 4 of the paper.
2. Failures and shortcomings: Equally important to revealing what models grounded in deep learning can do well, is
revealing what they cannot do well. To this end, we dedicate a significant portion of our analysis and discussion to
revealing current challenges and suggestions for overcoming these challenges. These issues are explored in section
5.
Overall, the experimentation that is included reveals a
number of issues important to any work involving the intersection of saliency with deep learning, and remaining challenges and possible paths forward are summarized in section 6.

2. Methods
In this section, we describe the models we have considered and evaluation methodology. This includes the struc1516

