Multiview Image Completion with Space Structure Propagation
Seung-Hwan Baek
Inchang Choi
Min H. Kim∗
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{shwbaek;inchangchoi;minhkim}@vclab.kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a multiview image completion method that
provides geometric consistency among different views by
propagating space structures. Since a user specifies the region to be completed in one of multiview photographs casually taken in a scene, the proposed method enables us
to complete the set of photographs with geometric consistency by creating or removing structures on the specified
region. The proposed method incorporates photographs to
estimate dense depth maps. We initially complete color as
well as depth from a view, and then facilitate two stages
of structure propagation and structure-guided completion.
Structure propagation optimizes space topology in the scene
across photographs, while structure-guide completion enhances, and completes local image structure of both depth
and color in multiple photographs with structural coherence by searching nearest neighbor fields in relevant views.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method in
completing multiview images.

as geometric constraints. While completing multiview images, our method accounts for not only structure in an image, but also space structure across multiview images.
Our method first receives a target region from a user in
one of the multiview photographs. The region is then completed by three steps: (1) the preprocessing step estimates
dense depth maps and camera parameters using structure
from motion, and completes the color and the depth of a
reference view, (2) the structure propagation step conveys
the space structure of the previous completions to the next
image to be completed, and (3) the structure-guided completion enhances the quality of completion by incorporating
the transferred space structure, searching for local similarity
via the nearest neighbor field across multiview photographs.
We perform the structure propagation and structure-guided
completion steps for all images, resulting in multiple completed images for the first iteration. To enhance the image
completion, our iterative approach repeats these two steps
until we reach to the final completed images.

2. Related Work
1. Introduction
Digital photography has been stimulated from the perspective of collaboration, yielding casual multiview photographs of a scene. Even though multiview images are
getting popular from the recent advances of digital imaging devices such as mobile cameras and light field cameras, consistent image editing of multiview photographs
rarely has been discussed. For instance, most traditional
image completion methods focus on an individual photograph [9, 31, 2]; hence, applying such single image completion methods is not able to retain the geometric consistency
of space structures in images.
Traditional inpainting [17, 28] focuses on preserving coherency of structure in an image. In contrast, we propose
a novel solution that allows for geometric coherency, socalled space structure, while completing multiview images.
Multiview photographs allow us to estimate depth, utilized
∗ Corresponding author

Image completion synthesizes image structure to fill in
larger missing areas using exemplar [9, 31, 2, 10, 17]. Our
work is a branch of image completion, focusing on image
completion of multiple photographs.
Single Image Completion Criminisi et al. [9] prioritized patches to be filled, and greedily propagated the
patches from the known source region to the target region.
Wexler et al. [31] solved the image completion problem
with an expectation-maximization (EM) optimization using
an image pyramid. Since the nearest neighbor field (NNF)
search is the computational bottleneck of image completion, Barnes et al. accelerated the process by introducing
an approximated search algorithm [2]. Darabi et al. [10]
considered the gradients of images for patch-based synthesis and also introduced alpha-blending of multiple patches.
Our method is based on the framework of Wexler et al. [31]
with the main difference that our approach simultaneously
completes the color and the depth of multiview photographs
with structural coherence.

488

