Ask Me Anything: Free-form Visual Question Answering
Based on Knowledge from External Sources
Qi Wu, Peng Wang, Chunhua Shen, Anthony Dick, Anton van den Hengel
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia
{qi.wu01,p.wang,chunhua.shen,anthony.dick,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
We propose a method for visual question answering
which combines an internal representation of the content of
an image with information extracted from a general knowledge base to answer a broad range of image-based questions. This allows more complex questions to be answered
using the predominant neural network-based approach than
has previously been possible. It particularly allows questions to be asked about the contents of an image, even when
the image itself does not contain the whole answer. The
method constructs a textual representation of the semantic
content of an image, and merges it with textual information sourced from a knowledge base, to develop a deeper
understanding of the scene viewed. Priming a recurrent
neural network with this combined information, and the
submitted question, leads to a very flexible visual question
answering approach. We are specifically able to answer
questions posed in natural language, that refer to information not contained in the image. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our model on two publicly available datasets,
Toronto COCO-QA [23] and VQA [1] and show that it produces the best reported results in both cases.

Attributes:

umbrella
beach
sunny
day
people
sand
laying
blue
green
mountain

Internal Textual Representation:

A group of people enjoying a sunny day at the beach with
umbrellas in the sand.

External Knowledge:

An umbrella is a canopy designed to protect against rain or
sunlight. Larger umbrellas are often used as points of shade on a
sunny beach. A beach is a landform along the coast of an ocean.
It usually consists of loose particles, such as sand….

Question Answering:
Q: Why do they have umbrellas? A : Shade.

Figure 1. A real case of question answering based on an internal textual representation and external knowledge. All of the attributes, textual representation, knowledge and answer are produced by our VQA model. Underlined words indicate the information required to answer the question.

1. Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) is distinct from many
problems in Computer Vision because the question to be
answered is not determined until run time [1]. In more traditional problems such as segmentation or detection, the
single question to be answered by an algorithm is predetermined, and only the image changes. In visual question
answering, in contrast, the form that the question will take
is unknown, as is the set of operations required to answer it.
In this sense it more closely reflects the challenge of general
image interpretation.
VQA typically requires processing both visual information (the image) and textual information (the question and
answer). One approach to Vision-to-Language problems,

such as VQA and image captioning, which interrelate visual and textual information is based on a direct method
pioneered in machine language translation [7, 26]. This direct approach develops an encoding of the input text using
a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and passes it to another
RNN for decoding.
The Vision-to-Language version of this direct translation approach uses a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
to encode the image, and an RNN to encode and generate text. This approach has been well studied. The image captioning methods developed in [9, 14, 21, 28, 32],
for example, learn a mapping from images to text using
CNNs trained on object recognition, and word embeddings
trained on large scale text corpora. Visual question answer-

4622

