What Value Do Explicit High Level Concepts Have
in Vision to Language Problems?
Qi Wu, Chunhua Shen, Lingqiao Liu, Anthony Dick, Anton van den Hengel
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia
{qi.wu01,chunhua.shen,lingqiao.liu,anthony.dick,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

Vision Understanding Part

Attributes
Prediction Layer

Pre-trained Single-label
CNN

Much recent progress in Vision-to-Language (V2L) problems has been achieved through a combination of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). This approach does not explicitly represent
high-level semantic concepts, but rather seeks to progress
directly from image features to text. In this paper we investigate whether this direct approach succeeds due to, or
despite, the fact that it avoids the explicit representation of
high-level information. We propose a method of incorporating high-level concepts into the successful CNN-RNN approach, and show that it achieves a significant improvement
on the state-of-the-art in both image captioning and visual
question answering. We also show that the same mechanism
can be used to introduce external semantic information and
that doing so further improves performance. We achieve the
best reported results on both image captioning and VQA on
several benchmark datasets, and provide an analysis of the
value of explicit high-level concepts in V2L problems.

1. Introduction
Vision-to-Language problems present a particular challenge in Computer Vision because they require translation
between two different forms of information. In this sense
the problem is similar to that of machine translation between languages. In machine language translation there
have been a series of results showing that good performance
can be achieved without developing a higher-level model of
the state of the world. In [3, 7, 47], for instance, a source
sentence is transformed into a fixed-length vector representation by an ‘encoder’ RNN, which in turn is used as the
initial hidden state of a ‘decoder’ RNN that generates the
target sentence.
Despite the supposed equivalence between an image and
1000 words, the manner in which information is represented
in each data form could hardly be more different. Human
language is designed specifically so as to communicate information between humans, whereas even the most care-

bag
car
dog
eating
group
.
.
.
people
pizza
running
red
table
wine
zebra

Parameter Transferring

CNN
Fine-tuned Multi-label

0.01
0.01
0.00
0.85
0.96
.
.
.
1.00
0.12
0.03
0.11
0.87
1.00
0.00

()

LSTM
Captioning: A group
of people sitting at a
food covered dinner
table eating.

Image
Captioning

Q: What kind of
glasses are they
drinking out of ?

Q: What is
this scene ?

LSTM
LSTM
A: Wine

Single Word
Question Answering

LSTM
A: It is a dinner party.

Sentence
Question Answering

Figure 1. Our attribute based V2L framework. The image analysis module learns a mapping between an image and the semantic
attributes through a CNN. The language module learns a mapping
from the attributes vector to a sequence of words using an LSTM.

fully composed image is the culmination of a complex set
of physical processes over which humans have little control. Given the differences between these two forms of information, it seems surprising that methods inspired by machine language translation have been so successful. These
RNN-based methods which translate directly from image
features to text, without developing a high-level model of
the state of the world, represent the current state of the art
for key Vision-to-Language (V2L) problems, such as image
captioning and visual question answering.
This approach is reflected in many recent successful
works on image captioning, such as [6, 10, 23, 36, 50, 55].
Current state-of-the-art captioning methods use a CNN as
an image ‘encoder’ to produce a fixed-length vector representation [25, 29, 45, 48], which is then fed into the ‘decoder’ RNN to generate a caption.
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a more recent challenge than image captioning. In this V2L problem an image
and a free-form, open-ended question about the image are

203

