Object Tracking via Dual Linear Structured SVM and Explicit Feature Map
Jifeng Ning1 , Jimei Yang2 , Shaojie Jiang1 , Lei Zhang3 and Ming-Hsuan Yang4
1
College of Information Engineering, Northwest A&F University, China
2
Adobe Research, USA
3
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, China
4
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California at Merced, USA
jf ning@sina.com, jimyang@adobe.com, shaojiejiang@126.com
cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk,mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Structured support vector machine (SSVM) based methods have demonstrated encouraging performance in recent
object tracking benchmarks. However, the complex and expensive optimization limits their deployment in real-world
applications. In this paper, we present a simple yet efficient dual linear SSVM (DLSSVM) algorithm to enable fast
learning and execution during tracking. By analyzing the
dual variables, we propose a primal classifier update formula where the learning step size is computed in closed
form. This online learning method significantly improves
the robustness of the proposed linear SSVM with lower computational cost. Second, we approximate the intersection
kernel for feature representations with an explicit feature
map to further improve tracking performance. Finally, we
extend the proposed DLSSVM tracker with multi-scale estimation to address the “drift” problem. Experimental results on large benchmark datasets with 50 and 100 video
sequences show that the proposed DLSSVM tracking algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Object tracking aims to estimate the locations of a target in an image sequence. It can be applied to numerous
tasks such as human-computer interaction, traffic monitoring, action analysis and video surveillance [34, 5, 26]. The
main issue of object tracking is the incapability to account
for large appearance variations due to viewpoint changes,
occlusions, deformations and fast motions.
Existing object tracking algorithms can be broadly categorized as either generative or discriminative. Generative
tracking algorithms [6, 22, 16, 17, 24] typically learn an appearance model to represent a target and use the model to
search for interesting regions in the next frame with min-

imal reconstruction error. Instead of constructing a model
to represent the appearance of a target, discriminative approaches [1, 2, 30, 3, 23, 11, 8, 33] consider the tracking
problem as a classification or regression problem of finding
the decision boundary that best separates the target from the
background. In recent years, the tracking-by-detection approach has attracted more attention due to its strength to
deal with targets undergoing large appearance variations.
Numerous classification algorithms such as support vector machines [1], boosting [2, 30], multiple instance learning [3] and random forests [23, 11] have been used in recent
tracking-by-detection methods. However, the goal of binary
classifiers is not seamlessly aligned with the one of object
trackers due to the structured output space of tracking. To
overcome this problem, Hare et al. [8] propose a kernelized
Structured SVM (Struck) for object tracking. The Struck
method treats object tracking as a structured output prediction problem that admits a consistent target representation for both learning and detection. Especially, in a recent
tracking benchmark studies [18, 31, 32], Struck [8] shows
the state-of-the-art performance.
However, the high complexity of optimization and detection processes for Struck [8] with nonlinear kernels limits
its usage of high dimension features. It is critical to tracking performance because object representation with high
dimensional features can model the target better than low
dimensional ones. For example, KCF [10] greatly outperforms its original version CSK [9] by only replacing
the low dimensional image feature with high dimensional
HOG feature. On the other hand, the primal SSVM can be
learned efficiently with linear kernels, which is very useful
for fast training and detection even if it uses high dimensional features to represent the target. However, existing
sub-gradients methods [25, 21] are sensitive to the step size
when applied to online tasks. Therefore, it is of great interest to design a proper SSVM tracking algorithm that can
run sufficiently fast with high dimensional features.

4266

