Pairwise Matching through Max-Weight Bipartite Belief Propagation
Zhen Zhang1 Qinfeng Shi2 Julian McAuley3 Wei Wei1 Yanning Zhang1 Anton van den Hengel2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
2
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia
3
Computer Science and Engineering Department, University of California, San Diego, USA

Abstract
Feature matching is a key problem in computer vision
and pattern recognition. One way to encode the essential interdependence between potential feature matches is
to cast the problem as inference in a graphical model,
though recently alternatives such as spectral methods, or
approaches based on the convex-concave procedure have
achieved the state-of-the-art. Here we revisit the use of
graphical models for feature matching, and propose a belief propagation scheme which exhibits the following advantages: (1) we explicitly enforce one-to-one matching constraints; (2) we offer a tighter relaxation of the original cost
function than previous graphical-model-based approaches;
and (3) our sub-problems decompose into max-weight bipartite matching, which can be solved efficiently, leading to
orders-of-magnitude reductions in execution time. Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm produces
results superior to those of the current state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
The feature matching problem aims to find consistent
correspondences between two sets of features or points, and
is a key step in many tasks in computer vision and pattern
recognition including self-calibration, image registration,
and multiple object tracking[8, 23, 24]. While finding oneto-one correspondences between local feature points can be
done efficiently, the problem becomes NP-hard as soon as
pairwise affinities are introduced, leading to a range of relaxation and approximation techniques.
Graphical models are often used to encode pairwise
matching problems as they naturally express the interdependence among a set of putative matches where each feature
can be matched only once. Bayati, Shah and Sharma[2]
first formulated feature matching as a MAP inference problem in a graphical model (without pairwise constraints) and
incorporating pairwise constraints was addressed by Duchi
et al. [9], and others[29]. The primary disadvantage of
the approach of Duchi et al. [9] is that convergence can-

not be guaranteed; Torresani, Kolmogorov and Rother[29]
addressed this limitation, devising a method which was considered the state-of-the-art at the time. Even so, the looseness of the relaxation limited the extent to which the matching quality could be guaranteed. This limitation served as
a primary motivator for recent approaches, and a shift away
from methods based on inference in graphical models.
A range of alternative approaches to the matching problem have been proposed (see [5] for a review). One approach has been to relax the one-to-one matching constraints, and to recover them later through post-processing;
this is the approach typically adopted by Spectral Matching
(SM) [7, 19], and Local Sparse Models (LSM)[15]. This
produces good results despite the lack of theoretical justification for the post-processing step. The Convex-Concave
Relaxation Procedure (CCRP) used in [23, 33], in contrast, maintains the constraints, but involves solving a series
of non-convex optimization problems; it thus is not guaranteed to find a high-quality solution, and may converge
slowly. Despite these limitations the CCRP-based method
Factorised Graph Matching[33] is considered to be the current state-of-the-art as its performance is superior to that of
competing methods in many scenarios.
In this paper, we revisit the problem of using graphical
models for feature matching. We find that graphical model
based feature matching can be both fast and accurate. We
first formulate the matching problem as MAP inference in a
graphical model with one-to-one matching constraints, and
use a tighter linear programming (LP) relaxation than has
previously been identified. We then propose an augmented
belief propagation scheme to solve the dual problem of the
LP relaxation. Unlike other dual methods such as [29], we
decompose the dual problem into sub-problems which either can be efficiently solved in terms of max-weight bipartite matching (e.g. using the Hungarian algorithm), and
others which have a closed-form solution. Note that the decomposition into sub-problems which can be cast as maxweight bipartite matching is possible only because of the
specific form of our novel LP relaxation. The fact that such
a relaxation is available in turn depends on the nature of the
11202

