Exemplar-Driven Top-Down Saliency Detection via Deep Association
Shengfeng He1 , Rynson W.H. Lau1 , and Qingxiong Yang∗2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
http://www.shengfenghe.com/exemplarsaliency.html
Abstract

Top-down saliency detection is a knowledge-driven
search task. While some previous methods aim to learn this
“knowledge” from category-specific data, others transfer
existing annotations in a large dataset through appearance
matching. In contrast, we propose in this paper a locateby-exemplar strategy. This approach is challenging, as we
only use a few exemplars (up to 4) and the appearances
among the query object and the exemplars can be very different. To address it, we design a two-stage deep model to
learn the intra-class association between the exemplars and
query objects. The first stage is for learning object-to-object
association, and the second stage is to learn background
discrimination. Extensive experimental evaluations show
that the proposed method outperforms different baselines
and the category-specific models. In addition, we explore
the influence of exemplar properties, in terms of exemplar
number and quality. Furthermore, we show that the learned
model is a universal model and offers great generalization
to unseen objects.

1. Introduction
The human visual system has an outstanding ability
to rapidly locate salient regions in complex scenes [20].
Our attention is mainly drawn by factors relevant to either bottom-up or top-down saliency detection. Bottomup visual saliency is stimulus-driven, and thus sensitive to
the most interesting and conspicuous regions in the scene.
Top-down visual saliency, on the other hand, is knowledgedriven and involves high-level visual tasks, such as intentionally looking for a specific object.
In computer vision, bottom-up saliency detection [19,
37, 36, 16, 17, 41, 40] receives much research attention,
due to its task-free nature. For the same reason, it can only
capture the most salient object(s) in the scene. On the other
hand, top-down saliency [21, 22, 12, 38, 23, 7] aims to locate all the intended objects in the scene, which can help
∗ Corresponding author.

(a) Chair & motorbike

(b) Person & sofa

(c) Horse & person

Figure 1: The proposed method can locate top-down
saliency using a few exemplars (shown under each saliency
map), even though there are significant differences among
them.
reduce the search space for object detection. Existing methods typically learn the “knowledge” that guides top-down
saliency detection, from a set of categorized training data.
Thus, they are confined to the pre-defined categories and
restricted from training a universal model.
However, human knowledge does not only come from
memory (i.e., locating salient objects in the scene using
knowledge from training data), but also from object association (i.e., locating objects in the scene using known or
unknown exemplars) [2]. For example, we can easily identify and locate a similar object in an image when given an
unseen example object in another. As suggested in cognitive
studies [27, 2], instead of recognizing an object according
to an explicit category representation, human brain categorizes objects by associating an input unseen object to a set
15723

