Structured Regression Gradient Boosting
Ferran Diego
Fred A. Hamprecht
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing (HCI)
Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing (IWR)
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg 69115, Germany
{ferran.diego,fred.hamprecht}@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de
Abstract

xi
Feature
Extraction

We propose a new way to train a structured output prediction model. More specifically, we train nonlinear data
terms in a Gaussian Conditional Random Field (GCRF) by
a generalized version of gradient boosting. The approach
is evaluated on three challenging regression benchmarks:
vessel detection, single image depth estimation and image
inpainting. These experiments suggest that the proposed
boosting framework matches or exceeds the state-of-the-art.

F1 r i,m
weak learner

b1,m(x)i

b1

yi

r i,m

F2 r i,m

2,m

i

b (x)

hm i
(x;b)
M

weak learner

b

2

F3 r i,m

(x)i

b3,m(x)i
weak learner

b3

m-1

i

(x;b)

1. Introduction
Many problems in machine learning involve the prediction of outputs that are not a single value, but a more
complicated object like a sequence, a graph or an image.
Such problems are referred to as structured output prediction [26]. Markov random fields have become popular for
structured prediction thanks to their ability to exhibit desirable global behavior based on the specification of local or
sparse interactions only. For generative models, the parameters can be found by maximum likelihood [46, 19, 6, 4]; and
for both generative and conditional models by discriminative training [43, 44, 12, 15]. The latter is generally found to
work better except when training data is extremely scarce.
This success is at least partially attributed to the fact that
such models learn to minimize the loss function of interest
for a specific task, rather than solve a more general problem, namely learning to generate images. The most frequent
approach to discriminative learning of structured models is
via max margin (structSVM, [47, 45]). One limitation of
structSVMs is that the model must be linear in its parameters in a joint feature space. Recent alternatives include regression tree fields [12, 14], where nonparametric potentials
are learned by minimizing a loss function using a projected
gradient method.
In this paper we propose, for the first time, a generalization of gradient boosting that allows directly training a

compute

m-1

i
h m-1(x;b)

m=1...M

Figure 1. Structured regression gradient boosting. Given input xi
and structured ground truth yi , we iterate the following: given the
current prediction ϕm−1 (xi ), compute gradient ri,m of the structured loss. Next, train shallow regression trees that produce good
fits bk,m to the structured loss gradient image and filtered versions
thereof. Use these fits to parametrize the data terms of a Gaussian
conditional random field. Its MAP solution hm (xi ) is added to the
current strong structured learner with a weight αm found through
line search. Repeat M times.

structured regression model and exploit all its benefits for
structured regression tasks in a principled way (Sect. 2).
The procedure, summarized in Fig. 1 and Algorithm 1, is
described in detail in section 2. In section 3, we study performance on a number of benchmarks for which many papers have previously pushed the accuracy to levels that are
remarkable given the difficulty of those problems. We close
with a brief summary in section 4.

1.1. Related Work
Discrete and continuous conditional random fields
(CRFs) [18, 33, 43, 12] are structured prediction models
that model explicitly the relation among latent variables.
Learning the optimal parameters of these models has been
4321
1459

