Multi-view Deep Network for Cross-view Classification
Meina Kan1,2
Shiguang Shan1,2
Xilin Chen1
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{kanmeina, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Cross-view recognition that intends to classify samples
between different views is an important problem in computer vision. The large discrepancy between different even heterogenous views make this problem quite challenging. To
eliminate the complex (maybe even highly nonlinear) view
discrepancy for favorable cross-view recognition, we propose a multi-view deep network (MvDN), which seeks for a
non-linear discriminant and view-invariant representation
shared between multiple views. Specifically, our proposed
MvDN network consists of two sub-networks, view-specific
sub-network attempting to remove view-specific variations
and the following common sub-network attempting to obtain common representation shared by all views. As the objective of MvDN network, the Fisher loss, i.e. the Rayleigh
quotient objective, is calculated from the samples of all views so as to guide the learning of the whole network.
As a result, the representation from the topmost layers of
the MvDN network is robust to view discrepancy, and also
discriminative. The experiments of face recognition across
pose and face recognition across feature type on three
datasets with 13 and 2 views respectively demonstrate the
superiority of the proposed method, especially compared to
the typical linear ones.

1. Introduction
The images of an object can be captured by different
cameras, different sensors, or from different view angles,
which brings about a great challenge of matching images
from these different views to recognize them. This kind of
problem is generally called as cross-view recognition or heterogenous recognition. Usually, the appearance of samples
from different views are quite different from each other, and
the large view discrepancy makes it quite challenging to directly compare them based on the image appearance. Substantial efforts have been dedicated to eliminate the view
discrepancy or extract view-invariant feature presentations.

Figure 1. An overview of Multi-view Deep Network (MvDN). MvDN consists of two sub-networks, the view-specific subnetwork fi |vi=1 and the common sub-network gc , along with a discriminant Fisher objective.

A straightforward way to deal with the view discrepancy
is to project all views into a common space, like the Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) [10][2]. CCA attempted
to learn two transforms, one for each view, to respectively project the samples from the two views into a common
subspace, by maximizing the cross correlation between two
views. CCA is only applicable for two-view scenario. To
deal with multi-view cases, the pairwise strategy is usually
exploited or a more efficient and robust solution is to learn a
unified common space shared by all views rather than only
two views. For this purpose, the Multiview CCA (MCCA)
[25][27] was proposed to obtain one common space for v
views. In MCCA, v view-specific transforms, one for each
view, are obtained by maximizing the total correlations between any two views. Another commonly used method was

4847

