Fast Algorithms for Convolutional Neural Networks
Andrew Lavin

Scott Gray
Nervana Systems

alavin@acm.org

sgray@nervanasys.com

Abstract

cause they achieve better accuracy with fewer weights than
shallow networks with larger filters [12, 8].

Deep convolutional neural networks take GPU-days of
computation to train on large data sets. Pedestrian detection for self driving cars requires very low latency. Image
recognition for mobile phones is constrained by limited processing resources. The success of convolutional neural networks in these situations is limited by how fast we can compute them. Conventional FFT based convolution is fast for
large filters, but state of the art convolutional neural networks use small, 3 × 3 filters. We introduce a new class
of fast algorithms for convolutional neural networks using
Winograd’s minimal filtering algorithms. The algorithms
compute minimal complexity convolution over small tiles,
which makes them fast with small filters and small batch
sizes. We benchmark a GPU implementation of our algorithm with the VGG network and show state of the art
throughput at batch sizes from 1 to 64.

Therefore there is a strong need for fast convnet algorithms for small batch sizes and small filters. However
conventional convnet libraries require large batch sizes and
large filters for fast operation.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (convnets) achieve
state of the art results on image recognition problems [12][8]. The networks take several days of GPU time
to train and require significant compute resources during
classification as well. Larger data sets and models lead to
better accuracy but also increase computation time. Therefore progress in deep neural networks is limited by how fast
the networks can be computed.
Likewise the application of convnets to low latency inference problems, such as pedestrian detection in self driving car video imagery, is limited by how fast a small set of
images, possibly a single image, can be classified.
Distributed training of convnets can be achieved by partitioning each batch of examples across the nodes of a cluster
and accumulating weight updates across the nodes. A large
batch size adversely affects convergence of the network, so
the minimum batch size that can be computed efficiently
places an upper limit on cluster size [9, 7].
State of the art convnet architectures for image recognition use deep networks of 3 × 3 convolutional layers, be-

This paper introduces a new class of fast algorithms for
convolutional neural networks based on the minimal filtering algorithms discovered by Toom [14] and Cook [4] and
generalized by Winograd [16]. The algorithms can reduce
the arithmetic complexity of a convnet layer by up to a factor of 4 compared to direct convolution. Almost all of the
arithmetic is performed by dense matrix multiplies of sufficient dimensions to be computed efficiently, even when
the batch size is very small. The memory requirements are
also light compared to the conventional FFT convolution
algorithm. These factors make practical implementations
possible. Our implementation for NVIDIA Maxwell GPUs
achieves state of the art throughput for all batch sizes measured, from 1 to 64, while using at most 16MB of workspace
memory.

2. Related Work
The FFT and convolution theorem have been used to reduce the arithmetic complexity of convnet layers, first by
Mathieu et al. [11], then refined by Vasilache et al. [15],
and then implemented in the NVIDIA cuDNN library [1].
The Strassen algorithm for fast matrix multiplication [13] was used by Cong and Xiao [3] to reduce the number of convolutions in a convnet layer, thereby reducing its
total arithmetic complexity. The authors also suggested that
more techniques from arithmetic complexity theory might
be applicable to convnets.
Various approaches have been attempted to reduce the
complexity of convnets by quantizing or otherwise approximating the convolutional layer. We consider these approaches as orthogonal and complementary to those that exploit algebraic structure, and therefore declare them outside
the scope of this paper.
14013

