Similarity Learning with Spatial Constraints for Person Re-identification
Dapeng Chen, Zejian Yuan, Badong Chen, Nanning Zheng
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
dapengchenxjtu@foxmail.com, {yuan.ze.jian, chenbd, nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Pose variation remains one of the major factors that adversely affect the accuracy of person re-identification. Such
variation is not arbitrary as body parts (e.g. head, torso, legs) have relative stable spatial distribution. Breaking
down the variability of global appearance regarding the spatial distribution potentially benefits the person matching.
We therefore learn a novel similarity function, which consists of multiple sub-similarity measurements with each taking in charge of a subregion. In particular, we take advantage of the recently proposed polynomial feature map
to describe the matching within each subregion, and inject
all the feature maps into a unified framework. The framework not only outputs similarity measurements for different
regions, but also makes a better consistency among them.
Our framework can collaborate local similarities as well as
global similarity to exploit their complementary strength.
It is flexible to incorporate multiple visual cues to further
elevate the performance. In experiments, we analyze the effectiveness of the major components. The results on four
datasets show significant and consistent improvements over
the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification refers a task of associating a
same person in different camera views. It plays a crucial
role for applications such as long-term person tracking [9],
multi-person association [28], group behavior analysis [38],
etc. Similarity measuring serves as a major step for a person
re-identification system. An ideal measurement is a matching rule that yields higher matching score for the image
pairs belonging to the same person than the pairs belonging to different persons. The similarity measurement can be
pre-defined or be learned. The former type adopts the offthe-shelf distance metric such as Euclidean distance [10],
Bhattacharyya distance[6], and covariance distance [22, 1],
while the latter type tries to exploit the inherent invariance
between image pairs [12, 27, 13, 24]. By making use of the
training data, learning-based models generally enjoy bet-

ter performance than the learning-free methods. However,
most similarity learning just focus on a “holistic” measurement, which discards the geometric structure of pedestrians
and can not further exploit the discriminative power.
We argue that similarity learning should obey certain spatial constraints, which indicates the matching of certain
body part should follow its spatial distribution. For example, the region containing the head of a person should
be compared with the region containing the head rather
than the region containing the feet. With such constraints,
each region has its own similarity measurement that excels at handling the special intra-person variation within it.
The combination of multiple measurements is more flexible to exploit the global invariance than a holistic one. Besides, enforcing the matching within the corresponding region can effectively reduce the risk of mismatching and become more robust to partial occlusion.
We combine such constraints with recently proposed
polynomial feature maps [4]. As each feature map can describe the matching within each local region, we employ
multiple feature maps to represent the different regions simultaneously and inject all of them into a unified learning
framework. The framework not only outputs the similarity
measurements for each local region, but also makes a better consistency among these measurements. Our framework
is able to collaborate the local measurements with global
measurement to exploit their complementary power, and it
is flexible to incorporate multiple visual cues to further improve the performance.
The main contributions are threefold: (1) We present a
novel similarity function to investigate how the spatial constraints can benefit the similarity learning for person reidentification. (2) We propose a convex objective function
as well as an efficient optimization algorithm for it. (3) We
operate in-depth experiments to analyze various aspects of
our approach, and the final results outperform the state-ofthe-arts over four benchmarks.

2. Related Work
A comprehensive survey can be found in [11]. Here, we
briefly review the most relevant works.
11268

