SemiContour: A Semi-supervised Learning Approach for Contour Detection
Zizhao Zhang, Fuyong Xing, Xiaoshuang Shi, Lin Yang
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
zizhao@cise.ufl.edu, {f.xing,xsshi2015}@ufl.edu, lin.yang@bme.ufl.edu

Abstract
Supervised contour detection methods usually require
many labeled training images to obtain satisfactory performance. However, a large set of annotated data might
be unavailable or extremely labor intensive. In this paper, we investigate the usage of semi-supervised learning
(SSL) to obtain competitive detection accuracy with very
limited training data (three labeled images). Specifically,
we propose a semi-supervised structured ensemble learning approach for contour detection built on structured random forests (SRF). To allow SRF to be applicable to unlabeled data, we present an effective sparse representation
approach to capture inherent structure in image patches by
finding a compact and discriminative low-dimensional subspace representation in an unsupervised manner, enabling
the incorporation of abundant unlabeled patches with their
estimated structured labels to help SRF perform better node
splitting. We re-examine the role of sparsity and propose a
novel and fast sparse coding algorithm to boost the overall learning efficiency. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first attempt to apply SSL for contour detection. Extensive experiments on the BSDS500 segmentation dataset and
the NYU Depth dataset demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed method.

1. Introduction
Contour detection is a fundamental but challenging computer vision task. In recent years, although the research
of contour detection is gradually shifted from unsupervised
learning to supervised learning, unsupervised contour detection approaches are still attractive, since it can be easily
adopted into other image domains without the demand of a
large amount of labeled data. However, one of the significant limitations is the high computational cost [2, 35]. On
the other hand, the cutting-edge supervised contour detection methods, such as deep learning, rely on a huge amount
of fully labeled training data, which often requires huge human efforts and domain expertise. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) [31, 23, 18] is an alternative technique to balance
the trade-off between unsupervised learning and supervised

: u-tokens
: l-tokens
: u-tokens with estimated structured labels
: u-tokens with estimated discrete labels

Parent
child

Left child Right child
High-dimensional space

Low-dimensional subspace
Right child

Node splitting
behaviors

Left child

Parent child

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed method. Top: At the parent
node that contains u-tokens and l-tokens with corresponding structured labels, u-tokens will help l-tokens better estimate the separating plane for the node splitting. This is achieved by mapping tokens into a discriminative low-dimensional subspace and estimating u-tokens’ discrete labels. Then the u-tokens are un-mapped to
the original high-dimensional space associated with the estimated
structured labels. Finally, all tokens will be propagated to child
nodes. Bottom: A general view of the node splitting behavior to
present how node splitting of SRF enables data with structured
labels in the parent node to be categorized in child nodes.

learning. However, currently there exist no reports on semisupervised learning based contour detection.
Supervised contour detection is often based on patchto-patch or patch-to-pixel classification. Contours in local
patches (denoted by sketch tokens [20]) contain rich and
well-known patterns, including straight lines, parallel lines,
curves, T-junctions, Y-junctions, etc [27, 20]. One of the
main objectives of the most recent supervised contour detection methods is to classify these patterns using structure
learning [12, 13], sparse representation [24, 35], convolution neutral network (CNN) [29, 16, 36], etc. In our method,
we use unsupervised techniques to capture the patterns of
unlabeled image patches, enabling the successful training
of the contour detector with a limited number of labeled images. For notation convenience, we denote labeled patches
1251

