Exploit Bounding Box Annotations for Multi-label Object Recognition
Hao Yang1 , Joey Tianyi Zhou2 , Yu Zhang3 , Bin-Bin Gao4 , Jianxin Wu4 , and Jianfei Cai1
1

SCE, Nanyang Technological University, lancelot365@gmail.com, ASJFCai@ntu.edu.sg
2
IHPC, A*STAR, zhouty@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
3
Bioinformatics Institute, A*STAR, zhangyu@bii.a-star.edu.sg
4
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
gaobb@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown
great performance as general feature representations for
object recognition applications. However, for multi-label
images that contain multiple objects from different categories, scales and locations, global CNN features are not
optimal. In this paper, we incorporate local information
to enhance the feature discriminative power. In particular, we first extract object proposals from each image. With
each image treated as a bag and object proposals extracted
from it treated as instances, we transform the multi-label
recognition problem into a multi-class multi-instance learning problem. Then, in addition to extracting the typical
CNN feature representation from each proposal, we propose to make use of ground-truth bounding box annotations
(strong labels) to add another level of local information
by using nearest-neighbor relationships of local regions to
form a multi-view pipeline. The proposed multi-view multiinstance framework utilizes both weak and strong labels
effectively, and more importantly it has the generalization
ability to even boost the performance of unseen categories
by partial strong labels from other categories. Our framework is extensively compared with state-of-the-art handcrafted feature based methods and CNN based methods on
two multi-label benchmark datasets. The experimental results validate the discriminative power and the generalization ability of the proposed framework. With strong labels,
our framework is able to achieve state-of-the-art results in
both datasets.

1. Introduction
Recently, the availability of large amount of labeled data
has greatly boosted the development of feature learning

Figure 1. An example of a typical multi-label image, which contains several cows in different locations as well as a person.

methods for classification. In particular, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) achieve great success in visual recognition/classification tasks. Features extracted from CNNs
can provide powerful global representations for the single
object recognition problem [15, 22, 23]. However, conventional CNN features may not generalize well for images
containing multiple objects as the objects can be in different
locations, scales, occlusions and categories. Fig. 1 shows
an example of such images. Since multi-label recognition
task is more general and practical in real world applications,
many CNN related methods [18, 19, 26] have been proposed
to address the problem.
A well known fact is that image-level labels can be utilized to fine-tune a pre-trained CNN model and produce
good global representations [22, 23, 19]. However, due
to the diversity and the complexity of multi-label images,
classifiers trained from such global representations might
not be optimal. For example, if we use images similar to
Fig. 1 to train a classifier for “person”, the classifier will
have to account for not only hundreds of different variations

280

