Learning to Localize Little Landmarks
Saurabh Singh, Derek Hoiem, David Forsyth
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
http://vision.cs.illinois.edu/projects/litland/
{ss1, dhoiem, daf}@illinois.edu

Abstract

Step 1

We interact everyday with tiny objects such as the door
handle of a car or the light switch in a room. These little
landmarks are barely visible and hard to localize in images.
We describe a method to find such landmarks by finding a
sequence of latent landmarks, each with a prediction model.
Each latent landmark predicts the next in sequence, and the
last localizes the target landmark. For example, to find the
door handle of a car, our method learns to start with a latent
landmark near the wheel, as it is globally distinctive; subsequent latent landmarks use the context from the earlier ones
to get closer to the target. Our method is supervised solely
by the location of the little landmark and displays strong
performance on more difficult variants of established tasks
and on two new tasks.

1. Introduction
The world is full of tiny but useful objects such as the
door handle of a car or the light switch in a room. We call
these little landmarks. We interact with many little landmarks everyday, often not actively thinking about them or
even looking at them. Consider the door handle of a car
(Figure 1), it is often the first thing we manipulate when
interacting with the car. However, in an image it is barely
visible; yet we know where it is. Automatically localizing
such little landmarks in images is hard, as they don’t have
a distinctive appearance of their own. These landmarks are
largely defined by their context. We describe a method to
localize little landmarks by discovering informative context
supervised solely by the location of the little landmark. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on several
datasets, including both new and established problems.
The target landmark may have a local appearance that is
similar to many other locations in the image. However, it
may occur in a consistent spatial configuration with some
pattern, such as an object or part, that is easier to find and
would resolve the ambiguity. We refer to such a pattern as
a latent landmark. The latent landmark may itself be hard

Step 3

Step 2

Figure 1. Several objects of interest are so tiny that they barely
occupy few pixels (top-left), yet we interact with them daily. Localizing such objects in images is difficult as they do not have
a distinctive local appearance. We propose a method that learns
to localize such landmarks by learning a sequence of latent landmarks. Each landmark in this sequence predicts where the next
landmark could be found. This information is then used to predict
the next landmark and so on, until the target is found.

to localize, although easier than the target. Another latent
landmark may then help localize the earlier one, which in
turn localizes the target. Our method discovers a sequence
of such landmarks, where every latent landmark helps find
the next one, with the sequence ending at the location of the
target.
The first latent landmark in the sequence must be localizable on its own. Each subsequent landmark must be localizable given the previous landmark and predictive of the
next latent landmark or the target. Our approach has to discover globally distinctive patterns to start the sequence and
conditionally distinctive ones to continue it, while only being supervised by the location of the target. A detection of a
latent landmark includes a set of positions, typically highly
concentrated, and a prediction of where to look next. The

260

