Weakly Supervised Deep Detection Networks
Hakan Bilen
University of Oxford

Andrea Vedaldi
University of Oxford

hbilen@robots.ox.ac.uk

vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

Weakly-supervised detection network
ImageNet

Weakly supervised learning of object detection is an important problem in image understanding that still does not
have a satisfactory solution. In this paper, we address this
problem by exploiting the power of deep convolutional neural networks pre-trained on large-scale image-level classification tasks. We propose a weakly supervised deep detection architecture that modifies one such network to operate
at the level of image regions, performing simultaneously region selection and classification. Trained as an image classifier, the architecture implicitly learns object detectors that
are better than alternative weakly supervised detection systems on the PASCAL VOC data. The model, which is a simple and elegant end-to-end architecture, outperforms standard data augmentation and fine-tuning techniques for the
task of image-level classification as well.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
[21] have emerged as the new state-of-the-art learning
framework for image recognition. Key to their success is
the ability to learn from large quantities of labelled data the
complex appearance of real-world objects. One of the most
striking aspects of CNNs is their ability to learn generic visual features that are generalise to many tasks. In particular,
CNNs pre-trained on datasets such as ImageNet ILSVRC
have been shown to obtain excellent results in recognition
in other domains [8], in object detection [12], in semantic
segmentation [13], in human pose estimation [33], and in
many other tasks.
In this paper we look at how the power of CNNs can be
leveraged in weakly supervised detection (WSD), which is
the problem of learning object detectors using only imagelevel labels. The ability of learning from weak annotations
is very important for two reasons: first, image understanding aims at learning an growing body of complex visual
concepts (e.g. hundred thousands object categories in ImageNet). Second, CNN training is data-hungry. Therefore,
being able to learn complex concepts using only light super-

pooling
recognition

detection
SPP

pre-trained
CNN

convolutional
features

region
proposals

Figure 1. Weakly Supervised Deep Detection Network. Our
method starts from a CNN pre-trained for image classification on
a large dataset, e.g. ImageNet. It then modifies to reason efficiently about regions, branching off a recognition and a detection
data streams. The resulting architecture can be fine-tuned on a
target dataset to achieve state-of-the-art weakly supervised object
detection using only image-level annotations.

vision can reduce significantly the cost of data annotation in
tasks such as image segmentation, image captioning, or object detection.
We are motivated in our research by the hypothesis that,
since pre-trained CNNs generalise so well to a large number of tasks, they should contain meaningful representations of the data. For example, there exists evidence that
CNNs trained for image classification learn proxies to objects and objects parts [37]. Remarkably, these concepts
are acquired implicitly, without ever providing the network
with information about the location of such structures in
images. Hence, CNNs trained for image classification may
already contain implicitly most of the information required
to perform object detection.
We are not the first to address the problem of WSD with
CNNs. The method of Wang et al. [36], for example, uses
a pre-trained CNN to describe image regions and then learn
object categories as corresponding visual topics. While this
method is currently state-of-the-art in weakly supervised
object detection, it comprises several components beyond
the CNN and requires signifiant tuning.
In this paper we contribute a novel end-to-end method
for weakly supervised object detection using pre-trained
12846

