How Far are We from Solving Pedestrian Detection?
Shanshan Zhang, Rodrigo Benenson, Mohamed Omran, Jan Hosang and Bernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarbrücken, Germany
firstname.lastname@mpi-inf.mpg.de
1

Abstract

.80
.64

1. Introduction
Object detection has received great attention during recent years. Pedestrian detection is a canonical sub-problem
that remains a popular topic of research due to its diverse
applications.
Despite the extensive research on pedestrian detection,
recent papers still show signiﬁcant improvements, suggesting that a saturation point has not yet been reached. In this
paper we analyse the gap between the state of the art and
a newly created human baseline (section 3.1). The results
indicate that there is still a ten fold improvement to be made
before reaching human performance. We aim to investigate
which factors will help close this gap.
We analyse failure cases of top performing pedestrian
detectors and diagnose what should be changed to further
push performance. We show several different analysis, including human inspection, automated analysis of problem
cases (e.g. blur, contrast), and oracle experiments (section
3.2). Our results indicate that localisation is an important
source of high conﬁdence false positives. We address this

.50
.40
.30
miss rate

Encouraged by the recent progress in pedestrian detection, we investigate the gap between current state-of-the-art
methods and the “perfect single frame detector”. We enable our analysis by creating a human baseline for pedestrian detection (over the Caltech dataset), and by manually
clustering the recurrent errors of a top detector. Our results characterise both localisation and background-versusforeground errors.
To address localisation errors we study the impact of
training annotation noise on the detector performance, and
show that we can improve even with a small portion of
sanitised training data. To address background/foreground
discrimination, we study convnets for pedestrian detection,
and discuss which factors affect their performance.
Other than our in-depth analysis, we report top performance on the Caltech dataset, and provide a new sanitised set
of training and test annotations.

.20

.10

.05

37.87% SDN
37.64% MTDPM+Context
37.34% ACF+SDt
32.38% AlexNet
29.76% ACFCaltech+
29.24% SpatialPooling
24.80% LDCF
22.49% Katamari
21.89% SpatialPooling+
20.86% TACNN
18.47% Checkerboards
5.62% OursHumanBaseline
3

10

2

1

10
10
false positives per image

0

10

1

10

Figure 1: Overview of the top results on the Caltech-USA
pedestrian benchmark (CVPR2015 snapshot). At ∼ 95%
recall, state-of-the-art detectors make ten times more errors
than the human baseline.
aspect by improving the training set alignment quality, both
by manually sanitising the Caltech training annotations and
via algorithmic means for the remaining training samples
(sections 3.3 and 4.1).
To address background versus foreground discrimination, we study convnets for pedestrian detection, and discuss which factors affect their performance (section 4.2).

1.1. Related work
In the last years, diverse efforts have been made to improve the performance of pedestrian detection. Following the success of integral channel feature detector (ICF)
[6, 5], many variants [21, 23, 15, 17, 22] were proposed
and showed signiﬁcant improvement. A recent review of
pedestrian detection [3] concludes that improved features
have been driving performance and are likely to continue
doing so. It also shows that optical ﬂow [18] and context
information [16] are complementary to image features and
can further boost detection accuracy.
By ﬁne-tuning a model pre-trained on external data
convolution neural networks (convnets) have also reached
11259

