HD Maps: Fine-grained Road Segmentation by Parsing Ground and Aerial
Images
Gellért Máttyus
Remote Sensing Technology Institute
German Aerospace Center

Shenlong Wang, Sanja Fidler, Raquel Urtasun
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto

gellert.mattyus@dlr.de

{slwang, fidler, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

access to imagery/LIDAR from millions of cars in order to
reliably enhance maps at a world-scale.

In this paper we present an approach to enhance existing maps with fine grained segmentation categories such as
parking spots and sidewalk, as well as the number and location of road lanes. Towards this goal, we propose an efficient approach that is able to estimate these fine grained
categories by doing joint inference over both, monocular
aerial imagery, as well as ground images taken from a
stereo camera pair mounted on top of a car. Important to
this is reasoning about the alignment between the two types
of imagery, as even when the measurements are taken with
sophisticated GPS+IMU systems, this alignment is not sufficiently accurate. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach on a new dataset which enhances KITTI [8] with
aerial images taken with a camera mounted on an airplane
and flying around the city of Karlsruhe, Germany.

Alternatively, aerial images provide us with full coverage
of a significant portion of the world, but at a much lower
resolution than ground images. This makes semantic segmentation from aerial images a very difficult task. In this
paper, we propose to use both aerial and ground images to
jointly infer fine grained segmentation of roads. Towards
this goal, we take advantage of the OpenStreetMap (OSM)
project, which provides us with freely available maps of the
road topology in the form of piece-wise linear road segments. We formulate the problem as energy minimization,
inferring the number and location of the lanes for each road
segment, parking spots, sidewalks and background, as well
as the alignment between the ground and aerial images. We
employ deep learning to estimate semantics from both aerial
and ground images, and define a set of potentials exploiting
these semantic cues, as well as road constraints, relationships between parallel roads, and the smoothness of both
the estimations along the road as well as the alignment between consecutive ground frames.

1. Introduction
We are in an exciting time for computer vision, and more
broadly AI, as the development of fully autonomous systems such as self-driving cars seems possible in the near
future. These systems have to robustly estimate the scene
in 3D, its semantics as well as be able to self-localize at all
times. Key to the success of these tasks is the use of maps
containing detailed information such as road location, number of lanes, speed limit, traffic signs, parking spots, traffic
rules at intersections, etc.
Current maps, however, have been created with the use
of semi-automatic systems that employ many man-hours of
laborious and tedious labeling. An alternative to this costly
labeling is to employ existing maps and correct/enhance
them based on ground imagery or LIDAR point clouds, captured, for example, by a Velodyne/cameras mounted on top
of a car. Systems like TESLA auto-pilot [1] are currently
using their deployed fleet of cars, which are equipped with
cameras, to perform such corrections. However, it is difficult to create full coverage of the world as we will need

We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in a
new dataset which covers a wide area of the city of Karlsruhe in Germany, both from the ground and from the air.
We provide pixel-level annotations for the aerial images in
terms of fine-grained road categories. We call our dataset
Air-Ground-KITTI. We show that our approach is able to
estimate these categories reliably, while significantly reducing the alignment error between the ground and aerial images when compared to a sophisticated GPS+IMU system.

2. Related work
For several decades, researchers from various communities (e.g., vision, remote sensing) have been working on automatic extraction of semantic information from aerial images. In the following, we summarize the approaches most
relevant to our work.
13611

