Learning Sparse High Dimensional Filters:
Image Filtering, Dense CRFs and Bilateral Neural Networks
Varun Jampani1 , Martin Kiefel1,2 and Peter V. Gehler1,2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, 72076, Germany
2
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, 72076, Germany
{varun.jampani, martin.kiefel, peter.gehler}@tuebingen.mpg.de
1

Abstract
Bilateral filters have wide spread use due to their edgepreserving properties. The common use case is to manually
choose a parametric filter type, usually a Gaussian filter.
In this paper, we will generalize the parametrization and
in particular derive a gradient descent algorithm so the filter parameters can be learned from data. This derivation
allows to learn high dimensional linear filters that operate
in sparsely populated feature spaces. We build on the permutohedral lattice construction for efficient filtering. The
ability to learn more general forms of high-dimensional filters can be used in several diverse applications. First, we
demonstrate the use in applications where single filter applications are desired for runtime reasons. Further, we
show how this algorithm can be used to learn the pairwise potentials in densely connected conditional random
fields and apply these to different image segmentation tasks.
Finally, we introduce layers of bilateral filters in CNNs
and propose bilateral neural networks for the use of highdimensional sparse data. This view provides new ways to
encode model structure into network architectures. A diverse set of experiments empirically validates the usage of
general forms of filters.

1. Introduction
Image convolutions are basic operations for many image processing and computer vision applications. In this
paper we will study the class of bilateral filter convolutions and propose a general image adaptive convolution that
can be learned from data. The bilateral filter [4, 42, 45]
was originally introduced for the task of image denoising
as an edge preserving filter. Since the bilateral filter contains the spatial convolution as a special case, we will in the
following directly state the general case. Given an image
v = (v1 , . . . , vn ), vi ∈ Rc with n pixels and c channels,
and for every pixel i, a d dimensional feature vector fi ∈ Rd
(e.g., the (x, y) position in the image fi = (xi , yi )⊤ ). The

bilateral filter then computes
vi′ =

n
X

wfi ,fj vj .

(1)

j=1

for all i. Almost the entire literature refers to the bilateral filter as a synonym of the Gaussian parametric form
wfi ,fj = exp (− 21 (fi − fj )⊤ Σ−1 (fi − fj )). The features
fi are most commonly chosen to be position (xi , yi ) and
color (ri , gi , bi ) or pixel intensity. To appreciate the edgepreserving effect of the bilateral filter, consider the five⊤
dimensional feature f = (x, y, r, g, b) . Two pixels i, j
have a strong influence wfi ,fj on each other only if they
are close in position and color. At edges the color changes,
therefore pixels lying on opposite sides have low influence
and thus this filter does not blur across edges. This behaviour is sometimes referred to as “image adaptive”, since
the filter has a different shape when evaluated at different locations in the image. More precisely, it is the projection of
the filter to the two-dimensional image plane that changes,
the filter values wf ,f ′ do not change. The filter itself can be
of c dimensions wfi ,fj ∈ Rc , in which case the multiplication in Eq. (1) becomes an inner product. For the Gaussian
case the filter can be applied independently per channel. For
an excellent review of image filtering we refer to [35].
The filter operation of Eq. (1) is a sparse highdimensional convolution, a view advocated in [7, 36]. An
image v is not sparse in the spatial domain, we observe
pixels values for all locations (x, y). However, when pixels are understood in a higher dimensional feature space,
e.g., (x, y, r, g, b), the image becomes a sparse signal, since
the r, g, b values lie scattered in this five-dimensional space.
This view on filtering is the key difference of the bilateral
filter compared to the common spatial convolution. An image edge is not “visible” for a filter in the spatial domain
alone, whereas in the 5D space it is. The edge-preserving
behaviour is possible due to the higher dimensional operation. Other data can naturally be understood as sparse signals, e.g., 3D surface points.
14452

