Depth from Semi-Calibrated Stereo and Defocus
Ting-Chun Wang
UC Berkeley

Manohar Srikanth
Nokia Technologies

Ravi Ramamoorthi
UC San Diego

tcwang0509@berkeley.edu

srimano@alum.mit.edu

ravir@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
In this work, we propose a multi-camera system where
we combine a main high-quality camera with two low-res
auxiliary cameras. The auxiliary cameras are well calibrated and act as a passive depth sensor by generating disparity maps. The main camera has an interchangeable lens
and can produce good quality images at high resolution.
Our goal is, given the low-res depth map from the auxiliary
cameras, generate a depth map from the viewpoint of the
main camera. The advantage of our system, compared to
other systems such as light-field cameras or RGBD sensors,
is the ability to generate a high-resolution color image with
a complete depth map, without sacrificing resolution and
with minimal auxiliary hardware.
Since the main camera has an interchangeable lens,
it cannot be calibrated beforehand, and directly applying
stereo matching on it and either of the auxiliary cameras
often leads to unsatisfactory results. Utilizing both the calibrated cameras at once, we propose a novel approach to
better estimate the disparity map of the main camera. Then
by combining the defocus cue of the main camera, the disparity map can be further improved. We demonstrate the
performance of our algorithm on various scenes.

1. Introduction
Multi-camera systems have their advantages over traditional cameras, and recent commercial developments (e.g.,
Lytro [1] and Light [3]) have proven the market interest.
In this paper, we show that by combining a high quality interchangeable-lens camera with auxiliary cameras that
can recover depth (Fig. 1a), we can obtain many of the practical advantages of light field cameras [37]. When the photographer captures an image with the main camera, we also
synchronously capture images from the auxiliary cameras
(Fig. 1b). We then use these images to estimate the disparity
map from the viewpoint of the main camera (Fig. 1c). This
disparity map, along with the high-resolution main camera
image, then enables a number of applications such as refocus magnification (Fig. 10) and parallax view generation
(Fig. 11), while preserving image quality and resolution.
The reason we cannot just use two calibrated main cameras to recover depth is because the main camera has an

Main camera

Main view

Main view disparity

Right view Left view

Aux cameras
Aux view disparity

(a) System setup

(b) System input

Defocus magnification

(c) System output

Figure 1: System overview. (a) The system consists of a
high-res uncalibrated main camera and two low-res calibrated auxiliary cameras. (b) The inputs contain the main
camera image, the aux camera images, and the aux view
disparity map. (c) Given these images, we generate the disparity map from the viewpoint of the main camera. We also
show an example application of applying synthetic blur beyond the aperture baseline limit given the disparity map.
interchangeable lens, so it is impossible to calibrate them
beforehand. Besides, two auxiliary cameras are usually still
much cheaper than a main camera. Finally, the auxiliary
cameras are only loosely attached to the main camera to increase flexibility (one can easily detach them if we don’t
need depth maps). Therefore, calibration between main and
auxiliary cameras is not possible.
To address this challenge, we are required to use uncalibrated rectification. However, the state-of-the-art results are
still far from those generated by calibrated cameras. Therefore, instead of using two uncalibrated cameras, we use the
(uncalibrated) main camera in conjunction with a calibrated
pair of auxiliary cameras, e.g. the Panasonic Lumix DMC3D1K [2], forming a semi-calibrated system. Our system
thus contains a pair of calibrated low-res stereo cameras,
and a high-res uncalibrated main camera. This is also similar to RGBD systems combining a color sensor and an active depth sensor (e.g. Kinect), where we want to transfer
the depth to the viewpoint of the color sensor. However,
RGBD cameras fail to perform well outdoors in sunlight,
while our method is applicable indoors and outdoors. Besides, we can gain more rectification information from the
color images of the calibrated camera pair, as we show in
13717

