Bilateral Space Video Segmentation
Nicolas Märki1 Federico Perazzi1,2 Oliver Wang3 Alexander Sorkine-Hornung2
1
ETH Zurich 2 Disney Research 3 Adobe Systems Inc.

Abstract
In this work, we propose a novel approach to video
segmentation that operates in bilateral space. We design a
new energy on the vertices of a regularly sampled spatiotemporal bilateral grid, which can be solved efficiently using a standard graph cut label assignment. Using a bilateral formulation, the energy that we minimize implicitly approximates long-range, spatio-temporal connections
between pixels while still containing only a small number
of variables and only local graph edges. We compare to
a number of recent methods, and show that our approach
achieves state-of-the-art results on multiple benchmarks in
a fraction of the runtime. Furthermore, our method scales
linearly with image size, allowing for interactive feedback
on real-world high resolution video.

1. Introduction
Video segmentation is a fundamental problem in computer vision, and a key component of numerous applications, including localized video editing, color grading, and
compositing. Furthermore, semantically meaningful clustering of video input is a crucial step in higher-level vision
problems such as scene understanding, learning object class
models, and video summarization [15, 16].
There are many similar and related definitions of what
specifically “video segmentation” refers to, but for the purpose of this work, we consider the problem of finding a binary partitioning of pixels into foreground and background
classes.
In general, this problem must be addressed semiautomatically, as the task itself requires a high level understanding of both the scene and the implicit goals of the user.
This is because defining what constitutes a “foreground object” is often application specific, and the same video could
have multiple valid solutions. For this reason, we consider a
semi-supervised approach that uses sparse user-given cues
to produce a video segmentation. These cues can be either a mask specified on one or a few key-frames, in which
case the problem can be described as mask propagation, or a
sparse set of labels specified by user clicks or strokes, which

Figure 1. Example results of our bilateral space video segmentation which automatically propagates a user provided mask on the
first frame (left column) through the complete video (remaining
columns). Thanks to the efficiency of our method, errors in the
later frames can be easily fixed in an interactive manner.

are then interpolated through the video.
A crucial aspect of semi-automatic video segmentation
methods is responsiveness. A user expects instant feedback,
and any computation delays present significant challenges
to the adoption of these technologies. This is one of the key
reasons that segmentation related tasks, such as rotoscoping, form the bulk of manual labor, and therefore associated
costs, of video effects. In this work, we present a highly
efficient method for user-guided video segmentation that is
able provide iterative feedback in a fraction of the time of
previous approaches, while still generating high quality results in semi-supervised applications, as demonstrated on
multiple benchmarks.
We accomplish this by performing the segmentation in
“bilateral space”, which is a high dimensional feature space,
originally proposed for accelerated bilateral filtering [8],
and recently extended to computing depth from stereo triangulation [4]. We describe a novel energy on a “bilateral
grid” [8], a regular lattice in bilateral space, and infer labels
for these vertices by minimizing an energy using graph cuts.
Processing on the bilateral grid has several advantages over
other approaches. First, the regular and data-independent
structure allows for a more efficient mapping from image
to bilateral space (and vice versa) than super-pixels or kmeans clustering approaches. Second, it allows for flexible
1743

