Large Scale Hard Sample Mining with Monte Carlo Tree Search
Olivier Canévet1,2 and François Fleuret1
1
Idiap Research Institut, Switzerland
2
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
{olivier.canevet,francois.fleuret}@idiap.ch

Abstract
Cumulated number of images visited

Training an ACF-face detector

We investigate an efficient strategy to collect false positives from very large training sets in the context of object
detection. Our approach scales up the standard bootstrapping procedure by using a hierarchical decomposition of an
image collection which reflects the statistical regularity of
the detector’s responses.
Based on that decomposition, our procedure uses a
Monte Carlo Tree Search to prioritize the sampling toward
sub-families of images which have been observed to be rich
in false positives, while maintaining a fraction of the sampling toward unexplored sub-families of images. The resulting procedure increases substantially the proportion of
false positive samples among the visited ones compared to
a naive uniform sampling.
We apply experimentally this new procedure to face detection with a collection of ∼100,000 background images
and to pedestrian detection with ∼32,000 images. We show
that for two standard detectors, the proposed strategy cuts
the number of images to visit by half to obtain the same
amount of false positives and the same final performance.

12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
1

2

3

Bootstrap iteration
Cumulated number of images visited (x1000)

Training a DPM-face detector

1. Introduction
Learning techniques for object detection require very
large sets of negative examples, which are usually used
through a bootstrapping procedure. The training process
constructs a sequence of predictors of increasing performance, each trained from a fixed set of positive samples
and a collection of so called “hard” negative samples that
fool the previous predictor.
Such an approach enriches the training set with negative
samples that get closer and closer to the boundary between
the positive and the negative populations, which are the ones
that matter for a discriminative criterion. From a computational perspective, bootstrapping decouples the selection of
the interesting (negative) samples from their use for training
the model. The latter usually has a cost linear with the number of selected samples, which is far less than the number

Uniform
MCTS - Thompson sampling
MCTS - UCB1

14000

450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1

2

3

4

Relabelling for the root

1

2

3

4

5

Relabelling for the parts

Figure 1: Number of images visited vs. bootstrapping iterations for a the ACF-face detector (top) and a DPM-face
detector (bottom). Our methods using a Monte-Carlo tree
search (blue and green) focus on difficult images and visit
roughly half the number of images the traditional approach
needs (red).
of samples in the full set. However, the selection process
from the full set requires one evaluation of the predictor per
candidate sample, and remains linear with the total number
of samples.
In practice one observes that the frequency of falsepositives in images is highly structured: certain types of
15128

