A Direct Least-Squares Solution to the PnP Problem
with Unknown Focal Length
Yinqiang Zheng
National Institute of Informatics
Tokyo, JAPAN

Laurent Kneip
Australian National University
Canberra, AUSTRALIA

yqzheng@nii.ac.jp

laurent.kneip@anu.edu.au

Abstract
In this work, we propose a direct least-squares solution
to the perspective-n-point (PnP) pose estimation problem
of a partially uncalibrated camera, whose intrinsic parameters except the focal length are known. The basic idea is
to construct a proper objective function with respect to the
target variables and extract all its stationary points so as to
find the global minimum. The advantages of our proposed
solution over existing ones are that (i) the objective function is directly built upon the imaging equation, such that
all the 3D-to-2D correspondences contribute equally to the
minimized error, and that (ii) the proposed solution is noniterative, in the sense that the stationary points are retrieved
by means of eigenvalue factorization and the common iterative refinement step is not needed. In addition, the proposed
solution has O(n) complexity, and can be used to handle
both planar and nonplanar 3D points. Experimental results
show that the proposed solution is much more accurate than
the existing state-of-the-art solutions, and is even comparable to the maximum likelihood estimation by minimizing the
reprojection error.

1. Introduction
To simultaneously estimate camera pose and focal length
by using n (n ≥ 4) 3D points in the world frame and their
image projections is an important problem in geometric
computer vision, with widespread applications in camera
tracking [7], incremental structure-from-motion [22] and
geolocalization using community image collections [9]. It
can be regarded as a natural extension to the classical absolute pose estimation problem with fully known camera calibration parameters, also known as the PnP problem. This
extension is of tremendous practical value, since the other
intrinsic parameters of modern digital cameras can usually
be assumed to be known a priori. For example, the skewness is usually zero and the aspect ratio is one. The principle

point lies approximately in the image center.
Due to its importance, many algorithms [1,3,4,11,21,24,
25, 28] have been proposed to solve the PnP problem with
unknown focal length. Unfortunately, the existing state-ofthe-art solutions for the general n-point case, like [21, 28],
are still not satisfactory in estimation accuracy. The primary
reason lies in that their objective functions are built upon
some intermediate entities, and some point correspondences
are harmfully privileged over the others. Although one can
resort to an additional iterative refinement step to improve
the estimation accuracy further, the potential risk of running
into local minima or wandering around some extreme points
justifies some more endeavors in developing an accurate but
noniterative solution.
In this paper, we propose a direct least-squares solution
to the PnP problem with unknown focal length in the general n ≥ 4 case. Similar to [28], our basic idea is to construct a proper objective function with respect to the target
variables and extract all its stationary points so as to find
the global minimum. However, our solution is quite different from the existing solutions in that (i) the objective
function is directly built upon the imaging equation, such
that all the 3D-to-2D correspondences are treated with balance, without privileging some points over the remaining,
and that (ii) the proposed solution is noniterative, in the
sense that the stationary points are retrieved by means of
standard eigenvalue factorization and the common iterative
refinement step is not needed.
The proposed solution has linear time complexity, and
thus can be used to handle large scale problems. Unlike the
existing work [21], our solution does not explicitly differentiate planar from nonplanar 3D points, thus is insensitive
to 3D point configurations. We have experimentally verified that the proposed solution is more accurate and efficient
than the current state-of-the-art solutions, whose accuracy is
even comparable to that of the maximum likelihood estimation by minimizing the reprojection error, despite the fact
that our cost function is algebraically meaningful only.
11790

