Instance-Level Segmentation for Autonomous Driving
with Deep Densely Connected MRFs
Ziyu Zhang
Sanja Fidler
Raquel Urtasun
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
{zzhang, fidler, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Our aim is to provide a pixel-wise instance-level labeling
of a monocular image in the context of autonomous driving. We build on recent work [32] that trained a convolutional neural net to predict instance labeling in local image
patches, extracted exhaustively in a stride from an image. A
simple Markov random field model using several heuristics
was then proposed in [32] to derive a globally consistent
instance labeling of the image. In this paper, we formulate
the global labeling problem with a novel densely connected
Markov random field and show how to encode various intuitive potentials in a way that is amenable to efficient mean
field inference [15]. Our potentials encode the compatibility between the global labeling and the patch-level predictions, contrast-sensitive smoothness as well as the fact that
separate regions form different instances. Our experiments
on the challenging KITTI benchmark [8] demonstrate that
our method achieves a significant performance boost over
the baseline [32].

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the fundamental open problems in computer vision. The main objective is to place
tight bounding boxes around each object of interest. In the
past two years, detection performance has almost doubled
thanks to the availability of large datasets as they enable
training very deep representations [16, 27]. While detection might have been a good proxy when performance was
low, recent work has been trying to go beyond simple boxes
by providing a detailed segmentation mask for each object
instance [12, 30, 28, 13, 29].
A mask is in many ways richer than a box: it allows an
informed reasoning about occlusion and depth layering. For
robotics applications where depth is available, it further enables a more precise 3D localization and segmentation [11]
which is important for, e.g., obstacle avoidance, route planning and object grasping. An instance mask is also more informative than pixel-wise class labeling as it allows counting, important for applications such as retrieval [21].

Figure 1: Our approach densely samples patches of different sizes
from the image (row 1) and exploits a CNN to provide a soft instance labeling of each patch (row 2). Our MRF connects all pixel
pairs inside the patches (yellow curves in row 2), as well as all
pixel pairs from far away connected components obtained from
patch-level CNN predictions (yellow curves in row 1), to provide
a globally consistent instance labeling of the image (row 3).

Instance segmentation has been addressed in a variety of
ways. In interactive segmentation, approaches like Grabcut [24, 4] require a user-supplied box, or a scribble on the
foreground and background, in order to segment the objects. This is typically done with graph-cuts by combining appearance cues and smoothness. The most common
approach to instance segmentation has been to utilize object detections and top-down shape priors to label pixels
inside each detected box [17, 9]. Methods that jointly reason about instance labeling and, possibly, depth ordering
given object detections and class-level semantic segmentation have shown improved performance [28]. Recently, approaches that train CNNs to predict instance labeling inside
densely sampled image patches have shown very promising
performance [32]. However, deriving a globally consistent
instance labeling of the image from local predictions is a

669

