Walk and Learn: Facial Attribute Representation Learning from Egocentric
Video and Contextual Data
Jing Wang
Northwestern University

Yu Cheng
IBM T. J. Watson

Rogerio Schmidt Feris
IBM T. J. Watson

jing.wang@u.northwestern.edu

chengyu@us.ibm.com

rsferis@us.ibm.com

Abstract
The way people look in terms of facial attributes (ethnicity, hair color, facial hair, etc.) and the clothes or accessories they wear (sunglasses, hat, hoodies, etc.) is highly
dependent on geo-location and weather condition, respectively. This work explores, for the first time, the use of this
contextual information, as people with wearable cameras
walk across different neighborhoods of a city, in order to
learn a rich feature representation for facial attribute classification, without the costly manual annotation required by
previous methods. By tracking the faces of casual walkers
on more than 40 hours of egocentric video, we are able to
cover tens of thousands of different identities and automatically extract nearly 5 million pairs of images connected by
or from different face tracks, along with their weather and
location context, under pose and lighting variations. These
image pairs are then fed into a deep network that preserves
similarity of images connected by the same track, in order
to capture identity-related attribute features, and optimizes
for location and weather prediction to capture additional
facial attribute features. Finally, the network is fine-tuned
with manually annotated samples. We perform an extensive experimental analysis on wearable data and two standard benchmark datasets based on web images (LFWA and
CelebA). Our method outperforms by a large margin a network trained from scratch. Moreover, even without using
manually annotated identity labels for pre-training as in
previous methods, our approach achieves results that are
better than the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Describing people based on attributes, such as gender,
age, hair style and clothing style, is an important problem
for many applications, including suspect search based on
eyewitness descriptions [11], fashion analytics [30, 18, 5],
face retrieval and verification [27, 2, 31], and person reidentification [22, 38]. In this work, we address the problem

of learning rich visual representations (i.e., “good features”)
for modeling person attributes without manual labels, with
a focus on facial attribute prediction.
The state of the art in facial attribute classification, as
demonstrated by standard evaluation benchmarks [31], has
been advanced by methods that use deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) pre-trained on massive amounts of images that have been manually annotated with identity labels.
In fact, it has been shown that identity-related attributes
such as gender, hair color, and age are implicitly encoded
in nodes of CNNs that are trained for identity discrimination [31, 42]. Despite the excellent performance, the feature representation learned by these methods requires costly
manual annotation of hundreds of thousands or even millions of images in the pre-training stage. Moreover, the pretrained network fails to encode attributes that are not related
to identity, such as eyewear and different types of hats.
In this paper, we address these issues by taking a different approach. Instead of relying on manually annotated
images from the web, we learn a discriminative facial attribute representation from egocentric videos captured by
a person walking across different neighborhoods of a city,
while leveraging discretized geo-location and weather information readily available in wearable devices as a free
source of supervision. The motivation for using location
and weather data to construct facial attribute representations
is illustrated in Figure 1. In New York City, for example,
the likelihood of meeting an Afro-American casual walker
in certain regions of Harlem is more than 90%. The same
is true for Hispanics in Washington Heights, East Asians in
Flushing, South Asians in India Square, East Europeans in
Brighton Beach, and so on. These groups are characterized
by their unique facial attributes (hair color, hair length, facial and eyes shape, etc.). Moreover, the weather conditions
influence the facial appearance changes due to lighting variations and also dictate the clothing and accessories people
wear. As an example, on sunny and warm days, the likelihood that a person will wear sunglasses, baseball hats, tshirts, and shorts increases, whereas the presence of scarfs,
beanies, and jackets is much more frequent in cold days.

2295

