Object-Proposal Evaluation Protocol is ‘Gameable’
Neelima Chavali*†

Harsh Agrawal*
Aroma Mahendru*
Virginia Tech

Dhruv Batra

{gneelima, harsh92, maroma, dbatra}@vt.edu

Abstract
Object proposals have quickly become the de-facto preprocessing step in a number of vision pipelines (for object
detection, object discovery, and other tasks). Their performance is usually evaluated on partially annotated datasets.
In this paper, we argue that the choice of using a partially annotated dataset for evaluation of object proposals
is problematic – as we demonstrate via a thought experiment, the evaluation protocol is ‘gameable’, in the sense
that progress under this protocol does not necessarily correspond to a “better” category independent object proposal
algorithm.
To alleviate this problem, we: (1) Introduce a nearly-fully
annotated version of PASCAL VOC dataset, which serves as
a test-bed to check if object proposal techniques are overfitting to a particular list of categories. (2) Perform an exhaustive evaluation of object proposal methods on our introduced nearly-fully annotated PASCAL dataset and perform cross-dataset generalization experiments; and (3) Introduce a diagnostic experiment to detect the bias capacity in an object proposal algorithm. This tool circumvents
the need to collect a densely annotated dataset, which can
be expensive and cumbersome to collect. Finally, we have
released an easy-to-use toolbox which combines various
publicly available implementations of object proposal algorithms which standardizes the proposal generation and
evaluation so that new methods can be added and evaluated
on different datasets. We hope that the results presented in
the paper will motivate the community to test the category
independence of various object proposal methods by carefully choosing the evaluation protocol.

1. Introduction
In the last few years, the Computer Vision community has
witnessed the emergence of a new class of techniques called
Object Proposal algorithms [1–11].
Object proposals are a set of candidate regions or bounding
boxes in an image that may potentially contain an object.
* Equal contribution.
† Now at Amgen Inc.

Object proposal algorithms have quickly become the defacto pre-processing step in a number of vision pipelines
– object detection [12–21], segmentation [22–26], object discovery [27–30], weakly supervised learning of
object-object interactions [31, 32], content aware media retargeting [33], action recognition in still images [34] and
visual tracking [35, 36]. Of all these tasks, object proposals have been particularly successful in object detection
systems. For example, nearly all top-performing entries
[13, 37–39] in the ImageNet Detection Challenge 2014 [40]
used object proposals. They are preferred over the formerly
used sliding window paradigm due to their computational
efficiency. Objects present in an image may vary in location, size, and aspect ratio. Performing an exhaustive search
over such a high dimensional space is difficult. By using
object proposals, computational effort can be focused on a
small number of candidate windows.
The focus of this paper is the protocol used for evaluating
object proposals. Let us begin by asking – what is the purpose of an object proposal algorithm?
In early works [2, 4, 6], the emphasis was on category independent object proposals, where the goal is to identify instances of all objects in the image irrespective of their category. While it can be tricky to precisely define what an “object” is1 , these early works presented cross-category evaluations to establish and measure category independence.
More recently, object proposals are increasingly viewed as
detection proposals [1, 8, 11, 42] where the goal is to improve the object detection pipeline, focusing on a chosen
set of object classes (e.g. ~20 PASCAL categories). In
fact, many modern proposal methods are learning-based
[9–11, 42–46] where the definition of an “object” is the set
of annotated classes in the dataset. This increasingly blurs
the boundary between a proposal algorithm and a detector.
Notice that the former definition has an emphasis on object discovery [27,28,30], while the latter definition emphasises on the ultimate performance of a detection pipeline.
Surprisingly, despite the two different goals of ‘object pro1 Most category independent object proposal methods define an object
as “stand-alone thing with a well-defined closed-boundary”. For “thing”
vs. “stuff” discussion, see [41].

835

