Recovering Transparent Shape from Time-of-Flight Distortion
Kenichiro Tanaka1,2
Yasuhiro Mukaigawa2
Hiroyuki Kubo2
Yasuyuki Matsushita1
Yasushi Yagi1
2
1
Osaka University
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
{{tanaka,yagi}@am.sanken,yasumat@ist}.osaka-u.ac.jp {mukaigawa,hkubo}@is.naist.jp

Abstract
This paper presents a method for recovering shape and
normal of a transparent object from a single viewpoint using
a Time-of-Flight (ToF) camera. Our method is built upon
the fact that the speed of light varies with the refractive index of the medium and therefore the depth measurement of
a transparent object with a ToF camera may be distorted.
We show that, from this ToF distortion, the refractive light
path can be uniquely determined by estimating a single parameter. We estimate this parameter by introducing a surface normal consistency between the one determined by a
light path candidate and the other computed from the corresponding shape. The proposed method is evaluated by both
simulation and real-world experiments and shows faithful
transparent shape recovery.

ToF
Modulated light
Measured depth

Background

Transparent object
ToF
ToF distortion

(a) Geometric distortion

(b) Time-of-Flight distortion

Figure 1: Two distortions caused by transparent objects. (a)
Background texture is geometrically distorted by refraction.
(b) Measured depth is distorted by slower light speed in the
medium.

1. Introduction
Transparent shape reconstruction is important for scientific imaging and applications in industrial manufacturing.
It has been a difficult problem in computer vision because
the appearance of a transparent object can only be indirectly
observed by the distortion of background textures as illustrated in Fig. 1a. Several methods that uses the observations
of the geometric distortion have been proposed, yet it is still
an active research subject.
Recently, a Time-of-Flight (ToF) camera, which measures distance by correlation of its modulated light, is
becoming a commodity device. When a scene containing a transparent object is recorded by a ToF camera, the
ToF measurement also becomes distorted because the light
slows down inside the transparent object due to its refractive index as illustrated in Fig. 1b. The distortion is different
than the geometric distortion on the image coordinates, but
still conveying rich information about the shape of transparent object. We call this distortion a Time-of-Flight distortion1 in this paper and use it for recovering the shape of
1 This is not ordinary depth distortions that are due to calibration or
multi-path effects but the distortion of “time-of-flight.”

transparent object.
Our method records two ToF measurements of a transparent object from a single viewpoint but by moving the
background reference surface which is calibrated. Assuming that the refractive index of the target object is known
and the ToF camera is calibrated, the shape estimation problem can be viewed as the problem of searching the light
path, which correspond to estimating front and back refraction points and its surface normal. We show that, using the
ToF distortion, the light path has a simple expression that
is governed by a single parameter. We develop a method
for estimating this parameter using a surface normal consistency, that represents a consistency between the surface
normal computed from the light path candidate and that obtained from the corresponding shape.
The proposed method estimates both front and back surfaces in a single viewpoint approach. Unlike previous single viewpoint approaches that are restricted to a scene with
a single refraction, or requiring a number of light sources
to illuminate the scene, the proposed method is able to recover a scene with two refraction surfaces from a single
view point, with two observations obtained by moving the

4387

