Learning Reconstruction-based Remote Gaze Estimation
Pei Yu, Jiahuan Zhou and Ying Wu
Northwestern University
2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston IL, 60208
{pyi980, jzt011, yingwu}@eecs.northwestern.edu

Abstract
It is a challenging problem to accurately estimate gazes
from low-resolution eye images that do not provide fine and
detailed features for eyes. Existing methods attempt to establish the mapping between the visual appearance space
to the gaze space. Different from the direct regression approach, the reconstruction-based approach represents appearance and gaze via local linear reconstruction in their
own spaces. A common treatment is to use the same local reconstruction in the two spaces, i.e., the reconstruction
weights in the appearance space are transferred to the gaze
space for gaze reconstruction. However, this questionable
treatment is taken for granted but has never been justified,
leading to significant errors in gaze estimation. This paper
is focused on the study of this fundamental issue. It shows
that the distance metric in the appearance space needs to
be adjusted, before the same reconstruction can be used. A
novel method is proposed to learn the metric, such that the
affinity structure of the appearance space under this new
metric is as close as possible to the affinity structure of the
gaze space under the normal Euclidean metric. Furthermore, the local affinity structure invariance is utilized to further regularize the solution to the reconstruction weights, so
as to obtain a more robust and accurate solution. Effectiveness of the proposed method is validated and demonstrated
through extensive experiments on different subjects.

1. Introduction
Visual sense is the most informative one among all human perceptions. Gaze estimation, which infers visual attention, has wide applications in many areas, e.g., humancomputer interfaces can utilize estimated gaze as an auxiliary input to aid disabled people.
Eye gaze tracking techniques can be divided into two categories, intrusive and non-intrusive eye gaze trackers [12].
Intrusive eye gaze trackers provide high accuracy and reliability, but require dedicated hardware. One example uses
contact lens, and the gaze directions are estimated by mea-

suring the change of voltage in the lens.
Non-intrusive eye gaze trackers are mostly vision-based.
They utilize the information from remote cameras, thus
are easier and suitable to use for a long period of time.
These techniques can be feature-based or appearance-based.
Feature-based methods track eye features such as iris contour, pupil location and etc. One popular method uses infrared light source to create glints on cornea.
Since the feature-based methods still need expensive
devices, appearance-based methods, which only need one
simple web camera to capture eye appearances, is simpler
and more attractive in practice. Such methods attempt to
construct the mapping between the visual appearance of the
eyes and the gaze. In [17] [9], the same weights that reconstruct the visual appearance are used to reconstruct the gaze.
These reconstruction-based methods are used as the base
estimation when handling the head movements and simplifying the calibration process [8] [10] [16], and they have
shown promising performance and considerable simplicity.
However, there is one fundamental problem in such
reconstruction-based methods that has not been well studied yet. The using of the same reconstruction weights in the
two different spaces (i.e. the appearance space and the gaze
space) is taken for granted, without justification or guarantee. In fact, they may not be the same, and can even be
significantly different. Without addressing this issue, regardlessly using the same reconstruction weights leads to
inaccurate results. This issue has not been investigated in
the literature.
To address this issue, we propose a new solution that
explicitly decomposes the gaze estimation error of the
reconstruction-based methods into two terms. The first term
is the matching error between the reconstructed appearance
and the query appearance. The second one is the error incurred by using the same reconstruction weight in the appearance space and the gaze space, which has never been
investigated before. We reduce the second error term via exploring the relationship between the reconstruction weights
in the two spaces by analyzing their structures. Two novel
methods, learning a global distance metric in training phase

3447

