Detecting Migrating Birds at Night
Jia-Bin Huang1 , Rich Caruana2 , Andrew Farnsworth3 , Steve Kelling3 , and Narendra Ahuja1
1 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
2 Microsoft Research,
3 Cornell Lab of Ornithology
jbhuang1@illinois.edu, rcaruana@microsoft.com, {af27,stk2}@cornell.edu, n-ahuja@illinois.edu

Abstract
Bird migration is a critical indicator of environmental
health, biodiversity, and climate change. Existing techniques for monitoring bird migration are either expensive
(e.g., satellite tracking), labor-intensive (e.g., moon watching), indirect and thus less accurate (e.g., weather radar),
or intrusive (e.g., attaching geolocators on captured birds).
In this paper, we present a vision-based system for detecting
migrating birds in flight at night. Our system takes stereo
videos of the night sky as inputs, detects multiple flying birds
and estimates their orientations, speeds, and altitudes. The
main challenge lies in detecting flying birds of unknown trajectories under high noise level due to the low-light environment. We address this problem by incorporating stereo constraints for rejecting physically implausible configurations
and gathering evidence from two (or more) views. Specifically, we develop a robust stereo-based 3D line fitting algorithm for geometric verification and a deformable part
response accumulation strategy for trajectory verification.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach
through quantitative evaluation of real videos of birds migrating at night collected with near-infrared cameras.

1. Introduction
Bird migration is the regular seasonal, large-scale, often long-distance movement between breeding and wintering grounds. Many species of bird migrate. Migration behavior is a critical indicator for evaluating environmental
health [24]. By identifying important stopover and wintering locations, one can take action to save these key locations to protect endangered species. Scientists use a variety of methods to monitor bird migration, including satellite tracking, weather radar, moon-watching, or attaching
geolocators on captured birds. However, these methods are
either expensive (e.g., satellite tracking), inaccurate because
they are indirect (e.g., weather surveillance radars), laborintensive and error-prone (e.g., moon-watching), or intrusive (e.g., geolocators). Moreover, these techniques only
crudely estimate the bulk density of migrating birds aloft.

Figure 2. An example of automatic bird detection in stereo sequences. Our system takes stereo videos of the night sky as inputs,
detects migrating birds in flight, and infers their orientation, speed,
and altitude in very low SNR.

We propose to use a vision-based approach as a complementary sensing modality to build a bird migration monitoring system. By setting up stereo cameras facing up to the
night sky, we can detect and track migrating birds in flight
illuminated from below by light pollution in the recorded
videos, as shown in Figure 2. Vision-based solutions offer
several advantages over existing techniques. First, we can
automatically and accurately count the number of individual
birds aloft along with detailed trajectory estimation such as
orientation, speed, and altitude. Such unprecedented accuracy in the reconstructed trajectories of individual birds may
help re-evaluate migration, locomotion and navigation theories. Second, the estimated statistics could be used to calibrate other sensing modalities such as weather radar. Third,
low-cost digital cameras allow us to build large-scale, distributed monitoring systems that cover broad areas.
There are three main challenges in developing a robust
bird detection algorithm from videos. First, as migration
usually occurs at night, the recorded videos inevitably contain substantial noise because of the low-light environment
— the birds are generally invisible to the naked eye in the
sky unless they pass in front of an illuminated object such
as the moon. We illustrate this using sample frames from
three video sequences in Figure 1. Second, depending on
the species, migrating birds fly at altitudes ranging from
several hundred feet to two miles. If the lens and camera
provide an adequate field of view, the imaged bird may span
only 1-2 pixels in a frame. This suggests that motion is the
only reliable cue for detecting a bird. Third, efficient algorithms are required for large-scale deployment.
Several methods have been proposed to detect small ob-

2091

