Fast Detection of Curved Edges at Low SNR
Nati Ofir

Meirav Galun Boaz Nadler Ronen Basri
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, 76100 Israel

Abstract
Detecting edges is a fundamental problem in computer
vision with many applications, some involving very noisy
images. While most edge detection methods are fast, they
perform well only on relatively clean images. Unfortunately, sophisticated methods that are robust to high levels
of noise are quite slow. In this paper we develop a novel
multiscale method to detect curved edges in noisy images.
Even though our algorithm searches for edges over an exponentially large set of candidate curves, its runtime is nearly
linear in the total number of image pixels. As we demonstrate experimentally, our algorithm is orders of magnitude
faster than previous methods designed to deal with high
noise levels. At the same time it obtains comparable and
often superior results to existing methods on a variety of
challenging noisy images.

Figure 1. A noisy binary pattern with three curved fibers at high
noise level (left, SNR=1) or low noise level (middle, SNR=2). The
clean pattern is shown on the right. While the long fiber is noticeable already at the low SNR. the two shorter fibers can be spotted
only at the higher SNR.

1. Introduction
This paper considers the problem of detecting faint edges
in noisy images. Our key contribution is the introduction of
a new, computationally efficient algorithm to detect faint
curved edges of arbitrary shapes and lengths, under low
signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). A key feature of our algorithm is that the longer an edge is, the fainter it can be and
still be detected. This is consistent with the performance of
the human visual system, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Edges with low signal-to-noise-ratio are common in a
variety of imaging domains, specifically when images are
captured under poor visibility conditions. Examples include
biomedical, satellite and high shutter speed imaging. As an
illustrative example, Fig. 2 shows an image of Plankton acquired with an underwater imaging system [5]. Automated
algorithms that detect the boundaries of different Plankton
species, segment and classify them are fundamental in the
study of ocean ecosystems. However, segmenting Plankton
in such images is challenging due to their low contrast and
background noise.
Noise poses an obstacle to edge detection since it can
reduce the contrast of actual edges, and introduce spurious

Figure 2. From left to right: Noisy image of a Plankton acquired by
an underwater imaging system [5] containing several faint edges;
our result; Canny result, and Canny after BM3D denoising.

high contrasts at background pixels. Thus, detecting edges
using only local image gradients is highly sensitive to noise.
To be more robust to noise, Canny [7], for example, first
denoises the image with a Gaussian filter, before computing
its gradients. While this smoothing operation indeed attenuates the noise, it also blurs existing edges, thus decreasing
their contrast. Applying more sophisticated image denoising algorithms before edge detection does not, in general,
solve the problem. We illustrate this point in Fig. 2. The
edges found by Canny [7] on either the noisy image or the
image denoised by the state-of-the art BM3D algorithm [9]
are shown in the two rightmost panels. Both methods fail
to accurately detect the Plankton boundaries. In contrast, as
shown in the middle-left panel, our proposed method is far
1213

