Exploit All the Layers: Fast and Accurate CNN Object Detector with Scale
Dependent Pooling and Cascaded Rejection Classifiers
Fan Yang∗1,2 , Wongun Choi2 , and Yuanqing Lin2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland College Park
2
NEC Laboratories America
fyang@cs.umd.edu, {wongun, ylin}@nec-labs.com

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate two new strategies to detect
objects accurately and efficiently using deep convolutional
neural network: 1) scale-dependent pooling and 2) layerwise cascaded rejection classifiers. The scale-dependent
pooling (SDP) improves detection accuracy by exploiting
appropriate convolutional features depending on the scale
of candidate object proposals. The cascaded rejection classifiers (CRC) effectively utilize convolutional features and
eliminate negative object proposals in a cascaded manner, which greatly speeds up the detection while maintaining high accuracy. In combination of the two, our method
achieves significantly better accuracy compared to other
state-of-the-arts in three challenging datasets, PASCAL object detection challenge, KITTI object detection benchmark
and newly collected Inner-city dataset, while being more efficient.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep convolutional neural network
(CNN) [18, 19] contributed much to various computer vision problems including image classification, object detection, semantic segmentation, etc, thanks to its capability to
learn discriminative features (or representations) at different
levels of granularities. A number of recent studies [41, 43]
suggest that high level visual semantics (such as motif,
parts, or objects) are appearing in the middle of deep architecture which in turn provide strong cues to recognize complex visual concepts. Leveraging on the representational
power of CNN, a number of methods are proposed to detect
objects in natural images using CNN [13, 14, 16, 7, 42].
R-CNN [14] has been proposed for object detection and
achieves promising results, where a pre-trained network is
fine-tuned to classify object proposals. However, both training and testing suffer from low efficiency since the network
∗ This work was done at NEC Laboratories America.

Figure 1. We present a fast and accurate object detection method
using the convolutional neural network. Our method exploits the
convolutional features in all layers to reject easy negatives via cascaded rejection classifiers and evaluate surviving proposals using
our scale-dependent pooling method.

performs a forward pass on every single object proposal independently. Convolutional filters are repeatedly applied to
thousands of object proposals that are redundant and expensive. In order to reduce the computational cost, recent
CNN based object detectors, such as Fast RCNN [13] and
spatial pyramid pooling networks (SPPnet) [16], share the
features generated by the convolutional layers and apply a
multi-class classifier for each proposal. In Fast RCNN, convolutional operations are done only once on the whole image, while the features for object proposals are pooled from
the last convolutional layer and fed into fully-connected (fc)
layers to evaluate the likelihood of object categories. Compared to R-CNN [14], these methods improve the efficiency
in the order of magnitude via shared convolutional layers.
For instance, Fast RCNN achieves 3× and 10 ∼ 100×

2129

