Online Learning with Bayesian Classification Trees
Samuel Rota Bulò
FBK-irst
Trento, Italy

Peter Kontschieder
Microsoft Research
Mapillary
Cambridge, UK
Graz, Austria

rotabulo@fbk.eu

Abstract
Randomized classification trees are among the most popular machine learning tools and found successful applications in many areas. Although this classifier was originally designed as offline learning algorithm, there has been
an increased interest in the last years to provide an online
variant. In this paper, we propose an online learning algorithm for classification trees that adheres to Bayesian principles. In contrast to state-of-the-art approaches that produce large forests with complex trees, we aim at constructing small ensembles consisting of shallow trees with high
generalization capabilities. Experiments on benchmark machine learning and body part recognition datasets show superior performance over state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Random classification forests are often the preferred machine learning tool due to their efficiency, scalability, and
robustness. They found successful application in many
areas such as computer vision [21], bio-informatics [26],
medical data analysis [9], data-mining [24], etc.
Random forests are usually trained in batch (or offline)
modality, i.e. all training data is expected to be given in advance and once a forest is trained it cannot be updated with
new, labelled samples. However, there are application domains where the training data is not available in advance,
but is collected over time, and inference might be required
at any moment. Online learning approaches can serve such
purposes and have a number of advantages over batch methods: they are more flexible as they can work in the presence
of online data generation processes, can adapt to distributions varying over time, do not need to store the training set
during the learning phase, to name just a few.
Joining the online learning paradigm with classification
trees is particularly difficult due to the recursive nature of
this classifier. Moreover, the presence of (typically) deterministic split decisions within the tree complicates using
new data samples to correct decisions that were taken at an

pkontschieder@gmail.com

earlier level. Consequently, the number of works addressing online learning within decision trees in the literature is
rather small and we review the most related ones next. The
Hoeffding tree algorithm [11] maintains a set of candidate
splits in the leaves and tracks their quality as new data arrives. The Hoeffding bound is used to control the amount
of data that should be collected before a probably-optimal
split selection can be ensured. In [20] a similar idea is pursued, but the leaf splitting condition changes and an online
bagging [19] strategy is adopted. A modification over [20]
was presented in [23], which uses reservoir sampling to
keep track of a fixed-length, unbiased set of training samples for updating the trees. The work in [2] also extends
the Hoeffding tree algorithm by introducing an adaptivesize version, allowing to mix differently-sized trees. Their
approach imposes restrictions on the number of split nodes
such that shallower trees can adapt more quickly to changes
in the distribution of the incoming data stream while deeper
trees adapt more slowly and therefore maintain a longerterm memory. The work in [10] also maintains sets of candidate splits in the leaf nodes. There, the authors provide a
decision forest construction algorithm, which dynamically
partitions the data into structure and estimation samples, the
former being used to influence the tree structure and the latter being used to estimate the leaf predictions. The work
of [13] presents an alternative approach by governing the
tree growing phase by a Mondrian process. There, label
distributions are kept at each node and controlled by a hierarchy of normalized, stable processes.
A remaining limitation of state-of-the-art online algorithms for random forests is a tendency to producing oversized trees, as the split selection process is unaware of the
tree complexity and split functions are very simple. Moreover, trees tend to overfit, thus requiring large forests to
achieve good performance, which however implies slowdown of the inference process and increased memory requirements. In particular, the algorithms that keep candidate splits in the leaves during training suffer from a prohibitive memory cost as trees get deep [10] or require multiple passes over the training data [10, 20].

3985

