Bottom-Up and Top-Down Reasoning with Hierarchical Rectified Gaussians
Peiyun Hu
UC Irvine

Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University

peiyunh@ics.uci.edu

dramanan@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Convolutional neural nets (CNNs) have demonstrated
remarkable performance in recent history. Such approaches
tend to work in a “unidirectional” bottom-up feed-forward
fashion. However, practical experience and biological evidence tells us that feedback plays a crucial role, particularly for detailed spatial understanding tasks. This work
explores “bidirectional” architectures that also reason with
top-down feedback: neural units are influenced by both
lower and higher-level units.
We do so by treating units as rectified latent variables
in a quadratic energy function, which can be seen as a hierarchical Rectified Gaussian model (RGs) [39]. We show
that RGs can be optimized with a quadratic program (QP),
that can in turn be optimized with a recurrent neural network (with rectified linear units). This allows RGs to be
trained with GPU-optimized gradient descent. From a theoretical perspective, RGs help establish a connection between CNNs and hierarchical probabilistic models. From a
practical perspective, RGs are well suited for detailed spatial tasks that can benefit from top-down reasoning. We illustrate them on the challenging task of keypoint localization under occlusions, where local bottom-up evidence may
be misleading. We demonstrate state-of-the-art results on
challenging benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical models of visual processing date back to
the iconic work of Marr [31]. Convolutional neural nets
(CNN’s), pioneered by LeCun et al. [27], are hierarchical
models that compute progressively more invariant representations of an image in a bottom-up, feedforward fashion.
They have demonstrated remarkable progress in recent history for visual tasks such as classification [25,38,43], object
detection [8], and image captioning [22], among others.
Feedback in biology: Biological evidence suggests that
vision at a glance tasks, such as rapid scene categorization [48], can be effectively computed with feedforward hierarchical processing. However, vision with scrutiny tasks,

Keypoint Predictions

Keypoint Heatmap

Feedforward
CNNs

y

image
Hierarchical
Rectified Gaussian
Model

y

image

Figure 1: On the top, we show a state-of-the-art multi-scale
feedforward net, trained for keypoint heatmap prediction,
where the blue keypoint (the right shoulder) is visualized
in the blue plane of the RGB heatmap. The ankle keypoint
(red) is confused between left and right legs, and the knee
(green) is poorly localized along the leg. We believe this
confusion arises from bottom-up computations of neural activations in a feedforward network. On the bottom, we introduce hierarchical Rectified Gaussian (RG) models that
incorporate top-down feedback by treating neural units as
latent variables in a quadratic energy function. Inference
on RGs can be unrolled into recurrent nets with rectified
activations. Such architectures produce better features for
“vision-with-scrutiny” tasks [17] (such as keypoint prediction) because lower-layers receive top-down feedback from
above. Leg keypoints are much better localized with topdown knowledge (that may capture global constraints such
as kinematic consistency).
such as fine-grained categorization [23] or detailed spatial
manipulations [19], appear to require feedback along a “reverse hierarchy” [17]. Indeed, most neural connections in
the visual cortex are believed to be feedback rather than
feedforward [4, 26].
Feedback in computer vision: Feedback has also
played a central role in many classic computer vision models. Hierarchical probabilistic models [20, 28, 55], allow

5600

