G-CNN: an Iterative Grid Based Object Detector
Mahyar Najibi
Mohammad Rastegari
Larry S. Davis
University of Maryland, College Park
{najibi,mrastega}@cs.umd.edu

lsd@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
We introduce G-CNN, an object detection technique
based on CNNs which works without proposal algorithms.
G-CNN starts with a multi-scale grid of fixed bounding
boxes. We train a regressor to move and scale elements
of the grid towards objects iteratively. G-CNN models the
problem of object detection as finding a path from a fixed
grid to boxes tightly surrounding the objects. G-CNN with
around 180 boxes in a multi-scale grid performs comparably to Fast R-CNN which uses around 2K bounding boxes
generated with a proposal technique. This strategy makes
detection faster by removing the object proposal stage as
well as reducing the number of boxes to be processed.

1. Introduction
Object detection, i.e. the problem of finding the locations
of objects and determining their categories, is an intrinsically more challenging problem than classification since it
includes the problem of object localization. The recent and
popular trend in object detection uses a pre-processing step
to find a candidate set of bounding-boxes that are likely to
encompass the objects in the image. This step is referred
to as the bounding-box proposal stage. The proposal techniques are a major computational bottleneck in state-of-theart object detectors [6]. There have been attempts [16, 14]
to take this pre-processing stage out of the loop but they
lead to performance degradations.
We show that without object proposals, we can achieve
detection rates similar to state-of-the-art performance in object detection. Inspired by the iterative optimization in [2],
we introduce an iterative algorithm that starts with a regularly sampled multi-scale grid of boxes in an image and
updates the boxes to cover and classify objects. One step
regression can-not handle the non-linearity of the mapping
from a regular grid to boxes containing objects. Instead, we
introduce a piecewise regression model that can learn this
non-linear mapping through a few iterations. Each step in
our algorithm deals with an easier regression problem than
enforcing a direct mapping to actual target locations.

Figure 1: This figure shows a schematic illustration of our iterative algorithm ”G-CNN”. It starts with a multi-scale regular grid
over the image and iteratively updates the boxes in the grid. Each
iteration pushes the boxes toward the objects of interest in the image while classifying their category.

Figure 1 depicts an overview of our algorithm. Initially,
a multi-scale regular grid is superimposed on the image. For
visualization we show a grid of non-overlapping, but in actuality the boxes do overlap. During training, each box is
assigned to a ground-truth object by an assignment function
based on intersection over union with respect to the ground
truth boxes. Subsequently, at each training step, we regress
boxes in the grid to move themselves towards the objects in
the image to which they are assigned. At test time, for each
box at each iteration, we obtain confidence scores over all
categories and update its location with the regressor trained
for the currently most probable class.
Our experimental results show that G-CNN achieves the
state-of-the-art results obtained by Fast-RCNN on PASCAL
VOC datasets without computing bounding-box proposals.
Our method is about 5X faster than Fast R-CNN for detection.

2. Related Work
Prior to CNN: For many years the problem of object
detection was approached by techniques involving sliding
window and classification [22, 20]. Lampert et al. [12]
proposed an algorithm that goes beyond sliding windows
and was guaranteed to reach the global optimal bounding
box for an SVM-based classifier. Implicit Shape Models
[13, 15] eliminated sliding window search by relying on
key-parts of an image to vote for a consistent bounding box
that covers an object of interest. Deformable Part-based

2369

