Temporal Epipolar Regions
Mor Dar and Yael Moses
Efi Arazi School of Computer Science
The Interdisciplinary Center, Herzliya 46150, Israel
mor.dar@post.idc.ac.il and yael@idc.ac.il

Abstract
Dynamic events are often photographed by a number of
people from different viewpoints at different times, resulting in an unconstrained set of images. Finding the corresponding moving features in each of the images allows us
to extract information about objects of interest in the scene.
Computing correspondence of moving features in such a set
of images is considerably more challenging than computing
correspondence in video due to possible significant differences in viewpoints and inconsistent timing between image
captures. The prediction methods used in video for improving robustness and efficiency are not applicable to a set of
still images. In this paper we propose a novel method to
predict locations of an approximately linear moving feature
point, given a small subset of correspondences and the temporal order of image captures. Our method extends the use
of epipolar geometry to divide images into valid and invalid
regions, termed Temporal Epipolar Regions (TERs). We formally prove that the location of a feature in a new image is
restricted to valid TERs. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method in reducing the search space for correspondence on both synthetic and challenging real world data,
and show the improved matching.

1. Introduction
While most moving object analysis is based on video
data, videos of dynamic scenes are not always available.
Instead of videos, still images captured by observers of a
dynamic event may be considered for analyzing a moving
object. Such a set of images, termed CrowdCam ([1, 10]),
is taken from multiple viewpoints at different times. As
in videos, feature matching may serve as a basic component for analysis of moving objects. A common strategy
to improve efficiency and robustness of feature matching in
a video sequence is to limit the search space of a feature
location using prediction. Such methods are not applicable to CrowdCam data, as video based approaches assume
short, consistent time intervals between frames as well as

Figure 1: An example (dataset h1) of limiting the search
space for correspondence using TERs. Epipolar lines calculated from three correspondences (yellow stars) are used
in conjunction with a known temporal order to define valid
regions in a fourth image, greatly limiting the search space
for correspondence. (Best viewed on a computer screen.)

no significant viewpoint change. In this paper, we propose a
method to predict the possible location of a candidate match
in CrowdCam images.
To predict the location of moving features, assumptions
must be made relating to the movement of the object, the
positions of the cameras, or the timing of the frames. Our
work assumes the following: (i) The features to be matched
are moving in an approximately linear 3D trajectory. This is
a common assumption in many video-based tracking works
(e.g., [30]). (ii) The epipolar geometry between pairs of
cameras can be computed using static features from a common background. Our method does not require epipolar geometry for every pair, but at least three fundamental matrices for each image in which we search for correspondence.
(iii) The temporal order of the image captures is given or can
be computed directly from the data. When reliable camera
clocks are unavailable, the temporal order of CrowdCam

1220

