Similarity Metric For Curved Shapes In Euclidean Space
Girum G. Demisse

Djamila Aouada

Björn Ottersten

Interdisciplinary Center for Security, Reliability and Trust
University of Luxembourg, 4, rue Alphonse Weicker, L-2721, Luxembourg
{girum.demisse, djamila.aouada, bjorn.ottersten}@uni.lu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a similarity metric for curved
shapes that can be described, distinctively, by ordered
points. The proposed method represents a given curve as
a point in the deformation space, the direct product of rigid
transformation matrices, such that the successive action of
the matrices on a fixed starting point reconstructs the full
curve. In general, both open and closed curves are represented in the deformation space modulo shape orientation
and orientation preserving diffeomorphisms. The use of direct product Lie groups to represent curved shapes led to an
explicit formula for geodesic curves and the formulation of
a similarity metric between shapes by the L2 -norm on the
Lie algebra. Additionally, invariance to reparametrization
or estimation of point correspondence between shapes is
performed as an intermediate step for computing geodesics.
Furthermore, since there is no computation of differential
quantities on the curves, our representation is more robust
to local perturbations and needs no pre-smoothing. We
compare our method with the elastic shape metric defined
through the square root velocity (SRV) mapping, and other
shape matching approaches.

1. Introduction
The analysis of the shape of an object has several applications in computer vision, engineering, computational
anatomy, and bioinformatics [23, 14, 6]. In fact, in [16]
the practical importances of shape analysis and modelling
were categorized as shape optimization: finding a shape
that satisfies a certain design requirement, e.g. active contours, and shape analysis: statistical analysis of shapes, e.g.
distance between shapes, mean shapes and probability distribution of shapes. Consequently, a significant effort has
been made to describe shapes based on features or landmarks that satisfy predefined requirements [28, 1]. However, in [24] feature based approaches are argued to be inadequate to represent a shape; since, shape space in gen-

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed representation. Given
the discrete path starts at point p1 , the curve’s representation
is (ĝ1 , · · · , ĝn−1 ), where the ĝ’s are rigid transformation
matrices.

eral is formulated as non-linear and infinite dimensional
space. Thus, theoretically, an infinite-dimensional object
can not distinctively be represented by a finite-dimensional
feature. For instance, landmark-based approaches [10] require the landmark points to be selected either automatically or with expert’s input. This leads to inconsistent representation, as the same shape can, potentially, be represented by two completely different sets of landmark points.
In contrast, in [24, 29, 11] shapes were parametrized by
functions. Thus, shape space is considered in its entirety
as an infinite dimensional space. Moreover, the infinite
dimensional space is complemented with a distance metric. Hence, in principle, shape space is framed as infinite
dimensional Riemannian manifold. There are several advantages in using the Riemannian framework to define a
shape space. The first advantage is the treatment of shape
space as a smooth manifold which is only natural considering the non-linearity of shapes. Secondly, the Riemannian
framework offers a smoothly varying metric, which is essential to measure distance, area and other associated geometric notions in the shape space. Furthermore, under the
Riemannian framework, shape space can be linearised, at
least locally, without disregarding the non-linear nature of
shapes; effectively, opening shape analysis problems to statistical treatment. Consequently, several and different distance metrics were considered in infinite dimensional manifolds [25, 16, 11, 17, 18, 29].
In the infinite dimensional setting, shape space is usually
15042

