Pull the Plug? Predicting If Computers or Humans Should Segment Images
Danna Gurari

Suyog Dutt Jain

Margrit Betke

Kristen Grauman

Abstract
Foreground object segmentation is a critical step for
many image analysis tasks. While automated methods can
produce high-quality results, their failures disappoint users
in need of practical solutions. We propose a resource allocation framework for predicting how best to allocate a
fixed budget of human annotation effort in order to collect
higher quality segmentations for a given batch of images
and automated methods. The framework is based on a proposed prediction module that estimates the quality of given
algorithm-drawn segmentations. We demonstrate the value
of the framework for two novel tasks related to “pulling the
plug” on computer and human annotators. Specifically,
we implement two systems that automatically decide, for
a batch of images, when to replace 1) humans with computers to create coarse segmentations required to initialize
segmentation tools and 2) computers with humans to create
final, fine-grained segmentations. Experiments demonstrate
the advantage of relying on a mix of human and computer
efforts over relying on either resource alone for segmenting
objects in three diverse datasets representing visible, phase
contrast microscopy, and fluorescence microscopy images.

1. Introduction
A common question people ask when needing to annotate images is whether automated options are sufficient for
their images or they should instead bring humans in the loop
to create accurate annotations. We explore this question for
the task of demarcating object regions, i.e., creating foreground object segmentations. Foreground object segmentation is important for many downstream tasks including
collecting measurements (features), differentiating between
types of objects (classification), and finding similar images
in a database (image retrieval). Our goal is to intelligently
distribute segmentation work between humans and computers when human effort is only available for K% of images.
Our work is partially inspired by the observation that
fully-automated algorithms can produce high-quality foreground object segmentations when they are successful, yet
their performance often is inconsistent on diverse datasets

Figure 1. Use a human-drawn or computer-drawn segmentation?
We propose a task of automatically deciding when to “pull the
plug” on human annotators and use computers instead to create
the initial foreground segmentations (rows 1, 2) that segmentation tools refine. We also propose a task of automatically deciding
when to “pull the plug” on computers (row 3) and use humans
instead to create high quality segmentations.

(Figure 1). This is because algorithms embed assumptions
about how to separate an object from the background that
are relevant for specific object and background appearances,
yet restrict their widespread applicability [4, 12, 26, 34, 35].
Consequently, the knowledge of when segmentation algorithms will succeed is currently a highly-specialized skill
often resigned to computer vision experts or applications
specialists who spent years studying the algorithms. Moreover, many researchers agree that there is not a one-sizefits-all segmentation solution. Thus, lay persons needing consistently high quality segmentations currently face
a brute force approach of reviewing all images with available algorithm-drawn segmentations to identify images that
should be re-annotated by humans.
Our work is also inspired by the observation that widelyused segmentation tools that rely on initialization are often
inefficient because of their exclusive reliance on human input [9, 18, 20, 23, 27, 35, 39]. Specifically, humans create
initial bounding boxes or coarse segmentations to localize
the object of interest in every image. A motivation for leveraging human guidance per image is that a segmentation tool
can only succeed when initializations are sufficiently close
to the true object boundary [23]. A weakness of relying on
humans is that for numerous methods, including level set
based methods [6, 12, 26, 28], humans typically have to wait
1382

