Latent Variable Graphical Model Selection using Harmonic Analysis:
Applications to the Human Connectome Project (HCP)
Won Hwa Kim†1

Hyunwoo J. Kim†1

Nagesh Adluru‡

Vikas Singh§†

†

§

Dept. of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, U.S.A.
Dept. of Biostatistics & Med. Informatics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, U.S.A.
‡
Waisman Center, Madison, WI, U.S.A.

Abstract
A major goal of imaging studies such as the (ongoing)
Human Connectome Project (HCP) is to characterize the
structural network map of the human brain and identify its
associations with covariates such as genotype, risk factors,
and so on that correspond to an individual. But the set of
image derived measures and the set of covariates are both
large, so we must first estimate a ‘parsimonious’ set of relations between the measurements. For instance, a Gaussian graphical model will show conditional independences
between the random variables, which can then be used to
setup specific downstream analyses. But most such data
involve a large list of ‘latent’ variables that remain unobserved, yet affect the ‘observed’ variables sustantially. Accounting for such latent variables is not directly addressed
by standard precision matrix estimation, and is tackled via
highly specialized optimization methods. This paper offers
a unique harmonic analysis view of this problem. By casting
the estimation of the precision matrix in terms of a composition of low-frequency latent variables and high-frequency
sparse terms, we show how the problem can be formulated using a new wavelet-type expansion in non-Euclidean
spaces. Our formulation poses the estimation problem in
the frequency space and shows how it can be solved by
a simple sub-gradient scheme. We provide a set of scientific results on ∼500 scans from the recently released HCP
data where our algorithm recovers highly interpretable and
sparse conditional dependencies between brain connectivity pathways and well-known covariates.

1. Introduction
Consider a large scale neuroimaging study, e.g., the ongoing Human Connectome Project (HCP), where diffusion
weighted magnetic resonance images (diffusion MRI) are
acquired for a cohort of participants. Each subject provides
a variety of clinical and cognitive measures in addition to
1 Won Hwa Kim and Hyunwoo J. Kim are joint first authors.

the images, as well as demographic information such as
age, gender, education status and so on. Such a rich data resource offers an unprecedented opportunity to answer many
scientific questions. For instance, how do brain networks
differ across gender, and does education or genotype have
an association with structural brain connectivity beyond the
expected effects of age? Until recently, the scientific community had limited means to answer such questions because
public datasets were either small, not well curated or the
imaging protocols used for acquisition were too heterogeneous. The recent public release of images (and covariates)
from the HCP study makes such an analysis possible if we
can address the associated modeling issues that arise in performing inference on such a high dimensional dataset.
A fundamental scientific goal in statistical analysis of
HCP (and similar datasets) is to identify associations between the full set of variables and the entire spectrum of
image-derived measurements [1, 30, 26, 24]. For example, are a subset of the clinical covariates highly predictive
of the inter-regional connectivity derived from the images?
The traditional approach here may proceed by estimating
a graphical model that best explains the data: where the
nodes correspond to the full set of covariates (image-derived
measures and clinical/cognitive scores) as jointly Gaussian
random variables. By estimating the inverse of the covariance matrix between the variables, we precisely recover the
graphical model structure. This may then be used to setup
hypothesis driven structural equation models (SEM) or simple regression model based experiments. The difficulty is
that in many modern image analysis problems, the total
number of such covariates, say p, is far larger than the number of samples (subjects) n in the study. Classical model
selection is highly problematic in this high dimensional setting since the empirical statistics are often poorly behaved.
The popular solution here is to impose a sparsity regularization on the inverse of the covariance matrix Σ−1 . Using a ℓ1
penalty on the entries of this matrix, under mild conditions,
one can guarantee that the maximum likelihood solution
will recover the true model [45, 13]. In the last five years,
12443

