Dense Monocular Depth Estimation in Complex Dynamic Scenes
René Ranftl1 , Vibhav Vineet1 , Qifeng Chen2 , and Vladlen Koltun1
1

2

Intel Labs
Stanford University

Abstract
We present an approach to dense depth estimation from
a single monocular camera that is moving through a dynamic scene. The approach produces a dense depth map
from two consecutive frames. Moving objects are reconstructed along with the surrounding environment. We provide a novel motion segmentation algorithm that segments
the optical flow field into a set of motion models, each with
its own epipolar geometry. We then show that the scene
can be reconstructed based on these motion models by optimizing a convex program. The optimization jointly reasons
about the scales of different objects and assembles the scene
in a common coordinate frame, determined up to a global
scale. Experimental results demonstrate that the presented
approach outperforms prior methods for monocular depth
estimation in dynamic scenes.

1. Introduction
Can mobile monocular systems densely estimate the spatial layout of complex dynamic scenes? Can a mobile robot,
UAV, or wearable device equipped with a single video camera see complex dynamic environments in three dimensions? In static scenes, dense depth can be recovered from
a single video captured by a moving camera using the established theory of multiple view geometry [35, 9]. Can
this theory be extended to reconstruct complex scenes from
monocular video when both the camera and the scene are in
motion?
To support challenging field applications, a monocular
depth reconstruction approach should have a number of
characteristics. It must provide complete dense reconstructions, in order to support dense mapping and detailed geometric reasoning. It must natively handle complex scenes,
with dozens of objects moving independently in a complex
environment. It must accommodate non-rigid motion, so as
to properly perceive people, animals, and articulated struc-

Figure 1: Given two frames from a monocular video of a
dynamic scene captured by a single moving camera, our approach computes a dense depth map that reproduces the spatial layout of the scene, including the moving objects. Top:
input frames. The white vehicle is approaching the camera,
while the camera itself undergoes forward translation and
in-plane rotation. Bottom: the estimated depth map.
tures. And it must accommodate realistic camera models,
including perspective projection.
In this paper, we present a monocular depth estimation
approach that has all of these characteristics. The approach
densely estimates depth throughout the visual field, including both static and dynamic parts of the environment. Multiple moving objects, complex geometry, and non-rigid motion are accommodated. The approach works with perspective cameras and yields metric reconstructions.
Our approach comprises two stages. The first stage performs motion segmentation. This stage segments the dynamic scene into a set of motion models, each described
by its own epipolar geometry. This enables reconstruction
of each component of the scene up to an unknown scale.
We propose a novel motion segmentation algorithm that is
based on a convex relaxation of the Potts model [5]. Our algorithm supports dense segmentation of complex dynamic
scenes into possibly dozens of independently moving components.
The second stage assembles the scene in a common met14058

