Learning a Discriminative Null Space for Person Re-identification
Li Zhang
Tao Xiang
Shaogang Gong
Queen Mary University of London
{david.lizhang, t.xiang, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Most existing person re-identification (re-id) methods focus on learning the optimal distance metrics across camera
views. Typically a person’s appearance is represented using
features of thousands of dimensions, whilst only hundreds
of training samples are available due to the difficulties in
collecting matched training images. With the number of
training samples much smaller than the feature dimension,
the existing methods thus face the classic small sample size
(SSS) problem and have to resort to dimensionality reduction techniques and/or matrix regularisation, which lead to
loss of discriminative power. In this work, we propose to
overcome the SSS problem in re-id distance metric learning by matching people in a discriminative null space of the
training data. In this null space, images of the same person are collapsed into a single point thus minimising the
within-class scatter to the extreme and maximising the relative between-class separation simultaneously. Importantly,
it has a fixed dimension, a closed-form solution and is very
efficient to compute. Extensive experiments carried out on
five person re-identification benchmarks including VIPeR,
PRID2011, CUHK01, CUHK03 and Market1501 show that
such a simple approach beats the state-of-the-art alternatives, often by a big margin.

1. Introduction
The problem of person re-identification (re-id) has attracted great attention in the past five years [34, 10]. When
a person is captured by multiple non-overlapping views, the
objective is to match him/her across views among a large
number of imposters. Despite the best efforts from the computer vision researchers, re-id remains a largely unsolved
problem. This is because that a person’s appearance often undergoes dramatic changes across camera views due to
changes in view angle, body pose, illumination and background clutter. Furthermore, since people are mainly distinguishable by their clothing under a surveillance setting,
many passers-by can be easily confused with the target person because they wear similar clothes.

Figure 1. Training images of same identity are projected to a single
point in a learned discriminative null space.

Existing approaches focus on developing discriminative feature representations that are robust against the
view/pose/illumination/background changes [12, 38, 6, 18,
26, 41, 22], or learning a distance metric [12, 17, 31, 44, 28,
33, 30, 21, 40, 39, 36, 27, 23, 22], or both jointly [20, 1].
Among them, the distance metric learning methods are most
popular and are the focus of this paper. Given any feature representation and a set of training data consisting of
matching image pairs across camera views, the objective is
to learn the optimal distance metric that gives small values
to images of the same person and large values for those of
different people. Distance metric learning has been extensively studied in machine learning [37], and existing metric
learning methods employed for re-id are either originated
elsewhere or extensions of existing methods with modifications to address the additional challenges arising from the
re-id task. Although they have been shown to be effective in
improving the existing re-id benchmarks over the past five
years, all these models are still limited by some of classical
problems in model learning.
Specifically, a key challenge for distance metric learning
when applied to person re-id is the small sample size (SSS)
problem [4]. Specifically, to capture rich person appearance whilst being robust against those condition changes
mentioned above, the feature representations used by most

1239

