Hierarchical Gaussian Descriptor for Person Re-Identification
Tetsu Matsukawa1 , Takahiro Okabe2 , Einoshin Suzuki1 , Yoichi Sato3
1
Kyushu University 2 Kyushu Institute of Technology 3 The University of Tokyo
{matsukawa, suzuki}@kyushu-u.ac.jp, okabe@ai.kyutech.ac.jp, ysato@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Describing the color and textural information of a person image is one of the most crucial aspects of person reidentification. In this paper, we present a novel descriptor based on a hierarchical distribution of pixel features.
A hierarchical covariance descriptor has been successfully
applied for image classification. However, the mean information of pixel features, which is absent in covariance,
tends to be major discriminative information of person images. To solve this problem, we describe a local region in
an image via hierarchical Gaussian distribution in which
both means and covariances are included in their parameters. More specifically, we model the region as a set of multiple Gaussian distributions in which each Gaussian represents the appearance of a local patch. The characteristics of the set of Gaussians are again described by another
Gaussian distribution. In both steps, unlike the hierarchical
covariance descriptor, the proposed descriptor can model
both the mean and the covariance information of pixel features properly. The results of experiments conducted on five
databases indicate that the proposed descriptor exhibits remarkably high performance which outperforms the state-ofthe-art descriptors for person re-identification.

1. Introduction
Appearance matching of person images observed in disjoint camera views, referred to as person re-identification, is
receiving increasing attention, mainly because of its broad
range of applications [11]. In this task, the person images
are captured from various viewpoints and under different
illuminations, resolutions, human poses, and background
environments. These large intra-personal variations in person images cause serious difficulties. In addition, similar
clothes among different persons add further challenges.
To address these difficulties, researchers are actively
working on appearance descriptors [27, 28, 29, 43, 46, 47]
and methods for matching them [22, 32, 33, 42, 48]. Descriptors characterize the appearance (color and textural)
information of human clothes. A good descriptor should

Divide
(a) Regions

(b) Patches

Region
distribution (c) Distributions of patch
level distributions

Figure 1. Importance of hierarchal distribution: (a) Regions that
have the same distribution (mean/covariance) of pixel features
(each color indicates the same feature vector). (b) Local patches
inside the regions which have different pixel feature distribution.
(c) Regions can be distinguished via distributions of patch level
distributions.

be robust against intra-personal variations and at the same
time have high discriminative power to distinguish different
persons.
Person images are low in resolution and have large pose
variations; consequently, it has been proved that the most
important cue for person re-identification is color information such as color histograms and color name descriptors [43]. Because they cannot sufficiently differentiate different persons of similar color, textural descriptors such as
Local Binary Pattern (LBP) and the responses of filter banks
are often combined with color descriptors [33, 42, 48].
A covariance descriptor [40] describes a region of interest as a covariance of pixel features. It provides a natural
way to fuse different modalities, e.g., color and texture, of
pixel features into a single meta-descriptor. Since the covariance descriptor is obtained by averaging features inside
the region, it remedies the effects of noise and spatial misalignments. Consequently, it has been successfully applied
to person re-identification [4, 5, 44].
In this paper, we propose a novel region descriptor based
on hierarchical Gaussian distribution of pixel features for
person re-identification. More specifically, we densely extract local patches inside a region and regard the region as
a set of local patches. We firstly model the region as a set
of multiple Gaussian distributions, each of which represents
the appearance of one local patch. We refer to such a Gaussian distribution representing each local patch as a patch
Gaussian. The characteristics of the set of patch Gaussians
are again described by another Gaussian distribution. We
refer to this Gaussian distribution as a region Gaussian. The
parameters of the region Gaussian are then used as feature
vector to represent the region.

1363

