Learning Cross-Domain Landmarks for Heterogeneous Domain Adaptation
Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai1 , Yi-Ren Yeh2 , Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1
1
Research Center for IT Innovation,Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
2
Department of Mathematics, National Kaohsiung Normal University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan
y.h.huberttsai@gmail.com, yryeh@nknu.edu.tw, ycwang@citi.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
While domain adaptation (DA) aims to associate the
learning tasks across data domains, heterogeneous domain
adaptation (HDA) particularly deals with learning from
cross-domain data which are of different types of features.
In other words, for HDA, data from source and target domains are observed in separate feature spaces and thus
exhibit distinct distributions. In this paper, we propose a
novel learning algorithm of Cross-Domain Landmark Selection (CDLS) for solving the above task. With the goal
of deriving a domain-invariant feature subspace for HDA,
our CDLS is able to identify representative cross-domain
data, including the unlabeled ones in the target domain, for
performing adaptation. In addition, the adaptation capabilities of such cross-domain landmarks can be determined
accordingly. This is the reason why our CDLS is able to
achieve promising HDA performance when comparing to
state-of-the-art HDA methods. We conduct classification
experiments using data across different features, domains,
and modalities. The effectiveness of our proposed method
can be successfully verified.

1. Introduction
When solving standard machine learning and pattern
recognition tasks, one needs to collect a sufficient amount
of labeled data for learning purposes. However, it is not always computationally feasible to collect and label data for
each problem of interest. To alleviate this concern, domain
adaptation (DA) aims to utilize labeled data from a source
domain, while only few (or no) labeled data can be observed
in the target domain of interest [27]. In other words, the goal
of DA is to transfer the knowledge learned from an auxiliary domain, so that the learning task in the target domain
can be solved accordingly.
A variety of real-world applications have been benefited
from the recent advances of DA (e.g., sentiment analysis
[7, 33], Wi-Fi localization [25, 26], visual object classification [43, 30, 34, 8], and cross-language text classification [10, 29]). Generally, most existing DA approaches

like [26, 24, 31, 6] consider that source and target-domain
data are collected using the same type of features. Such
problems can be referred to homogeneous domain adaptation, i.e., cross-domain data are observed in the same feature space but exhibit different distributions.
On the other hand, heterogeneous domain adaptation
(HDA) [32, 38, 21, 28] deals with a even more challenging
task, in which cross-domain data are described by different
types of features and thus exhibit distinct distributions (e.g.,
training and test image data with different resolutions or encoded by different codebooks). Most existing approaches
choose to solve HDA by learning feature transformation,
which either projects data from one domain to the other,
or to project cross-domain data to a common subspace for
adaptation purposes [32, 38, 21, 12, 18, 42, 19].
As noted in [39, 23, 40, 41], exploiting unlabeled targetdomain instances during adaptation would be beneficial for
HDA. Following their settings, we choose to address semisupervised HDA in this paper. To be more precise, a sufficient amount and few labeled data will be observed in
the source and target domains, respectively. And, the remaining target-domain data (to be classified) will also be
presented during the learning process. In our work, we
propose a learning algorithm of Cross-Domain Landmark
Selection (CDLS) for solving HDA. Instead of viewing all
cross-domain data to be equally important during adaptation, our CDLS derives a heterogeneous feature transformation which results in a domain-invariant subspace for associating cross-domain data. In addition, the representative source and target-domain data will be jointly exploited
for improving the adaptation capability of our CDLS. Once
the adaptation process is complete, one can simply project
cross-domain labeled and unlabeled target domain data into
the derived subspace for performing recognition. Illustration of our CDLS is shown in Figure 1.
The contributions of this paper are highlighted below:
• We are among the first to exploit heterogenous source
and target-domain data for learning cross-domain
landmarks, aiming at solving semi-supervised HDA
problems.
15081

