Proposal Flow
Bumsub Ham1,∗ ,†
1

Inria

Minsu Cho1,∗ ,†
2

Cordelia Schmid1,‡

Jean Ponce2,†

École Normale Supérieure / PSL Research University

Abstract
Finding image correspondences remains a challenging
problem in the presence of intra-class variations and large
changes in scene layout. Semantic flow methods are designed to handle images depicting different instances of the
same object or scene category. We introduce a novel approach to semantic flow, dubbed proposal flow, that establishes reliable correspondences using object proposals. Unlike prevailing semantic flow approaches that operate on
pixels or regularly sampled local regions, proposal flow
benefits from the characteristics of modern object proposals, that exhibit high repeatability at multiple scales, and
can take advantage of both local and geometric consistency constraints among proposals. We also show that proposal flow can effectively be transformed into a conventional dense flow field. We introduce a new dataset that can
be used to evaluate both general semantic flow techniques
and region-based approaches such as proposal flow. We use
this benchmark to compare different matching algorithms,
object proposals, and region features within proposal flow,
to the state of the art in semantic flow. This comparison,
along with experiments on standard datasets, demonstrates
that proposal flow significantly outperforms existing semantic flow methods in various settings.

1. Introduction
Classical approaches to finding correspondences across
images are designed to handle scenes that contain the same
objects with moderate view point variations in applications
such as stereo matching [42, 47], optical flow [23, 46, 52],
and wide-baseline matching [41, 54]. Semantic flow methods, such as SIFT Flow [35] for example, on the other
hand, are designed to handle a much higher degree of variability in appearance and scene layout, typical of images
depicting different instances of the same object or scene
category. They have proven useful for many tasks such as
scene recognition, image registration, semantic segmentation, and image editing and synthesis [20, 29, 35, 54, 57].
∗ indicates equal contribution
† WILLOW project-team, Département d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS/Inria/CNRS UMR 8548.
‡ Thoth project-team, Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, Laboratoire Jean
Kuntzmann.

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

(a) Region-based semantic flow.

(b) Dense flow field.

Figure 1. Proposal flow generates a reliable semantic flow between
similar images using local and geometric consistency constraints
among object proposals, and it can be transformed into a dense
flow field. (a) Region-based semantic flow. (b) Dense flow field
and image warping using the flow field. (Best viewed in color.)

In this context, however, appearance and shape variations
may confuse similarity measures for local region matching,
and prohibit the use of strong geometric constraints (e.g.,
epipolar geometry, limited disparity range). Existing approaches to semantic flow are thus easily distracted by scene
elements specific to individual objects and image-specific
details (e.g., background, texture, occlusion, clutter). This
is the motivation for our work, where we use robust region
correspondences to focus on regions containing prominent
objects and scene elements rather than clutter and distracting details.
Concretely, we introduce an approach to semantic flow
computation, called proposal flow, that establishes region
correspondences using object proposals and their geometric relations (Fig. 1). Unlike previous semantic flow algorithms [4, 20, 22, 25, 29, 35, 45, 49, 50, 54, 57], that
use regular grid structures for local region generation and
matching, we leverage a large number of multi-scale object
proposals [1, 24, 40, 51, 58], as now widely used in object
detection [19, 27]. The proposed approach establishes region correspondences by exploiting their visual features and
geometric relations in an efficient manner, and generates
a region-based semantic flow composed of object proposal
matches. We also show that the proposal flow can be effectively transformed into a conventional dense flow field. Finally, we introduce a new dataset that can be used to evalu-

3475

