NTU RGB+D: A Large Scale Dataset for 3D Human Activity Analysis
Amir Shahroudy†,‡

Jun Liu†

Tian-Tsong Ng‡

Gang Wang†,∗

amir3@ntu.edu.sg

jliu029@ntu.edu.sg

ttng@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

wanggang@ntu.edu.sg

† School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
‡ Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore
Abstract
Recent approaches in depth-based human activity analysis achieved outstanding performance and proved the effectiveness of 3D representation for classification of action classes. Currently available depth-based and RGB+Dbased action recognition benchmarks have a number of
limitations, including the lack of training samples, distinct
class labels, camera views and variety of subjects. In this
paper we introduce a large-scale dataset for RGB+D human action recognition with more than 56 thousand video
samples and 4 million frames, collected from 40 distinct
subjects. Our dataset contains 60 different action classes
including daily, mutual, and health-related actions. In addition, we propose a new recurrent neural network structure to model the long-term temporal correlation of the features for each body part, and utilize them for better action
classification. Experimental results show the advantages of
applying deep learning methods over state-of-the-art handcrafted features on the suggested cross-subject and crossview evaluation criteria for our dataset. The introduction of
this large scale dataset will enable the community to apply,
develop and adapt various data-hungry learning techniques
for the task of depth-based and RGB+D-based human activity analysis.

1. Introduction
Recent development of depth sensors enabled us to obtain effective 3D structures of the scenes and objects [13].
This empowers the vision solutions to move one important step towards 3D vision, e.g. 3D object recognition, 3D
scene understanding, and 3D action recognition [1].
Unlike the RGB-based counterpart, 3D video analysis
suffers from the lack of large-sized benchmark datasets.
Yet there are no any sources of publicly shared 3D videos
such as YouTube to supply “in-the-wild” samples. This
limits our ability to build large-sized benchmarks to eval∗ Corresponding author

uate and compare the strengths of different methods, especially the recent data-hungry techniques like deep learning
approaches. To the best of our knowledge, all the current
3D action recognition benchmarks have limitations in various aspects.
First is the small number of subjects and very narrow
range of performers’ ages, which makes the intra-class variation of the actions very limited. The constitution of human activities depends on the age, gender, culture and even
physical conditions of the subjects. Therefore, variation of
human subjects is crucial for an action recognition benchmark.
Second factor is the number of the action classes. When
only a very small number of classes are available, each action class can be easily distinguishable by finding a simple
motion pattern or even the appearance of an interacted object. But when the number of classes grows, the motion patterns and interacting objects will be shared between classes
and the classification task will be more challenging.
Third is the highly restricted camera views. For most
of the datasets, all the samples are captured from a front
view with a fixed camera viewpoint. For some others, views
are bounded to fixed front and side views, using multiple
cameras at the same time.
Finally and most importantly, the highly limited number of video samples prevents us from applying the most
advanced data-driven learning methods to this problem. Although some attempts have been done [9, 42], they suffered
from overfitting and had to scale down the size of learning
parameters; as a result, they clearly need many more samples to generalize and perform better on testing data.
To overcome these limitations, we develop a new largescale benchmark dataset for 3D human activity analysis.
The proposed dataset consists of 56, 880 RGB+D video
samples, captured from 40 different human subjects, using
Microsoft Kinect v2. We have collected RGB videos, depth
sequences, skeleton data (3D locations of 25 major body
joints), and infrared frames. Samples are captured in 80
distinct camera viewpoints. The age range of the subjects in
our dataset is from 10 to 35 years which brings more realis-

1010

