CRAFT Objects from Images
Bin Yang1
Junjie Yan2
Zhen Lei1∗
Stan Z. Li1
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Tsinghua University
{bin.yang, zlei, szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

yanjunjie@outlook.com

Abstract
Object detection is a fundamental problem in image understanding. One popular solution is the R-CNN framework [15] and its fast versions [14, 27]. They decompose
the object detection problem into two cascaded easier tasks:
1) generating object proposals from images, 2) classifying
proposals into various object categories. Despite that we
are handling with two relatively easier tasks, they are not
solved perfectly and there’s still room for improvement.
In this paper, we push the “divide and conquer” solution even further by dividing each task into two sub-tasks.
We call the proposed method “CRAFT” (Cascade Regionproposal-network And FasT-rcnn), which tackles each task
with a carefully designed network cascade. We show that
the cascade structure helps in both tasks: in proposal generation, it provides more compact and better localized object proposals; in object classification, it reduces false positives (mainly between ambiguous categories) by capturing
both inter- and intra-category variances. CRAFT achieves
consistent and considerable improvement over the state-ofthe-art on object detection benchmarks like PASCAL VOC
07/12 and ILSVRC.

1. Introduction
The problem definition of object detection is to determine where in the image the objects are and which category each object belongs to. The above definition gives us
a clue of how to solve such a problem: by generating object
proposals from an image (where they are), and then classifying each proposal into different object categories (which
category it belongs to). This two-step solution matches to
some extent with the attentional mechanism of humans seeing things, which is to first give a coarse scan of the whole
scenario and then focus on regions of our interest.
As a matter of fact, the above intuitive solution is where
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Overview of the widely used two-step framework in object detection, and the proposed CRAFT pipeline.

the research community is moving forward for years. Recently, the two steps (proposal generation and object classification) have been solved quite satisfactorily by two advances in computer vision: first is the introduction of general object proposals, second is the revival of the Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). The general object proposal
algorithm (e.g., Selective Search [34] and EdgeBox [38])
can provide around 2000 proposals per image to cover most
of the objects and make the employment of more complex
classifier for each proposal possible. The prosperity of the
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) comes from its rich
representation capacity and powerful generalization ability
in image recognition, which is proved in challenging ImageNet classification task [20, 31, 29]. With the off-the-shelf
methods available, the seminal work R-CNN [15] shows
that Selective Search based region proposals plus the CNN
based object classifier can achieve very promising performance in object detection. The R-CNN framework is further improved by Fast R-CNN [14] and Faster R-CNN [27],
while the former enables end-to-end learning of the whole
pipeline, and the latter introduces the Region Proposal Network (RPN) to get object proposals of higher quality.
16043

