Approximate Log-Hilbert-Schmidt Distances
between Covariance Operators for Image Classification
Hà Quang Minh1
1

Marco San Biagio1

Loris Bazzani2

Vittorio Murino1

Pattern Analysis and Computer Vision (PAVIS), Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT), Italy
2
Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College, USA
{minh.haquang,marco.sanbiagio,vittorio.murino}@iit.it,loris.bazzani@gmail.com

Abstract

Feature extraction

Kernel

Infinite

K1

Kernel

K2

Input image

This paper presents a novel framework for visual object recognition using infinite-dimensional covariance operators of input features, in the paradigm of kernel methods
on infinite-dimensional Riemannian manifolds. Our formulation provides a rich representation of image features by
exploiting their non-linear correlations, using the power of
kernel methods and Riemannian geometry. Theoretically,
we provide an approximate formulation for the Log-HilbertSchmidt distance between covariance operators that is efficient to compute and scalable to large datasets. Empirically, we apply our framework to the task of image classification on eight different, challenging datasets. In almost all
cases, the results obtained outperform other state of the art
methods, demonstrating the competitiveness and potential
of our framework.

1. Introduction
Covariance descriptors are a powerful image representation approach in computer vision. In this approach, an image is compactly represented by a covariance matrix encoding correlations between different features extracted from
that image. This representation has been demonstrated to
work very well in numerous vision tasks, including tracking
[24], object detection and classiﬁcation [31, 30], and image
retrieval [7]. Covariance descriptors, properly regularized if
necessary, are symmetric positive deﬁnite (SPD) matrices,
which do not form a vector subspace of Euclidean space
under the standard matrix addition and scalar multiplication operations, but form a Riemannian manifold. The optimal measure of similarity between covariance descriptors
is thus not the Euclidean distance, but a metric that captures
this manifold structure. One of the most commonly used
Riemannian metrics in the literature is the Log-Euclidean
metric developed by [1]. This is a so-called bi-invariant

R G B Ix

Approximate
Covariance
Operators

Figure 1. Model of the proposed framework

Riemannian metric under which the manifold is ﬂat, that is
having zero curvature. Therefore, it is efﬁcient to compute
and can be used to deﬁne many positive deﬁnite kernels,
allowing kernel methods to be applied directly on the manifold. This latter property has been exploited successfully
in various recent work in vision [15, 19]. However, a major
limitation of covariance matrices is that they only capture
linear correlations between input features.
In this work, we propose to use infinite-dimensional covariance operators as image representations. These are covariance matrices of inﬁnite-dimensional features, which
are induced implicitly when a positive deﬁnite kernel (K1 in
Fig. 1), such as the Gaussian kernel, is applied to the original image features. These covariance operators capture in
particular non-linear correlations between the original input features. Each image is then represented by one such
covariance operator.
For tasks such as image classiﬁcation, we require the notion of distance between image representations, which in
this case means the distance between the corresponding covariance operators. It is known that covariance operators,
properly regularized, lie on the infinite-dimensional Riemannian manifold of positive deﬁnite operators [17]. On
this manifold, the generalization of the Log-Euclidean metric is the Log-Hilbert-Schmidt (Log-HS) metric [21]. Having computed the Log-HS distances between the covariance
operators, another positive deﬁnite kernel (K2 in Fig. 1) can
be computed using these distances and used as input to a
15195

