Deep Structured Scene Parsing by Learning with Image Descriptions
Liang Lin1 , Guangrun Wang1 , Rui Zhang1 , Ruimao Zhang1 , Xiaodan Liang1 , Wangmeng Zuo2
1
2

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China

linliang@ieee.org; r.m.zhang1989@gmail.com; cswmzuo@gmail.com.

Abstract
This paper addresses a fundamental problem of scene
understanding: How to parse the scene image into a structured configuration (i.e., a semantic object hierarchy with
object interaction relations) that finely accords with human
perception. We propose a deep architecture consisting of
two networks: i) a convolutional neural network (CNN) extracting the image representation for pixelwise object labeling and ii) a recursive neural network (RNN) discovering
the hierarchical object structure and the inter-object relations. Rather than relying on elaborative user annotations
(e.g., manually labeling semantic maps and relations), we
train our deep model in a weakly-supervised manner by
leveraging the descriptive sentences of the training images.
Specifically, we decompose each sentence into a semantic
tree consisting of nouns and verb phrases, and facilitate
these trees discovering the configurations of the training
images. Once these scene configurations are determined,
then the parameters of both the CNN and RNN are updated
accordingly by back propagation. The entire model training is accomplished through an Expectation-Maximization
method. Extensive experiments suggest that our model is
capable of producing meaningful and structured scene configurations and achieving more favorable scene labeling
performance on PASCAL VOC 2012 over other state-of-theart weakly-supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding started with the goal of creating systems that can infer meaningful configurations (e.g.,
parts, objects and their compositions with relations) from
imagery like humans [10]. In computer vision research,
significant progresses have been made in semantic scene
labeling / segmentation (i.e., assigning the label for each
pixel of the scene image) [14][32][17][25]. However, the
problem of structured scene parsing (i.e., producing meaningful scene configurations) remains a challenge due to the
following difficulties.

sit on

hold

Image

person

bottle

stand by

chair

support

monitor

table

Structured Scene Configuration

Figure 1. An illustration of our structured scene parsing. An input
scene image is automatically parsed into a hierarchical configuration that comprises hierarchical semantic objects (black labels)
and the interaction relations (red labels) of objects.

• The representations of nested hierarchical structure in
scene images are often ambiguous, e.g., a configuration may have more than one way of parsing. Conducting these parsing results to finely accord with human
perception is an interesting yet fundamental problem.
• Training a scene parsing model usually relies on very
expensive manual annotations, e.g., including semantic maps and structured configurations.
To address these above issues, we develop a novel deep
neural network architecture that automatically parses an input scene into a structured and meaningful configuration.
Fig. 1 shows an illustration of our structured scene parsing,
where our model identifies salient semantic objects in the
scene and generates the hierarchical scene structure with the
interaction relations among objects. Our model is inspired
by the effectiveness of two widely successful deep learning
techniques: convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [13][17]
and recursive neural network (RNNs) [29]. The former category of models is widely applied for generating powerful
feature representations in various vision tasks such as im12276

