Learning Transferrable Knowledge for Semantic Segmentation
with Deep Convolutional Neural Network

†

Seunghoon Hong†,‡
Junhyuk Oh‡
Honglak Lee‡
Bohyung Han†
‡
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
POSTECH, Pohang, Korea
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
{maga33,bhhan}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a novel weakly-supervised semantic segmentation algorithm based on Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN). Contrary to existing weakly-supervised approaches, our algorithm exploits auxiliary segmentation annotations available for different categories to guide segmentations on images with only image-level class labels.
To make segmentation knowledge transferrable across categories, we design a decoupled encoder-decoder architecture with attention model. In this architecture, the model
generates spatial highlights of each category presented in
images using an attention model, and subsequently performs binary segmentation for each highlighted region using decoder. Combining attention model, the decoder
trained with segmentation annotations in different categories boosts accuracy of weakly-supervised semantic segmentation. The proposed algorithm demonstrates substantially improved performance compared to the state-of-theart weakly-supervised techniques in PASCAL VOC 2012
dataset when our model is trained with the annotations in
60 exclusive categories in Microsoft COCO dataset.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation refers to the task assigning dense
class labels to pixels in an image. Although pixel-wise labels provide richer descriptions of images than bounding
box labels or image-level tags, inferring such labels is a
much more challenging task as it involves a highly complicated structured prediction problem.
Recent breakthrough in semantic segmentation has been
mainly accelerated by the approaches based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [4, 21, 11, 10, 25]. Given
a classification network pre-trained on a large image collection, they learn a network for segmentation based on
strong supervision—pixel-wise class labels. Although the
approaches substantially improve the performance over the

{junhyuk,honglak}@umich.edu

prior arts, training CNN requires a large number of finequality segmentation annotations, which are difficult to collect due to extensive labeling cost. For this reason, scaling
up the semantic segmentation task to a large number of categories is very challenging in practice.
Weakly-supervised learning [5, 27, 29, 31] is an alternative approach to alleviate annotation efforts. They infer
segmentation labels from training images given weak labels such as bounding boxes [5] or image-level class labels [31, 27, 29]. Since such annotations are easy to collect and even already available in existing datasets [6], it
is straightforward to apply those approaches to large-scale
problems with many categories. However, the segmentation quality by the weakly-supervised techniques is typically much worse than the one by supervised methods since
there is no direct supervision for segmentation such as object shapes and locations during training.
The objective of this paper is to reduce the gap between
semantic segmentation algorithms based on strong supervisions (e.g., semi- and fully-supervised approaches) and
weak supervisions (e.g., weakly-supervised approaches).
Our key idea is to employ segmentation annotations available for different categories to compensate for missing supervisions in weakly annotated images. No additional cost
is required to collect such data since there are already several datasets publicly available with pixel-wise annotations,
e.g., BSD [22], Microsoft COCO [20], and LabelMe [32].
These datasets have not been actively explored yet for semantic segmentation due to the mismatches in semantic
categories with the popular benchmark datasets, e.g., PASCAL VOC [7]. The critical challenge in this problem is
to learn common prior knowledge for segmentation transferrable across categories. It is not a trivial task with existing architectures, since they simply pose the semantic segmentation as pixel-wise classification and it is difficult to
exploit examples from the unseen classes.
We propose a novel encoder-decoder architecture with
an attention model, which is conceptually appropriate to
transfer segmentation knowledge from one category to an13204

