Deeply-Recursive Convolutional Network for Image Super-Resolution
Jiwon Kim, Jung Kwon Lee and Kyoung Mu Lee
Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
{j.kim, deruci, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose an image super-resolution method (SR) using a deeply-recursive convolutional network (DRCN). Our
network has a very deep recursive layer (up to 16 recursions). Increasing recursion depth can improve performance without introducing new parameters for additional
convolutions. Albeit advantages, learning a DRCN is very
hard with a standard gradient descent method due to exploding/vanishing gradients. To ease the difficulty of training, we propose two extensions: recursive-supervision and
skip-connection. Our method outperforms previous methods by a large margin.

1. Introduction
For image super-resolution (SR), receptive field of a convolutional network determines the amount of contextual
information that can be exploited to infer missing highfrequency components. For example, if there exists a pattern with smoothed edges contained in a receptive field, it is
plausible that the pattern is recognized and edges are appropriately sharpened. As SR is an ill-posed inverse problem,
collecting and analyzing more neighbor pixels can possibly
give more clues on what may be lost by downsampling.
Deep convolutional networks (DCN) succeeding in various computer vision tasks often use very large receptive fields (224x224 common in ImageNet classification
[13, 24]). Among many approaches to widen the receptive
field, increasing network depth is one possible way: a convolutional (conv.) layer with filter size larger than a 1 × 1 or
a pooling (pool.) layer that reduces the dimension of intermediate representation can be used. Both approaches have
drawbacks: a conv. layer introduces more parameters and a
pool. layer typically discards some pixel-wise information.
For image restoration problems such as super-resolution
and denoising, image details are very important. Therefore,
most deep-learning approaches for such problems do not
use pooling. Increasing depth by adding a new weight layer
basically introduces more parameters. Two problems can
arise. First, overfitting is highly likely. More data are now

required. Second, the model becomes too huge to be stored
and retrieved.
To resolve these issues, we use a deeply-recursive convolutional network (DRCN). DRCN repeatedly applies the
same convolutional layer as many times as desired. The
number of parameters do not increase while more recursions are performed. Our network has the receptive field
of 41 by 41 and this is relatively large compared to SRCNN
[5] (13 by 13). While DRCN has good properties, we find
that DRCN optimized with the widely-used stochastic gradient descent method does not easily converge. This is due
to exploding/vanishing gradients [1]. Learning long-range
dependencies between pixels with a single weight layer is
very difficult.
We propose two approaches to ease the difficulty of
training (Figure 3(a)). First, all recursions are supervised.
Feature maps after each recursion are used to reconstruct the
target high-resolution image (HR). Reconstruction method
(layers dedicated to reconstruction) is the same for all recursions. As each recursion leads to a different HR prediction,
we combine all predictions resulting from different levels of
recursions to deliver a more accurate final prediction. The
second proposal is to use a skip-connection from input to
the reconstruction layer. In SR, a low-resolution image (input) and a high-resolution image (output) share the same
information to a large extent. Exact copy of input, however, is likely to be attenuated during many forward passes.
We explicitly connect the input to the layers for output reconstruction. This is particularly effective when input and
output are highly correlated.
Contributions In summary, we propose an image superresolution method deeply recursive in nature. It utilizes a
very large context compared to previous SR methods with
only a single recursive layer. We improve the simple recursive network in two ways: recursive-supervision and skipconnection. Our method demonstrates state-of-the-art performance in common benchmarks.
11637

