Convexity Shape Constraints for Image Segmentation
Loic A. Royer1∗ David L. Richmond1∗ Carsten Rother2 Bjoern Andres3 Dagmar Kainmueller1
1
MPI-CBG 2 TU Dresden 3 MPI for Informatics
kainmueller@mpi-cbg.de

Abstract
Segmenting an image into multiple components is a central task in computer vision. In many practical scenarios,
prior knowledge about plausible components is available.
Incorporating such prior knowledge into models and algorithms for image segmentation is highly desirable, yet can
be non-trivial. In this work, we introduce a new approach
that allows, for the first time, to constrain some or all components of a segmentation to have convex shapes. Specifically,
we extend the Minimum Cost Multicut Problem by a class
of constraints that enforce convexity. To solve instances of
this NP-hard integer linear program to optimality, we separate the proposed constraints in the branch-and-cut loop
of a state-of-the-art ILP solver. Results on photographs and
micrographs demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach
as well as its advantages over the state-of-the-art heuristic.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is a challenging task for which often
times the use of suitable prior knowledge about the shape of
the sought objects plays an important role. One interesting
shape prior is convexity [13, 14, 10, 9]. In natural images,
it often occurs that there are multiple convex structures of
the same or different classes present in one image, such
as bricks in walls, floor tiles, and piles of fruit or wooden
logs. Biology similarly gives numerous examples of multiple
convex structures in one micrograph. For example, many
cell types are convex, such as bacteria, yeast, and more
complicated cells densely packed into tissue. Numerous
sub-cellular structures, including nuclei and various types of
vesicles, are also convex. Despite the clear relevance of this
situation to the task of image segmentation, respective priors
have, to the best of our knowledge, not yet been addressed
in the literature.
Existing methods for segmenting multiple convex structures are specifically designed for certain shapes like ellip∗ Shared first authors

soids or rods, as e.g. [7]. Such methods do not enforce
generic convexity, but instead employ priors of specific
shapes that happen to be convex. Furthermore, such methods commonly segment multiple structures sequentially, and
neither the reconstruction of individual structures nor the
resulting segmentation of multiple structures is globally optimal w.r.t. the underlying objective.
Beyond specific shape priors, there has been recent interest in generic convexity priors for binary image segmentation.
Star convexity priors were introduced in [14], where convexity is defined with respect to all rays emanating from a central, user-defined seed point. This approach was generalized
to the case of Geodesic Star Convexity by [10], which defines convexity with regards to Geodesic paths. Truly convex
objects were first handled by [13]. However, this approach
is limited to a single foreground class, which must be explicitly modeled. The task of segmenting convex foreground
objects without the requirement of user input or explicit modeling is studied in [9]. They propose a graphical model with
triple-cliques that encode convexity constraints as 1-0-1 label
sequences along straight lines in the image. This formulation
captures the global nature of convexity. However, it implies
that only one connected component of the foreground class
can be present. Furthermore, the complexity of the problem
requires the use of approximate solvers which may lead to
local minima. None of the above methods is able to segment
many generic convex objects of multiple foreground classes,
fully automatically, without user-defined seed points.
Contributions. In this work we propose the first model and
solver for pixel-level segmentation of many generic convex objects of multiple foreground classes. We introduce
new models that include convexity constraints into multicut
problems, which are ILP formulations of image decomposition problems. We consider two multicut problems, one
equivalent to the correlation clustering problem [4], another
one equivalent to the Potts model. For efficiency, following the idea in [11, 1], we iteratively incorporate into the
respective ILPs only the constraints that are violated per
instance, and when no more violations occur, we are guaranteed the globally optimal solution. To the best of our
knowledge, our models are the first to handle many convex
1402

