Pedestrian Detection Inspired by Appearance Constancy and Shape Symmetry
Jiale Cao1 , Yanwei Pang1∗ , Xuelong Li2
1
School of Electronic Information Engineering, Tianjin University
2
Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences
connor@tju.edu.cn, pyw@tju.edu.cn, xuelong li@opt.ac.cn

Abstract
The discrimination and simplicity of features are very
important for effective and efficient pedestrian detection.
However, most state-of-the-art methods are unable to
achieve good tradeoff between accuracy and efficiency. Inspired by some simple inherent attributes of pedestrians
(i.e., appearance constancy and shape symmetry), we propose two new types of non-neighboring features (NNF):
side-inner difference features (SIDF) and symmetrical similarity features (SSF). SIDF can characterize the difference between the background and pedestrian and the difference between the pedestrian contour and its inner part.
SSF can capture the symmetrical similarity of pedestrian
shape. However, it’s difficult for neighboring features to
have such above characterization abilities. Finally, we
propose to combine both non-neighboring and neighboring features for pedestrian detection. It’s found that nonneighboring features can further decrease the average miss
rate by 4.44%. Experimental results on INRIA and Caltech
pedestrian datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method. Compared to the state-ofthe-art methods without using CNN, our method achieves
the best detection performance on Caltech, outperforming
the second best method (i.e., Checkerboards) by 1.63%.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection is a premise in many computer vision tasks including gait recognition, behavior analysis, action recognition, and camera-based driver assistance. Generally speaking, the performance of pedestrian detection is
determined by the performance of feature extraction and
classification. This paper focuses on feature extraction.
There are three manners for feature extraction: (1) completely Hand-Crafted (HC) features, (2) Hand-Crafted candidate features followed by Learning Algorithms (HCLA),
and (3) Deep Leaning (DL) based features. Due to simplicity and robustness, it is much more possible for HCLA to
achieve good tradeoff between efficiency and accuracy. So

this paper concentrates on HCLA.
Usually, the input of HCLA for pedestrian detection is
CIE-LUV color channels, gradient histogram channels, gradient magnitude channel, etc. Once the channels are specified, the question remained is how to generate candidate
features from the channels. Most of state-of-the-art methods generate the candidate features by using local (e.g., local mean features) or neighboring features (e.g., haar features). In fact, some inherent attributes of pedestrians can
be also used for feature design. Inspired by appearance
constancy and shape symmetry of pedestrians, we design
two types of non-neighboring features: side-inner difference features (SIDF) and symmetrical similarity features
(SSF). The contributions of the paper are as follows:
1) Appearance constancy and shape symmetry can be
seen as the inherent attributes of pedestrians. Inspired by
these attributes, we propose side-inner difference features
(SIDF) and symmetrical similarity features (SSF), respectively. Compared to some state-of-the-art features, our features are oriented non-neighboring features. SIDF can characterize the difference between the background and pedestrian and the difference between the pedestrian contour and
its inner part. SSF can capture the symmetrical similarity
of pedestrian shape. However, it’s difficult for neighboring
features to have such above characterization abilities.
2) We propose to employ non-neighboring and neighboring features for pedestrian detection. Among all the selected
features, about 70% are neighboring features and 30% of
them are non-neighboring ones. So the non-neighboring
features are complementary to the neighboring ones.
3) Compared to the state-of-the-art methods without using CNN, we achieve the best detection performance (i.e.,
16.84% miss rate on Caltech). Meanwhile, our methods
achieve the best performance tradeoff between detection efficiency and log-average miss rate only by common CPU.
Moreover, SIDF and SSF may also be combined with CNN
features to further boost the detection performance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We review
related work in Section 2. The proposed method is given in
Section 3. Experimental results are provided in Section 4.
11316

