A 3D Morphable Model learnt from 10,000 faces
James Booth⋆

Anastasios Roussos⋆

Stefanos Zafeiriou⋆,∗

Allan Ponniah†

David Dunaway†
⋆
†
Imperial College London, UK
Great Ormond Street Hospital, UK
∗ Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis (CMVS), University of Oulu, Finland
⋆

{james.booth,troussos,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk, † {allan.ponniah,david.dunaway}@gosh.nhs.uk

Abstract
We present Large Scale Facial Model (LSFM) — a 3D
Morphable Model (3DMM) automatically constructed from
9,663 distinct facial identities. To the best of our knowledge LSFM is the largest-scale Morphable Model ever constructed, containing statistical information from a huge variety of the human population. To build such a large model
we introduce a novel fully automated and robust Morphable
Model construction pipeline. The dataset that LSFM is
trained on includes rich demographic information about
each subject, allowing for the construction of not only a
global 3DMM but also models tailored for specific age,
gender or ethnicity groups. As an application example,
we utilise the proposed model to perform age classification from 3D shape alone. Furthermore, we perform a systematic analysis of the constructed 3DMMs that showcases
their quality and descriptive power. The presented extensive
qualitative and quantitative evaluations reveal that the proposed 3DMM achieves state-of-the-art results, outperforming existing models by a large margin. Finally, for the benefit of the research community, we make publicly available
the source code of the proposed automatic 3DMM construction pipeline. In addition, the constructed global 3DMM
and a variety of bespoke models tailored by age, gender
and ethnicity are available on application to researchers
involved in medically oriented research.

1. Introduction
3D Morphable Models (3DMMs) are powerful 3D statistical models of human face shape and texture. In the original formulation, as presented by the seminal work of Blanz
and Vetter [6], a 3DMM used in an analysis-by-synthesis
framework was shown to be capable of inferring a full 3D
facial surface from a single image of a person. 3DMMs
have since been widely applied in numerous areas, such
as computer vision, human behavioral analysis, computer

Figure 1: The sheer number of facial meshes used in training LSFM produces a 3D Morphable Model with an unprecedented range of human identity in a compact model.

graphics and craniofacial surgery [7, 3, 2, 28].
A 3DMM is constructed by performing some form of
dimensionality reduction, typically Principal Component
Analysis (PCA), on a training set of facial meshes. This
is feasible if and only if each mesh is first re-parametrised
into a consistent form where the number of vertices, the
triangulation, and the anatomical meaning of each vertex
are made consistent across all meshes. Meshes satisfying
the above properties are said to be in dense correspondence
with one another. Whilst this correspondence problem is
easy to state, it is challenging to solve accurately and robustly between highly variable facial meshes.
Once built, 3DMMs provide two functions. Firstly,
3DMMs are powerful priors on 3D face shape that can be
leveraged in fitting algorithms to reconstruct accurate and
complete 3D representations of faces from data-deficient
sources like in-the-wild 2D images or noisy 3D depth scan
data. Secondly, 3DMMs provide a mechanism to encode
any 3D face in a low dimensional feature space, a compact
15543

