Consistency of silhouettes and their duals
Matthew Trager∗

Martial Hebert

Jean Ponce∗

Inria

Carnegie Mellon University

École Normale Supérieure / PSL Research University

Abstract
Silhouettes provide rich information on threedimensional shape, since the intersection of the associated
visual cones generates the “visual hull”, which encloses
and approximates the original shape. However, not all
silhouettes can actually be projections of the same object
in space: this simple observation has implications in object
recognition and multi-view segmentation, and has been
(often implicitly) used as a basis for camera calibration.
In this paper, we investigate the conditions for multiple
silhouettes, or more generally arbitrary closed image sets,
to be geometrically “consistent”. We present this notion as
a natural generalization of traditional multi-view geometry,
which deals with consistency for points. After discussing
some general results, we present a “dual” formulation for
consistency, that gives conditions for a family of planar
sets to be sections of the same object. Finally, we introduce
a more general notion of silhouette “compatibility” under
partial knowledge of the camera projections, and point out
some possible directions for future research.

1. Introduction
When can a set of 2D silhouettes be projections of the
same object in space? This seemingly simple question is related to a variety of practical problems in computer vision,
such as multi-view segmentation [10], object recognition
[37], and multi-view stereo [12]. Geometric consistency is
sometimes taken for granted, when appearance-based features give reasonable evidence that the silhouettes are associated to the same object. However, it is clear that incorporating geometric constraints can be important, either in the
process of inference, or for correcting the effects of noisy
data.
In this paper, we analyze the notion of “consistency” for
silhouettes and for more general closed image sets (Figure 1). We consider opaque objects projected in different
images and assume, in our initial setting, the knowledge of
all camera parameters. The theory can be seen as a natural
extension of classical multi-view geometry, which provides
∗ Willow project team. DI/ENS, ENS/CNRS/Inria UMR 8548.

Figure 1: Geometrically consistent silhouettes are feasible projections of a single object.

conditions for points (and sometimes lines) to be consistent
(i.e., to correspond) in terms of given camera projections
[11, 16]. This also expands an analogy initiated by the generalized epipolar constraint introduced in [1]. Throughout
our discussion, we point out several results that hold for arbitrary closed image sets (or sometimes convex image sets),
that have identical counterparts in the theory of point correspondences.
As consistency is clearly not a metric property of silhouettes, it is natural to adopt the framework of projective
geometry [7], since this eliminates various degenerate situations and allows, for example, to unify the cases of orthographic and perspective projections. This is also typical
in multi-view geometry.1 Another advantage of the projective language is that it provides a homogeneous formulation
of duality. In particular, we exploit the fact that perspective projections are related to planar sections in the dual
space [27], to define a very natural “dual” notion of consistency, expressing conditions for a family of planar sets to be
sections of the same object.
Finally, we also consider the case of having only partial
knowledge of the camera parameters, and discuss a more
general concept of “compatibility” for silhouettes. This extends a setting first considered in [2].
1 The most significant difference between the euclidean and projective

frameworks in our setting is that in the latter case visual cones are twosided. An alternative (but perhaps less natural) approach would have been
the use of oriented projective geometry [31].

3346

