In the Shadows, Shape Priors Shine:
Using Occlusion to Improve Multi-Region Segmentation
Yuka Kihara
Ricoh Co., Ltd.∗

Matvey Soloviev
Cornell University

Tsuhan Chen
Cornell University

yuuka.kihara@nts.ricoh.co.jp

msoloviev@cs.cornell.edu

tsuhan@cornell.edu

Abstract
We present a new algorithm for multi-region segmentation of 2D images with objects that may partially occlude
each other. Our algorithm is based on the observation that
human performance on this task is based both on prior
knowledge about plausible shapes and taking into account
the presence of occluding objects whose shape is already
known – once an occluded region is identified, the shape
prior can be used to guess the shape of the missing part.
We capture the former aspect using a deep learning model
of shape; for the latter, we simultaneously minimize the energy of all regions and consider only unoccluded pixels for
data agreement.
Existing algorithms incorporating object shape priors
consider every object separately in turn and can’t distinguish genuine deviation from the expected shape from parts
missing due to occlusion. We show that our method significantly improves on the performance of a representative
algorithm, as evaluated on both preprocessed natural and
synthetic images. Furthermore, on the synthetic images, we
recover the ground truth segmentation with good accuracy.

1. Introduction
The objective of multi-region segmentation of an image
is to determine the boundaries of a number of regions containing objects of interest. Unlike the single-region case,
in which the boundary unambiguously defines a partition
of the image domain (and so every pixel can be associated with the object or the background), region membership becomes ambiguous when multiple regions are considered and are allowed to intersect. While several methods for
multi-region segmentation have been presented in the past
[24, 25, 26, 27, 31], most of these algorithms generate a
true partition of the image into regions (including the background), so that every image point is assigned to a unique
region.
∗ Work done while the first author was visiting Cornell University.

The scenario where regions may overlap arises naturally when trying to infer the true outlines of a number
of objects in a two-dimensional picture of a 3D scene,
which may partially occlude each other. Human observers
have been known to vastly outperform known algorithms
in this setting [28, 29]; folk wisdom and previous studies
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] partially attribute this gap to extensive explicit (having seen many objects, familiarity with laws of
physics) and implicit (neurovisual tendency towards completing straight lines, constant-curvature curves and many
more complex features) prior knowledge about plausible
object shapes. Yet, as the following pair of figures demonstrates, this is not the whole story:

On the right, we clearly see a figure “8”, partially obscured by a black circle in front of it. The figure on the left,
though, could be resolved either in the same fashion (especially if the background is not a uniform color), or as an
unusually-shaped figure “3”, with most observers, human
or algorithmic, likely to lean towards the latter.
This suggests that besides prior knowledge about the
shape of objects, knowledge of the presence and shape of
occluding objects is also relevant to segmentation performance – failure of the image to manifest the expected shape
of a figure “8” due to the presence of an overlapping shape
counts as weaker evidence against the presence of a figure
“8” than failure due to a gap or perhaps noise. In fact,
it is precisely in the regions that can be established to be
occluded that prior knowledge about shape attains its full
significance – in the absence of data on occluded pixels,
whether a certain class of object may be identified in a region depends on whether the exposed parts may be extended
into an occluded region in a new way that creates a shape
considered plausible for that class.
1392

