Parametric Object Motion from Blur
Jochen Gast
Anita Sellent
Stefan Roth
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

Abstract
Motion blur can adversely affect a number of vision
tasks, hence it is generally considered a nuisance. We instead treat motion blur as a useful signal that allows to compute the motion of objects from a single image. Drawing
on the success of joint segmentation and parametric motion models in the context of optical flow estimation, we
propose a parametric object motion model combined with
a segmentation mask to exploit localized, non-uniform motion blur. Our parametric image formation model is differentiable w.r.t. the motion parameters, which enables us
to generalize marginal-likelihood techniques from uniform
blind deblurring to localized, non-uniform blur. A two-stage
pipeline, first in derivative space and then in image space,
allows to estimate both parametric object motion as well
as a motion segmentation from a single image alone. Our
experiments demonstrate its ability to cope with very challenging cases of object motion blur.

1. Introduction
The analysis and removal of image blur has been an active area of research over the last decade [e.g., 5, 11, 17, 34].
Starting with [8], camera shake has been in the focus of
this line of work. Conceptually, the blur is treated as a nuisance that should be removed from the image. While the
blur needs to be estimated in the form of a blur kernel, its
only purpose is to be used for deblurring. In contrast, it is
also possible to treat image blur as a signal that allows to
recover certain scene properties from the image. One such
example is blur from defocus, where the relationship between the local blur strength and depth can be exploited to
recover information on the scene depth at each pixel [19].
In this paper, we also treat blur as a useful signal and aim
to recover information on the motion in the scene from a
single still image. Unlike work dealing with camera shake,
which affects the image in a global manner, we consider localized motion blur arising from the independent motion of
objects in the scene (e.g., the “London eye” in Fig. 1(a)).
Previous work has approached the problem of estimating motion blur as identifying the object motion from a

(a) Input image with motion blur (b) Parametric motion with colorcoded motion segmentation

Figure 1. Our algorithm estimates motion parameters and motion
segmentation from a single input image.

fixed set of candidate motions [4, 13, 28], or by estimating a non-parametric blur kernel [25] along with the object
mask. The former has the problem that the discrete set of
candidate blurs restricts the possible motions that can be
handled. Estimating non-parametric blur kernels overcomes
this problem, but requires restricting the solution space, e.g.
by assuming spatially invariant motion. Moreover, existing
methods are challenged by fast motion, as these require a
large set of candidate motions or large kernels, and consequently many parameters, to be estimated. We take a different approach here and are inspired by recent work on optical
flow and scene flow, despite the fact that we work with a single input image only. Motion estimation methods have increasingly relied on approaches based on explicit segmentation and parametric motion models [e.g. 29, 36, 37] to cope
with large motion and insufficient image evidence.
Following that, we propose a parametrized motion blur
formulation with an analytical relation between the motion parameters of the object and spatially varying blur kernels. Doing so allows us to exploit well-proven and robust marginal-likelihood approaches [17, 18] for inferring
the unknown motion. To address the fact that object motion is confined to a certain region, we rely on an explicit
segmentation, which is estimated as part of the variational
inference scheme, Fig. 1(b). Since blur is typically estimated in derivative space [8], yet segmentation models are
best formulated in image space, we introduce a two-stage
pipeline, Fig. 2. First, we estimate the parametric motion
along with an initial segmentation in derivative space, and
then refine the segmentation in image space by exploiting

1846

