Highlight Detection with Pairwise Deep Ranking
for First-Person Video Summarization
Ting Yao, Tao Mei, and Yong Rui
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{tiyao, tmei, yongrui}@microsoft.com

(a) Raw video

Abstract
The emergence of wearable devices such as portable
cameras and smart glasses makes it possible to record life
logging first-person videos. Browsing such long unstructured videos is time-consuming and tedious. This paper studies the discovery of moments of user’s major or special
interest (i.e., highlights) in a video, for generating the summarization of first-person videos. Specifically, we propose
a novel pairwise deep ranking model that employs deep
learning techniques to learn the relationship between highlight and non-highlight video segments. A two-stream network structure by representing video segments from complementary information on appearance of video frames and
temporal dynamics across frames is developed for video
highlight detection. Given a long personal video, equipped
with the highlight detection model, a highlight score is assigned to each segment. The obtained highlight segments
are applied for summarization in two ways: video timelapse and video skimming. The former plays the highlight
(non-highlight) segments at low (high) speed rates, while
the latter assembles the sequence of segments with the highest scores. On 100 hours of first-person videos for 15 unique sports categories, our highlight detection achieves the
improvement over the state-of-the-art RankSVM method by
10.5% in terms of accuracy. Moreover, our approaches produce video summary with better quality by a user study from
35 human subjects.

1. Introduction
Wearable devices have become pervasive. People are
taking first-person videos using these devices everyday and
everywhere. For example, wearable camcorders such as
GoPro cameras and Google Glass are now able to capture
high quality first-person videos for recording our daily experience. These first-person videos are usually extremely
unstructured and long-running. Browsing and editing such
videos is really a tedious job. Therefore, video summariza-

...

...

...

Highlights

(b) Highlight curve
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
-0.50

Figure 1. Retrieving highlights from unconstrained first-person
videos: (a) raw video, where each segment is represented by a
frame sampled from the segment; (b) highlight prediction score
curve. The segments with high scores are selected as highlights in
red bounding boxes.

tion, which produces a short summary of a full-length video
and ideally encapsulates its most informative parts, is becoming increasingly important for alleviating the problem
of first-person video browsing, editing and indexing.
The research on video summarization has mainly proceeded along two dimensions, i.e., keyframe or shot-based
[15, 18], and structure-driven [17, 22] approaches. The
keyframe or shot-based method always selects a collection
of keyframes or shots by optimizing diversity or representativeness of a summary, while structure-driven approach
exploits a set of well-defined structures in certain domains (e.g., audience cheering, goal or score events in sports
videos) for summarization. In general, existing approaches offer sophisticated ways to sample a condensed synopsis
from the original video, reducing the time required for users
to view all the contents.
However, defining video summarization as a sampling
problem in conventional approaches is very limited as users’ interests in a video are fully overlooked. As a result, the
special moments may be omitted due to the visual diversity
criteria of excluding redundant parts in a summary. The limitation is particularly severe when directly applying those
methods to first-person videos. First-person videos captured with wearable devices record experiences from a first-

982

