Simultaneous Optical Flow and Intensity Estimation from an Event Camera
Patrick Bardow

Andrew J. Davison

p.bardow14@imperial.ac.uk

a.davison@imperial.ac.uk

Stefan Leutenegger
s.leutenegger@imperial.ac.uk

Dyson Robotics Laboratory at Imperial College, Dept. of Computing, Imperial College London, UK

Abstract
Event cameras are bio-inspired vision sensors which
mimic retinas to measure per-pixel intensity change rather
than outputting an actual intensity image. This proposed
paradigm shift away from traditional frame cameras offers significant potential advantages: namely avoiding high
data rates, dynamic range limitations and motion blur.
Unfortunately, however, established computer vision algorithms may not at all be applied directly to event cameras.
Methods proposed so far to reconstruct images, estimate
optical flow, track a camera and reconstruct a scene come
with severe restrictions on the environment or on the motion of the camera, e.g. allowing only rotation. Here, we
propose, to the best of our knowledge, the first algorithm to
simultaneously recover the motion field and brightness image, while the camera undergoes a generic motion through
any scene. Our approach employs minimisation of a cost
function that contains the asynchronous event data as well
as spatial and temporal regularisation within a sliding window time interval. Our implementation relies on GPU optimisation and runs in near real-time. In a series of examples,
we demonstrate the successful operation of our framework,
including in situations where conventional cameras suffer
from dynamic range limitations and motion blur.

1. Introduction
The ‘silicon retina’ or event camera appears to offer
enormous potential for a new level of performance in realtime geometric vision, and in the longer term a drive towards dramatically more efficient algorithms. It discards
the frame-based paradigm of standard cameras and instead
adopts a bio-inspired approach of independent and asynchronous pixel brightness change measurement. The highly
appealing promise is that all of the information contained
in a standard video stream of tens or more Megabytes of
data per second is present in a natural and much compressed
event stream of only tens or hundreds of kilobytes per sec-

(a) Raw event camera output

(b) Standard camera image

(c) Intensity estimate from events

(d) Optical flow from events

Figure 1: Results from our method: (a) integrated output of
a DVS128 event camera; (b) the same scene from a standard
camera. (c) and (d) show a snapshots of the intensity and
velocity fields we estimate jointly only from event data. A
color-wheel is used to show the velocity per pixel.

ond — all of the redundancy of sending regular, unchanging
values where motion and intensity change is small is removed. As systems like LSD-SLAM [8] very clearly highlight, pixels where edges move are the only ones which give
information useful for tracking and reconstruction, and it is
precisely these locations which are highlighted in hardware
by an event camera. On top of this, the pixels of an event

884

