Part-Stacked CNN for Fine-Grained Visual Categorization
Shaoli Huang∗1 , Zhe Xu∗1,2 , Dacheng Tao1 , and Ya Zhang2
1

Centre for Quantum Computation & Intelligent Systems and Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of
Technology Sydney, Australia
2
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{shaoli.huang@student.,dacheng.tao@}uts.edu.au, {xz3030,ya zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In the context of fine-grained visual categorization, the
ability to interpret models as human-understandable visual
manuals is sometimes as important as achieving high classification accuracy. In this paper, we propose a novel PartStacked CNN architecture that explicitly explains the finegrained recognition process by modeling subtle differences
from object parts. Based on manually-labeled strong part
annotations, the proposed architecture consists of a fully
convolutional network to locate multiple object parts and a
two-stream classification network that encodes object-level
and part-level cues simultaneously. By adopting a set of
sharing strategies between the computation of multiple object parts, the proposed architecture is very efficient running at 20 frames/sec during inference. Experimental results on the CUB-200-2011 dataset reveal the effectiveness
of the proposed architecture, from multiple perspectives of
classification accuracy, model interpretability, and efficiency. Being able to provide interpretable recognition results
in realtime, the proposed method is believed to be effective
in practical applications.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained visual categorization aims to distinguish
objects at the subordinate level, e.g., different species of
birds [47, 44, 4], pets [17, 30], flowers [29, 1] and cars
[38, 26]. It is a highly challenging task due to the small inter-class variance caused by highly similar subordinate
categories, and the large intra-class variance by nuisance
factors such as pose, viewpoint and occlusion. Inspiringly, huge progress has been made over the last few years
[43, 4, 42, 18, 49], making fine-grained recognition techniques a large step closer to practical use in various applications, such as wildlife observation and surveillance systems.
Whilst numerous attempts have been made to boost the
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

The class

California Gull

Ring billed Gull

has its beak mostly different from the class

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed approach. We propose to classify fine-grained categories by modeling the subtle difference from
specific object parts. Beyond classification results, the proposed
PS-CNN architecture also offers human-understandable instructions on how to classify highly similar object categories explicitly.

classification accuracy of fine-grained visual categorization
[10, 9, 6, 22, 46], we argue that another important aspect of
the problem has yet been severely overlooked, i.e., the ability to generate a human-understandable “manual” on how to
distinguish fine-grained categories in detail. For example,
volunteers for ecological protection may certainly benefit
from an algorithm that could not only classify bird species
accurately, but also provide brief instructions on how to distinguish a category from its most similar subspecies - e.g.,
a salient difference between a Ringed-billed gull and a California gull lies in the pattern on their beaks (Figure 1) with some intuitive illustration examples. Existing finegrained recognition methods that aim to provide a visual
field guide mostly follow the routine of “part-based onevs-one features” (POOFs) [2, 3, 4] or employ human-inthe-loop methods [20, 7, 41]. Since the data size has been
increasing drastically, a method that simultaneously implements and interprets fine-grained visual categorization using the latest deep learning methods [19] is therefore highly
advocated.
It is widely acknowledged that the subtle difference between fine-grained categories mostly resides in the unique
11173

