A Key Volume Mining Deep Framework for Action Recognition
Wangjiang Zhu1 , Jie Hu2 , Gang Sun2 , Xudong Cao2 , Yu Qiao3
1

2
Tsinghua University
SenseTime Group Limited
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China

Figure 1. Key volumes detected by our key volume mining deep framework. A volume is a spatial-temporal video clip. The top row shows
key volumes are very sparse among the whole video, and the second row shows that key volumes may come from different modalities
(different motion patterns here). Note that frames are sampled with fixed time interval.

Abstract. Recently, deep learning approaches have demonstrated remarkable progresses for action recognition in
videos. Most existing deep frameworks equally treat every
volume i.e. spatial-temporal video clip, and directly assign
a video label to all volumes sampled from it. However, within a video, discriminative actions may occur sparsely in a
few key volumes, and most other volumes are irrelevant to
the labeled action category. Training with a large proportion of irrelevant volumes will hurt performance.
To address this issue, we propose a key volume mining
deep framework to identify key volumes and conduct classification simultaneously. Specifically, our framework is
trained is optimized in an alternative way integrated to the
forward and backward stages of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). In the forward pass, our network mines key
volumes for each action class. In the backward pass, it updates network parameters with the help of these mined key
volumes. In addition, we propose “Stochastic out” to model
key volumes from multi-modalities, and an effective yet simple “unsupervised key volume proposal” method for high
quality volume sampling. Our experiments show that action recognition performance can be significantly improved
by mining key volumes, and we achieve state-of-the-art per-

formance on HMDB51 and UCF101 (93.1%).

1. Introduction
Action recognition in videos receives extensive research
interests nowadays due to its wide applications in video
retrieval, surveillance, human-computer interface [21] etc.
Early works [16, 29, 30] utilized hand-crafted spatialtemporal local descriptors for video representation and classification. Inspired by the remarkable successes of deep
learning for image classification, recent works [23, 13, 28]
have explored deep convolutional neural networks (CNN)
for video classification.
A problem exists when extending deep learning methods from image to video: unlike images, videos are 3D
in nature and have variable temporal durations, but CNN
only accept fixed size input. Existing works [23, 13, 28]
tackle this problem by sampling fixed-size volumes regardless of the video’s actual length. Note that a volume is a
spatial-temporal video clip containing a sequence of images
cropped from consecutive frames.
However, it is problematic to equally treat all the
sampled volumes and apply video-level labels to all of
11991

