Real-time Action Recognition with Enhanced Motion Vector CNNs
Bowen Zhang1,2
1
2

Limin Wang1,3

Zhe Wang1

Yu Qiao1∗

Hanli Wang2

Shenzhen key lab of Comp. Vis. & Pat. Rec., Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China

Key Laboratory of Embedded System and Service Computing, Ministry of Education, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
3

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Motion Vector

Abstract
The deep two-stream architecture [23] exhibited excellent performance on video based action recognition. The
most computationally expensive step in this approach comes
from the calculation of optical flow which prevents it to be
real-time. This paper accelerates this architecture by replacing optical flow with motion vector which can be obtained directly from compressed videos without extra calculation. However, motion vector lacks fine structures, and
contains noisy and inaccurate motion patterns, leading to
the evident degradation of recognition performance. Our
key insight for relieving this problem is that optical flow
and motion vector are inherent correlated. Transferring the
knowledge learned with optical flow CNN to motion vector
CNN can significantly boost the performance of the latter.
Specifically, we introduce three strategies for this, initialization transfer, supervision transfer and their combination.
Experimental results show that our method achieves comparable recognition performance to the state-of-the-art, while
our method can process 390.7 frames per second, which is
27 times faster than the original two-stream method.

1. Introduction
Action recognition aims to enable computer automatically recognize human action in real world video. Recent
years have witnessed extensive research efforts and significant research progresses in this area. The existence of large
action datasets and worldwide competitions, like UCF101
[25], HMDB51 [15], and THUMOS14 [11] promote researches in this area. Early approaches in this area utilize a Bag-of-Visual-Words paradigm and its variants [20],
which mainly consists of feature extraction, feature encoding, and classification steps. The performance of these approaches highly depends on the hand crafted features. Previous studies show that iDT descriptors and Fisher vector representation yield superior performance on various
∗ Corresponding author.

Optical Flow

Original Frame
X-axis

Y-axis

Figure 1. Comparison of motion vector and optical flow in x and y
components. We can see that motion vector contains lots of noisy
movement information and it is much coarser than optical flow.

datasets [28]. More recently researchers exploit deep learning for action recognition. One successful example along
this line is the two-stream framework [23] which utilizes
both RGB CNN and optical flow CNN for classification and
achieves the state-of-the-art performance on several large
action datasets. However, two-stream CNNs cannot process videos at real-time. The calculation of optical flow is
time consuming which hinders the processing speed of twostream CNNs.
This paper aims to develop a real-time action recognition method with high performance based on the successful
two-stream framework. This is challenging, since optical
flow itself is computationally expensive and cannot be estimated in real-time with most current algorithms [1, 4]. It
takes 60 ms [1] to calculate optical flows per frame in K40
GPU, which is far from the requirement of real-time processing. To circumvent this difficulty, instead of using optical flow, this paper leverages motion vector as the input of
CNN, which can be decoded directly from standard video
compressed files with very low computational cost.
Motion vectors represent movement patterns of image
blocks which resemble optical flows in terms of describing local motions. Early research [12] indicates that motion
vectors include useful information for action recognition.
However, the purpose of motion vector is not to unveil the
temporal relationship of two macro blocks as accurate as
possible, but to exploit temporal redundancy between ad-

2718

