Joint Recovery of Dense Correspondence and Cosegmentation in Two Images
Tatsunori Taniai
The University of Tokyo

Sudipta N. Sinha
Microsoft Research

Yoichi Sato
The University of Tokyo

Abstract
We propose a new technique to jointly recover cosegmentation and dense per-pixel correspondence in two images.
Our method parameterizes the correspondence field using
piecewise similarity transformations and recovers a mapping between the estimated common “foreground” regions
in the two images allowing them to be precisely aligned.
Our formulation is based on a hierarchical Markov random
field model with segmentation and transformation labels.
The hierarchical structure uses nested image regions to constrain inference across multiple scales. Unlike prior hierarchical methods which assume that the structure is given,
our proposed iterative technique dynamically recovers the
structure along with the labeling. This joint inference is performed in an energy minimization framework using iterated
graph cuts. We evaluate our method on a new dataset of 400
image pairs with manually obtained ground truth, where it
outperforms state-of-the-art methods designed specifically
for either cosegmentation or correspondence estimation.

1. Introduction
Recovering dense per-pixel correspondence between image regions in two or more images is a central problem
in computer vision. While correspondence estimation for
images of the same scene (stereo, optic flow, etc.) is
well studied, there has been growing interest in the case
where the images portray semantically similar but different
scenes or depict semantically related but different object instances [36]. Due to the variability in appearance, shape and
pose of distinct object instances, camera viewpoint, scene
lighting and backgrounds in the images, the task is quite
challenging in the unsupervised setting. Yet, correspondence estimation enables fine-grained image alignment crucial in tasks such as non-parametric scene parsing and label
transfer [36], 3D shape recovery [51], image editing [19]
and unsupervised visual object discovery [11, 42, 45, 50].
In parallel to advances in correspondence estimation,
there has also been rapid progress in image cosegmentation [17, 26, 41, 46] methods that automatically segment
similar “foreground” areas in two or more images. These

Input images

Seg. & flow (GT)

Warped (GT)

Warped (Ours)

Figure 1. Joint recovery of dense correspondence and cosegmentation where foregrounds are segmented and aligned. We show our
results and corresponding ground truth (GT) from our new dataset.

methods often require the foregrounds depicting common
objects to have similar region statistics. Most cosegmentation methods do not explicitly recover dense pixel correspondence and alignment in the region labeled foreground.
On the other hand, correspondence estimation methods
[36, 29, 53, 23] align all the pixels without explicitly inferring which pixels in the two images actually have valid correspondence. Thus, recovering cosegmentation along with a
dense alignment of the common foregrounds can be viewed
as a holistic approach to solving both tasks.
In this paper, we present insight into how image cosegmentation and correspondence (or flow) estimation can be
tackled within a unified framework by framing it as a labeling problem (Figure 1). We show that jointly solving the
two tasks in this way can improve performance on both of
them. This paper deals with the case where only two input
images are given. The setting is unsupervised and we do not
assume a priori information about the objects or the scene.
Our contributions are three folds. First, we propose a
new hierarchical Markov random field (MRF) model for
joint cosegmentation and correspondence recovery. The hierarchy is defined over nested image regions in the reference image and the nodes representing these regions take
segmentation and flow labels. In our method, the hierarchy itself is inferred in conjunction with the labeling and is
crucial for achieving robustness to dissimilar appearance of
different object instances. Precomputed hierarchical structures [29, 23, 27] are unsuitable for our task because pixels
inferred as background must be excluded from matching.
Second, we propose a new optimization technique for
the joint inference of the graph structure and labeling. Per-

4246

