Copula Ordinal Regression
for Joint Estimation of Facial Action Unit Intensity
Robert Walecki? , Ognjen Rudovic? , Vladimir Pavlovic† and Maja Pantic?‡
?
†

Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, USA
‡
EEMCS, University of Twente, The Netherlands

{r.walecki14,o.rudovic,m.pantic}@imperial.ac.uk, vladimir@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Joint modeling of the intensity of facial action units
(AUs) from face images is challenging due to the large number of AUs (30+) and their intensity levels (6). This is in
part due to the lack of suitable models that can efficiently
handle such a large number of outputs/classes simultaneously, but also due to the lack of labelled target data. For
this reason, majority of the methods proposed so far resort
to independent classifiers for the AU intensity. This is suboptimal for at least two reasons: the facial appearance of
some AUs changes depending on the intensity of other AUs,
and some AUs co-occur more often than others. Encoding this is expected to improve the estimation of target AU
intensities, especially in the case of noisy image features,
head-pose variations and imbalanced training data. To this
end, we introduce a novel modeling framework, Copula Ordinal Regression (COR), that leverages the power of copula functions and CRFs, to detangle the probabilistic modeling of AU dependencies from the marginal modeling of
the AU intensity. Consequently, the COR model achieves
the joint learning and inference of intensities of multiple
AUs, while being computationally tractable. We show on
two challenging datasets of naturalistic facial expressions
that the proposed approach consistently outperforms (i) independent modeling of AU intensities, and (ii) the state-ofthe-art approach for the target task.

1. Introduction
Human facial expressions are typically described in
terms of variation in configuration and intensity of facial
muscle actions defined using the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [6]. Specifically, the FACS defines a unique
set of 30+ atomic non-overlapping facial muscle actions
named Action Units (AUs) [19]. It also provides rules
for scoring the intensity of each AU in the range from absent to maximal intensity on a six-point ordinal scale, de-

AU1 :0

AU2 :0

Ordinal Marginal Potential

AU6 :3
AU12 :4
AU26 : 1
AU25 : 3

Infer Network
Joint Copula Potential

Figure 1: The AU intensity estimation with the proposed
Copula Ordinal Regression using the random fields framework. The pruning of the edges in the fully connected graph
is accomplished by learning the sparse graph of AU relationships using graph lasso. Pa and Pad denote the node
potentials (modeled using marginal ordinal models for each
AU) and the edge potentials (modeled using Copula functions accounting for dependencies among the pairs of target
AUs), while the ~x represents the input features (a set of fiducial facial points), in the proposed random field model.
noted as neutral<A<B<C<D<E. Thus, using FACS, human coders can manually code nearly any anatomically possible facial expression, decomposing it into specific AUs
and their intensities. However, this process is tedious and
error-prone due to the large number of AUs and the difficulty in discerning their intensities [20]. On the other hand,
automated estimation of the AU intensity is challenging for
many reasons such as the subject-specific facial morphology and expressiveness level [24], as well as the changes
in lighting and the head-pose variation. Co-occurrences of
the intensity levels of different AUs are another important
factor that affects their coding/automated estimation. For
instance, the criteria for intensity scoring of AU7 (lid tightener) are changed significantly if AU7 appears with a maximal intensity of AU43 (eye closure), since this combination
changes the appearance as well as timing of these AUs [6].
14902

