Efficient Coarse-to-Fine PatchMatch for Large Displacement Optical Flow
Yinlin Hu1

Rui Song1,2

Yunsong Li1,∗

huyinlin@gmail.com

rsong@xidian.edu.cn

ysli@mail.xidian.edu.cn

1

Xidian University, China

2

Shanghai Institute of Technical Physics, China

Abstract
As a key component in many computer vision systems, optical flow estimation, especially with large displacements, remains an open problem. In this paper we present
a simple but powerful matching method works in a coarseto-fine scheme for optical flow estimation. Inspired by the
nearest neighbor field (NNF) algorithms, our approach,
called CPM (Coarse-to-fine PatchMatch), blends an efficient random search strategy with the coarse-to-fine scheme
for optical flow problem. Unlike existing NNF techniques,
which is efficient but the results is often too noisy for optical
flow caused by the lack of global regularization, we propose
a propagation step with constrained random search radius
between adjacent levels on the hierarchical architecture.
The resulting correspondences enjoys a built-in smoothing
effect, which is more suited for optical flow estimation than
NNF techniques. Furthermore, our approach can also capture the tiny structures with large motions which is a problem for traditional coarse-to-fine optical flow algorithms.
Interpolated by an edge-preserving interpolation method
(EpicFlow), our method outperforms the state of the art on
MPI-Sintel and KITTI, and runs much faster than the competing methods.

1. Introduction
Optical flow has traditionally been, and continues to be,
one of the most fundamental components in many vision
tasks. There has been abundant literature on this topic,
while obtaining a reliable optical flow for real-world videos
remains a challenging problem caused mainly by motion
discontinuities, large displacements, and occlusions.
Since the pioneering work by Horn and Schunck [11]
who formulated the optical flow estimation as a problem
of energy minimization, many effective approaches have emerged for improving the performance with complex motions [5, 26, 29]. Though combined with a coarse-to-fine
scheme, such approaches still often failed to estimate large
∗ Corresponding author

(a) EpicFlow [24]

(b) CPM-Flow

(c) MDPFlow2 [29]

(d) Ground truth

Figure 1. Comparison of state-of-the-art flow methods. In addition
to the sharp motion boundaries which is similar to EpicFlow, our
CPM-Flow can survive in the case of tiny structures with large
motions (like the leg of the character and the bar of the weapon)
which is usually a problem.

displacements introduced by fast motion, which is caused
by the propagation of errors from coarser levels to the finest
level, especially in the case of tiny structures with large motions (see Figure 1(c)).
The visual similarity between two image regions is the
most important clue for large optical flow estimation. Recently, optical flow interpolated from sparse descriptor
matching correspondences directly has shown great success
for large displacements, especially with significant occlusions [24]. While the results is mainly constrained by the
efficiency and accuracy of the matching techniques.
In contrast, as a core component in image editing and
scene correspondence [18], the nearest neighbor field (NNF) is closely related to optical flow estimation. The objective of NNF computation is to find one or more nearest (visually similar) neighbors for every patch in a given image against another image. The main challenge in this procedure
is the computational complexity. Through the seminal work
called PatchMatch [4] and the improved methods [15, 10],
the efficiency of computing NNF has advanced remarkably.
The core idea behind this boost is random search and propagation between neighbors. While with a different objective
from optical flow estimation, the computed NNF is often

5704

