Sparseness Meets Deepness: 3D Human Pose Estimation from Monocular Video
Xiaowei Zhou†∗, Menglong Zhu†∗ , Spyridon Leonardos† , Konstantinos G. Derpanis‡ , Kostas Daniilidis†
†
‡
University of Pennsylvania
Ryerson University

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of 3D full-body human pose estimation from a monocular image sequence.
Here, two cases are considered: (i) the image locations of
the human joints are provided and (ii) the image locations
of joints are unknown. In the former case, a novel approach
is introduced that integrates a sparsity-driven 3D geometric
prior and temporal smoothness. In the latter case, the former case is extended by treating the image locations of the
joints as latent variables to take into account considerable
uncertainties in 2D joint locations. A deep fully convolutional network is trained to predict the uncertainty maps
of the 2D joint locations. The 3D pose estimates are realized via an Expectation-Maximization algorithm over the
entire sequence, where it is shown that the 2D joint location uncertainties can be conveniently marginalized out
during inference. Empirical evaluation on the Human3.6M
dataset shows that the proposed approaches achieve greater
3D pose estimation accuracy over state-of-the-art baselines. Further, the proposed approach outperforms a publicly available 2D pose estimation baseline on the challenging PennAction dataset.

1. Introduction
This paper is concerned with the challenge of recovering
the 3D full-body human pose from a monocular RGB image
sequence. Potential applications of the presented research
include human-computer interaction (cf. [37]), surveillance,
video browsing and indexing, and virtual reality.
From a geometric perspective, 3D articulated pose recovery is inherently ambiguous from monocular imagery
[20]. Further difficulties are raised due to the large variation
in human appearance (e.g., clothing, body shape, and illumination), arbitrary camera viewpoint, and obstructed visibility due to external entities and self-occlusions. Notable
successes in pose estimation consider the challenge of 2D
pose recovery using discriminatively trained 2D part models coupled with 2D deformation priors, e.g., [50, 4, 49],
and more recently using deep learning, e.g., [46]. Here,
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

……

EM

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed approach. (top-left) Input
image sequence, (top-right) CNN-based heat map outputs representing the soft localization of 2D joints, (bottom-left) 3D pose
dictionary, and (bottom-right) the recovered 3D pose sequence reconstruction.

the 3D pose geometry is not leveraged. Combining robust
image-driven 2D part detectors, expressive 3D geometric
pose priors and temporal models to aggregate information
over time is a promising area of research that has been given
limited attention, e.g., [5, 54]. The challenge posed is how
to seamlessly integrate 2D, 3D and temporal information to
fully account for the model and measurement uncertainties.
This paper presents a 3D pose recovery framework that
consists of a novel synthesis between discriminative imagebased and 3D reconstruction approaches. In particular, the
approach reasons jointly about image-based 2D part location estimates and model-based 3D pose reconstruction, so
that they can benefit from each other. Further, to improve
the approach’s robustness against detector error, occlusion,
and reconstruction ambiguity, temporal smoothness is imposed on the 3D pose and viewpoint parameters. Figure 1
provides an overview of the proposed approach. Given the
input video (Fig. 1, top-left), 2D joint heat maps are generated with a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) (Fig.
1, top-right). These heat maps are combined with a sparse
model of 3D human pose (Fig. 1, bottom-left) within an
Expectation-Maximization (EM) framework to recover the
3D pose sequence (Fig. 1, bottom-right).
14966

