Regularizing Long Short Term Memory with 3D Human-Skeleton Sequences
for Action Recognition
Behrooz Mahasseni and Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331, USA
mahasseb@eecs.oregonstate.edu, sinisa@eecs.oregonstate.edu

Abstract
This paper argues that large-scale action recognition in
video can be greatly improved by providing an additional
modality in training data – namely, 3D human-skeleton sequences – aimed at complementing poorly represented or
missing features of human actions in the training videos.
For recognition, we use Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)
grounded via a deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
onto the video. Training of LSTM is regularized using
the output of another encoder LSTM (eLSTM) grounded
on 3D human-skeleton training data. For such regularized training of LSTM, we modify the standard backpropagation through time (BPTT) in order to address the wellknown issues with gradient descent in constraint optimization. Our evaluation on three benchmark datasets – Sports1M, HMDB-51, and UCF101 – shows accuracy improvements from 1.7% up to 14.8% relative to the state of the art.

1. Introduction
This paper is about classifying videos of human actions.
We focus on domains that present challenges along two
axes. First, we consider a large set of action classes (e.g., the
Sports-1M dataset with 487 action classes [15]) which may
have very subtle inter-class differences and large intra-class
variations (e.g., Sports-1M contains 6 different types of
bowling, 7 different types of American football and 23 types
of billiards). The actions may be performed by individuals
or groups of people (e.g., skateboarding vs. marathon), and
may be defined by a particular object of interaction (e.g.,
bull-riding vs. horseback riding). Second, our videos are
captured in uncontrolled environments, where the actions
are viewed from various camera viewpoints and distances,
and under partial occlusion.
Recent work uses Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) to address the above challenges [2, 13, 31, 15,

41, 4, 35, 26]. However, despite the ongoing research efforts to: (a) Increase the amount of training data [15],
(b) Fuse hand-designed and deep-convolutional features
[35, 26, 41], and (c) Combine CNNs with either graphical
models [31, 11, 39], or recurrent neural networks [4, 39]
for capturing complex dynamics of human actions, we observe that their classification accuracy is still markedly below the counterpart performance on large-scale image classification. This motivates us to seek a novel deep architecture, leveraging some of the promising directions in (a)–(c).
Our key idea is to augment the training set of videos
with additional data coming from another modality. This
has the potential to facilitate capturing important features
of human actions poorly represented in the training videos,
or even provide complementary information missing in the
videos. Specifically, in training, we use 3D human-skeleton
sequences of a few human actions to regularize learning of
our deep representation of all action classes. This regularization rests on our hypothesis that since videos and skeleton sequences are about human motions their respective
feature representations should be similar. The skeleton sequences, being view-independent and devoid of background
clutter, are expected to facilitate capturing important motion
patterns of human-body joints in 3D space. This, in turn, is
expected to regularize, and thus improve our deep learning
from videos.
It is worth noting that the additional modality that we use
in training does not provide examples of most action classes
from our video domain. Rather, available 3D humanskeleton sequences form a small-size training dataset that
is insufficient for robust deep learning. Nevertheless, in this
paper, we show that accounting for this additional modality
greatly improves our performance relative to the case when
only videos are used in training.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, for action recognition, we use
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) grounded via a deep
Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) onto the video.
LSTM is modified to have an additional representational
layer at the top, aimed at extracting deep-learned feature
13054

