Fits Like a Glove: Rapid and Reliable Hand Shape Personalization
David Joseph Tan1,2
Thomas Cashman1
Jonathan Taylor1
Andrew Fitzgibbon1
Daniel Tarlow1
Sameh Khamis1
Shahram Izadi1
Jamie Shotton1
1
2
Microsoft Research
Technische Universität München

The ability to accurately and efficiently reconstruct the
motion of the human hand from images promises exciting
new applications in immersive virtual and augmented realities, robotic control, and sign language recognition. There
has been great progress in recent years, especially with the
arrival of consumer depth cameras [16, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30,
32, 33, 36]. However, it remains a challenging task [31]
due to unconstrained global and local pose variations, frequent occlusion, local self-similarity, and a high degree of
articulation.
Most recent approaches combine the best of discriminative and generative approaches: the ‘bottom-up’ discriminative component attempts to make a prediction about the
state of the hand directly from the image data, which then
guides a ‘top-down’ generative component by deforming the
parameters of a model to try to explain the data. Discriminative methods can be faster and typically require no temporal
history. In contrast a good generative model can use its ex-

Frame 2

Frame F

Model near depth data
Model in front of depth data
Model behind depth data

Optimized

1. Introduction

Frame 1

Initialization

We present a fast, practical method for personalizing a
hand shape basis to an individual user’s detailed hand shape
using only a small set of depth images. To achieve this, we
minimize an energy based on a sum of render-and-compare
cost functions called the golden energy. However, this energy
is only piecewise continuous, due to pixels crossing occlusion boundaries, and is therefore not obviously amenable to
efficient gradient-based optimization. A key insight is that
the energy is the combination of a smooth low-frequency
function with a high-frequency, low-amplitude, piecewisecontinuous function. A central finite difference approximation with a suitable step size can therefore jump over the discontinuities to obtain a good approximation to the energy’s
low-frequency behavior, allowing efficient gradient-based
optimization. Experimental results quantitatively demonstrate for the first time that detailed personalized models
improve the accuracy of hand tracking and achieve competitive results in both tracking and model registration.

Model Fit to Data

Shape Space

Abstract

Figure 1: We show how to fit a deformable hand shape basis
model [17] to a small set of depth images. Our method
jointly optimizes over the shape β ∈ RK and F poses θf
to maximize the model’s alignment to the data in F depth
images. The initial hand poses are automatically determined
by a hand tracker that uses the mean shape β mean , but there
is clearly poor alignment between model and data. After our
optimization to obtain personalized shape β personalized , the
alignment is much better, with remaining errors largely due
to sensor noise.

planatory power and priors to produce what is usually a more
accurate result, even in the presence of occlusion.
Generative models of hands are limited by their capacity
to accurately explain the image observations. High-quality,
though expensive and off-line, models have been shown to
reliably fit both the pose and shape of complex sequences [4].
However, most interactive (real-time) hand tracking systems
(e.g. [25, 30]) approximate the hand surface using primitives
such as spheres or cylinders, parameterized to articulate the
surface geometry. Others [28] use a detailed hand mesh
model, though only attempt to fit the hand poses using a
fixed template shape. To improve the model’s capacity, some
approaches [22, 30] allow shape deformations of primitive
spheres and cylinders, but these models can only compensate
for gross model-data mismatches.
Recent work [35] has investigated an off-line process for
‘personalizing’ a detailed 3D mesh model to an individual’s
hand shape using a set of depth images of the hand in varied
poses, each paired with a manually-annotated initialization
pose. The mesh shape is optimized to jointly explain the

5610

