Automatic Image Cropping : A Computational Complexity Study
Jiansheng Chen
Gaocheng Bai
Shaoheng Liang
Zhengqin Li
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
jschenthu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn,

{bgc13, liangsh13, li-zq12}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Attention based automatic image cropping aims at preserving the most visually important region in an image. A
common task in this kind of method is to search for the
smallest rectangle inside which the summed attention is
maximized. We demonstrate that under appropriate formulations, this task can be achieved using efficient algorithms
with low computational complexity. In a practically useful
scenario where the aspect ratio of the cropping rectangle
is given, the problem can be solved with a computational
complexity linear to the number of image pixels. We also
study the possibility of multiple rectangle cropping and a
new model facilitating fully automated image cropping.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of imaging and storage technologies, pixel resolution of digital images captured by
modern imaging devices such as the digital camera, webcam or mobile phone has increased dramatically. Images
containing over millions of pixels has become more and
more common even in mobile devices. This has brought
difficulties to the transmission and sharing of the images
especially through the mobile Internet. Considering both
the time and the cost, images are usually excessively down
sampled or compressed before transmission, leading to serious degradation of image quality on the receiver’s side.
Visual importances vary a log across different regions in
real life images. Examples are shown in Figure 1. Actually, with the continuous increasing of pixel resolution of
capturing devices, people tends to include a unnecessary
amount of less important background or unrelated scenery
in the image when taking pictures. In addition to causing
difficulties to image transmission, these relatively less important image pixels may also harm the visual effectiveness
of important image parts, especially after image retargeting
for mobile devices equipped with small sized displays. To
solve this problem, previous researchers have proposed a
number of context aware image cropping/resizing methods
which can be generally divided into two categories, atten-

tion based methods and aesthetics oriented methods [24].

1.1. Previous works
The fundamental idea of attention based methods is
trying to preserve visually important area of an image
after cropping or resizing. Pixel importances for visual attention are usually estimated using their saliency
scores [5] [20] [18] [16], objectness [27] [7], or empirically
defined energy functions [15] [1]. Chen et al. were among
the first to study the image cropping problem in order to
facilitate viewing large images on small sized displays [5].
Pixel saliency values calculated using Itti’s model [9] was
combined with face and text detection results for generating
the attention map. Suh et al. extended this work by using
summed saliency values within cropping rectangles for determining the best cropping position [20]. Santella et al. acquired image saliency values by means of human-computer
interaction [18]. User fixation data were captured and utilized together with image segmentation results to identify
important image contents and compute the best crop. By
assuming that images sharing similar global visual appearances are likely to share similar salience, Marchesotti et al.

Figure 1. Examples of automatic image cropping. Images are selected from the MSRA Salient Object Database [13]. 1st column:
cropping results using the graph cut based method [16]. 2nd column: cropping results R̈(τ ∗ ) using the proposed method. 3rd column: cropped images using the proposed method. 4th column:
retargeted images using the shortest path base method [1].

1507

