Consensus of Non-Rigid Reconstructions
Minsik Lee†∗
Jungchan Cho‡∗
Songhwai Oh‡
Division of EE, Hanyang University, Korea†
Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea‡
mleepaper@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, there have been many progresses for the problem of non-rigid structure reconstruction based on 2D trajectories, but it is still challenging to deal with complex
deformations or restricted view ranges. Promising alternatives are the piecewise reconstruction approaches, which
divide trajectories into several local parts and stitch their
individual reconstructions to produce an entire 3D structure. These methods show the state-of-the-art performance,
however, most of them are specialized for relatively smooth
surfaces and some are quite complicated. Meanwhile, it
has been reported numerously in the field of pattern recognition that obtaining consensus from many weak hypotheses can give a strong, powerful result. Inspired by these
reports, in this paper, we push the concept of part-based reconstruction to the limit: Instead of considering the parts
as explicitly-divided local patches, we draw a large number of small random trajectory sets. From their individual
reconstructions, we pull out a statistic of each 3D point to
retrieve a strong reconstruction, of which the procedure can
be expressed as a sparse l1 -norm minimization problem. In
order to resolve the reflection ambiguity between weak (and
possibly bad) reconstructions, we propose a novel optimization framework which only involves a single eigenvalue decomposition. The proposed method can be applied to any
type of data and outperforms the existing methods for the
benchmark sequences, even though it is composed of a few,
simple steps. Furthermore, it is easily parallelizable, which
is another advantage.

1. Introduction
There have been many remarkable advances in non-rigid
structure from motion (NRSfM), a problem to reconstruct
3D structures from a set of 2D trajectories, during the last
decade. The ambiguity in global rotations, pointed out by
Xiao et al. [30], was proven to be resolvable with the rank-3
*Authors contributed equally.

{cjc83, songhwai}@snu.ac.kr

constraint [4]. An algorithm to find an approximate rank-3
solution followed in [10], combined with an efficient structure reconstruction algorithm which is concisely expressed
by a convex rank-minimization problem. On the other hand,
there have been many attempts to incorporate the temporal
dependence prior in the reconstruction process [5, 17], one
of which [17] already showed good performances for the
popular benchmark data sets. The difficulty of deciding the
number of shape bases has been resolved by the Procrustean
distributions [20, 21], which are shape distributions without
global rigid transformations, and online reconstruction became possible by processing data sequentially based on the
continuum mechanics [1, 2]. Finally, most recent proposals
on dense structure recovery [13, 15] have made the practicality of NRSfM convincing.
Even with all these progresses, however, non-rigid structure recovery is still a difficult problem when there are complex deformations or when the range of viewpoint is restricted. Existing methods are usually based on linear or
Gaussian shape models, which are not strong enough to
handle complicated shape changes. The situation is worse
for the restricted view range cases, i.e., the reconstruction
itself becomes completely impossible for this case because
these methods rely on global rigid transformations. Regarding this, some of the state-of-the-art results achieved
by the existing methods for benchmark data sets are mainly
attributed by the artificially added rotations. For example,
the benchmark sets proposed in [4] contain unrealistic artificial rotations, of which the total amount is about 1500
– 5500 degrees depending on the data. This problem can
be confirmed in the experiments of Section 4, where the
performances of the existing methods degrade severely for
realistic view ranges.
A possible alternative to these problems is the piecewise
reconstruction approach [11, 12, 24]. This approach tries to
divide trajectories into several parts, which are local patches
of the entire structure. Fayad et al. [11] used the quadratic
deformation model to reconstruct overlapping patches and
connected them based on a smoothness assumption, and its
heuristic patch assignment was later replaced by a graph-

4670

