Refining Architectures of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
Sukrit Shankar∗ Duncan Robertson† Yani Ioannou∗ Antonio Criminisi† Roberto Cipolla∗
∗

Machine Intelligence Lab, University of Cambridge, UK
†
Microsoft Research Cambridge, UK

ss965@cam.ac.uk | a-durobe@microsoft.com | yai20@cam.ac.uk | antcrim@microsoft.com | rc10001@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have recently evinced immense success for various image recognition tasks [11, 27]. However, a question of paramount
importance is somewhat unanswered in deep learning research - is the selected CNN optimal for the dataset in terms
of accuracy and model size?
In this paper, we intend to answer this question and
introduce a novel strategy that alters the architecture of a
given CNN for a specified dataset, to potentially enhance
the original accuracy while possibly reducing the model
size. We use two operations for architecture refinement, viz.
stretching and symmetrical splitting. Stretching increases
the number of hidden units (nodes) in a given CNN layer,
while a symmetrical split of say K between two layers separates the input and output channels into K equal groups,
and connects only the corresponding input-output channel
groups. Our procedure starts with a pre-trained CNN for
a given dataset, and optimally decides the stretch and split
factors across the network to refine the architecture. We empirically demonstrate the necessity of the two operations.
We evaluate our approach on two natural scenes attributes datasets, SUN Attributes [16] and CAMIT-NSAD
[20], with architectures of GoogleNet and VGG-11, that
are quite contrasting in their construction. We justify our
choice of datasets, and show that they are interestingly distinct from each other, and together pose a challenge to our
architectural refinement algorithm. Our results substantiate
the usefulness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have recently shown immense success for various image recognition tasks, such as object recognition [11, 22], recognition
of man-made places [27], prediction of natural scenes attributes [20] and discerning of facial attributes [13]. Out
of the many CNN architectures, AlexNet [11], GoogleNet
[22] and VGG [21] can be considered as the most popu-

lar ones, based on their impressive performance across a
variety of datasets. While architectures of AlexNet and
GoogleNet have been carefully designed for the large-scale
ImageNet [4] dataset, VGG can be seen as being relatively
more generic in curation. Irrespective of whether an architecture has been hand-curated for a given dataset or not,
all of them show significant redundancy in their parameter space [8, 12], i.e. for a significantly reduced number of
parameters (sometimes as high as 90% reduction), a given
architecture might achieve nearly the same accuracy as obtained with the entire set of parameters. Researchers have
utilized this fact to speed up inference by estimating the set
of parameters that can be zeroed out with a minimal loss
in original accuracy. This is typically done through sparse
optimization techniques [12] and low-rank procedures [8].
Envisaging a real-world scenario: We try to envisage
a real-world scenario. A user has a new sizeable image
dataset, which he wants to train with a CNN. He would
typically try out famous CNN architectures like AlexNet,
GoogleNet, VGG-11, VGG-16, VGG-19 and then select the
one which gives maximum accuracy. In case his application
prioritizes a reduced model size (number of parameters) as
compared to the accuracy (e.g. applications for mobile platforms and embedded systems), he will try to strike a manual
trade-off of how much he wants to sacrifice the accuracy for
a reduction in model size.
Once he makes his choice, what if his finally selected architecture could be altered so as to potentially give a better
accuracy while also reducing the model size ? In this paper,
we aim to target such a scenario. Note that in all cases, the
user can further choose to apply one of the sparsification
techniques such as [12] to significantly reduce the model
size with a slight decrease in accuracy. We now formally
define our problem statement as follows :
Given a pre-trained CNN for a specific dataset, refine the
architecture in order to potentially increase the accuracy
while possibly reducing the model size.
Operations for CNN architecture refinement: One
may now ask what is exactly meant by the refinement of
a CNN architecture. On a broader level, refining a CNN
12212

