Recognizing Activities of Daily Living with a Wrist-mounted Camera
Katsunori Ohnishi, Atsushi Kanehira, Asako Kanezaki, Tatsuya Harada
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo
{ohnishi, kanehira, kanezaki, harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We present a novel dataset and a novel algorithm for recognizing activities of daily living (ADL) from a first-person
wearable camera. Handled objects are crucially important
for egocentric ADL recognition. For specific examination
of objects related to users’ actions separately from other
objects in an environment, many previous works have addressed the detection of handled objects in images captured
from head-mounted and chest-mounted cameras. Nevertheless, detecting handled objects is not always easy because
they tend to appear small in images. They can be occluded
by a user’s body. As described herein, we mount a camera
on a user’s wrist. A wrist-mounted camera can capture handled objects at a large scale, and thus it enables us to skip
the object detection process. To compare a wrist-mounted
camera and a head-mounted camera, we also developed a
novel and publicly available dataset 1 that includes videos
and annotations of daily activities captured simultaneously
by both cameras. Additionally, we propose a discriminative video representation that retains spatial and temporal
information after encoding the frame descriptors extracted
by convolutional neural networks (CNN).

1. Introduction
Recently, activity recognition from first-person camera
views has been attracting increasing interest, motivated by
advances in wearable device technology. Recognition of activities of daily living (ADL) from first-person views is an
important task related to activity recognition. ADL are basic activities in a typical human life such as “making coffee”
or “cutting paper.” If the system recognizes ADL properly,
then it is applicable to nursing services, rehabilitation, and
lifestyle habit improvements.
To recognize ADL, it is important to examine objects
undergoing hand manipulation specifically. For example, a
cleaning activity might be recognized only by recognizing
that a user is using a vacuum cleaner. One can also recog1 http://www.mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp/static/projects/miladl/

Wrist-mounted
Camera!
Headmounted Camera!

Figure 1. Activities of daily living (ADL) captured by a wristmounted camera (left) and a head-mounted camera (right).

nize coffee-making activity if it is observed that a user is
handling a mug and coffee beans. Pirsiavash and Ramanan
[26] described the importance of recognizing handled objects for ADL recognition. They developed an ADL dataset
collected using a chest-mounted camera. Then, they implemented ADL recognition in different homes by detecting the user’s hands and handled objects. The result suggests the crucial importance of detecting the handled objects
properly in various environments for ADL recognition.
In a view from a head-mounted camera or a chestmounted camera, handled objects are captured at a small
scale in various positions. Furthermore, many non-handled
objects also appear in the captured image. Consequently,
many studies have examined hand detection or gaze prediction to develop a means of discerning picked-up and handled objects from other detected objects. However, such
approaches entail the following difficulties: (a) Despite the
advances in object-detection techniques, object detection is
not an easy task in various environments. (b) Discerning a
handled object from detected objects with hand detection or
gaze prediction is not an easy task. (c) To train object detectors, it is necessary to collect numerous images with bounding boxes. Building a high-quality dataset with bounding
boxes requires a considerable amount of labor, which hinders us from expanding a dataset.

3103

