Efficient Deep Learning for Stereo Matching
Wenjie Luo
Alexander G. Schwing
Raquel Urtasun
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
{wenjie, aschwing, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
In the past year, convolutional neural networks have
been shown to perform extremely well for stereo estimation. However, current architectures rely on siamese networks which exploit concatenation followed by further processing layers, requiring a minute of GPU computation per
image pair. In contrast, in this paper we propose a matching network which is able to produce very accurate results
in less than a second of GPU computation. Towards this
goal, we exploit a product layer which simply computes the
inner product between the two representations of a siamese
architecture. We train our network by treating the problem
as multi-class classification, where the classes are all possible disparities. This allows us to get calibrated scores,
which result in much better matching performance when
compared to existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the scene in 3D is key in many applications such as robotics and self-driving cars. To ease this
process, 3D sensors such as LIDAR are commonly employed. Utilizing cameras is an attractive alternative, as it is
typically a more cost-effective solution. However, despite
decades of research, estimating depth from a stereo pair is
still an open problem. Dealing with cclusions, large saturated areas and repetitive patterns are some of the remaining
challenges.
Many approaches have been developed that try to aggregate information from local matches. Cost aggregation, for
example, averages disparity estimates in a local neighborhood. Similarly, semi-global block matching and Markov
random field based methods combine pixelwise predictions
and local smoothness into an energy function. However
all these approaches employ cost functions that are hand
crafted, or where only a linear combination of features is
learned from data.
In the past few years we have witnessed a revolution in
high-level vision, where deep representations are learned directly from pixels to solve many scene understanding tasks

Figure 1: To learn informative image patch representations
we employ a siamese network which extracts marginal distributions over all possible disparities for each pixel.
with unprecedented performance. These approaches currently are the state-of-the-art in tasks such as detection, segmentation and classification.
Very recently, convolutional networks have also been exploited to learn how to match for the task of stereo estimation [30, 28]. Current approaches learn the parameters
of the matching network by treating the problem as binary
classification; Given a patch in the left image, the task is
to predict if a patch in the right image is the correct match.
While [29] showed great performance in challenging benchmarks such as KITTI [11], it is computationally very expensive, requiring a minute of computation in the GPU. This is
due to the fact that they exploited a siamese architecture
followed by concatenation and further processing via a few
more layers to compute the final score.
In contrast, in this paper we propose a matching network
which is able to produce very accurate results in less than a
second of GPU computation. Towards this goal, we exploit
a product layer which simply computes the inner product
between the two representations of a siamese architecture.
We train our network by treating the problem as multi-class
classification, where the classes are all possible disparities.
This allows us to get calibrated scores, which result in much
15695

