Fine-grained Image Classification by Exploring Bipartite-Graph Labels
Feng Zhou
NEC Labs

Yuanqing Lin
NEC Labs

www.f-zhou.com

ylin@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Given a food image, can a fine-grained object recognition engine tell “which restaurant which dish” the food
belongs to? Such ultra-fine grained image recognition is
the key for many applications like search by images, but it
is very challenging because it needs to discern subtle difference between classes while dealing with the scarcity of
training data. Fortunately, the ultra-fine granularity naturally brings rich relationships among object classes. This
paper proposes a novel approach to exploit the rich relationships through bipartite-graph labels (BGL). We show
how to model BGL in an overall convolutional neural networks and the resulting system can be optimized through
back-propagation. We also show that it is computationally efficient in inference thanks to the bipartite structure.
To facilitate the study, we construct a new food benchmark dataset, which consists of 37,885 food images collected from 6 restaurants and totally 975 menus. Experimental results on this new food and three other datasets
demonstrate BGL advances previous works in fine-grained
object recognition. An online demo is available at http:
//www.f-zhou.com/fg_demo/.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained image classification concerns the task of
distinguishing sub-ordinate categories of some base classes
such as dogs [26, 43], birds [5, 8], flowers [1, 40],
plants [32, 45], cars [30, 36, 48], food [3, 6, 38, 59],
clothes [14], fonts [10] and furniture [4]. It differs from the
base-class classification [15] in that the differences among
object classes are more subtle, and thus it is more difficult
to distinguish them. Yet fine-grained object classification is
extremely useful because it is the key to a variety of challenging applications even difficult for human annotators.
While general image classification has achieved impressive success within the last few years [31, 49, 46, 21, 56,
22], it is still very challenging to recognize object classes
with ultra-fine granularity. For instance, how to recognize
each of the three food images shown in Fig. 1 into which
restaurant which dish? The challenge arises in two ma-

Graph 1

Graph 2
A
Mapo Tofu

Mapo
Tofu

Salt
Pepper
Tofu

B
Salt Pepper Tofu

Graph 3

B
Mapo Tofu
Figure 1. Illustration of three ultra-fine grained classes (middle),
Mapo Tofu of Restaurant A, Salt Pepper Tofu of Restaurant B,
and Mapo Tofu of Restaurant B. Their relationships can be modeled through three bipartite graphs, fine-grained classes vs. general food dishes (left) and fine-grained classes vs. two ingredients
(right). This paper shows how to incorporate the rich bipartitegraph labels (BGL) into convolutional neural network training to
improve recognition accuracy.

jor aspects. First, different classes may be visually similar,
e.g., the Mapo Tofu dish from Restaurant A (the 1st image in Fig. 1) looks very similar to the one from Restaurant
B (the 3rd image in Fig. 1). Second, each class may not
have enough training images because of the ultra-fine granularity. In such setting, how to share information between
similar classes while maintaining strong discriminativeness
becomes more critical.
To that end, we propose a novel approach using bipartitegraph labels (BGL) that models the rich relationships
among the ultra-fine grained classes. In the example of
Fig. 1, the 1st and 3rd images are both Mapo Tofu dishes;
and they share some ingredients with the 2nd one. Such
class relationships can be modeled in three bipartite graphs.
This paper shows how to incorporate the class bipartite
graphs into CNN and learn the optimal classifiers through
overall back-propagation.
11124

