Adaptive Object Detection Using Adjacency and Zoom Prediction
Yongxi Lu
University of California, San Diego

Tara Javidi
University of California, San Diego

yol070@ucsd.edu

tjavidi@ucsd.edu

Svetlana Lazebnik
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
slazebni@illinois.edu

Abstract
State-of-the-art object detection systems rely on an accurate set of region proposals. Several recent methods use
a neural network architecture to hypothesize promising object locations. While these approaches are computationally efficient, they rely on fixed image regions as anchors
for predictions. In this paper we propose to use a search
strategy that adaptively directs computational resources to
sub-regions likely to contain objects. Compared to methods based on fixed anchor locations, our approach naturally adapts to cases where object instances are sparse and
small. Our approach is comparable in terms of accuracy
to the state-of-the-art Faster R-CNN approach while using
two orders of magnitude fewer anchors on average. Code is
publicly available.

1. Introduction
Object detection is an important computer vision problem for its intriguing challenges and large variety of applications. Significant recent progress in this area has
been achieved by incorporating deep convolutional neural networks (DCNN) [15] into object detection systems
[5, 8, 10, 12, 17, 23, 25].
An object detection algorithm with state-of-the-art accuracy typically has the following two-step cascade: a set
of class-independent region proposals are hypothesized and
are then used as input to a detector that gives each region
a class label. The role of region proposals is to reduce the
complexity through limiting the number of regions that need
be evaluated by the detector. However, with recently introduced techniques that enable sharing of convolutional features [9, 12], traditional region proposal algorithms such as
selective search [27] and EdgeBoxes [29] become the bottleneck of the detection pipeline.
An emerging class of efficient region proposal meth-

ods are based on end-to-end trained deep neural networks
[5, 22]. The common idea in these approaches is to train
a class-independent regressor on a small set of pre-defined
anchor regions. More specifically, each anchor region is assigned the task of deciding whether an object is in its neighborhood (in terms of center location, scale and aspect ratio),
and predicting a bounding box for that object through regression if that is the case. The design of anchors differs for
each method. For example, MultiBox [5] uses 800 anchors
from clustering, YOLO [21] uses a non-overlapping 7 by 7
grid, RPN [22] uses overlapping sliding windows. In these
prior works the test-time anchors are not adaptive to the actual content of the images, thus to further improve accuracy
for detecting small object instances a denser grid of anchors
is required for all images, resulting in longer test time and a
more complex network model.
We alternatively consider the following adaptive search
strategy. Instead of fixing a priori a set of anchor regions,
our algorithm starts with the entire image. It then recursively divides the image into sub-regions (see Figure 2) until it decides that a given region is unlikely to enclose any
small objects. The regions that are visited in the process
effectively serve as anchors that are assigned the task of
predicting bounding boxes for objects nearby. A salient
feature of our algorithm is that the decision of whether to
divide a region further is based on features extracted from
that particular region. As a result, the generation of the set
of anchor regions is conditioned on the image content. For
an image with only a few small objects most regions are
pruned early in the search, leaving a few small anchor regions near the objects. For images that contain exclusively
large instances, our approach gracefully falls back to existing methods that rely on a small number of large anchor
regions. In this manner, our algorithm adaptively directs its
computational resources to regions that are likely to contain
objects. Figure 1 compares our algorithm with RPN.
To support our adaptive search algorithm, we train a deep

2351

