A Multi-Level Contextual Model For Person Recognition in Photo Albums
Haoxiang Li† ,
†
†

Jonathan Brandt‡ ,

Stevens Institute of Technology

hli18@stevens.edu

‡

Zhe Lin‡ ,
‡

Xiaohui Shen‡ ,

Adobe Research

{jbrandt, zlin, xshen}@adobe.com

♮

Gang Hua♮

Microsoft Research
♮

ganghua@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this work, we present a new framework for person
recognition in photo albums that exploits contextual cues
at multiple levels, spanning individual persons, individual
photos, and photo groups. Through experiments, we show
that the information available at each of these distinct contextual levels provides complementary cues as to person
identities. At the person level, we leverage clothing and
body appearance in addition to facial appearance, and to
compensate for instances where the faces are not visible. At
the photo level we leverage a learned prior on the joint distribution of identities on the same photo to guide the identity
assignments. Going beyond a single photo, we are able to
infer natural groupings of photos with shared context in an
unsupervised manner. By exploiting this shared contextual
information, we are able to reduce the identity search space
and exploit higher intra-personal appearance consistency
within photo groups. Our new framework enables efficient
use of these complementary multi-level contextual cues to
improve overall recognition rates on the photo album person recognition task, as demonstrated through state-of-theart results on a challenging public dataset. Our results outperform competing methods by a significant margin, while
being computationally efficient and practical in a real world
application.

1. Introduction
After decades of research, the problem of face recognition as measured by standard benchmarks such as Labeled
Faces in the Wild (LFW) [11, 12] is to the point of being
nearly solved. For example, Schroff et al. [24] achieved
99.63% verification accuracy using a deep convolutional
neural network (CNN). That said, this impressive result is
misleading because such benchmarks are typically skewed
towards images with clearly visible, high quality faces (see
Figure 1). However, when applying face recognition for
tagging faces in the real-world photo albums, faces are often not so clearly visible and present many challenges due

Figure 1. Faces in the Labeled Faces in the Wild dataset: most
faces are clear with good image quality.

Figure 2. Faces in the People In Photo Albums dataset: the large
visual appearance variations are very challenging for face recognition.

to changes in body pose, illumination, heavy occlusion and
so forth (see Figure 2). As an example, Zhang et al. [31] observed a dramatic drop in recognition accuracy when a top
performing LFW algorithm was applied to a photo album
test set.
In addition to learning more discriminative and robust
face features, we must look beyond the faces in order to
approach human-level performance on thismore challenging task. In general, information beyond the faces can be
viewed as context to guide recognition. Such “extra-face”
context can naturally be divided into three levels: the person
or body level, the photo level, and the photo group level, as
depicted in Figure 3.
At the person level, perhaps the most obvious contextual cue is clothing, which has been shown to be an effective supplemental cue for face recognition in photo albums [1, 8, 25, 30]. However, it is still not well understood how best to fuse face and body appearance features as
the relative importance of these features depends on higher
level context. In this paper, we explore several alternatives
for fusing person-level appearance features.
Contextual cues at the photo level include metadata
(when present) such as geographical and temporal information [19], event labels, and social relationships [17, 26].
However, we cannot always rely on metadata to be present
11297

