When Naı̈ve Bayes Nearest Neighbors Meet Convolutional Neural Networks
Ilja Kuzborskij1,2,3 , Fabio Maria Carlucci1 , Barbara Caputo1,2
1

Sapienza Rome University, Dept. of Computer, Control and Management Engineering, Italy
2
Idiap Research Institute, Switzerland
3
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
{kuzborskij, fmcarlucci, caputo}@dis.uniroma1.it

Abstract
Since Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have become the leading learning paradigm in visual recognition,
Naive Bayes Nearest Neighbor (NBNN)-based classifiers
have lost momentum in the community. This is because (1)
such algorithms cannot use CNN activations as input features; (2) they cannot be used as final layer of CNN architectures for end-to-end training , and (3) they are generally
not scalable and hence cannot handle big data. This paper proposes a framework that addresses all these issues,
thus bringing back NBNNs on the map. We solve the first
by extracting CNN activations from local patches at multiple scale levels, similarly to [13]. We address simultaneously the second and third by proposing a scalable version of Naive Bayes Non-linear Learning (NBNL, [7]). Results obtained using pre-trained CNNs on standard scene
and domain adaptation databases show the strength of our
approach, opening a new season for NBNNs.

1. Introduction
The current easy access to terabytes of visual data, combined with the impressive ability of deep learning algorithms to exploit them, has led to a paradigm shift in visual recognition over the last few years. The so called shallow architectures, i.e. learning algorithms consisting of 1-3
levels, have survived only when (a) they have been able to
scale over very large amount of data and classes ( i.e. ≥ 106
and ≥ 103 respectively); (b) they could be used as the final
layer of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)s, allowing
for end-to-end learning, and/or (c) they could use effectively
the activation layers of pre-computed CNNs [5, 3] as input
features. All shallow architectures which do not comply
with these requirements have started to fade away.
One of those fading algorithms is the Naı̈ve Bayes Near-

est Neighbour (NBNN) classifier [2]. Indeed, the key requisites of NBNN-based approaches do not fit well with CNNs.
To begin with, they require local feature representations
without any vector quantization, as opposed to the global
feature representation derived from the CNN activation layers [5, 3]. Moreover, NBNN-based algorithms rely on the
Image-2-Class (I2C) paradigm: for every image, each local descriptor is considered as independently sampled from
a class-specific feature distribution. Hence, each descriptor
votes for the most probable class, and the collection of votes
is used to label each image. As opposed to that, CNNs operate on another classification principle. These two intrinsic
features of NBNN approaches led to a strong generalization
ability, showcased by remarkable results in place classification [7] and domain adaptation [42]. Still, as of today no
solution has been found for bridging these two approaches.
This paper fills this gap. We propose a simple way
to compute local features from whole images, using pretrained CNNs. Our starting point is the paper of Gong et
al. [13], on which to a large extent we build. We extract
CNN activations for local patches at multiple scale levels.
As opposed to [13], we do not perform any pooling or concatenation. The resulting features can be used directly as input to any NBNN-based classifier. However, the total number of examples can be very large, especially when doing
a dense sampling for the patches and tackling large scale
problems. To deal with this, while at the same time maximizing the predictive power of NBNN-based approaches,
we propose a scalable version of Naive Bayes Non-linear
Learning (NBNL, [7]). NBNL tries to circumvent limitations of NBNN through non-linear learning powered by Latent Locally-Linear SVM [8], that to our knowledge is the
current state of the art among NBNN-based classifiers. Our
stochastic algorithm retains the generality and robustness of
the original method, yet it wins by having low memory footprint. At the same time, it considerably increases its scalability during training, making it applicable also to problems

2100

