Learned Binary Spectral Shape Descriptor for 3D Shape Correspondence

Jin Xie, Meng Wang, and Yi Fang
NYU Multimedia and Visual Computing Lab, UAE
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New York University Abu Dhabi
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, NYU Tandon School of Engineering
{jin.xie, mengw, yfang}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Dense 3D shape correspondence is an important problem in computer vision and computer graphics. Recently,
the local shape descriptor based 3D shape correspondence
approaches have been widely studied, where the local shape
descriptor is a real-valued vector to characterize the geometrical structure of the shape. Different from these realvalued local shape descriptors, in this paper, we propose
to learn a novel binary spectral shape descriptor with the
deep neural network for 3D shape correspondence. The
binary spectral shape descriptor can require less storage
space and enable fast matching. First, based on the eigenvectors of the Laplace-Beltrami operator, we construct a
neural network to form a nonlinear spectral representation
to characterize the shape. Then, for the defined positive and
negative points on the shapes, we train the constructed neural network by minimizing the errors between the outputs
and their corresponding binary descriptors, minimizing the
variations of the outputs of the positive points and maximizing the variations of the outputs of the negative points,
simultaneously. Finally, we binarize the output of the neural network to form the binary spectral shape descriptor for
shape correspondence. The proposed binary spectral shape
descriptor is evaluated on the SCAPE and TOSCA 3D shape
datasets for shape correspondence. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed binary
shape descriptor for the shape correspondence task.

1. Introduction
3D shape feature extraction and matching is an important
topic in the community of computer vision and computer
graphics. With the recent developments of the 3D scanning technology such as the Microsoft Kinect scanner, 3D
shape correspondence has been receiving much more atten-

tion in many fields (e.g., molecular biology, mechanical engineering, and medical image analysis). Finding the intrinsic correspondences between 3D shapes can be applied to
3D scan alignment, texture mapping, shape morphing and
animation, etc. Due to the large nonrigid deformations of
the shapes, the shape correspondence task is usually very
challenging.
Extensive research efforts have been dedicated to 3D
shape correspondence in the past decades. Early shape correspondence approaches focused on the rigid shapes. The
transformation between the rigid shapes can be parameterized by a few parameters such as the translation, rotation and scale factors. Thus, these parameters can be estimated by the optimization methods such as the iterative
closest point (ICP) method [6] and graph matching methods [10, 12]. For example, the traditional ICP method first
calculates the transformation between the rigid shapes with
the least-square solution. Then, the points on one shape
are transformed by the estimated rigid transformation. The
correspondence-register cycle is iterated until the stopping
criterion is satisfied. In addition, for the 3D point set matching problem, Jian et al. [13] proposed to represent the input
point sets using the Gaussian mixture models. The correspondence problem is then converted into the problem of
aligning two Gaussian mixture models such that the statistical discrepancy measure between the two models is minimized.
Compared to the rigid shape correspondence, establishing correspondence between two shapes with the nonrigid
deformations is much more challenging. Nonrigid shape
matching can be formulated as the graph matching problem
[15, 18, 20, 25], where the point-to-point correspondence,
i.e., the permutation matrix, can be obtained by minimizing the structural distortions such as the point-wise costs
[3, 8, 22] and pairwise costs [3, 12]. By incorporating the
point-wise costs and the pairwise costs, the graph match-

3309

