Functional Faces: Groupwise Dense Correspondence using Functional Maps
Chao Zhang1 , William A.P. Smith1 , Arnaud Dessein2 , Nick Pears1 and Hang Dai1
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of York, UK
{cz679, william.smith, nick.pears, hd816}@york.ac.uk
2

IMB/LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux, France
arnaud.dessein@u-bordeaux.fr

Abstract
In this paper we present a method for computing dense
correspondence between a set of 3D face meshes using
functional maps. The functional maps paradigm brings with
it a number of advantages for face correspondence. First,
it allows us to combine various notions of correspondence.
We do so by proposing a number of face-specific functions,
suited to either within- or between-subject correspondence.
Second, we propose a groupwise variant of the method allowing us to compute cycle-consistent functional maps between all faces in a training set. Since functional maps
are of much lower dimension than point-to-point correspondences, this is feasible even when the input meshes are very
high resolution. Finally, we show how a functional map
provides a geometric constraint that can be used to filter
feature matches between non-rigidly deforming surfaces.

1. Introduction
Computing dense correspondence between a collection
of faces (whether images or 3D meshes) is a fundamental
problem in face modelling. It arises in a number of settings
including statistical face modelling [2], face morphing [13],
motion capture [31], performance driven animation [8] and
face transfer [28]. Dense correspondence allows a collection of faces to be treated as a vector space, enabling analysis with, for example, PCA.
There are two distinct classes of dense face correspondence problem. The first version of the problem (which
we term within-person correspondence) is to compute correspondence between meshes of the same face exhibiting
different expressions. This is a non-rigid registration problem which, in principle, has a well defined correct solution.
Given enough information, it should be possible to uniquely
describe a local region of one scan and find its corresponding region in another (for example, if shape or texture resolves skin pores, these could be explicitly put into correspondence). A special case (and more constrained version)

of this problem is where the meshes come from a motion
sequence where the face non-rigidly deforms over time. In
this context, temporal consistency means that dense correspondence can be viewed as a tracking problem.
The second version of the problem (which we term
between-person correspondence) is computing dense correspondence between meshes of different faces (i.e. faces
with different identities). This is a much harder problem and
arguably not well defined. In general, correspondence is a
hypothesis of equivalence and defining the objective of the
correspondence requires a definition of equivalence. Defining a meaningful notion of equivalence may only be possible in a sparse or low frequency sense. For example, sparse
fiducial points can be identified across different faces [25]
or it may be meaningful to talk of correspondence between
face parts [18] (for example, nose-to-nose or eyebrow-toeyebrow). In this case, the correspondence in the remaining regions of the face is interpolated (either explicitly or
implicitly). An alternate view is to impose some external
desirable criterion on the correspondence. For example, we
may require that the correspondence is smooth [2] or that it
is optimal with respect to an information theoretic measure
(e.g. minimum description length [7]). Although practically
useful, these choices are in some sense arbitrary and are not
justified by any fundamental property of face populations.
In both within- and between-person correspondence, another important distinction is between pairwise and groupwise methods. Pairwise methods compute correspondence
between each face in the collection and a reference shape.
This includes all template-based methods. On the other
hand, groupwise methods explicitly optimise functions that
measure the quality of the correspondence across the whole
set of shapes simultaneously. The advantage of this is that
the result is not dependent on a choice of reference shape
or the order in which samples are processed. Also, groupwise information can help resolve ambiguities that would
be present in pairwise correspondence. Historically, groupwise approaches to computing correspondence have had
limited practical application. This is because the dimen15033

