DAG-Recurrent Neural Networks For Scene Labeling
Bing Shuai∗ , Zhen Zuo∗, Bing Wang , Gang Wang †
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
{bshuai001,zzuo1,wanggang,wang0775}@ntu.edu.sg

Input Image

CNN

DAG-RNN

Ground Truth

Input Image

CNN

DAG-RNN

Ground Truth

Figure 1: (Best viewed in color) With the local representations extracted from Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), the ‘sand’ pixels (in the ﬁrst image)
are likely to be misclassiﬁed as ‘road’, and the ‘building’ pixels (in the second image) are easy to get confused with ‘streetlight’. Our DAG-RNN is able to
signiﬁcantly boost the discriminative power of local representations by modeling their contextual dependencies. As a result, it can produce smoother and
more semantically meaningful labeling maps.

Abstract
In image labeling, local representations for image
units are usually generated from their surrounding image
patches, thus long-range contextual information is not effectively encoded. In this paper, we introduce recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) to address this issue. Speciﬁcally,
directed acyclic graph RNNs (DAG-RNNs) are proposed to
process DAG-structured images, which enables the network
to model long-range semantic dependencies among image
units. Our DAG-RNNs are capable of tremendously enhancing the discriminative power of local representations, which
signiﬁcantly beneﬁts the local classiﬁcation. Meanwhile,
we propose a novel class weighting function that attends to
rare classes, which phenomenally boosts the recognition accuracy for non-frequent classes. Integrating with convolution and deconvolution layers, our DAG-RNNs achieve new
state-of-the-art results on the challenging SiftFlow, CamVid
and Barcelona benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Scene labeling refers to associating one of the semantic
classes to each pixel in a scene image. It is usually deﬁned
as a multi-class classiﬁcation problem based on their surrounding image patches. However, some classes may be in∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

distinguishable in a close-up view. As an example in Figure
1, the ‘sand’ and ‘road’ pixels are hard to be distinguished
even for humans with limited context. In contrast, their differentiation becomes conspicuous when they are considered
in the global scene. Thus, how to equip local features with
a broader view of contextual awareness is a pivotal issue in
image labeling.
In this paper, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [10][18]
are introduced to address this issue by modeling the contextual dependencies of local features. Speciﬁcally, we
adopt undirected cyclic graphs (UCGs) 1 to represent the
connectivity of pixels in images. Due to the loopy property of UCGs, RNNs are not directly applicable to UCGstructured images. Thus, we decompose the UCG to several
directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). In other words, an UCGstructured image is represented by the combination of several DAG-structured images. Then, we develop the DAGRNNs, a generalization of RNNs [9][10], to process DAGstructured images. Each hidden layer is generated independently through applying DAG-RNNs to the corresponding
DAG-structured image, and they are aggregated to produce
the context-aware feature maps. In this case, the local representations are able to embed the abstract gist of the image,
so their discriminative power are enhanced remarkably.
We integrate the DAG-RNNs with the convolution and
deconvolution layers, thus giving rise to an end-to-end trainable full labeling network. Functionally, the convolution
1 UCG refers to the undirected graph in which there exists a closed walk
with no repetition of edges.

13620

