Robust Tensor Factorization with Unknown Noise
Xi’ai Chen1,2 , Zhi Han1∗ , Yao Wang1,3 , Qian Zhao3 , Deyu Meng3 , Yandong Tang1
1
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences;
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences; 3 Xi’an Jiaotong University
{chenxiai, hanzhi, ytang}@sia.cn, {yao.s.wang, timmy.zhaoqian}@gmail.com, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Because of the limitations of matrix factorization, such
as losing spatial structure information, the concept of tensor factorization has been applied for the recovery of a low
dimensional subspace from high dimensional visual data.
Generally, the recovery is achieved by minimizing the loss
function between the observed data and the factorization
representation. Under different assumptions of the noise
distribution, the loss functions are in various forms, like L1
and L2 norms. However, real data are often corrupted by
noise with an unknown distribution. Then any specific form of loss function for one specific kind of noise often fails
to tackle such real data with unknown noise. In this paper, we propose a tensor factorization algorithm to model
the noise as a Mixture of Gaussians (MoG). As MoG has
the ability of universally approximating any hybrids of continuous distributions, our algorithm can effectively recover
the low dimensional subspace from various forms of noisy
observations. The parameters of MoG are estimated under
the EM framework and through a new developed algorithm
of weighted low-rank tensor factorization (WLRTF). The effectiveness of our algorithm are substantiated by extensive
experiments on both of synthetic data and real image data.

1. Introduction
The problem of recovering a low dimensional linear subspace from high dimensional visual data naturally arises in
the fields of computer vision, machine learning and statistics, and has drawn increasing attention in the recent years.
Typical examples include representation and recognition of
faces [25, 20, 22, 1], structure from motion [21], recognition of 3D objects under varying pose [15], motion segmentation [23].In such contexts, the data to be analyzed usually
can be formulated as high-order tensors, which are natural
generalization of vectors and matrices. Existing approach*Corresponding author.

Figure 1. High-order data represented by tensorization better preserves the essential data structure compared with matricizaiton.

es, including LRMF and RPCA, proceed by unfolding tensors into matrices and then applying common matrix techniques to deal with tensor problems. However, as shown in
[10], such matricization fails to exploit the essential tensor
structure and often leads to suboptimal procedure. Figure 1
illustrates the difference between the matrix based method
and tensor based method in dealing with the high-order tensor data. The upper row is the matrix based factorization
method, which needs to preliminarily unfold or vectorize
the tensor; the lower row is the tensor based method which
directly factorize the tensor without destroying the spatial
structures. Given a high-order tensor data, an efficient way
to extract the underlying useful information is low-rank tensor factorization (LRTF), which aims to extract low-rank
subspaces underlying those vector spaces so that the original tensor can be suitably expressed through reasonably
affiliating these subspaces. In the recent years, the application of LRTF has been extended to a wide range of fields
throughout science and engineering [7].
The notation in this paper are defined as follows. Scalars are denoted by lowercase letters (a, b, ...) and vectors
are denoted by bold lowercase letters (a, b, ...) with elements (ai , bj , ...). Matrices are represented by uppercase
letters (A, B, ...) with column vectors (a:j , b:j , ...) and elements (aij , bij , ...). The calligraphic letters (A, B, ...) stand for the the high-order tensors. A K-order tensor X ∈
RI1 ×I2 ×···×IK is a rank-1 tensor, if it can be written as the
outer product of K vectors, i.e., X = a1 ◦a2 ◦···◦aK . Then
15213

