Facial Expression Intensity Estimation Using Ordinal Information
Rui Zhao1 , Quan Gan2 , Shangfei Wang2∗, Qiang Ji1
1
Department of Electrical, Computer & Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
1

{zhaor,jiq}@rpi.edu, 2 {gqquan@mail.,sfwang@}ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous studies on facial expression analysis have been
focused on recognizing basic expression categories. There
is limited amount of work on the continuous expression
intensity estimation, which is important for detecting and
tracking emotion change. Part of the reason is the lack of
labeled data with annotated expression intensity since expression intensity annotation requires expertise and is time
consuming. In this work, we treat the expression intensity
estimation as a regression problem. By taking advantage of
the natural onset-apex-offset evolution pattern of facial expression, the proposed method can handle different amounts
of annotations to perform frame-level expression intensity
estimation. In fully supervised case, all the frames are
provided with intensity annotations. In weakly supervised
case, only the annotations of selected key frames are used.
While in unsupervised case, expression intensity can be estimated without any annotations. An efficient optimization
algorithm based on Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) is developed for solving the optimization
problem associated with parameter learning. We demonstrate the effectiveness of proposed method by comparing it
against both fully supervised and unsupervised approaches
on benchmark facial expression datasets.

1. Introduction
Facial expression provides rich information in understanding a person’s emotional state, feeling and attitude (see
[8] for a survey). So far the majority of expression analysis work focus on recognition of basic expression categories
including anger, happy, fear, surprise, sadness, disgust, contempt, etc. Recently, there is an increasing interest in a more
fine-grained analysis, namely the facial expression intensity
estimation. For instance, the pain intensity is used to evaluate the extent of discomfort in a healthcare application [13].
Automatic expression intensity estimation is challenging
∗ Corresponding author

partially due to the lack of standard rule for expression intensity labeling. One way to define expression intensity
uses the intensity of Action Units (AUs), which is a set
of atomic facial muscle actions defined by Facial Action
Coding System (FACS). [6]. For example, Prkachin and
Solomon [21] used the intensity summation of four AUs:
brow lowering, orbital tightening, levator contraction and
eye closure to define the pain intensity. However, manually recognizing AU and annotating its intensity is a time
consuming process with requirement of domain expertise.
While automatic AU intensity estimation is still an open research problem [25, 15, 24].
Another way to define expression intensity uses relative difference between facial images presented at different
stages of an expression. For example, Hess et al. [11] defined the expression intensity as the relative degree of displacement away from a neutral or relaxed facial expression.
Dhall and Goecke [5] divided the dynamic process of smile
into 6 stages. Despite the simple definition, there is no accurate way of determining different intensity levels except
manual labeling, which requires substantial labor and expertise. Due to this reason, there are few datasets that come
with expression intensity labels. One exception is [18].
In this work, we introduce a method that learns a framelevel expression intensity estimator by exploiting the ordinal information among different frames and intensity labels
of selected frames, if available, in the training image sequences. Our approach is based on the observation that
the temporal evolution of facial expression usually follows
a particular order. Starting from a neutral stage where no
expression is observed, we consider the expression intensity reaching its lowest level. Then we observe the onset of
expression followed by apex, when the intensity reaches its
peak. After reaching its peak, the expression intensity starts
to reduce until it is back to neutral status. Even though the
duration of each stage may vary under different occasions
for different subjects, the general trend of the evolution remains the same. Figure 1 shows some expression sequence
examples with such evolution trend. Similar idea of temporal evolution pattern has been applied to other computer

3466

