Eye Tracking for Everyone
Kyle Krafka∗† Aditya Khosla∗‡ Petr Kellnhofer‡⋆ Harini Kannan‡
Suchendra Bhandarkar†
Wojciech Matusik‡
Antonio Torralba‡
†
‡
University of Georgia
Massachusetts Institute of Technology ⋆ MPI Informatik
{krafka, suchi}@cs.uga.edu

{khosla, pkellnho, hkannan, wojciech, torralba}@csail.mit.edu

1. Introduction
From human–computer interaction techniques [16, 23,
26] to medical diagnoses [12] to psychological studies [27]
to computer vision [3, 18], eye tracking has applications in
many areas [6]. Gaze is the externally-observable indicator of human visual attention, and many have attempted to
record it, dating back to the late eighteenth century [14]. Today, a variety of solutions exist (many of them commercial)
but all suffer from one or more of the following: high cost
(e.g., Tobii X2-60), custom or invasive hardware (e.g., Eye
Tribe, Tobii EyeX) or inaccuracy under real-world condi∗ indicates equal contribution
Corresponding author: Aditya Khosla (khosla@csail.mit.edu)

iTracker

From scientific research to commercial applications, eye
tracking is an important tool across many domains. Despite
its range of applications, eye tracking has yet to become a
pervasive technology. We believe that we can put the power
of eye tracking in everyone’s palm by building eye tracking
software that works on commodity hardware such as mobile
phones and tablets, without the need for additional sensors
or devices. We tackle this problem by introducing GazeCapture, the first large-scale dataset for eye tracking, containing data from over 1450 people consisting of almost 2.5M
frames. Using GazeCapture, we train iTracker, a convolutional neural network for eye tracking, which achieves a significant reduction in error over previous approaches while
running in real time (10–15fps) on a modern mobile device. Our model achieves a prediction error of 1.71cm and
2.53cm without calibration on mobile phones and tablets
respectively. With calibration, this is reduced to 1.34cm and
2.12cm. Further, we demonstrate that the features learned
by iTracker generalize well to other datasets, achieving
state-of-the-art results. The code, data, and models are
available at http://gazecapture.csail.mit.edu.

GazeCapture

Abstract

Figure 1: In this work, we develop GazeCapture, the first
large-scale eye tracking dataset captured via crowdsourcing. Using GazeCapture, we train iTracker, a convolutional
neural network for robust gaze prediction.

tions (e.g. [25, 34, 43]). These factors prevent eye tracking
from becoming a pervasive technology that should be available to anyone with a reasonable camera (e.g., a smartphone
or a webcam). In this work, our goal is to overcome these
challenges to bring eye tracking to everyone.
We believe that this goal can be achieved by developing systems that work reliably on mobile devices such as
smartphones and tablets, without the need for any external
attachments (Fig. 1). Mobile devices offer several benefits
over other platforms: (1) widespread use—more than a third
of the world’s population is estimated to have smartphones
by 2019 [32], far exceeding the number of desktop/laptop
users; (2) high adoption rate of technology upgrades—a
large proportion of people have the latest hardware allowing for the use of computationally expensive methods, such
as convolutional neural networks (CNNs), in real-time; (3)
the heavy usage of cameras on mobile devices has lead to
rapid development and deployment of camera technology,
and (4) the fixed position of the camera relative to the screen
reduces the number of unknown parameters, potentially al12176

