Gaussian Conditional Random Field Network for Semantic Segmentation
Raviteja Vemulapalli† , Oncel Tuzel* , Ming-Yu Liu* , and Rama Chellappa†
†
Center for Automation Research, UMIACS, University of Maryland, College Park.
*
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Cambridge, MA.

Abstract
In contrast to the existing approaches that use discrete
Conditional Random Field (CRF) models, we propose to
use a Gaussian CRF model for the task of semantic segmentation. We propose a novel deep network, which we refer to
as Gaussian Mean Field (GMF) network, whose layers perform mean field inference over a Gaussian CRF. The proposed GMF network has the desired property that each of
its layers produces an output that is closer to the maximum
a posteriori solution of the Gaussian CRF compared to its
input. By combining the proposed GMF network with deep
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), we propose a new
end-to-end trainable Gaussian conditional random field
network. The proposed Gaussian CRF network is composed
of three sub-networks: (i) a CNN-based unary network for
generating unary potentials, (ii) a CNN-based pairwise network for generating pairwise potentials, and (iii) a GMF
network for performing Gaussian CRF inference. When
trained end-to-end in a discriminative fashion, and evaluated on the challenging PASCALVOC 2012 segmentation
dataset, the proposed Gaussian CRF network outperforms
various recent semantic segmentation approaches that combine CNNs with discrete CRF models.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which aims to predict a category
label for every pixel in the image, is an important task
for scene understanding. Though it has received significant attention from the vision community over the past
few years, it still remains a challenging problem due to
large variations in the visual appearance of the semantic
classes and complex interactions between various classes in
the visual world. Recently, convolutional neural networks
have been shown to work very well for this challenging
task [35, 13, 18, 30, 31, 35]. Their success can be attributed
to several factors such as their ability to represent complex
input-output relationships, feed-forward nature of their inference, availability of large training datasets and fast computing hardware like GPUs, etc.

However, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) may
not be optimal for structured prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation as they do not model the interactions
between output variables directly. Acknowledging this, various semantic segmentation approaches have been proposed
in the recent past that use Conditional Random Field (CRF)
models [26] on top of CNNs [3, 7, 13, 33, 37, 45, 55], and
all these approaches have shown significant improvement
in the segmentation results by using CRFs. By combining
CNNs and CRFs, these approaches get the best of both
worlds: the ability of CNNs to model complex input-output
relationships and the ability of CRFs to directly model the
interactions between output variables. While some of these
approaches use CRF as a separate post-processing step
[3, 7, 13, 33, 37], some other approaches train the CNNs
along with the CRFs in an end-to-end fashion [45, 55].
All of the above approaches use discrete graphical models, and hence end up using graph-cuts or mean field-based
approximate inference procedures. Though these inference
procedures do not have global optimum guarantees, they
have been successfully used for the semantic segmentation task in conjunction with CNNs. In contrast to discrete graphical models, Gaussian graphical models [41, 50]
are simpler models, and have inference procedures that
are guaranteed to converge to the global optimal solution.
Gaussian graphical models have been used in the past for
various applications such as image denoising [22, 50], depth
estimation [29, 42], deblurring [43, 56], edge detection [54],
texture classification [5], etc.
While a discrete CRF is a natural fit for labeling tasks
such as semantic segmentation, one needs to use inference
techniques that do not have optimality guarantees. While
exact inference is tractable in the case of a Gaussian CRF,
it is not clear if this model is a good fit for discrete labeling tasks. This leads us to the following question: Should
we use a better model with approximate inference or an approximate model with better inference?
To answer this question, in this work, we use a Gaussian
CRF (GCRF) model for the task of semantic segmentation.
To use a GCRF model for this discrete labeling task, we first
replace each discrete variable with a vector of K mutually

3224

