Semantic Image Segmentation with Task-Specific Edge Detection Using CNNs
and a Discriminatively Trained Domain Transform
Liang-Chieh Chen∗ Jonathan T. Barron, George Papandreou, Kevin Murphy
Alan L. Yuille
lcchen@cs.ucla.edu
{barron, gpapan, kpmurphy}@google.com
yuille@stat.ucla.edu
alan.yuille@jhu.edu
Edge Prediction

Abstract
Image

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are the backbone of state-of-art semantic image segmentation systems.
Recent work has shown that complementing CNNs with
fully-connected conditional random fields (CRFs) can significantly enhance their object localization accuracy, yet dense
CRF inference is computationally expensive. We propose
replacing the fully-connected CRF with domain transform
(DT), a modern edge-preserving filtering method in which
the amount of smoothing is controlled by a reference edge
map. Domain transform filtering is several times faster than
dense CRF inference and we show that it yields comparable
semantic segmentation results, accurately capturing object
boundaries. Importantly, our formulation allows learning
the reference edge map from intermediate CNN features
instead of using the image gradient magnitude as in standard DT filtering. This produces task-specific edges in an
end-to-end trainable system optimizing the target semantic
segmentation quality.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are very
effective in semantic image segmentation, the task of assigning a semantic label to every pixel in an image. Recently, it
has been demonstrated that post-processing the output of a
CNN with a fully-connected CRF can significantly increase
segmentation accuracy near object boundaries [5].
As explained in [26], mean-field inference in the fullyconnected CRF model amounts to iterated application of the
bilateral filter, a popular technique for edge-aware filtering.
This encourages pixels which are nearby in position and in
color to be assigned the same semantic label. In practice,
this produces semantic segmentation results which are well
aligned with object boundaries in the image.
One key impediment in adopting the fully-connected CRF
is the rather high computational cost of the underlying bilateral filtering step. Bilateral filtering amounts to high∗ Work done in part during an internship at Google Inc.

Filtered Score
Convolutional
Neural Network

Segmentation Score

Domain
Transform

Figure 1. A single unified CNN produces both coarse semantic
segmentation scores and an edge map, which respectively serve as
input multi-channel image and reference edge to a domain transform edge-preserving filter. The resulting filtered semantic segmentation scores are well-aligned with the object boundaries. The full
architecture is discriminatively trained by backpropagation (red
dashed arrows) to optimize the target semantic segmentation.

dimensional Gaussian filtering in the 5-D bilateral (2-D position, 3-D color) space and is expensive in terms of both
memory and CPU time, even when advanced algorithmic
techniques are used.
In this paper, we propose replacing the fully-connected
CRF and its associated bilateral filtering with the domain
transform (DT) [16], an alternative edge-aware filter. The
recursive formulation of the domain transform amounts to
adaptive recursive filtering of a signal, where information
is not allowed to propagate across edges in some reference
signal. This results in an extremely efficient scheme which
is an order of magnitude faster than the fastest algorithms
for a bilateral filter of equivalent quality.
The domain transform can equivalently be seen as a recurrent neural network (RNN). In particular, we show that the
domain transform is a special case of the recently proposed
RNN with gated recurrent units. This connection allows us to
share insights, better understanding two seemingly different
methods, as we explain in Section 3.4.
The amount of smoothing in a DT is spatially modulated
by a reference edge map, which in the standard DT corresponds to image gradient magnitude. Instead, we will learn
the reference edge map from intermediate layer features
of the same CNN that produces the semantic segmentation
scores, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Crucially, this allows us to
learn a task-specific edge detector tuned for semantic image

4545

