Active Image Segmentation Propagation
Suyog Dutt Jain
Kristen Grauman
University of Texas at Austin
suyog@cs.utexas.edu, grauman@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose a semi-automatic method to obtain foreground object masks for a large set of related images. We
develop a stagewise active approach to propagation: in
each stage, we actively determine the images that appear
most valuable for human annotation, then revise the foreground estimates in all unlabeled images accordingly. In
order to identify images that, once annotated, will propagate well to other examples, we introduce an active selection procedure that operates on the joint segmentation
graph over all images. It prioritizes human intervention for
those images that are uncertain and influential in the graph,
while also mutually diverse. We apply our method to obtain
foreground masks for over 1 million images. Our method
yields state-of-the-art accuracy on the ImageNet and MIT
Object Discovery datasets, and it focuses human attention
more effectively than existing propagation strategies.

1. Introduction
Large-scale labeled image datasets have had a transformative impact on computer vision in recent years, most
notably for image classification. However, image annotation remains a costly undertaking in terms of both time and
money. In particular, gathering high quality spatial annotations—pixel-level foreground masks—is challenging. First
of all, the physical mousing actions required are time intensive (e.g., compared to simply labeling which object is
present). Furthermore, non-expert annotators exhibit inconsistencies in how precisely they mark object boundaries,
which means leveraging the crowd typically requires some
finessing and “re-dos”.
As a result, datasets with spatial annotations lag seriously behind their category-labeled counterparts. For example, while ImageNet is comprised of an impressive 14M
labeled images, there are orders of magnitude fewer spatial annotations—only 1M images (7% of the dataset) offer bounding box annotations, and only 4K images (0.03%)
have foreground segmentation masks [12]. While the new
Microsoft COCO dataset [27] has spatial annotations for

Figure 1: Our active image segmentation propagation method alternates
between: (1) Actively choosing images which once annotated by humans
will likely be most useful in propagating segmentations to other images
and (2) Given human annotations on actively chosen images (marked in
pink), propagating them (dark arrows) to generate segmentations for other
unlabeled images. Best viewed in color.

2.5M object instances, these were obtained only by investing staggering amounts of time and money; at over 22 person hours per 1,000 segmentations [27], that’s more than
$400,000 if paying minimum wage.
The difficulty in generating foreground spatial annotations for image collections is problematic given their high
potential utility. For example, they are useful to build training sets for region-based object detectors, or improve image
retrieval by focusing on the region of interest. Aside from
serving as training data, there are also applications that directly use a well-segmented image database, such as datadriven image synthesis or retargeting.
Aware of this need, researchers have developed an array
of weakly supervised segmentation algorithms [2, 10, 44,
20, 36, 39, 35, 42, 12]. The main idea is to take a pool
of images known to contain the same object category, and
exploit the repeated patterns to jointly segment out the foreground per image. On the one hand, this paradigm is attractive for its low manual effort, especially since such weakly
labeled images are readily available on the Web via keyword
search. On the other hand, the resulting segmentations are
imperfect. No matter the method, the foreground masks hit
a ceiling of accuracy since the segmentation task is underconstrained even with weak supervision.
We propose an intermediate solution. Rather than rely
solely on human-provided segmentations (accurate but too
expensive) or automatic segmentations (inexpensive but
12864

