Learning Activity Progression in LSTMs for
Activity Detection and Early Detection
Shugao Ma
Boston University

Leonid Sigal
Disney Research

Stan Sclaroff
Boston University

shugaoma@bu.edu

lsigal@disneyresearch.com

sclaroff@bu.edu

Abstract
In this work we improve training of temporal deep models to better learn activity progression for activity detection and early detection tasks. Conventionally, when training a Recurrent Neural Network, specifically a Long Short
Term Memory (LSTM) model, the training loss only considers classification error. However, we argue that the detection score of the correct activity category, or the detection
score margin between the correct and incorrect categories,
should be monotonically non-decreasing as the model observes more of the activity. We design novel ranking losses
that directly penalize the model on violation of such monotonicities, which are used together with classification loss in
training of LSTM models. Evaluation on ActivityNet shows
significant benefits of the proposed ranking losses in both
activity detection and early detection tasks.

1. Introduction
In this work we study human activity detection and early
detection in videos (Fig. 1). For activity detection, we detect segments of human activities in a video sequence, recognizing the activities’ categories and detecting their start
and end points. For early detection, we detect the activity
segment after observing only a fraction of the activity.
Automatic detection of human activities, in videos, has
many potential applications, such as video understanding
and retrieval, automatic video surveillance, and humancomputer interaction. Further, for many applications, such
as human-robot interaction it is desirable to detect the activity as early as possible [5, 19], to make the interaction more
natural, e.g., deploying a robot to help an elderly patient
stand up before he/she is upright and is at risk of a fall.
Activity detection in realistic settings is quite challenging. There is high variability in the viewpoint from which
the activity is observed, the actors and their appearance,
as well as the execution and overall duration of the activities (see Fig. 6). This is particularly true for relatively long

Figure 1: We study two problems: activity detection and
early detection. For activity detection, we detect the category of the activity and its start and end point. For early
detection, we need to detect the category and the start point
of an activity after observing only a fraction of the activity.
This example sequence contains the activity using ATM.
and complex activities. For example, the activity “making
pasta” typically entails cutting vegetables, setting a pot on
the fire, boiling water, boiling pasta noodles, cooking pasta
sauce, and combining pasta with sauce. To better detect,
i.e., recognize and temporally localize such activities, we
argue that it is critically important for the learned detector
to model the activities’ temporal progression.
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) models are particularly helpful in this context: the prediction at each time
instant is based not only on the observations at that time
instant, but also on the previous model hidden states that
provide temporal context for the progression of the activity. More specifically, in the Long Short Term Memory
(LSTM), a type of RNN, memory is used to capture useful
patterns of previous observations, and is used in addition to
the previous hidden states to provide longer-range context
(e.g., as compared to HMMs) for the current prediction.
While RNN models are powerful, using only classification loss in training such models typically fails to properly
penalize incorrect predictions, i.e., the prediction error is
penalized the same no matter how much context the model
11942

