Blind Image Deblurring Using Dark Channel Prior
Jinshan Pan1,2,3
Deqing Sun3,4
Hanspeter Pfister3
Ming-Hsuan Yang2
1
2
3
4
Dalian University of Technology
UC Merced
Harvard University
NVIDIA

(a) Input

(b) Our results

(c) Dark channel of (a)

(d) Dark channel of (b)

Figure 1. Deblurring result on a challenging low-light image. The blur process makes the dark channel of the blurred image less sparse (c).
Enforcing sparsity on the dark channel of the recovered image favors clean images over blurred ones.

Abstract
We present a simple and effective blind image deblurring method based on the dark channel prior. Our work is
inspired by the interesting observation that the dark channel of blurred images is less sparse. While most image
patches in the clean image contain some dark pixels, these
pixels are not dark when averaged with neighboring highintensity pixels during the blur process. This change in the
sparsity of the dark channel is an inherent property of the
blur process, which we both prove mathematically and validate using training data. Therefore, enforcing the sparsity
of the dark channel helps blind deblurring on various scenarios, including natural, face, text, and low-illumination
images. However, sparsity of the dark channel introduces
a non-convex non-linear optimization problem. We introduce a linear approximation of the min operator to compute the dark channel. Our look-up-table-based method
converges fast in practice and can be directly extended to
non-uniform deblurring. Extensive experiments show that
our method achieves state-of-the-art results on deblurring
natural images and compares favorably methods that are
well-engineered for specific scenarios.

1. Introduction
Blind image deblurring aims to recover a blur kernel and
a sharp latent image from a blurred image. This is a classical
image and signal processing problem [22], which has been
an active research effort in the vision and graphics community within the last decade. This problem becomes increasingly important as more photos are taken using hand-held

cameras, particularly with smart phones. Camera shake is
often inevitable and the resulting image blur is usually undesirable. As captured moments are ephemeral and difficult to reproduce, it is of great interest to remove blur for a
higher-quality image.
When the blur is uniform and spatially invariant, we can
model the blur process with the convolution operation
B = I ⊗ k + n,

(1)

where B, I, k, and n denote the blur image, latent image,
blur kernel, and noise, respectively, and ⊗ is the convolution
operator. As only B is available, we need to recover both
I and k simultaneously. This problem is highly ill-posed
because many different pairs of I and k give rise to the same
B, e.g., blurred images and delta blur kernels.
To make blind deblurring well posed, existing methods
make assumptions on blur kernels, latent images, or both
[2, 7, 17, 20, 26, 27, 36]. For example, numerous methods [2, 7, 19, 20] assume sparsity of image gradients, which
has been widely used in low-level vision tasks including denoising, stereo, and optical flow. Levin et al. [19] show that
deblurring methods based on this prior tend to favor blurry
images over original clear images, especially for algorithms
formulated within the maximum a posterior (MAP) framework. To remedy this problem, a heuristic edge selection
step [5, 34] is often necessary to achieve state-of-the-art results in the MAP framework. New natural image priors have
also been introduced that favor clean images over blurred
ones, e.g., normalized sparsity prior [17], L0 -regularized
prior [36], and internal patch recurrence [24]. However,
11628

