Attention to Scale: Scale-aware Semantic Image Segmentation
Liang-Chieh Chen∗
Yi Yang, Jiang Wang, Wei Xu
Alan L. Yuille
lcchen@cs.ucla.edu {yangyi05, wangjiang03, wei.xu}@baidu.com yuille@stat.ucla.edu
alan.yuille@jhu.edu
Image with scale = 0.5

Abstract
Incorporating multi-scale features in fully convolutional
neural networks (FCNs) has been a key element to achieving state-of-the-art performance on semantic image segmentation. One common way to extract multi-scale features
is to feed multiple resized input images to a shared deep
network and then merge the resulting features for pixelwise classification. In this work, we propose an attention
mechanism that learns to softly weight the multi-scale features at each pixel location. We adapt a state-of-the-art semantic image segmentation model, which we jointly train
with multi-scale input images and the attention model. The
proposed attention model not only outperforms averageand max-pooling, but allows us to diagnostically visualize
the importance of features at different positions and scales.
Moreover, we show that adding extra supervision to the output at each scale is essential to achieving excellent performance when merging multi-scale features. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our model with extensive experiments on
three challenging datasets, including PASCAL-Person-Part,
PASCAL VOC 2012 and a subset of MS-COCO 2014.

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation, also known as image labeling or scene parsing, relates to the problem of assigning
semantic labels (e.g., “person” or “dog”) to every pixel in
the image. It is a very challenging task in computer vision
and one of the most crucial steps towards scene understanding [18]. Successful image segmentation techniques could
facilitate a large group of applications such as image editing
[17], augmented reality [3] and self-driving vehicles [22].
Recently, various methods [11, 15, 37, 42, 58, 34] based
on Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) [38] demonstrate
astonishing results on several semantic segmentation benchmarks. Among these models, one of the key elements to
successful semantic segmentation is the use of multi-scale
features [19, 45, 27, 38, 41, 34]. In the FCNs setting,
∗ Work done in part during an internship at Baidu USA.

Deep Convolutional
Neural Network

Score Map

x

Result

Attention to
Scale

Attention
Model

+

Image with scale = 1

Deep Convolutional
Neural Network

Score Map

x

Figure 1. Model illustration. The attention model learns to put
different weights on objects of different scales. For example, our
model learns to put large weights on the small-scale person (green
dashed circle) for features from scale = 1, and large weights on the
large-scale child (magenta dashed circle) for features from scale
= 0.5. We jointly train the network component and the attention
model.

there are mainly two types of network structures that exploit multi-scale features [54].
The first type, which we refer to as skip-net, combines
features from the intermediate layers of FCNs [27, 38, 41,
11]. Features within a skip-net are multi-scale in nature
due to the increasingly large receptive field sizes. During training, a skip-net usually employs a two-step process
[27, 38, 41, 11], where it first trains the deep network backbone and then fixes or slightly fine-tunes during multi-scale
feature extraction. The problem with this strategy is that
the training process is not ideal (i.e., classifier training and
feature-extraction are separate) and the training time is usually long (e.g., three to five days [38]).
The second type, which we refer to as share-net, resizes
the input image to several scales and passes each through
a shared deep network. It then computes the final prediction based on the fusion of the resulting multi-scale features
[19, 34]. A share-net does not need the two-step training
process mentioned above. It usually employs average- or
max-pooling over scales [20, 14, 44, 15]. Features at each
scale are either equally important or sparsely selected.
Recently, attention models have shown great success in
several computer vision and natural language processing

3640

