Deep Decision Network for Multi-Class Image Classification
Venkatesh N. Murthy∗1 , Vivek Singh1 , Terrence Chen2 , R. Manmatha1 and Dorin Comaniciu2
1
1

{venk,manmatha}@cs.umass.edu

School of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA.
2
2

{vivek-singh,terrence.chen,dorin.comaniciu}@siemens.com

Medical Imaging Technologies, Siemens Healthcare, Princeton, NJ, USA.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel Deep Decision Network
(DDN) that provides an alternative approach towards building an efficient deep learning network. During the learning phase, starting from the root network node, DDN automatically builds a network that splits the data into disjoint clusters of classes which would be handled by the subsequent expert networks. This results in a tree-like structured network driven by the data. The proposed method
provides an insight into the data by identifying the group
of classes that are hard to classify and require more attention when compared to others. DDN also has the ability
to make early decisions thus making it suitable for timesensitive applications. We validate DDN on two publicly
available benchmark datasets: CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100
and it yields state-of-the-art classification performance on
both the datasets. The proposed algorithm has no limitations to be applied to any generic classification problems.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based methods
have consistently been the top performers on large scale
image classification benchmarks such as ImageNet LargeScale Visual Recognition challenge (ILSVRC 2012, 2013
and 2014) [12][24][29]. This success of CNNs is partly due
to the availability of large datasets and high-performance
computing systems and partly due to the recent technical
advances on learning methods and regularization techniques
like dropout [27], dropconnect [31], maxout [5] and batch
normalization [8]. However there are still no well established guidelines to train a performant deep network, and
thus, training a deep network often involves thorough experimentation and statistical analysis. Although going deeper
∗ work was carried out during his internship at Siemens

in the neural network design has shown to be effective
[24][29]. It also increases the training duration as well as
the risk of over-fitting.
We propose a novel computational framework called
Deep Decision Network (DDN) to design an efficient deep
network architecture without over-fitting the training process. In contrast to existing deep learning based approaches,
DDN is built stage-wise during the learning phase. At each
stage, the network introduces decision stumps to classify
confident samples and partition the remaining data, which
is difficult to classify, into smaller data clusters which are
used for learning successive expert networks in the next
stage. Note that data clusters at each stage are such that
the samples within a cluster are difficult to distinguish using the trained classifier at that stage but the samples across
clusters are easily distinguishable. This is achieved by fine
tuning the trained classifier using a combination of softmax
and weighted contrastive loss. While the clustering is motivated by the divide-and-conquer principle, it has the added
benefit to automatically discovering a data hierarchy based
on appearance similarity. Notice that the DDN implicitly
captures the intuition that hard samples require more computation.
Our contributions are as follows: (a) proposed stagewise training strategy for the DDN helps alleviate problems
encountered by gradient based methods on deeper architectures, (b) joint-loss (weighted contrastive and classification)
optimization of the network to minimize errors during data
partitioning, (c) data-driven design of DDN offers an insight into underlying structure in the data, (b) proposed network architecture can make early decisions thereby reducing computational time without compromising on the performance and finally, (e) DDN achieves state of the art performance on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 [11] public benchmarks.
12240

