Subspace Clustering with Priors via Sparse Quadratically Constrained
Quadratic Programming∗
Yongfang Cheng, Yin Wang, Mario Sznaier, Octavia Camps
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, US
{cheng.yong,wang.yin@husky.neu.edu}, {msznaier,camps}@coe.neu.edu

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of recovering a subspace arrangement from noisy samples, potentially corrupted with outliers. Our main result shows that this problem can be formulated as a convex semi-definite optimization problem subject to an additional rank constrain that involves only a very small number of variables. This is established by first reducing the problem to a quadratically constrained quadratic problem and then using its special structure to find conditions guaranteeing that a suitably built
convex relaxation is indeed exact. When combined with
the standard nuclear norm relaxation for rank, the results
above lead to computationally efficient algorithms with optimality guarantees. A salient feature of the proposed approach is its ability to incorporate existing a-priori information about the noise, co-ocurrences, and percentage of
outliers. These results are illustrated with several examples.

1. Introduction
Many practical problems involve fitting piecewise models to a given set of sample points. Examples of applications
include image compression [11], face recognition [3], motion segmentation [21], video segmentation [19] and system
identification [15]. Due to its importance, a substantial research effort has been devoted to this problem, leading to
many algorithms, that can be roughly classified into statistical, algebraic and self-representation based.
RANdom SAmple Consensus (RANSAC) [8] is an iterative approach that proceeds by fitting one subspace at each
iteration to as many points as possible, using a sampling
based approach, removing these inliers from the dataset and
repeating the process, until a given threshold on the percentage of inliers has been exceeded. While in principle the al∗ This work was supported in part by NSF grants IIS–1318145 and
ECCS–1404163; AFOSR grant FA9550-15-1-0392; and the Alert DHS
Center of Excellence under Award Number 2013-ST-061-ED0001.

gorithm provides robust estimates of the parameters of the
subspaces, it may require a large number of iterations to do
so. On the other hand, due to its random nature, limiting the
number of iterations may lead to arbitrarily bad solutions.
Algebraic methods such as GPCA [16], exploit the properties of subspace arrangements by reducing the problem
to estimating the coefficients of a multivariate polynomial
from noisy measurements of its zeros. Once this polynomial
has been found, the parameters of each subspace can be recovered via polynomial differentiation. While GPCA works
well with clean data, its performance degrades quickly with
the noise level. This drawback has motivated the approach
in [18], where the original data is “cleaned” via rank minimization. Although this approach is shown to be capable
of handling substantial noise level, its main drawback is its
computational complexity. In addition, in the presence of
noise there are no guarantees that the resulting polynomial
can be factored as a product of linear forms (and hence the
parameters of the subspaces are recovered).
Due to these drawbacks, several methods have been recently proposed to handle noisy samples by exploiting the
geometric properties of subspaces to reduce the problem to
that of looking for sparse or low rank solutions to a set
of linear equations that encode the fact that subspaces are
self-expressive (e.g. a point in a subspace can be expressed
as a linear combination of other points in it). These methods include Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC) [7], Robust
PCA (RPCA) [5], Low Rank Representation (LRR) [13],
Fixed Rank Representation (FRR) [14] and Robust Subspace Clustering (RSC) [19]. All of these methods typically
involve using relaxations (such as nuclear norm for rank and
the ℓ1 norm for sparsity), in order to obtain tractable convex
problems1 . While in the noiseless case these relaxations are
exact under suitable conditions on the distribution of the
data, in the presence of noise such guarantees are usually
lost. Further, finding the parameters of the subspaces re1 FRR uses directly a non-convex formulation, but it is shown that, for
noiseless data, the global optimum has a closed form solution.

15204

