Trust No One: Low Rank Matrix Factorization Using Hierarchical RANSAC
Magnus Oskarsson Kenneth Batstone Kalle Åström
Centre for Mathematical Sciences
Lund University, Sweden
magnuso@maths.lth.se ∗

Abstract
In this paper we present a system for performing low
rank matrix factorization. Low-rank matrix factorization is
an essential problem in many areas, including computer vision with applications in affine structure-from-motion, photometric stereo, and non-rigid structure from motion. We
specifically target structured data patterns, with outliers
and large amounts of missing data. Using recently developed characterizations of minimal solutions to matrix factorization problems with missing data, we show how these
can be used as building blocks in a hierarchical system that
performs bootstrapping on all levels. This gives a robust
and fast system, with state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
We will in this paper address the problem of robust estimation of low rank factorizations of matrices with missing
data and outliers. Many problems in geometric computer
vision can be formulated as such. Two examples are
• Affine structure-from-motion (SfM), where the observation matrix containing feature tracks can be factorized into the camera motions and the 3D structure.
• Photometric stereo, where the directions of light
sources and the surface normals are separated by factorizing the measurement matrix composed of pixel intensities under a Lambertian model.
Other applications can be found in [2, 4, 12, 36]. These
problems often lead to measurement matrices with highly
structured data, in terms of which measurements that are
available. In this paper we specifically target problems that
exhibit such structured data patterns. Without missing data,
the optimal solution to low rank matrix factorization, under
the L2 -norm, is given by truncating the singular value decomposition of the measurement matrix, see [10]. When
∗ This work has been financed by ELLIIT, MAPCI and eSSENCE.

there are measurements missing in the data, there is no
closed form solution to the L2 -norm minimization problem. The Wiberg algorithm [35] was the first method to
handle missing data. A modified version of the Wiberg algorithm was presented in [29]. In [5], a damped Newton
method is proposed to handle the missing data. If there
are gross outliers in the data, optimizing the L2 -norm can
give poor results. In [1], Aanaes et al. proposed an iteratively re-weighted least squares approach to optimize the
objective function for robustness to outliers. Using more robust norms to outliers was considered in [20], where algorithms based on alternating optimization under the Hubernorm and the L1 -norm were introduced. Eriksson and Hengel generalized the Wiberg algorithm in [11], to using the
L1 -norm. Sometimes, extra constraints can be posed on the
factorization matrices. In [6, 37] constraints that the solution should lie on a certain manifold are considered and
incorporated in the formulation. Due to the non-convexity
of the matrix factorization, most methods mentioned above
are based on alternating optimization, and are prone to get
trapped in local minima. To address this issue, several
works, such as [9, 8, 25, 12, 30] re-formulate the problem to
minimize the convex surrogate of the rank function – the nuclear norm. This makes it possible to use convex optimization to find the global optimum of the approximated objective function. These approaches can handle the problems
when the rank is not known a priori. However, for applications with a given rank, the nuclear norm based methods
usually perform inferior to the bilinear formulation-based
methods [7]. The convex formulations often have problems
with very high amounts of missing data and outliers. A way
of handling highly structured data matrices is to divide the
whole matrix into overlapping sub-blocks and combine the
sub-block solutions, see [27, 17, 24, 23, 16]. Most of these
methods do not consider both outliers and missing data at
the same time. There are a number of works that target
specific computer vision applications for incomplete data.
Examples are relative orientation problems, [18, 31], batch
structure from motion estimation, [13], multi-dimensional
scaling, [32], and shape estimation, [19]. It has also been

15820

