A Continuous Occlusion Model for Road Scene Understanding
Vikas Dhiman†
†

Quoc-Huy Tran∗

University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Jason J. Corso†
∗

Manmohan Chandraker∗

NEC Laboratories America, Inc.
Cupertino, CA, USA

Abstract
We present a physically interpretable, continuous threedimensional (3D) model for handling occlusions with applications to road scene understanding. We probabilistically
assign each point in space to an object with a theoretical
modeling of the reflection and transmission probabilities for
the corresponding camera ray. Our modeling is unified in
handling occlusions across a variety of scenarios, such as
associating structure from motion (SFM) point tracks with
potentially occluding objects or modeling object detection
scores in applications such as 3D localization. For point
track association, our model uniformly handles static and
dynamic objects, which is an advantage over motion segmentation approaches traditionally used in multibody SFM.
Detailed experiments on the KITTI raw dataset show the
superiority of the proposed method over both state-of-the-art
motion segmentation and a baseline that heuristically uses
detection bounding boxes for resolving occlusions. We also
demonstrate how our continuous occlusion model may be
applied to the task of 3D localization in road scenes.

Figure 1: We propose an occlusion model in 3D that is physically-

1. Introduction

inspired and continuous. Given object detection and SFM point
tracks, our unified model probabilistically assigns point tracks to
objects and reasons about object detection scores and bounding
boxes. It uniformly handles static and dynamic objects, thus, outperforms motion segmentation for association problems. We also
demonstrate occlusion-aware 3D localization in road scenes.

As a two-dimensional (2D) projection of the threedimensional (3D) world, image formation is associated with
a loss of information. This is especially significant when
objects in 3D space occlude each other with respect to the
camera viewpoint. In recent years, we have seen remarkable
progress in various aspects of scene understanding, such as
structure from motion (SFM) and object detection. However,
occlusions still present a challenge, with the difficulty of
physically modeling them being a major bottleneck.
Our main contribution is a novel theoretical model for occlusion handling that is continuous and fully 3D. Our model
is motivated by insights from computer graphics, whereby
we represent objects as translucent 3D ellipsoids. In Section 3, we develop novel continuous models for representing
transmission and reflection probabilities for each ray emanating from the camera. This allows assigning probabilities for

each point in space belonging to an object, which can explicitly explain image observations and reason about occlusions.
This is in contrast to prior works that consider occlusions in
2D, or through discrete occluder patterns or models that are
not physically interpretable [18, 19, 30, 33, 34, 35].
A key advantage afforded by our occlusion model is unification. While previous approaches to handling occlusions
are application-dependent, ours is physically-inspired, thus,
flexible enough to be used in a variety of scenarios. In this
paper, we show that our theory can be used for uniformly
modeling the association of SFM point tracks with static or
dynamic objects (Section 4.1), as well as modeling object
detection scores in applications like 3D localization (Section
4.2). We demonstrate the application of our formulations for
road scenes from the KITTI raw dataset [7].
In particular, assigning 2D point tracks to independent,
14331

