Visual7W: Grounded Question Answering in Images
Yuke Zhu†
Oliver Groth‡
Michael Bernstein†
Li Fei-Fei†
†
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
‡
Computer Science Department, Dresden University of Technology

Abstract
We have seen great progress in basic perceptual tasks
such as object recognition and detection. However, AI models still fail to match humans in high-level vision tasks due
to the lack of capacities for deeper reasoning. Recently the
new task of visual question answering (QA) has been proposed to evaluate a model’s capacity for deep image understanding. Previous works have established a loose, global
association between QA sentences and images. However,
many questions and answers, in practice, relate to local
regions in the images. We establish a semantic link between textual descriptions and image regions by object-level
grounding. It enables a new type of QA with visual answers,
in addition to textual answers used in previous work. We
study the visual QA tasks in a grounded setting with a large
collection of 7W multiple-choice QA pairs. Furthermore,
we evaluate human performance and several baseline models on the QA tasks. Finally, we propose a novel LSTM
model with spatial attention to tackle the 7W QA tasks.

1. Introduction
The recent development of deep learning technologies
has achieved successes in many perceptual visual tasks such
as object recognition, image classification and pose estimation [15, 21, 25, 38, 39, 42, 43]. Yet the status quo of
computer vision is still far from matching human capabilities, especially when it comes to understanding an image
in all its details. Recently, visual question answering (QA)
has been proposed as a proxy task for evaluating a vision
system’s capacity for deeper image understanding. Several
QA datasets [1, 7, 27, 36, 49] have been released since last
year. They contributed valuable data for training visual QA
systems and introduced various tasks, from picking correct
multiple-choice answers [1] to filling in blanks [49].
Pioneer work in image captioning [4, 5, 13, 45, 47],
sentence-based image retrieval [14, 40] and visual QA [1, 7,
36] shows promising results. These works aimed at establishing a global association between sentences and images.
However, as Flickr30K [34, 48] and Visual Madlibs [49]

Where
does this
scene take
place?

Why is there
foam?

A) Because of a wave. ✔
B) Because of a boat.
C) Because of a fire.
D) Because of a leak.

A) In the sea. ✔
B) In the desert.
C) In the forest.
D) On a lawn.

What is
the dog
doing?

What is the dog
standing on?

A) Surfing. ✔
B) Sleeping.
C) Running.
D) Eating.

Which paw is lifted?

A) On a surfboard. ✔
B) On a table.
C) On a garage.
D) On a ball.

Figure 1: Deep image understanding relies on detailed knowledge about different image parts. We employ diverse questions to
acquire detailed information on images, ground objects mentioned
in text with their visual appearances, and provide a multiple-choice
setting for evaluating a visual question answering task with both
textual and visual answers.

suggest, a tighter semantic link between textual descriptions and corresponding visual regions is a key ingredient
for better models. As Fig. 1 shows, the localization of objects can be a critical step to understand images better and
solve image-related questions. Providing these image-text
correspondences is called grounding. Inspired by Geman
et al.’s prototype of a visual Turing test based on image
regions [8] and the comprehensive data collection of QA
pairs on COCO images [25] such as VQA [1] and Baidu [7],
we fuse visual QA and grounding in order to create a new
QA dataset with dense annotations and a more flexible
evaluation environment. Object-level grounding provides
a stronger link between QA pairs and images than global
image-level associations. Furthermore, it allows us to resolve coreference ambiguity [19, 35] and to understand object distributions in QA, and enables visually grounded answers that consist of object bounding boxes.
Motivated by the goal of developing a model for visual QA based on grounded regions, our paper introduces
a dataset that extends previous approaches [1, 7, 36] and
proposes an attention-based model to perform this task. We
collected 327,939 QA pairs on 47,300 COCO images [25],
together with 1,311,756 human-generated multiple-choices
and 561,459 object groundings from 36,579 categories. Our
data collection was inspired by the age-old idea of the W
14995

