DeLay: Robust Spatial Layout Estimation for Cluttered Indoor Scenes
Saumitro Dasgupta, Kuan Fang∗ , Kevin Chen∗ , Silvio Savarese
Stanford University
{sd, kuanfang, kchen92}@cs.stanford.edu, ssilvio@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating the spatial layout
of an indoor scene from a monocular RGB image, modeled
as the projection of a 3D cuboid. Existing solutions to this
problem often rely strongly on hand-engineered features
and vanishing point detection, which are prone to failure in
the presence of clutter. In this paper, we present a method
that uses a fully convolutional neural network (FCNN) in
conjunction with a novel optimization framework for generating layout estimates. We demonstrate that our method is
robust in the presence of clutter and handles a wide range
of highly challenging scenes. We evaluate our method on
two standard benchmarks and show that it achieves state of
the art results, outperforming previous methods by a wide
margin.

1. Introduction
Consider the task of estimating the spatial layout of a
cluttered indoor scene (say, a messy classroom). Our goal
is to delineate the boundaries of the walls, ground, and ceiling, as depicted in Fig. 1. These bounding surfaces are an
important source of information. For instance, objects in
the scene usually rest on the ground plane. Many objects,
like furniture, are also usually aligned with the walls. As a
consequence, these support surfaces are valuable for a wide
range of tasks such as indoor navigation, object detection,
and augmented reality. However, inferring the layout, particularly in the presence of a large amount of clutter, is a
challenging task. Indoor scenes have a high degree of intraclass variance, and critical information required for inferring the layout, such as room corners, is often occluded and
must be inferred indirectly.
There are works which approach the same problem given
either depth information (e.g. an RGBD frame) or a sequence of monocular images from which depth can be inferred. For our work, we restrict the input to the most
general case: a single RGB image. Given this image, our

Figure 1: An overview of our layout estimation pipeline.
Each heat map corresponds to one of the five layout labels
shown in the final output. They are color coded correspondingly.

∗ indicates equal contribution.

616

