Zero-Shot Learning via Joint Latent Similarity Embedding
Ziming Zhang and Venkatesh Saligrama
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Boston University
{zzhang14, srv}@bu.edu

Abstract
Zero-shot recognition (ZSR) deals with the problem of
predicting class labels for target domain instances based on
source domain side information (e.g. attributes) of unseen
classes. We formulate ZSR as a binary prediction problem.
Our resulting classifier is class-independent. It takes an arbitrary pair of source and target domain instances as input and predicts whether or not they come from the same
class, i.e. whether there is a match. We model the posterior probability of a match since it is a sufficient statistic
and propose a latent probabilistic model in this context. We
develop a joint discriminative learning framework based
on dictionary learning to jointly learn the parameters of
our model for both domains, which ultimately leads to our
class-independent classifier. Many of the existing embedding methods can be viewed as special cases of our probabilistic model. On ZSR our method shows 4.90% improvement over the state-of-the-art in accuracy averaged across
four benchmark datasets. We also adapt ZSR method for
zero-shot retrieval and show 22.45% improvement accordingly in mean average precision (mAP).

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) deals with the problem of
learning to classify previously unseen class instances. It is
particularly useful in large scale classification where labels
for many instances or entire categories can often be missing. One popular version of ZSL is based on the so-called
source and target domains. In this paper we consider the
source domain as a collection of class-level vectors, where
each vector describes side information of one single class
with, for instance, attributes [10, 19, 24, 27, 31], language
words/phrases [4, 11, 34], or even learned classifiers [39].
The target domain is described by a distribution of instances
(e.g. images, videos, etc.) [19, 38]. During training, we are
given source domain side information and target domain
data corresponding to only a subset of classes, which we
call seen classes. During test time for the source domain,
side information is then provided for unseen classes. A tar-

Figure 1. Illustration of our joint latent space model with images as target domain and text-documents as source domain. The bar graph next to
the (latent) topics indicate the mixture weights of the topics. The links between the topics indicate the co-occurrence (thicker lines depicting larger
likelihood values). Our method is based on learning a class-independent
similarity function using seen class training data, which measures the likelihood of a source domain class vector and a target domain data sample
being the same class, regardless of their true underlying classes.

get domain instance from an unknown unseen class is then
presented. The goal during test time is to predict the class
label for the unseen target domain instance.
Intuition: In contrast to previous methods (e.g. [2]) which
explicitly learn the relationships between source and target domain data, we posit that for both domains there exist
corresponding latent spaces, as illustrated in Fig. 1, where
there is a similarity function independent of class labels.
Our supposition implies that, regardless of the underlying class labels, there is a statistical relationship between
latent co-occurrence patterns of corresponding source and
target instance pairs when the instance pairs describe the
same thing. For example, with our supposition the “zebra”
image in Fig. 1 on the left will share an underlying statistical relationship with the description of zebra in text on the
right, and that this relationship can be inferred by means of
a class-independent “universal” similarity function1 .
To mathematically formalize this intuition we formulate
zero-shot recognition (ZSR) as a binary classification problem. In this framework, we train a score function that takes
an arbitrary source-target instance pair as input and outputs
a likelihood score that the paired source and target instances
1 Intuitively this is a plausible mechanism. We as humans tend to draw
connections from different sources to improve our understanding of objects/concepts.

16034

