Slow and steady feature analysis:
higher order temporal coherence in video
Dinesh Jayaraman
UT Austin

Kristen Grauman
UT Austin

dineshj@cs.utexas.edu

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
How can unlabeled video augment visual learning? Existing methods perform “slow” feature analysis, encouraging the representations of temporally close frames to exhibit
only small differences. While this standard approach captures the fact that high-level visual signals change slowly
over time, it fails to capture how the visual content changes.
We propose to generalize slow feature analysis to “steady”
feature analysis. The key idea is to impose a prior that
higher order derivatives in the learned feature space must
be small. To this end, we train a convolutional neural network with a regularizer on tuples of sequential frames from
unlabeled video. It encourages feature changes over time
to be smooth, i.e., similar to the most recent changes. Using five diverse datasets, including unlabeled YouTube and
KITTI videos, we demonstrate our method’s impact on object, scene, and action recognition tasks. We further show
that our features learned from unlabeled video can even surpass a standard heavily supervised pretraining approach.

1. Introduction
Visual feature learning with deep neural networks has
yielded dramatic gains for image recognition tasks in recent years [22, 37]. While the main techniques involved in
these methods have been known for some time, a key factor
in their recent success is the availability of large humanlabeled image datasets like ImageNet [6]. Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) designed for image recognition typically have millions of parameters, necessitating
notoriously large training databases to avoid overfitting.
Intuitively, however, visual learning should not be restricted to sets of category-labeled exemplars. Taking human learning as an obvious example, children build up visual representations through constant observation and action in the world. This hints that machine-learned representations would also be well served to exploit long-term
video observations, even in the absence of deliberate labels.
Indeed, researchers in cognitive science find that temporal
coherence plays an important role in visual learning. For

Figure 1: From unlabeled videos, we learn “steady features” that
exhibit consistent feature transitions among sequential frames.

example, altering the natural temporal contiguity of visual
stimuli hinders translation invariance in the inferior temporal cortex [26], and functions learned to preserve temporal
coherence share behaviors observed in complex cells of the
primary visual cortex [4].
Our goal is to exploit unlabeled video, as might be obtained freely from the web, to improve visual feature learning. In particular, we are interested in improving learned
image representations for visual recognition tasks.
Prior work leveraging video for feature learning focuses
on the concept of slow feature analysis (SFA). First formally proposed in [42], SFA exploits temporal coherence in
video as “free” supervision to learn image representations
invariant to small transformations. In particular, SFA encourages the following property: in a learned feature space,
temporally nearby frames should lie close to each other, i.e.
for a learned representation z and adjacent video frames
a and b, one would like z(a) ≈ z(b). The rationale behind SFA rests on a simple observation: high-level semantic visual concepts associated with video frames typically
change only gradually as a function of the pixels that compose the frames. Thus, representations useful for recognizing high-level concepts are also likely to possess this
property of “slowness”. Another way to think about this
is that scene changes between temporally nearby frames
are usually small and represent label-preserving transformations. A slow representation will tolerate minor geometric
or lighting changes, which is essential for high-level visual
recognition tasks. The value of exploiting temporal coherence for recognition has been repeatedly verified in ongoing
research, including via modern deep convolutional neural
13852

