Efficient and Robust Color Consistency for Community Photo Collections
Jaesik Park∗
Intel Labs

Yu-Wing Tai
SenseTime

Abstract
We present an efficient technique to optimize color consistency of a collection of images depicting a common
scene. Our method first recovers sparse pixel correspondences in the input images and stacks them into a matrix
with many missing entries. We show that this matrix satisfies a rank two constraint under a simple color correction
model. These parameters can be viewed as pseudo white
balance and gamma correction parameters for each input
image. We present a robust low-rank matrix factorization
method to estimate the unknown parameters of this model.
Using them, we improve color consistency of the input images or perform color transfer with any input image as the
source. Our approach is insensitive to outliers in the pixel
correspondences thereby precluding the need for complex
pre-processing steps. We demonstrate high quality color
consistency results on large photo collections of popular
tourist landmarks and personal photo collections containing images of people.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, the growing popularity of photo sharing and
social networks makes it easy to crowdsource photo collections of popular locations and social events. This has
led to applications ranging from virtual tourism and navigation [35], image completion [19], colorization [7] and photo
uncropping [32]. However, the color statistics of each image in the collection could differ due to different scene illumination at capture time or due to different non linear camera response functions [15, 25]. Such photometric inconsistencies cause visual artifacts in applications that require
seamless alignment of multiple overlapping images.
Although modern image editing packages provide some
color correction, and tone adjustment functionalities, these
techniques usually require indirect user interaction [2, 20],
or direct adjustment of color balance or manipulation of
the tone curve. Consequently, these interactive techniques

Sudipta N. Sinha
Microsoft Research

In So Kweon
KAIST

are too tedious for large image collections. On the other
hand, individual color correction is likely to produce images
with inconsistent colors across the whole collection. Recently, HaCohen et al. [17] proposed a method to optimize
color consistency across an image collection with respect
to a reference image that relies on recovering dense pixel
correspondence across multiple images [16]. This method
is computationally expensive and not ideal for processing
large collections involving thousands of images.
In this paper, we present a new matrix factorization based
approach to automatically optimize color consistency for
multiple images using sparse correspondence obtained from
multi-image sparse local feature matching. For rigid scenes,
we leveraging structure from motion (SfM) although it is an
optional step. We stack the aligned pixel intensities into a
vector whose size equals the number of images. Such vectors are stacked into a matrix, one with many missing entries. This is the observation matrix that will be factorized.
Under a simple color correction model, the logarithm of this
matrix satisﬁes a rank two constraint under idealized conditions (perfect correspondences, no noise, constant illumination). The rank two matrix can be expressed as a sum of
two rank one matrices – one that depends on the color correction parameters and another that depends on the albedos
of the scene points associated with the sparse correspondences. The color correction parameters can be viewed as
pseudo white balance and gamma correction parameters of
the image. Here, pseudo indicates that the estimates do not
necessarily coincide with the ground truth values.

∗ Part of this work was done while the ﬁrst and second author were

Our method is based on the low-rank matrix factorization
technique proposed in [4] that is robust to outliers. Robustness is key to the success of our method since in real conditions, several factors – lighting change, shadows, saturated
pixels, incorrect feature correspondences, etc. produce outliers that corrupts the low rank structure of the observation
matrix. We also analyze ambiguities in the matrix factorization formulation and suggest ways to resolve them practically. The low rank matrix formulation and the application
of the L1 -norm based robust factorization technique are the
main contributions of our work.

in KAIST. This work was supported in part by the National Research
Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIP)
(No.2010-0028680).

Unlike the previous quadratic optimization problem formulation [17] which relies on dense and accurate correspon-

430

