Object Skeleton Extraction in Natural Images by Fusing Scale-associated Deep
Side Outputs
Wei Shen1 , Kai Zhao1 , Yuan Jiang1 , Yan Wang2 , Zhijiang Zhang1 , Xiang Bai3∗
Key Laboratory of Specialty Fiber Optics and Optical Access Networks, Shanghai University
2
Rapid-Rich Object Search Lab, Nanyang Technological University
3
School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
1

wei.shen@shu.edu.cn,xbai@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Object skeleton is a useful cue for object detection, complementary to the object contour, as it provides a structural
representation to describe the relationship among object
parts. While object skeleton extraction in natural images
is a very challenging problem, as it requires the extractor
to be able to capture both local and global image context to determine the intrinsic scale of each skeleton pixel.
Existing methods rely on per-pixel based multi-scale feature computation, which results in difficult modeling and
high time consumption. In this paper, we present a fully
convolutional network with multiple scale-associated side
outputs to address this problem. By observing the relationship between the receptive field sizes of the sequential
stages in the network and the skeleton scales they can capture, we introduce a scale-associated side output to each
stage. We impose supervision to different stages by guiding
the scale-associated side outputs toward groundtruth skeletons of different scales. The responses of the multiple scaleassociated side outputs are then fused in a scale-specific
way to localize skeleton pixels with multiple scales effectively. Our method achieves promising results on two skeleton extraction datasets, and significantly outperforms other
competitors.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we investigate an interesting and nontrivial problem in computer vision, object skeleton extraction
from natural images (Fig. 1). Here, the concept of “object” means a standalone thing with a well-defined boundary
and center [2], such as an animal, a human, and a plane,
as opposed to amorphous background stuff, such as sky,
grass, and mountain. Skeleton, also called symmetry axis, is a useful structure-based object descriptor. Extracting
∗ Corresponding author

object skeletons directly from natural images is of broad interests to many real applications including object recognition/detection [4, 28], text recognition [34], road detection
and blood vessel detection [27].

Figure 1. Object skeleton extraction in natural images. The skeletons are in yellow.

Skeleton extraction from pre-segmented images [21]
used to be a hot topic, which has been well studied and successfully applied to shape-based object matching and recognition [25, 22, 9]. However, such methods have severe limitations when being applied to natural images, as segmentation from natural images is still an unsolved problem.
Skeleton extraction from natural images is a much more
challenging problem. The main difficulties stem from three
aspects: (1) Complexity of natural scenes: Natural scenes
can be very cluttered. Amorphous background elements,
such as fences, bricks and even the shadows of objects, exhibit somewhat self-symmetry, and thus are prone to cause
distractions. (2) Diversity of objects: Objects in natural images may exhibit entirely different colors, textures, shapes
and sizes. (3) Specificity of skeletons: local skeleton segments have a variety of patterns, such as straight lines, Tjunctions and Y-junctions. In addition, a local skeleton segment naturally associates with a certain scale, determined
by the thickness of its corresponding object part. However,
it is unknown in natural images. We term this problem as
unknown-scale problem in skeleton extraction.
A number of works have been proposed to study this
problem in the past decade. Broadly speaking, they can
be categorized into two groups: (1) Traditional image processing methods [32, 12, 16, 33], which compute skeletons
from a gradient intensity map according to some geometric
1222

