RIFD-CNN: Rotation-Invariant and Fisher Discriminative Convolutional Neural
Networks for Object Detection
Gong Cheng, Peicheng Zhou, Junwei Han*
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an, China
{gcheng,jhan}@nwpu.edu.cn, zpc19881119@gmail.com

Abstract1
Thanks to the powerful feature representations obtained
through deep convolutional neural network (CNN), the
performance of object detection has recently been
substantially boosted. Despite the remarkable success, the
problems of object rotation, within-class variability, and
between-class similarity remain several major challenges.
To address these problems, this paper proposes a novel and
effective method to learn a rotation-invariant and Fisher
discriminative CNN (RIFD-CNN) model. This is achieved
by introducing and learning a rotation-invariant layer and
a Fisher discriminative layer, respectively, on the basis of
the existing high-capacity CNN architectures. Specifically,
the rotation-invariant layer is trained by imposing an
explicit regularization constraint on the objective function
that enforces invariance on the CNN features before and
after rotating. The Fisher discriminative layer is trained by
imposing the Fisher discrimination criterion on the CNN
features so that they have small within-class scatter but
large between-class separation. In the experiments, we
comprehensively evaluate the proposed method for object
detection task on a public available aerial image dataset
and the PASCAL VOC 2007 dataset. State-of-the-art
results are achieved compared with the existing baseline
methods.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the most fundamental yet
challenging problems in computer vision community.
Since the groundbreaking success of deep convolutional
neural networks (CNN) [1] in image classification task [2]
on the ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge
(ILSVRC) [3, 4], CNN-based object detection methods
have recently attracted a great deal of research interest and
have achieved state-of-the-art performance [5-27].
Among various CNN-based methods for object detection,
one of the most notable work is made by Girshick et al. [5]
with the framework of region-CNN (R-CNN), which is ac*

Corresponding author.

2884

Figure 1. While the CNN features have shown impressive success
for object detection, the problems of object rotation, within-class
variability, and between-class similarity still remain several major
challenges. Here we show some example patches for each
challenge obtained from PASCAL VOC 2007 dataset [28]. All
example patches are warped into a fixed 224×224 pixel size. In
this situation, how to learn a more powerful feature representation
that is rotation insensitive and meanwhile has small within-class
scatter and big between-class separation is highly desirable. The
proposed rotation-invariant and Fisher discriminative CNN model
provides a possible solution to address these problems.

tually a chain of conceptually simple steps: generating
candidate object proposals, classifying them as foreground
or background, and post-processing them to improve their

