Collaborative Quantization for Cross-Modal Similarity Search
Ting Zhang1∗ Jingdong Wang2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, China 2 Microsoft Research, China
1

zting@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-modal similarity search is a problem about designing a search system supporting querying across content modalities, e.g., using an image to search for texts
or using a text to search for images. This paper presents
a compact coding solution for efficient search, with a focus on the quantization approach which has already shown
the superior performance over the hashing solutions in the
single-modal similarity search. We propose a cross-modal
quantization approach, which is among the early attempts
to introduce quantization into cross-modal search. The major contribution lies in jointly learning the quantizers for
both modalities through aligning the quantized representations for each pair of image and text belonging to a document. In addition, our approach simultaneously learns the
common space for both modalities in which quantization
is conducted to enable efficient and effective search using
the Euclidean distance computed in the common space with
fast distance table lookup. Experimental results compared
with several competitive algorithms over three benchmark
datasets demonstrate that the proposed approach achieves
the state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Similarity search has been a fundamental problem in information retrieval and multimedia search. Classical approaches, however, are designed to address the singlemodal search problem, where, for instance, the text query
is used to search in a text database, or the image query is
used to search in an image database. In this paper, we deal
with the cross-modal similarity search problem, which is an
important problem emerged in multimedia information retrieval, for example, using a text query to retrieve images or
using an image query to retrieve texts.
We study the compact coding solutions to cross-modal
similarity search, in particular focusing on a common realworld scenario, image and text modalities. Compact cod∗ This work was done when Ting Zhang was an intern at MSR.

2

jingdw@microsoft.com

ing is an approach of converting the database items into
short codes on which similarity search can be efficiently
conducted. It has been widely studied in single-modal
similarity search with typical solutions including hashing [3, 13, 21] and quantization [5, 6, 14, 27], while relatively unexplored in cross-modal search except a few hashing approaches [1, 8, 11, 30]. We are interested in the quantization approach that represents each point by a short code
formed by the index of the nearest center, as quantization
has shown more powerful representation ability than hashing in single-modal search.
Rather than performing the quantization directly in the
original feature space, we learn a common space for both
modalities with the goal that the pair of image and text lie in
the learnt common space closely. Learning such a common
space is important and useful for the subsequent quantization whose similarity is computed based on the Euclidean
distance. Similar observation has also been made in some
hashing techniques [15, 16, 30] that apply the sign function
on the learnt common space.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for crossmodal similarity search, called collaborative quantization,
that conducts the quantization simultaneously for both
modalities in the common space, to which the database
items of both modalities are mapped through matrix factorization. The quantization and the common space mapping
are jointly optimized for both modalities under the objective that the quantized approximations of the descriptors of
an image and a text forming a pair in the search database
are well aligned. Our approach is one of the early attempts
to introduce quantization into cross-modal similarity search
offering the superior search performance. Experimental results on several standard datasets show that our approach
outperforms existing cross-modal hashing and quantization
algorithms.

2. Related work
There are two categories of compact coding approaches
for cross-modal similarity search: cross-modal hashing and
cross-modal quantization.
Cross-modal hashing often maps multi-modal data into

2036

