MDL-CW: A Multimodal Deep Learning Framework with Cross Weights
Sarah Rastegar, Mahdieh Soleymani Baghshah, Hamid R. Rabiee, Seyed Mohsen Shojaee
AICT Innovation Center, Department of Computer Engineering, Sharif University of Technology
Tehran, Iran
rabiee@sharif.edu

Abstract
Deep learning has received much attention as of the most
powerful approaches for multimodal representation learning in recent years. An ideal model for multimodal data
can reason about missing modalities using the available
ones, and usually provides more information when multiple
modalities are being considered. All the previous deep models contain separate modality-specific networks and find a
shared representation on top of those networks. Therefore,
they only consider high level interactions between modalities to find a joint representation for them. In this paper,
we propose a multimodal deep learning framework (MDLCW) that exploits the cross weights between representation
of modalities, and try to gradually learn interactions of the
modalities in a deep network manner (from low to high level
interactions). Moreover, we theoretically show that considering these interactions provide more intra-modality information, and introduce a multi-stage pre-training method
that is based on the properties of multi-modal data. In the
proposed framework, as opposed to the existing deep methods for multi-modal data, we try to reconstruct the representation of each modality at a given level, with representation
of other modalities in the previous layer. Extensive experimental results show that the proposed model outperforms
state-of-the-art information retrieval methods for both image and text queries on the PASCAL-sentence and SUNAttribute databases.

1. Introduction
In real-world applications, we usually encounter data
consisting of different modalities. Images annotated with
tags and videos containing audio signal along with visual
signal are examples of multimodal data. Although each
modality has its own information and statistical properties,
different modalities usually share high level concepts. The
rationale for using different modalities to learn a shared representation is that those modalities may provide complementary information about a common concept. Moreover, if

we could model and learn the cross-modal relations, we can
reason about missing modalities using the available modalities or even improve the unimodal models. In recent years,
there has been a growing interest in using deep networks
for multi-modal learning. Ngiam et al. [13] used deep autoencoder to extract high level features from speech and video
signals, and then aggregated these features to find a shared
representation. Srivastava et al. [20] introduced the multimodal deep Boltzman machine that learns a deep generative
model over joint space of image and text inputs. Recently,
Sohn et al. [19] proposed a training approach for multimodal deep learning that is based on minimizing variation
of information instead of maximizing the likelihood. All of
these methods for multimodal data have a common strategy in which they first learn layers of modality-specific representations and then learn a shared representation across
multiple modalities at the top layer of the deep network.
Besides deep multimodal learning approaches, some probabilistic methods have also been recently introduced for multimodal data. Xing et al. [24] proposed dual-wing harmoniums to learn a joint representation of the image and
text modalities. Zhen et al. [26] introduced a probabilistic generative approach called multimodal latent binary embedding. Ozdemir et al. [14] presented a model based on
Bayesian nonparametric framework to learn the underlying semantically meaningful and abstract features of multimodal data. However, since different data modalities have
different statistical properties, shallow models are not usually able to extract high-level concepts from multimodal
data.
One of the other recent challenges about multimodal
datasets is their huge size. In order to achieve real time
retrieval, some approaches such as multimodal hashing has
been introduced which encodes the high-dimensional input
vectors into compact binary strings while trying to increase
similarity between different modalities that having the same
concept in the resulted space. For example, Bronstein et al.
[2] applied a boosting procedure for cross-modality similarity learning. Zhen et al. [25] proposed a co-regularized
hashing based on a boosted co-regularization framework.

12601

