Real-Time Single Image and Video Super-Resolution Using an Efficient
Sub-Pixel Convolutional Neural Network
Wenzhe Shi1 , Jose Caballero1 , Ferenc Huszár1 , Johannes Totz1 , Andrew P. Aitken1 ,
Rob Bishop1 , Daniel Rueckert2 , Zehan Wang1
1
Magic Pony Technology 2 Imperial College London
1

{wenzhe,jose,ferenc,johannes,andy,rob,zehan}@magicpony.technology
2

D.Rueckert@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Recently, several models based on deep neural networks
have achieved great success in terms of both reconstruction
accuracy and computational performance for single image
super-resolution. In these methods, the low resolution (LR)
input image is upscaled to the high resolution (HR) space
using a single filter, commonly bicubic interpolation, before
reconstruction. This means that the super-resolution (SR)
operation is performed in HR space. We demonstrate that
this is sub-optimal and adds computational complexity. In
this paper, we present the first convolutional neural network
(CNN) capable of real-time SR of 1080p videos on a single
K2 GPU. To achieve this, we propose a novel CNN architecture where the feature maps are extracted in the LR space.
In addition, we introduce an efficient sub-pixel convolution
layer which learns an array of upscaling filters to upscale
the final LR feature maps into the HR output. By doing so,
we effectively replace the handcrafted bicubic filter in the
SR pipeline with more complex upscaling filters specifically
trained for each feature map, whilst also reducing the
computational complexity of the overall SR operation. We
evaluate the proposed approach using images and videos
from publicly available datasets and show that it performs
significantly better (+0.15dB on Images and +0.39dB on
Videos) and is an order of magnitude faster than previous
CNN-based methods.

1. Introduction
The recovery of a high resolution (HR) image or video
from its low resolution (LR) counter part is topic of great
interest in digital image processing. This task, referred
to as super-resolution (SR), finds direct applications in
many areas such as HDTV [15], medical imaging [28, 33],

satellite imaging [38], face recognition [17] and surveillance [53]. The global SR problem assumes LR data to
be a low-pass filtered (blurred), downsampled and noisy
version of HR data. It is a highly ill-posed problem, due
to the loss of high-frequency information that occurs during the non-invertible low-pass filtering and subsampling
operations. Furthermore, the SR operation is effectively
a one-to-many mapping from LR to HR space which can
have multiple solutions, of which determining the correct
solution is non-trivial. A key assumption that underlies
many SR techniques is that much of the high-frequency data
is redundant and thus can be accurately reconstructed from
low frequency components. SR is therefore an inference
problem, and thus relies on our model of the statistics of
images in question.

Many methods assume multiple images are available as
LR instances of the same scene with different perspectives,
i.e. with unique prior affine transformations. These can be
categorised as multi-image SR methods [1, 11] and exploit
explicit redundancy by constraining the ill-posed problem
with additional information and attempting to invert the
downsampling process. However, these methods usually
require computationally complex image registration and
fusion stages, the accuracy of which directly impacts the
quality of the result. An alternative family of methods
are single image super-resolution (SISR) techniques [45].
These techniques seek to learn implicit redundancy that is
present in natural data to recover missing HR information
from a single LR instance. This usually arises in the form of
local spatial correlations for images and additional temporal
correlations in videos. In this case, prior information in the
form of reconstruction constraints is needed to restrict the
solution space of the reconstruction.
11874

