Information-Driven Adaptive Structured-Light Scanners
Guy Rosman, Daniela Rus, John W. Fisher III
CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{rosman,rus,fisher}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Sensor planning and active sensing, long studied in
robotics, adapt sensor parameters to maximize a utility
function while constraining resource expenditures. Here
we consider information gain as the utility function. While
these concepts are often used to reason about 3D sensors,
these are usually treated as a predefined, black-box, component. In this paper we show how the same principles can
be used as part of the 3D sensor.
We describe the relevant generative model for
structured-light 3D scanning and show how adaptive
pattern selection can maximize information gain in an
open-loop-feedback manner. We then demonstrate how
different choices of relevant variable sets (corresponding
to the subproblems of locatization and mapping) lead to
different criteria for pattern selection and can be computed
in an online fashion. We show results for both subproblems
with several pattern dictionary choices and demonstrate
their usefulness for pose estimation and depth acquisition.

1. Introduction
Range sensors have revolutionized computer vision in
recent years, with commodity RGB-D scanners allowing
us to easily tackle challenging problems such as articulated
pose estimation [27], Simultaneaous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [16, 31, 6], and object recognition [15, 21].
The use of 3D sensors often relies on a simplified model
of the resulting depth images that is loosely coupled to the
photometric principles behind the design of the scanner.
Given this intermediate representation, we deploy computer
vision algorithms to understand the world and take actions
based on the acquired scene information.
Significant efforts have been devoted to optimal planning
of sensor deployment under resource constraints, e.g., on
energy, time, or computation. Sensor planning has been
employed in many aspects of vision and robotics, including
positioning of 3D sensors and cameras, as well as other active sensing problems, see for example [25, 3, 2, 37, 32].
The goal is to focus sensing on the aspects of the environ-

Figure 1. Illustration of patterns selection. Each row illustrates
another turn of pattern selection. For each pattern, the information
gain is estimated, shown by different border color around each
pattern, and the different stem heights in the plot on the left. Black
arrowheads and red circles in the plot mark the selected pattern
at each turn. Note the different patterns selected, and diminishing
information gain over time. Bottom row: Left: the proposed openloop w/ feedback 3D scanning with pattern selection flowchart.
Right: the project/camera system used for 3D scanning.

ment or scene most relevant to the specific inference task.
However, the same principles are generally not used to
examine the operation of the 3D sensor itself. At a finer
scale, each acquisition by a photosensitive sensor is a measurement, and the parameters of the sensors, including any
active illumination, are an action parameter (in the decisiontheoretic sense [29]) to be optimized and planned.
In this paper we reformulate adaptive selection of patterns in structured-light scanners as the following resource
constrained sensor-selection process. We treat the choice of
the projected pattern at each time as a planning choice, and
the number of projected patterns as a resource. Our goal is
to minimize the number of projected patterns while maximizing the task-specific information gain. We compute in1874

