Learning Attributes Equals
Multi-Source Domain Generalization
Chuang Gan
IIIS, Tsinghua University

Tianbao Yang
University of Iowa

Boqing Gong
CRCV, U. of Central Florida

ganchuang1990@gmail.com

tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu

bgong@crcv.ucf.edu

Agility

Abstract
Attributes possess appealing properties and benefit
many computer vision problems, such as object recognition, learning with humans in the loop, and image retrieval. Whereas the existing work mainly pursues utilizing attributes for various computer vision problems, we
contend that the most basic problem—how to accurately
and robustly detect attributes from images—has been left
under explored. Especially, the existing work rarely explicitly tackles the need that attribute detectors should
generalize well across different categories, including
those previously unseen. Noting that this is analogous
to the objective of multi-source domain generalization, if
we treat each category as a domain, we provide a novel
perspective to attribute detection and propose to gear
the techniques in multi-source domain generalization for
the purpose of learning cross-category generalizable attribute detectors. We validate our understanding and
approach with extensive experiments on four challenging datasets and three different problems.

Giraffe
Monkey

Zebra

Elephant
Dolphin
Seal

Sheep

Whale

Figure 1. The boundaries between middle-level attributes and
high-level object classes cross each other. We thus do not
expect that the features originally learned for separating elephant, sheep, and giraffe could also be optimal for detecting
the attribute “bush”, which is shared by them. We propose to
understand attribute detection as multi-source domain generalization and to explicitly break the class boundaries in order to
learn high-quality attribute detectors.

1. Introduction
or videos—far from being solved. Especially, the existing work rarely explicitly tackles the need that attribute detectors should generalize well across different categories, including those previously unseen
ones. For instance, the attribute detector “four-legged”
is expected to correctly tell a giant panda is four-legged
even if it is trained from the images of horses, cows, zebras, and pigs (i.e., no pandas).

Visual attributes are middle-level concepts which humans use to describe objects, human faces, scenes, activities, and so on (e.g., four-legged, smiley, outdoor, and
crowded). A major appeal of attributes is that they are
not only human-nameable but also machine-detectable,
making it possible to serve as the building blocks to
describe instances [18, 42, 57, 55], teach machines to
recognize previously unseen classes by zero-shot learning [44, 52], or offer a natural human-computer interactions channel for image/video search [64, 81, 40, 70].
However, we contend that the long-standing pursuit after utilizing attributes for various computer vision
problems has left the most basic problem—how to accurately and robustly detect attributes from images

Indeed, most of the existing attribute detectors [44,
18, 42, 9, 32, 35, 8, 10, 12, 75, 31] are built using
features engineered or learned for object recognition
together with off-shelf machine learning classifiers—
without tailoring them to reflect the idiosyncrasies of attributes. This is suboptimal; the successful techniques

87

