Using Spatial Order to Boost the Elimination of Incorrect Feature Matches
Lior Talker
The University of Haifa
ltalke01@campus.haifa.ac.il

Yael Moses
The Interdisciplinary Center
Herzliya 46150, Israel
yael@idc.ac.il

Abstract
Correctly matching feature points in a pair of images is
an important preprocessing step for many computer vision
applications. In this paper we propose an efficient method
for estimating the number of correct matches without explicitly computing them. In addition, our method estimates
the region of overlap between the images. To this end, we
propose to analyze the set of matches using the spatial order of the features, as projected to the x-axis of the image.
The set of features in each image is thus represented by a sequence. This reduces the analysis of the matching problem
to the analysis of the permutation between the sequences.
Using the Kendall distance metric between permutations
and natural assumptions on the distribution of the correct
and incorrect matches, we show how to estimate the abovementioned values. We demonstrate the usefulness of our
method in two applications: (i) a new halting condition
for RANSAC based epipolar geometry estimation methods
that considerably reduce the running time, and (ii) discarding spatially unrelated image pairs in the Structure-fromMotion pipeline. Furthermore, our analysis can be used to
compute the probability that a given match is correct based
on the estimated number of correct matches and the rank
of the features within the sequences. Our experiments on
a large number of synthetic and real data demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method. For example, the running time
of the image matching stage in the Structure-from-Motion
pipeline may be reduced by about 99% while preserving
about 80% of the correctly matched feature points.

1. Introduction
Matching feature points between a pair of images is a
fundamental problem in computer vision. The estimation
of epipolar geometry between images [13, 22], 3D structure reconstruction (SfM) [29, 30], and scene recognition
[17] are typical examples of useful tasks that are based on
feature matching. While many methods for feature matching exist, the critical stage of filtering incorrect matches is

Ilan Shimshoni
The University of Haifa
ishimshoni@mis.haifa.ac.il

costly when using algorithms such as Random Sample Consensus (RANSAC) [12, 13, 22, 3].
In this paper we propose to analyze the set of correct
matches, without explicitly computing it, using the spatial
order of the features in each image. We estimate the number
of correct matches and the probability that a given match is
correct. In addition, we estimate the overlap region of the
pair of images and whether they overlap at all. Our method
can be applied to sets of matching features irrespective of
their descriptors (e.g., [21, 1, 4, 24]) or the matching method
used to compute them. Our method can be used as a preprocessing step to improve the efficiency of existing methods
such as RANSAC and SfM, as described below.
The basic idea is as follows. We represent the image features as sequences defined by their spatial order along the
x-axis of the image. The matching between features in a
pair of images induces a permutation that relates the spatial
order in one image to that in the other image (see Fig. 1).
The matching is analyzed using a measure of correlation between permutations, the Kendall distance metric [9, 10]. We
use statistical assumptions on the distribution of correctly
and incorrectly matched features; the spatial order of correctly matched features is usually preserved, while incorrectly matched features are expected to have random order.
Note that the problem is not trivialized by these assumptions since simply computing the largest set of features that
preserve their spatial order does not necessarily provide the
correct set of matches (see discussion in Sec. 3). Hence, we
also consider the interaction between correct and incorrect
matches for obtaining our estimations.
Our estimation of the number of correct matches can
be used to improve the running time of RANSAC methods
[12, 13, 22, 3]. In adaptive RANSAC, a subset of matches in
a pair of images is randomly sampled and used to compute
the expected geometric transformation between the features
(e.g., homography or epipolar geometry), which is then
verified against all matches. The transformation with the
largest set of inliers, features consistent with the computed
geometric transformation, is chosen. Since the number of
inliers is usually unknown, the number of required itera11809

