Spatiotemporal Bundle Adjustment for Dynamic 3D Reconstruction ∗
Minh Vo

Srinivasa G. Narasimhan
Carnegie Mellon University

Yaser Sheikh

{mpvo, srinivas, yaser}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Bundle adjustment jointly optimizes camera intrinsics
and extrinsics and 3D point triangulation to reconstruct a
static scene. The triangulation constraint however is invalid for moving points captured in multiple unsynchronized videos and bundle adjustment is not purposed to estimate the temporal alignment between cameras. In this
paper, we present a spatiotemporal bundle adjustment approach that jointly optimizes four coupled sub-problems:
estimating camera intrinsics and extrinsics, triangulating
3D static points, as well as subframe temporal alignment
between cameras and estimating 3D trajectories of dynamic
points. Key to our joint optimization is the careful integration of physics-based motion priors within the reconstruction pipeline, validated on a large motion capture corpus.
We present an end-to-end pipeline that takes multiple uncalibrated and unsynchronized video streams and produces a
dynamic reconstruction of the event. Because the videos are
aligned with sub-frame precision, we reconstruct 3D trajectories of unconstrained outdoor activities at much higher
temporal resolution than the input videos.

1. Introduction
When a moving point is observed from multiple cameras with simultaneously triggered shutters, the dynamic
3D reconstruction problem reduces exactly to the case of
static 3D reconstruction. The classic point triangulation
constraint [11], and the algorithmic edifice of bundle adjustment [19] built upon it, applies directly. Currently,
there exists no consumer mechanism to ensure that multiple
personal cameras, i.e., smartphones, consumer camcorders,
or egocentric cameras, are simultaneously triggered [10].
Thus, in the vast majority of dynamic scenes captured by
multiple independent video cameras, no two cameras see
the 3D point at the same time instant. This fact trivially
invalidates the triangulation constraint.
To optimally solve the dynamic 3D reconstruction prob∗ http://www.cs.cmu.edu/ ILIM/projects/IM/STBA/

lem, we must first recognize all the constituent subproblems that exist. The classic problems of point triangulation and camera resectioning in the static case are subsumed. In addition, two new problems arise: reconstructing
3D trajectories of moving points and estimating the temporal location of each camera. Second, we must recognize
that the sub-problems are tightly coupled. As an example, consider the problem of estimating 3D camera pose.
While segmenting out stationary points and using them to
estimate camera pose is a strategy that has been used in
prior work [13], it ignores evidence from moving points that
are often closer to the cameras and therefore provide tighter
constraints for precise camera calibration. Imprecise camera calibration and quantization errors in estimating discrete
temporal offsets result in significant errors in the reconstruction of moving points1 [14, 8, 21].
Prior work in dynamic 3D reconstruction has addressed
some subset of these problems. For instance, assuming
known (or separately estimated) camera pose and temporal alignment, Avidan and Shashua posed the problem of
trajectory triangulation [2], where multiple noncoincidental projections of a point are reconstructed. Trajectory triangulation is an ill-posed problem and current algorithms
appeal to motion priors to constrain reconstruction: linear
and conical motion [2]; smooth motion [13, 20]; sparsity
priors [27]; low rank spatiotemporal priors [15]. Estimating
the relative temporal offsets of videos captured by the moving cameras is more involved [24, 9]. Currently, the most
stable temporal alignment methods require corresponding
2D trajectories as input [23, 4, 12, 5, 18] and rely purely
on geometric cues to align the interpolated points along the
trajectories across cameras. Recent work has considered the
aggregate problem, but address the spatial and temporal aspects of the problem independently [3, 26].
In this paper, we introduce the concept of spatiotemporal bundle adjustment that jointly optimizes for all for sub1 Consider this example: when a person jogging at 10m/s is captured
by two cameras at 30Hz, one static and one handheld jittering at 3mm per
frame, with the camera baseline of 1m, recording from 4m away. A simple
calculation suggests that a näive attempt to triangulate points of the static
camera with their correspondences of the best aligned frame in the other
camera results in up to 40 cm reconstruction error.

1710

