Beyond F-formations: Determining Social Involvement in Free Standing
Conversing Groups from Static Images
Lu Zhang1,2 and Hayley Hung1
1

Delft University of Technology, Mekelweg 2, Delft, Netherlands,
{lu.zhang,h.hung}@tudelft.nl
2
University of Twente, Drienerlolaan 5, Enschede, Netherlands

Abstract
In this paper, we present the first attempt to analyse differing levels of social involvement in free standing conversing groups (or the so-called F-formations) from static images. In addition, we enrich state-of-the-art F-formation
modelling by learning a frustum of attention that accounts
for the spatial context. That is, F-formation configurations
vary with respect to the arrangement of furniture and the
non-uniform crowdedness in the space during mingling scenarios. The majority of prior works have considered the labelling of conversing group as an objective task, requiring
only a single annotator. However, we show that by embracing the subjectivity of social involvement, we not only generate a richer model of the social interactions in a scene but
also significantly improve F-formation detection. We carry
out extensive experimental validation of our proposed approach by collecting a novel set of multi-annotator labels
of involvement on the publicly available Idiap Poster Data;
the only multi-annotator labelled database of free standing
conversing groups that is currently available.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the analysis of mingling scenarios has
received growing attention. The potential of studying social
patterns of behaviour in visual scenes has great potential
with the recent advances in social signal processing [21].
Potential applications include enabling robots to approach
a group and offer assistance in a socially intelligent manner [18], or social surveillance [3], image interpretation or
retreival [14].
A major challenge in visual scene interpretation is addressing the problem of bridging the semantic gap [14],
which defines the disconnect between information that can
be extracted from the pixels in an image and how a human
might interpret its contents. Traditionally, this gap has been

attributed to the mapping of imagery data to objective interpretations such as the labelling of objects or activities in a
scene. However, in recent years, scene analysis has started
to consider more complex and subjective concepts such as
safety [11] or ambiance [12]. Similarly, in the area of social
surveillance [3], researchers have been trying to ascribe social meaning to social scenes. However, unlike conventional
scene analysis, social surveillance bridges a more complex
semantic gap that associates observable behavioural cues to
social phenomena. We call this the social semantic gap.
Since social phenomena are extremely complex, it is desirable to use findings from social psychology to help inform
how visually observed behaviours could be linked to social
phenomena to help bridge the gap in an informed manner.
Given the great advances already in person tracking and
orientation detection, we focus on how these solutions can
be used as behavioural input for bridging the social semantic gap. Specifically, we approach the novel problem of detecting associates of conversing groups (or the so-called Fformations). F-formations are defined by social psychology
theory as [8]; as a spatial organization of people gathered
for conversation where each member has an equal ability
to sense all other members. The so-called associates of Fformations are defined by psychologists as people who are
attached to an F-formation but do not have the same status
as full members (see Figure 1 (a)).
To the best of our knowledge, state-of-the-art methods
for F-formation detection [6, 2, 13, 19, 20] have made three
simplifying assumptions. First, each individual is assumed
to have a binary membership to an F-formation and to our
knowledge, no work has considered refining and enriching
this model to label individuals who are partially involved in
it. Second, global parameters for the frustrum of attention
of each person have been used for the entire visual scene.
However, social psychology theory has cited the relaxation
of the geometric model of an F-formation when consider11086

