Hierarchically Gated Deep Networks for Semantic Segmentation
Guo-Jun Qi
Department of Computer Science
University of Central Florida
guojun.qi@ucf.edu

Abstract
Semantic segmentation aims to parse the scene structure
of images by annotating the labels to each pixel so that images can be segmented into different regions. While image
structures usually have various scales, it is difﬁcult to use a
single scale to model the spatial contexts for all individual
pixels. Multi-scale Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
and their variants have made striking success for modeling
the global scene structure for an image. However, they are
limited in labeling ﬁne-grained local structures like pixels
and patches, since spatial contexts might be blindly mixed
up without appropriately customizing their scales. To address this challenge, we develop a novel paradigm of multiscale deep network to model spatial contexts surrounding
different pixels at various scales. It builds multiple layers
of memory cells, learning feature representations for individual pixels at their customized scales by hierarchically
absorbing relevant spatial contexts via memory gates between layers. Such Hierarchically Gated Deep Networks (HGDNs) can customize a suitable scale for each pixel, thereby delivering better performance on labeling scene
structures of various scales. We conduct the experiments on
two datasets, and show competitive results compared with
the other multi-scale deep networks on the semantic segmentation task.

1. Introduction
The goal of semantic segmentation [2, 17, 1] is to segment images into different regions usually by assigning one
of semantic labels to each pixel. It is a crucial step towards understanding image scene structures. The label of
an image pixel cannot be determined by its local features
extracted from a small sliding windows or neighborhood
surrounding it. Rather, pixel labels are usually deﬁned in
spatial contexts, whose scales often have large variation in
sizes. For example, sky and sea have a large scale of spatial context, but vessel and pedestrian are more localized to
a relatively small scale of context. Moreover, even the re-

gions of the same category may have various sizes of spatial
contexts, making it impossible to ﬁx a scale to model each
pixel. This inspires us to develop a model that is capable of
learning to customize spatial contexts and their scales for
individual pixels in an image.
To model the spatial context of a pixel, a typical approach is to model the dependencies between the adjacent
local image structures based on 2D Markov Random Fields [4][12][13] and Conditional Random Fields [7][21][9].
These models usually capture the local similarity between
adjacent image structures of various scales, ranging from
pixels, patches to regions. Then, the scene labeling is performed by maximizing the consistency between the similar
neighbors which are considered as being in the same spatial
context.
On the other hand, the success of deep learning framework on ImageNet challenge [11] has inspired us to apply hierarchical neural networks to build the spatial context on various scales. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [14], among all deep learning models, have shown
their striking performances on modeling the image structures on different levels with multiple layered convolutional
kernels.
The CNN models have been generalized to scene labeling. For example, multi-scale CNNs are proposed in
[3], which produce and concatenate the feature maps of
all scales. Usually, the learned features have to be postprocessed by up-sampling coarser-scale maps to match with
ﬁner-grained image pixels, and the global contextual coherence and spatial consistency are imposed by CRFs and segmentation trees. Long et al. [16] propose an alternative
paradigm of fully convolutional networks to annotate images pixel-wise. They present an approach to de-convolve
coarser scale of output maps to label the image pixels. Unlike these two CNN-based models, we are interested in a
hierarchical network, which not only explores multi-scale
structures of input images, but also avoids producing coarse
results that have to be up-sampled for labeling pixels. Such
a model is highlighted with customized scale of the spatial
context for each individual pixels so that the local structures
12267

