POD: Discovering Primary Objects in Videos Based on Evolutionary Refinement
of Object Recurrence, Background, and Primary Object Models
Yeong Jun Koh
Korea University

Won-Dong Jang
Korea University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

yjkoh@mcl.korea.ac.kr

wdjang@mcl.korea.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
A primary object discovery (POD) algorithm for a video
sequence is proposed in this work, which is capable of
discovering a primary object, as well as identifying noisy
frames that do not contain the object. First, we generate object proposals for each frame. Then, we bisect each
proposal into foreground and background regions, and extract features from each region. By superposing the foreground and background features, we build the object recurrence model, the background model, and the primary object
model. We develop an iterative scheme to refine each model
evolutionarily using the information in the other models.
Finally, using the evolved primary object model, we select
candidate proposals and locate the bounding box of a primary object by merging the proposals selectively. Experimental results on a challenging dataset demonstrate that
the proposed POD algorithm extracts primary objects accurately and robustly.

videos. In cosegmentation [11, 12, 15, 19, 25, 27, 31], assuming that an identical object appears in multiple images,
the object is delineated at the pixel-level in each image. In
video object segmentation, objects are separated from its
background [9,10,16–18,22,30,34–36], or dense object segments are determined based on motion clustering [4,21,28].
However, the primary object discovery (POD) is still a challenging problem due to a wide variety of difficulties, such as
cluttered and diverse backgrounds, object appearance variations, interrupting objects, and noisy frames.
In this work, we propose a novel POD algorithm, which
discovers an identical object in a video sequence. The proposed algorithm has the following main advantages:
• It discovers a primary object efficiently in a single
video, whereas most conventional object discovery
techniques assume a large set of images or videos.
• It provides robust performance even when a primary
object exhibits abrupt motions or is interfered by other
moving objects. This is because the proposed algorithm does not depend on motion information.
• While discovering a primary object, it also identifies
noisy frames that do not contain the object.

1. Introduction
Discovering a primary object is an essential task in computer vision, since a repeatedly appearing object in multiple
images or videos conveys useful information about those
signals. For example, the segmentation of a common object across frames in a video facilitates the video summarization. Also, object discovery techniques can be used for
collecting objects of the common class from many images
to train an object detector. Without those techniques, the
collection would demand a lot of human efforts. Moreover,
in a content-based image retrieval system, object discovery
techniques can identify noisy frames, which do not contain
a target object, and exclude them from the system.
Many techniques have been developed to discover a primary object. They can be classified into three categories:
object discovery, cosegmentation, and video object segmentation. In object discovery [6, 7, 13, 23, 26, 29, 33], objects
of the common class are localized in a set of images or

To this end, we first generate object proposals for each
frame. Then, we divide each proposal into foreground and
background regions and extract superpixel-based features
from each region. By superposing the foreground and background features, we construct three models: object recurrence, background, and primary object models. We iteratively update each model by exploiting the other models.
During the iteration, we also detect noisy frames. Finally,
we choose candidate proposals using the primary object
model and discover a primary object by merging the proposals selectively. Experimental results on an extensive dataset
demonstrate that the proposed POD algorithm discovers primary objects effectively and robustly.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
reviews conventional techniques, related to POD. Section 3
describes the proposed POD algorithm. Section 4 discusses
experimental results. Section 5 concludes this work.

1068

