BORDER: An Oriented Rectangles Approach
to Texture-less Object Recognition
Jacob Chan1 , Jimmy Addison Lee2 and Qian Kemao1
1

School of Computer Engineering (SCE), Nanyang Technological University
Block N4 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798
jchan015@ntu.edu.sg, MKMQian@ntu.edu.sg

2

Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
1 Fusionopolis Way, Connexis (South Tower), Singapore 138632
jalee@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
This paper presents an algorithm coined BORDER
(Bounding Oriented-Rectangle Descriptors for Enclosed
Regions) for texture-less object recognition. By
fusing a regional object encompassment concept with
descriptor-based pipelines, we extend local-patches into
scalable object-sized oriented rectangles for optimal
object information encapsulation with minimal outliers.
We correspondingly introduce a modified line-segment
detection technique termed Linelets to stabilize keypoint
repeatability in homogenous conditions. In addition, a
unique sampling technique facilitates the incorporation
of robust angle primitives to produce discriminative
rotation-invariant descriptors. BORDER’s high competence
in object recognition particularly excels in homogenous
conditions obtaining superior detection rates in the
presence of high-clutter, occlusion and scale-rotation
changes when compared with modern state-of-the-art
texture-less object detectors such as BOLD and LINE2D
on public texture-less object databases.

1. Introduction
Recognition of texture-less objects has become
increasingly significant in modern times as the world
diversifies into 2D-3D research areas such as Augmented
Reality and 3D reconstruction/printing. Yet, these objects
make detection challenging even for state-of-the-art
descriptor-based detectors like the popular SIFT (Scale
Invariant Feature Transform) [1], and SURF (Speeded
Up Robust Features) [2]. The key factor that inhibits
decent performance in homogeneity originates from the
scarcity of local salient information, which impedes
the effectiveness of keypoint registration and ultimately
degrading the performance of these local patch-based
description-matching paradigms. Consequently, this led to

many variants of texture-less detection schemes, therefore
potentially excluding many descriptor-based virtues such
as scale-rotation invariance, model scalability, and the high
distinctiveness in the presence of occlusion and clutter.
Current contemporary texture-less object detectors
mainly fall into two categories to cope with the lackluster
information that these objects resonate. The first technique
involves edge/gradient-based template matching [3–9],
where objects are trained with various indifferent methods
and windowed through the scene to find the best matched
location. The popularity of this approach stems from its
ability to encompass the object in its entirety, thus granting
optimal object description in both textured and homogenous
domains at efficient runtimes. However, its robustness
quickly diminishes in occluding circumstances, and would
need sophisticated amounts of training data to uphold
invariances such as rotation, scale and various vantage
viewpoints. The second technique assumes an edge-feature
aggregation approach [10–14], often adopting a partial
SIFT-like pipeline to describe its grouped edge-features.
These algorithms typically form interest-points by engaging
a line-based representation of the edges, while exploiting
various methods to aggregate and describe their associative
properties. Despite incorporating virtues like scale-rotation
invariance as well as model scalability, this technique
often suffers from stability issues especially during
occlusion where edges become altered, affecting its
size and potentially causing shifts in the interest-points.
Furthermore, its spatial feature-grouping approach often
degrades due to nearby clutter, corrupting the aggregations
and eventually their descriptors.
In this paper, we aim to design a detector that
combines texture-less based techniques with qualities
from the descriptor-based pipeline to robustly recognize
homogenous objects in high clutter and occlusion. Our
proposed work BORDER, commences its SIFT-like
pipeline with a detection scheme to meaningfully
divide elongated line-segments into smaller equal-sized

2855

