Structured Feature Similarity with Explicit Feature Map
Takumi Kobayashi
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
Umezono 1-1-1, Tsukuba, Japan
takumi.kobayashi@aist.go.jp

Abstract
Feature matching is a fundamental process in a variety of
computer vision tasks. Beyond the standard L2 metric, various methods to measure similarity between features have
been proposed mainly on the assumption that the features
are defined in a histogram form. On the other hand, in a
field of image quality assessment, SSIM [27] produces effective similarity between images, taking the place of L2
metric. In this paper, we propose a feature similarity measurement method based on the SSIM. Unlike the previous
methods, the proposed method is built on not a histogram
form but a tensor structure of a feature array extracted such
as on spatial grids, in order to construct effective SSIMbased similarity measure of high robustness which is a key
requirement in feature matching. In addition, we provide the
explicit feature map such that the proposed similarity metric is embedded as a dot product. It contributes to significant speedup in similarity measurement as well as to feature
transformation toward an effective vector form to which linear classifiers are directly applicable. In the experiments on
various tasks, the proposed method exhibits favorable performance in both feature matching and classification.

1. Introduction
It is a fundamental and primary process in computer vision tasks to match/compare features extracted from images
and videos. Its application covers keypoint matching [8], retrieval [7] and classification based on exemplars such as by
k-NN, while in recent years, feature matching is also found
in scene parsing or flow estimation by SIFT flow [14]. The
features are matched based on similarities between them,
and along with the development of feature extraction methods, the similarity measurement methods are attracting keen
attention.
The most standard (dis)similarity measure is L2 metric.
It is regarded as a natural choice on the basis that feature
vectors are embedded in the Euclidean space. Depending on
feature extraction methods, however, the feature vectors are

not distributed throughout the Euclidean space but restricted
in a subspace with a constraint inherently imposed by the
extraction method. For example, in the computer vision
community, image features are enthusiastically developed
in a form of histogram comprising non-negative values.
By exploiting the intrinsic characteristics of features, the
(dis)similarity measurement methods are proposed beyond
the L2 metric. χ2 distance [2] is a commonly used distance
measure for histogram-based features derived from statistical χ2 test, being also applied to a kernel function [31]. In
the other approach, the Earth Mover’s distance (EMD) [21]
is proposed by applying an optimization problem of transportation to effectively measure dissimilarity between histogram features. The EMD, however, requires huge computational cost, which motivates to propose faster variants
of EMD such as in [17, 16], and it is specialized to SIFT
features as SiftDist [16]. The EMD takes into account the
relationships between the histogram bins while L2 and χ2
metrics are composed solely of differences in corresponding
bins. Such cross-bin distance is also employed in diffusion
distance [13] based on the structure of histogram features
other than a simple vector. Such feature structure is introduced into the proposed method as described in the later.
In the other literature than the feature matching, an image quality assessment requires such similarity metric between images that are close to human perception. In that
field, it is widely known that L2 metric is not compatible
with the human perception and thus unsuitable for image
similarity measure. According to the human visual system,
structural similarity (SSIM) index [26, 27] was proposed.
The method measures a similarity between a reference image and its distorted one by exploiting the structural characteristics in the image (patch) as in the human visual process.
The structural information extracted by the SSIM is similar
to the cross-bin distance mentioned above; we show the detailed form in Sec. 2. The SSIM has taken the place of L2
metric in image quality assessment since it thoroughly defeats L2 in a variety of experiments, and some variants of
SSIM have also been proposed [28, 29, 3].
In this paper, based on the SSIM measure, we propose
11211

