Deep Canonical Time Warping
George Trigeorgis1

Mihalis A. Nicolaou2
Stefanos Zafeiriou1,3
Björn W. Schuller1
1
Imperial College London, UK 2 Goldsmiths, University of London,U K
3
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Finland
1

{g.trigeorgis, s.zafeiriou, bjoern.schuller}@imperial.ac.uk, 2 m.nicolaou@gold.ac.uk

Abstract
Machine learning algorithms for the analysis of timeseries often depend on the assumption that the utilised data
are temporally aligned. Any temporal discrepancies arising in the data is certain to lead to ill-generalisable models, which in turn fail to correctly capture the properties of
the task at hand. The temporal alignment of time-series is
thus a crucial challenge manifesting in a multitude of applications. Nevertheless, the vast majority of algorithms
oriented towards the temporal alignment of time-series are
applied directly on the observation space, or utilise simple
linear projections. Thus, they fail to capture complex, hierarchical non-linear representations which may prove to be
beneficial towards the task of temporal alignment, particularly when dealing with multi-modal data (e.g., aligning visual and acoustic information). To this end, we present the
Deep Canonical Time Warping (DCTW), a method which
automatically learns complex non-linear representations of
multiple time-series, generated such that (i) they are highly
correlated, and (ii) temporally in alignment. By means of
experiments on four real datasets, we show that the representations learnt via the proposed DCTW significantly outperform state-of-the-art methods in temporal alignment, elegantly handling scenarios with highly heterogeneous features, such as the temporal alignment of acoustic and visual
features.

1. Introduction
The alignment of multiple data sequences is a commonly
arising problem, raised in multiple fields related to machine
learning, such as signal, speech and audio analysis [29],
computer vision [6], graphics [5] and bio-informatics [1].
Example applications range from the temporal alignment
of facial expressions and motion capture data [37, 38],
to the alignment for human action recognition [34], and
speech [18].
The most prominent temporal alignment method is

Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [29], which identifies the
optimal warping path that minimises the Euclidean distance
between two time-series. While DTW has found wide
application over the past decades, the application is limited
mainly due to the inherent inability of DTW to handle
observations of different or high dimensionality since it directly operates on the observation space. Motivated by this
limitation while recognising that this scenario is commonly
encountered in real-world applications (e.g., capturing data
from multiple sensors), in [37] an extension to DTW is
proposed. Coined Canonical Time Warping (CTW), the
method combines Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA)
and DTW by aligning the two sequences in a common,
latent subspace of reduced dimensionality whereon the two
sequences are maximally correlated. Other extensions of
DTW include the integration of manifold learning, thus
facilitating the alignment of sequences lying on different
manifolds [34, 11] while in [31, 38] constraints are introduced in order to guarantee monotonicity and adaptively
constrain the temporal warping. It should be noted that in
[38], a multi-set variant of CCA is utilised [14] thus enabling the temporal alignment of multiple sequences, while
a Gauss-Newton temporal warping method is proposed.
While methods aimed at solving the problem of temporal
alignment have been successful in a wide spectrum of applications, most of the aforementioned techniques find a single
linear projection for each sequence. While this may suffice
for certain problem classes, in many real world applications
the data are likely to be embedded with more complex, possibly hierarchical and non-linear structures. A prominent
example lies in the alignment of non-linear acoustic features with raw pixels extracted from a video stream (for
instance, in the audiovisual analysis of speech, where the
temporal misalignment is a common problem). The mapping between these modalities is deemed highly nonlinear,
and in order to appropriately align them in time this needs
to be taken into account. An approach towards extracting
such complex non-linear transformations is via adopting the
principles associated with the recent revival of deep neural
15110

