DenseCap: Fully Convolutional Localization Networks for Dense Captioning
Justin Johnson∗
Andrej Karpathy∗
Li Fei-Fei
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
{jcjohns,karpathy,feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu

Whole Image

Abstract

Image Regions
Detection

Classification

We introduce the dense captioning task, which requires a
computer vision system to both localize and describe salient
regions in images in natural language. The dense captioning task generalizes object detection when the descriptions
consist of a single word, and Image Captioning when one
predicted region covers the full image. To address the localization and description task jointly we propose a Fully Convolutional Localization Network (FCLN) architecture that
processes an image with a single, efficient forward pass, requires no external regions proposals, and can be trained
end-to-end with a single round of optimization. The architecture is composed of a Convolutional Network, a novel
dense localization layer, and Recurrent Neural Network
language model that generates the label sequences. We
evaluate our network on the Visual Genome dataset, which
comprises 94,000 images and 4,100,000 region-grounded
captions. We observe both speed and accuracy improvements over baselines based on current state of the art approaches in both generation and retrieval settings.

1. Introduction
Our ability to effortlessly point out and describe all aspects
of an image relies on a strong semantic understanding of a
visual scene and all of its elements. However, despite numerous potential applications, this ability remains a challenge for our state of the art visual recognition systems.
In the last few years there has been significant progress
in image classification [39, 26, 53, 45], where the task is
to assign one label to an image. Further work has pushed
these advances along two orthogonal directions: First, rapid
progress in object detection [40, 14, 46] has identified models that efficiently identify and label multiple salient regions
of an image. Second, recent advances in image captioning
[3, 32, 21, 49, 51, 8, 4] have expanded the complexity of
the label space from a fixed set of categories to sequence of
words able to express significantly richer concepts.
However, despite encouraging progress along the label
density and label complexity axes, these two directions have
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

Single
Label

label density

Cat

Cat
Skateboard

Captioning
Sequence
label
complexity

Dense Captioning
Orange spotted cat

A cat
riding a
skateboard

Skateboard with
red wheels
Cat riding a
skateboard
Brown hardwood
flooring

Figure 1. We address the Dense Captioning task (bottom right)
with a model that jointly generates both dense and rich annotations
in a single forward pass.

remained separate. In this work we take a step towards unifying these two inter-connected tasks into one joint framework. First, we introduce the dense captioning task (see
Figure 1), which requires a model to predict a set of descriptions across regions of an image. Object detection is hence
recovered as a special case when the target labels consist
of one word, and image captioning is recovered when all
images consist of one region that spans the full image.
Additionally, we develop a Fully Convolutional Localization Network (FCLN) for the dense captioning task.
Our model is inspired by recent work in image captioning
[49, 21, 32, 8, 4] in that it is composed of a Convolutional
Neural Network and a Recurrent Neural Network language
model. However, drawing on work in object detection [38],
our second core contribution is to introduce a new dense localization layer. This layer is fully differentiable and can
be inserted into any neural network that processes images
to enable region-level training and predictions. Internally,
the localization layer predicts a set of regions of interest in
the image and then uses bilinear interpolation [19, 16] to
smoothly crop the activations in each region.
We evaluate the model on the large-scale Visual Genome
dataset, which contains 94,000 images and 4,100,000 region
captions. Our results show both performance and speed improvements over approaches based on previous state of the
art. We make our code and data publicly available to support further progress on the dense captioning task.
14565

