Cross Modal Distillation for Supervision Transfer
Saurabh Gupta
Judy Hoffman
Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley
{sgupta, jhoffman, malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Trained on ImageNet

Abstract
In this work we propose a technique that transfers supervision between images from different modalities. We use
learned representations from a large labeled modality as
supervisory signal for training representations for a new
unlabeled paired modality. Our method enables learning
of rich representations for unlabeled modalities and can be
used as a pre-training procedure for new modalities with
limited labeled data. We transfer supervision from labeled
RGB images to unlabeled depth and optical flow images and
demonstrate large improvements for both these cross modal
supervision transfers.

1. Introduction
Current paradigms for recognition in computer vision involve learning a generic feature representation on a large
dataset of labeled images, and then specializing or finetuning the learned generic feature representation for the specific task at hand. Successful examples of this paradigm
include almost all state-of-the-art systems: object detection
[11], semantic segmentation [31], object segmentation [17],
and pose estimation [44], which start from generic features
that are learned on the ImageNet dataset [5] using over a
million labeled images and specialize them for each of the
different tasks. Several different architectures for learning
these generic feature representations have been proposed
over the years [26, 39], but all of these rely on the availability of a large dataset of labeled images to learn feature
representations.
The question we ask in this work is, what is the analogue
of this paradigm for images from modalities which do not
have such large amounts of labeled data? There are a large
number of image modalities beyond RGB images which are
dominant in computer vision, for example depth images
coming from a Microsoft Kinect, infra-red images from
thermal sensors, aerial images from satellites and drones,
Code, data and pretrained models are available at https://
github.com/s-gupta/fast-rcnn/tree/distillation.

Loss

RGB Image

Paired Depth
Image

Mid-level
layer

Back propagate to
train depth CNN

Figure 1: Architecture for supervision transfer: We train a
CNN model for a new image modality (like depth images), by
teaching the network to reproduce the mid-level semantic representations learned from a well labeled image modality (such as
RGB images) for modalities for which there are paired images.

LIDAR point clouds from laser scanners, or even images
of intermediate representations output from current vision
systems e.g. optical flow and stereo images. The number
of labeled images from such modalities are at least a few
orders of magnitude smaller than the RGB image datasets
used for learning features, which raises the question: do we
need similar large scale annotation efforts to learn generic
features for images from each such different modality?
We answer this question in this paper and propose a technique to transfer learned representations from one modality to another. Our technique uses ‘paired’ images from
the two modalities and utilizes the mid-level representations
from the labeled modality to supervise learning representations on the paired un-labeled modality. We call our scheme
supervision transfer and show that our learned representations perform well on standard tasks like object detection.
We also show that our technique leads to learning useful
feature hierarchies in the unlabeled modality, which can be
improved further with finetuning, and are still complementary to representations in the source modality.
As a motivating example, consider the case of depth images. While the largest labeled RGB dataset, ImageNet [5]
consists of over a million labeled images, the size of most
existing labeled depth datasets is of the order of a few thousands [37, 41]. At the same time there are a large number of
unlabeled RGB and depth image pairs. Our technique leverages this large set of unlabeled paired images to transfer the

2827

