Guaranteed Outlier Removal with Mixed Integer Linear Programs
Tat-Jun Chin∗ , Yang Heng Kee∗ , Anders Eriksson† and Frank Neumann∗
∗
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide
†
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology

Abstract
The maximum consensus problem is fundamentally important to robust geometric fitting in computer vision. Solving the problem exactly is computationally demanding, and
the effort required increases rapidly with the problem size.
Although randomized algorithms are much more efficient,
the optimality of the solution is not guaranteed. Towards
the goal of solving maximum consensus exactly, we present
guaranteed outlier removal as a technique to reduce the
runtime of exact algorithms. Specifically, before conducting global optimization, we attempt to remove data that are
provably true outliers, i.e., those that do not exist in the
maximum consensus set. We propose an algorithm based on
mixed integer linear programming to perform the removal.
The result of our algorithm is a smaller data instance that
admits a much faster solution by subsequent exact algorithms, while yielding the same globally optimal result as
the original problem. We demonstrate that overall speedups
of up to 80% can be achieved on common vision problems1 .

where |Ĩ| ≤ |I ∗ |, and the subset X \ Ĩ are removed as outliers. Usually RANSAC-type algorithms do not provide optimality bounds, i.e., Ĩ can differ arbitrarily from I ∗ . Also,
in general Ĩ 6⊆ I ∗ , hence, the consensus set Ĩ of RANSAC
may contain true outliers, or conversely some of the data
removed by RANSAC may be true inliers.
Solving (1) exactly, however, is non-trivial. Maximum
consensus is an instance of the maximum feasible subsystem (MaxFS) problem [7, Chap. 7], which is intractable in
general. Exact algorithms for (1) are brute force search in
nature, whose runtime increases rapidly with N . The most
well known is branch-and-bound (BnB) [4, 19, 15, 27],
which can take exponential time in the worst case. For a
fixed dimension L of θ, the problem can be solved in time
proportional to an L-th order polynomial of N [11, 16, 9, 6].
However, this is only practical for small L.
In this paper, we present a guaranteed outlier removal
(GORE) approach to speed up exact solutions of maximum
consensus. Rather than attempting to solve (1) directly, our
technique reduces X to a subset X ′ , under the condition
I∗ ⊆ X ′ ⊆ X ,

1. Introduction
Given a set of data X = {xi , yi }N
i=1 , a frequently occurring problem in computer vision is to remove the outliers in
X . Often this is achieved by fitting a model, parametrized
by θ ∈ RL , that has the largest consensus set I within X
maximize |I|
θ,I⊆X

subject to

xTi θ − yi ≤ ǫ

(1)
∀{xi , yi } ∈ I,

where ǫ ≥ 0 is the inlier threshold. The solution I ∗ is the
maximum consensus set, with consensus size |I ∗ |. In this
paper, we call I ∗ as true inliers, and X \ I ∗ as true outliers,
to indicate this segmentation as our target result.
Randomized algorithms such as RANSAC [10] and its
variants are often used for outlier removal by approximately
solving (1). Specifically, via a hypothesize-and-test procedure, RANSAC finds an approximate solution Ĩ to (1),
1 Demo program is provided in the supplementary material.

(2)

i.e., any data removed by our reduction of X are guaranteed
to be true outliers. While X ′ may not be outlier-free, solving (1) exactly on X ′ will take less time, while yielding the
same result as on the original input X ; see Fig. 1.
Note that naive heuristics used to reduce X , e.g., by removing the most outlying data according to RANSAC, will
not guarantee (2) and preserve global optimality. Instead,
we propose a mixed integer linear program (MILP) algorithm to conduct GORE. For clarity our initial derivations
will be based on the linear regression residual |xT θ − y|.
In Sec. 3, we will extend our algorithm to handle geometric
(non-linear regression) residuals [14].
We can expect that solving (1) on X ′ instead of X will
be much faster, since any exact algorithm scales badly with
problem size, and thus can be speeded up by even small
reductions of X . Of course, the time spent on conducting
GORE must be included in the overall runtime. Intuitively,
the effort required to remove all true outliers is unlikely to
be less than that for solving (1) on X without any data re15858

