Detecting Vanishing Points using Global Image
Context in a Non-Manhattan World
Menghua Zhai

Scott Workman

Nathan Jacobs

ted@cs.uky.edu

scott@cs.uky.edu

jacobs@cs.uky.edu

Computer Science, University of Kentucky
Abstract
We propose a novel method for detecting horizontal vanishing points and the zenith vanishing point in man-made
environments. The dominant trend in existing methods is
to first find candidate vanishing points, then remove outliers by enforcing mutual orthogonality. Our method reverses this process: we propose a set of horizon line candidates and score each based on the vanishing points it
contains. A key element of our approach is the use of
global image context, extracted with a deep convolutional
network, to constrain the set of candidates under consideration. Our method does not make a Manhattan-world assumption and can operate effectively on scenes with only
a single horizontal vanishing point. We evaluate our approach on three benchmark datasets and achieve state-ofthe-art performance on each. In addition, our approach is
significantly faster than the previous best method.

1. Introduction
Automatic vanishing point (VP) and horizon line detection are two of the most fundamental problems in geometric
computer vision [6, 22]. Knowledge of these quantities is
the foundation for many higher level tasks, including image mensuration [10], facade detection [20], geolocalization [4, 31], and camera calibration [2, 12, 15, 17]. Recent
work in this area [3, 30, 33] has explored novel problem
formulations that significantly increase robustness to noise.
A vanishing point results from the intersection of projections of a set of parallel lines in the world. In man-made environments, such sets of lines are often caused by the edges
of buildings, roads, and signs. VPs can typically be classified as either vertical, there is one such VP, and horizontal,
there are often many such VPs. Given a set of horizontal
VPs, there are numerous methods to estimate the horizon
line. Therefore, previous approaches to this problem focus
on first detecting the vanishing points, which is a challenging problem in many images due to line segment intersec-

Figure 1: An example result of our method. (left) Horizon line candidates, colored by their scores (red means high
score), and the true horizon line (green dash). (right) The
horizon line (magenta) estimated by our algorithm is very
close to the true horizon line (green dash). Line segments
are color coded based on the most consistent detected vanishing point.

tions that are not true VPs.
Our approach is to propose candidate horizon lines, score
them, and keep the best (Fig. 1). We use a deep convolutional neural network to extract global image context and
guide the generation of a set of horizon line candidates. For
each candidate, we identify vanishing points by solving a
discrete-continuous optimization problem. The final score
for each candidate line is based on the consistency of the
lines in the image with the selected vanishing points.
This seemingly simple shift in approach leads to the need
for novel algorithms and has excellent performance. We
evaluated the proposed approach on two standard benchmark datasets, the Eurasian Cities Dataset [5] and the York
Urban Dataset [11]. To our knowledge, our approach has
the current best performance on both datasets. To evaluate
our algorithm further, we also compare with the previous
state-of-the-art method (Lezama et al. [19]) on a recently
introduced dataset [32]; the results shows that our method
is more accurate and much faster.
The main contributions of this work are: 1) a novel
method for horizon line/vanishing point detection, which
uses global image context to guide precise geometric analysis; 2) a strategy for quickly extracting this context, in
15657

