A weighted variational model for simultaneous reflectance and illumination
estimation
Xueyang Fu1,2 ,
1

Delu Zeng1,2 ,

Yue Huang1,2 ,

Xiao-Ping Zhang1,3 ,

Xinghao Ding1,2∗

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Xiamen University, China
2
3

School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, China

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ryerson University, Canada

fxy@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {dltsang, yhuang2010}@xmu.edu.cn, xzhang@ee.ryerson.ca, dxh@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a weighted variational model to estimate
both the reflectance and the illumination from an observed
image. We show that, though it is widely adopted for ease of
modeling, the log-transformed image for this task is not ideal. Based on the previous investigation of the logarithmic
transformation, a new weighted variational model is proposed for better prior representation, which is imposed in
the regularization terms. Different from conventional variational models, the proposed model can preserve the estimated reflectance with more details. Moreover, the proposed
model can suppress noise to some extent. An alternating
minimization scheme is adopted to solve the proposed model. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed model with its algorithm. Compared with other variational methods, the proposed method yields comparable or better results on both subjective and objective
assessments.

1. Introduction
Observed images can be decomposed as a product of reflectance and illumination using a simplified physical model
of light reflection [14]. In such a decomposition, the illumination represents the light intensity on the objects in the
image, and the reflectance represents the physical characteristics of objects. There are many applications derived from
this decomposition, such as ordinary image enhancement [24, 33, 3, 9], high dynamic range image tone mapping
[7, 29], remote sensing image correction [12] and target selection and tracking [18, 10].
Since estimating the reflectance and the illumination
from a single observed image is an ill-posed inverse problem [14], a number of modeling approaches have been developed to incorporate prior structural assumptions. For
∗ Correspondence author.

example, [14, 13] propose path-based algorithms. These
methods require intensive parameter tuning and have high
computational complexity, which was later addressed using recursive matrix calculation [5, 21]. Another family
of methods use partial differential equations (PDE) [8, 23],
which can be solved efficiently using the fast Fourier transformation (FFT). In [38], a nonlocal texture constraint is
adopted for decomposing intrinsic images.
Recently, several variational methods have been presented. In [11], Kimmel et al. propose a variational model to
estimate the illumination, which is assumed varies smoothly. The assumption of the reflectance is not considered in
the model. In [20], a total variation (TV) and nonlocal
TV regularized model, solved by adopting Bregman iteration, is developed and studied. An L1-based variational
model is further introduced in [19] to focus on estimating
the reflectance. In [26], a TV model for image decomposition by considering both reflectance and illumination components in the objective function is proposed. The model
is divided into two sub-problems and solved by the split
Bregman method. However, this method may result in an
over-smoothed reflectance due to the side effect of the logarithmic transformation. This method is complemented by
using nonlocal bounded variation [35] to achieve an effective decomposition of illumination and reflectance. Following [26], a variational model with barriers for image decomposition is proposed in [34]. The model is defined as
a constrained optimization problem associated with the deduced energy functional. In [16], an adaptive perceptually inspired variational model is developed to recover the
reflectance and to adjust the uneven intensity distribution.
However, the computational cost of this method is high;
processing a 1000×1000 image requires about 10 minutes.
A kernel-based variational model is introduced in [2]. An
analysis of this model on contrast is provided in the literature. This method can deal with color cast and enhance
both under- and over-exposed images. A perception based

2782

