From Bows to Arrows: Rolling Shutter Rectification of Urban Scenes
Vijay Rengarajan1 , A.N. Rajagopalan2 , R. Aravind3
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
1

vijay.ap@ee.iitm.ac.in, 2 raju@ee.iitm.ac.in, 3 aravind@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
The rule of perspectivity that ‘straight-lines-mustremain-straight’ is easily inflected in CMOS cameras by
distortions introduced by motion. Lines can be rendered
as curves due to the row-wise exposure mechanism known
as rolling shutter (RS). We solve the problem of correcting
distortions arising from handheld cameras due to RS effect
from a single image free from motion blur with special relevance to urban scenes. We develop a procedure to extract
prominent curves from the RS image since this is essential
for deciphering the varying row-wise motion. We pose an
optimization problem with line desirability costs based on
straightness, angle, and length, to resolve the geometric
ambiguities while estimating the camera motion based on a
rotation-only model assuming known camera intrinsic matrix. Finally, we rectify the RS image based on the estimated
camera trajectory using inverse mapping. We show rectification results for RS images captured using mobile phone
cameras. We also compare our single image method against
existing video and nonblind RS rectification methods that
typically require multiple images.

1. Introduction
In recent years, inferring scene geometry has become
possible from as little as a single image [13, 7, 18, 33].
The images of interest are often man-made structures (e.g.
in the Manhattan world) which have predominant straight
lines. From the knowledge of these lines, properties such as
vanishing points, horizon, and zenith can be estimated [33]
to aid in applications such as scene classification [14] and
depth estimation [29]. For the single image scenario, camera motion is a hindrance to scene understanding. It introduces image distortions which are increasingly becoming
commonplace. The CMOS mobile phone cameras employ
a shutter mechanism in which the pixels on the sensor plane
are exposed in a row-wise manner from top to bottom with
a constant inter-row delay. Hence, even a small camera motion due to handshake can cause visible distortions in the
captured image, a phenomenon referred to as the rolling

(a) RS image

(b) Our rectification

(c) Lens rectification

Figure 1. (a) Image curved due to RS effect, (b) rectified image
in which curves are corrected to lines respecting the orthogonality
of vertical and horizontal edges using the proposed method, and
(c) rectified image using the lens correction method [35]

shutter (RS) effect [19, 4, 26, 25, 31]. In a high exposure
setting, motion blur further complicates the distortions, but
in typical daylight scenarios, the blur is negligible and only
the RS distortion is most perceivable.
The RS effect is more prominent in imaging urban
scenes, since the row-varying camera motion alters the
straightness of lines in the scene. This results in the manifestation of curves in the captured image in place of lines
which can be problematic for scene inference methods that
rely on line properties. The image shown in Fig. 1(a) is captured using a Motorola Moto G2 camera with handshake
during exposure. The vertical lines in the 3D scene are
affected by the row-varying camera motion and appear as
curves.
Video rectification (i.e. correction of RS distortions) has
been studied elaborately in RS imaging [19, 4, 26, 10, 32];
however, these methods are not applicable for the case
of single image RS removal, since the RS motion is estimated by using the correspondences between successive
video frames. While there are works for absolute RS camera
pose estimation that use only a single image [1, 22, 2], they
assume known correspondences between image and world
points. It is also possible to use inertial sensor information
to infer RS motion especially for videos [11, 16, 23, 24]
and for long exposure motion blur images [30], but the low
acquisition rate of inertial sensors prohibits usage on a single RS image. A combined RS and motion blur framework
without the inertial information is proposed for change detection in [25]. Though the camera motion experienced by
the RS image is actually estimated, it is carried out in a non-

2773

