Recurrent Face Aging
∗

Wei Wang1 , Zhen Cui3 , Yan Yan1 , Jiashi Feng2 , Shuicheng Yan4,2 , Xiangbo Shu2 , and Nicu Sebe1
1

Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Italy
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
3
Research Center for Learning Science, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
4
360 Artificial Intelligence Institute, China
{wei.wang,yan.yan,niculae.sebe}@unitn.it {elefjia,eleyans}@nus.edu.sg
zhen.cui@seu.edu.cn shuxb104@gmail.com

Abstract
Modeling the aging process of human face is important
for cross-age face verification and recognition. In this paper, we introduce a recurrent face aging (RFA) framework
based on a recurrent neural network which can identify the
ages of people from 0 to 80. Due to the lack of labeled face
data of the same person captured in a long range of ages,
traditional face aging models usually split the ages into discrete groups and learn a one-step face feature transformation for each pair of adjacent age groups. However, those
methods neglect the in-between evolving states between the
adjacent age groups and the synthesized faces often suffer
from severe ghosting artifacts. Since human face aging is a
smooth progression, it is more appropriate to age the face
by going through smooth transition states. In this way, the
ghosting artifacts can be effectively eliminated and the intermediate aged faces between two discrete age groups can
also be obtained. Towards this target, we employ a twolayer gated recurrent unit as the basic recurrent module
whose bottom layer encodes a young face to a latent representation and the top layer decodes the representation to a
corresponding older face. The experimental results demonstrate our proposed RFA provides better aging faces over
other state-of-the-art age progression methods.

1. Introduction
Face aging, also known as age progression, is attracting
more and more research interest. It has wide applications in
various domains including cross-age face verification [22]
and finding lost children. In recent years, face aging has
witnessed various breakthroughs and a number of face ag∗ J. Feng is supported by NUS startup grant R–263–000–C08–133.

Figure 1. Exemplars of face aging from teenager to adult generated
by our model. The left most column shows the input, and the other
columns show the generated aged faces.

ing models have been proposed [7]. Face aging, however,
is still a very challenging task in practice for various reasons. First, faces may have many different expressions and
lighting conditions, which pose great challenges to modeling the aging patterns. Besides, the training data are usually
very limited and the face images for the same person only
cover a narrow range of ages. Moreover, the face aging process also depends on the environment and genes which are
hard to model.
Generally, face aging follows some common patterns
of the human aging process. For kids, the main appearance change is the shape change caused by cranium growth.
For adults, the appearance change is mainly reflected by
wrinkles [30]. Various face aging approaches were proposed to model such dynamic aging patterns, which can be
roughly divided into two types [30], namely, prototype approaches [17, 34] and physical model approaches [31, 33].
The physical model approaches employ parametric models
to simulate face aging by modeling the aging mechanisms
of muscles, skins, or cranium. However, those approaches
are very complex and computationally expensive, and they
require a large number of face sequences of the same person

2378

