Accelerated Generative Models for 3D Point Cloud Data
Ben Eckart1,2 Kihwan Kim2 Alejandro Troccoli2 Alonzo Kelly1 Jan Kautz2
1
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 2 NVIDIA Research
https://research.nvidia.com/publication/accelerated-generative-models

Abstract
Finding meaningful, structured representations of 3D
point cloud data (PCD) has become a core task for spatial perception applications. In this paper we introduce
a method for constructing compact generative representations of PCD at multiple levels of detail. As opposed to
deterministic structures such as voxel grids or octrees, we
propose probabilistic subdivisions of the data through local mixture modeling, and show how these subdivisions can
provide a maximum likelihood segmentation of the data.
The final representation is hierarchical, compact, parametric, and statistically derived, facilitating run-time occupancy calculations through stochastic sampling. Unlike
traditional deterministic spatial subdivision methods, our
technique enables dynamic creation of voxel grids according the application’s best needs. In contrast to other generative models for PCD, we explicitly enforce sparsity among
points and mixtures, a technique which we call expectation
sparsification. This leads to a highly parallel hierarchical
Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm well-suited for
the GPU and real-time execution. We explore the trade-offs
between model fidelity and model size at various levels of
detail, our tests showing favorable performance when compared to octree and NDT-based methods.

1. Introduction
Given the recent commoditization of different types of
active range sensors (e.g., TOF, Lidar, structured light), spatial processing and visualization of large collections of 3D
point clouds has become one of the most important stages in
3D imaging/vision pipelines [15]. 3D point cloud processing introduces several new challenging problems such as
(1) uneven sampling density, (2) unstructured organization
of the incoming data, (3) level-of-detail processing given
varying speed and memory requirements, and (4) measurement uncertainty from sensor noise. Additionally, modern
depth sensors generate millions of data points per second,
making it difficult to utilize all incoming data effectively in
real-time for devices with limited computational resources.
Many current techniques for processing large amounts

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. Processing PCD with a Hierarchy of Gaussian Mixtures: (a) Raw PCD from Stanford Bunny (35k vertices), (b) and
(c) Two levels of detail extracted from the proposed model. Each
color denotes the area of support of a single Gaussian and the ellipsoids indicate their one σ extent. Finer grained color patches
therefore indicate higher statistical fidelity but larger model size,
(d) a log-scale heat-map of a PDF from a high fidelity model. (e)
stochastically re-sampled PCD from the model (5k points), (f) occupancy grid map also derived directly from the model.

of point cloud data (PCD) either simply subsample the data
or apply some sort of discretization, either through dense,
sparse [16] or hierarchical [7] voxelization techniques. Representing continuous geometry through voxels creates discretization artifacts and offers no clear way of handling
noise or data uncertainty. Furthermore, the discrete nature of voxels and sub-sampled point clouds greatly complicate spatial processing procedures that require continuous derivatives or high quality normal estimates.
We address these challenges with a hierarchical and
probabilistic representation of 3D point cloud data (PCD)
in the form of a hierarchy of Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMMs). As a representation of 3D space, a GMM model
has several advantages. First, being a continuous probability density function (PDF), the GMM does not require the
discretization of 3D space. Second, the uncertainties of data
measurements are embedded in the covariance matrices of
the GMM, which combined with a special cluster to handle
outliers, provide an effective way of handling noisy mea15497

