Cataloging Public Objects Using Aerial and Street-Level Images – Urban Trees
Jan D. Wegnera,∗ Steve Bransonb,∗ David Hallb Konrad Schindlera Pietro Peronab
ETH Züricha
California Institute of Technologyb
Abstract
Each corner of the inhabited world is imaged from multiple viewpoints with increasing frequency. Online map services like Google Maps or Here Maps provide direct access
to huge amounts of densely sampled, georeferenced images
from street view and aerial perspective. There is an opportunity to design computer vision systems that will help us
search, catalog and monitor public infrastructure, buildings
and artifacts. We explore the architecture and feasibility of
such a system. The main technical challenge is combining test time information from multiple views of each geographic location (e.g., aerial and street views). We implement two modules: det2geo, which detects the set of locations of objects belonging to a given category, and geo2cat,
which computes the fine-grained category of the object at a
given location. We introduce a solution that adapts state-ofthe-art CNN-based object detectors and classifiers. We test
our method on “Pasadena Urban Trees”, a new dataset of
80,000 trees with geographic and species annotations, and
show that combining multiple views significantly improves
both tree detection and tree species classification, rivaling
human performance.

1. Introduction
In this very moment thousands of geo-tagged images of
almost any location of the populated world are being captured and shared on the web. There are two main sources
of publicly available images, user-contributed photographs
and imagery from online mapping services. While userprovided photographs cover mostly popular sites, systematic commercial efforts provide a homogeneous and dense
coverage of the populated parts of the world, especially urban areas. This includes overhead imagery captured by
satellite and aircraft, and high-resolution ground panoramas
that are regularly distributed along the road network [3].
Browser-based interfaces such as Google Maps provide free
and well-structured access to this rich, up-to-date and geocoded treasure trove.
Publicly available imagery has already found its use in
∗ joint first authorship

Street View Images

Map Data

Aerial Images

Multiview Detection
& Recognition

Southern Magnolia

Fine-Grained Geographic Tree Catalog

Figure 1. Overview of proposed automated public tree cataloguing
system from online maps. Aerial images and street view panoramas along with semantic map data are downloaded for some geographical region. Category detection and fine-grained classification algorithms are trained from human-annotated exemplars.
Detection, classification and geolocation information is computed
automatically from multiple street view images and aerial images
and combined with map data to achieve a geolocated fine-grained
catalog. The image shows a catalog of location and species of trees
in a medium-sized city.

a great number of applications and circumstances. To cite
a few: navigation and geo-localization [19, 3, 34], virtual
tourism [2], urban planning and evaluation of the quality of
public spaces [23, 18, 17]. However, the process of cataloguing and classifying visible objects in the public space
(e.g. street signs, building facades, fire hydrants, solar panels and mail boxes) is still carried out ‘by hand’, often by inperson inspection or from expensive ad-hoc imagery such as
LiDAR. Due to the cost, time, and organizational headache
it involves, such information is rarely collected and analyzed. Harvesting such information automatically from online maps will provide inexpensive ready-to-use and reliable
information to the public, to administrators, and to scientists
which would greatly improve the quality and timeliness of
public resource management.
We present a vision-based system that systematically detects and classifies publicly visible objects. Overhead and
street-view imagery are combined to populate and update a
16014

