Backtracking ScSPM Image Classifier for Weakly Supervised Top-down Saliency
Hisham Cholakkal Jubin Johnson
Deepu Rajan
Multimedia Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University Singapore
{hisham002, jubin001, asdrajan}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Top-down saliency models produce a probability map
that peaks at target locations specified by a task/goal such
as object detection. They are usually trained in a supervised setting involving annotations of objects. We propose a
weakly supervised top-down saliency framework using only
binary labels that indicate the presence/absence of an object in an image. First, the probabilistic contribution of each
image patch to the confidence of an ScSPM-based classifier produces a Reverse-ScSPM (R-ScSPM) saliency map.
Neighborhood information is then incorporated through a
contextual saliency map which is estimated using logistic
regression learnt on patches having high R-ScSPM saliency.
Both the saliency maps are combined to obtain the final
saliency map. We evaluate the performance of the proposed
weakly supervised top-down saliency and achieves comparable performance with fully supervised approaches. Experiments are carried out on 5 challenging datasets across
3 different applications.

1. Introduction
A saliency map can be thought of as a probability map
in which the probabilities of pixels belonging to salient regions are mapped to intensities. It helps to reduce the search
space for further processing, for example, in object segmentation. Bottom-up saliency aims to locate regions in an image that capture human fixations within first few milliseconds after the stimulus is presented [4, 14]. Here, feature
contrast at a location plays the central role, with no regard
to the notion of an object, although high-level concepts like
face have been used in conjunction with visual cues like
color and shape [23]. Lack of prior knowledge about the
target in goal-oriented applications such as object detection
and object class segmentation limits its utility. For example, the saliency maps produced by recent bottom-up approaches [10, 39] cannot discriminate between bus, person
and bicycle in Fig. 1(b, c).
On the contrary, top-down approaches utilize prior

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. Comparison of our top-down saliency with bottom-up
methods. (a) Input image, (b) saliency map of [10], (c) [39]; proposed top-down saliency maps for (d) bus (e) bicycle and (f) person categories.

knowledge about the target for better estimation of saliency.
The top-down saliency models produce a probability map
that peaks at target/object locations [5, 36]. Our objective
is to generate top-down saliency maps like those shown in
Fig. 1(d, e, f). They were generated using the proposed
method to identify probable image regions that belong to
bus, bicycle and person separately.
Most methods for top-down saliency detection learn object classes in a fully supervised manner, where an exact object annotation is available. The learning component enables either discrimination between object classes
or generation of saliency models of objects. Weakly supervised learning (WSL) alleviates the need for such userintensive annotation by providing only class labels for an
image during learning. The top-down saliency method using WSL [25] employs iterative refinement of object hypothesis on a training image. The proposed weakly supervised top-down saliency approach (Fig. 2 (e)) does not require these iterative steps, but produces a saliency map that
is even comparable to fully supervised approaches as shown
in Fig. 2(b, c, d).
In the proposed method, first, an ScSPM-based image
classifier [37] is trained for an object category. On a val15278

