An Empirical Evaluation of Current Convolutional Architectures’ Ability to
Manage Nuisance Location and Scale Variability
Nikolaos Karianakis

Jingming Dong

Stefano Soatto

nikarianakis@ucla.edu

dong@cs.ucla.edu

soatto@ucla.edu

UCLA Vision Lab, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095

Abstract
We conduct an empirical study to test the ability of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to reduce the effects of
nuisance transformations of the input data, such as location, scale and aspect ratio. We isolate factors by adopting
a common convolutional architecture either deployed globally on the image to compute class posterior distributions,
or restricted locally to compute class conditional distributions given location, scale and aspect ratios of bounding
boxes determined by proposal heuristics. In theory, averaging the latter should yield inferior performance compared
to proper marginalization. Yet empirical evidence suggests
the converse, leading us to conclude that – at the current
level of complexity of convolutional architectures and scale
of the data sets used to train them – CNNs are not very effective at marginalizing nuisance variability. We also quantify
the effects of context on the overall classification task and
its impact on the performance of CNNs, and propose improved sampling techniques for heuristic proposal schemes
that improve end-to-end performance to state-of-the-art levels. We test our hypothesis on a classification task using
the ImageNet Challenge benchmark and on a wide-baseline
matching task using the Oxford and Fischer’s datasets.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are the de-facto
paragon for detecting the presence of objects in a scene, as
portrayed by an image. CNNs are described as being “approximately invariant” to nuisance transformations such as
planar translation, both by virtue of their architecture (the
same operation is repeated at every location akin to a “sliding window” and is followed by local pooling) and by virtue
of their approximation properties that, given sufficient parameters and transformed training data, could in principle
yield discriminants that are insensitive to nuisance transformations of the data represented in the training set. In ad-

dition to planar translation, an object detector must manage
variability due to scaling (possibly anisotropic along the coordinate axes, yielding different aspect ratios) and (partial)
occlusion. Some nuisances are elements of a transformation group, e.g., the (anisotropic) location-scale group for
the case of position, scale and aspect ratio of the object’s
support.1 The fact that convolutional architectures appear
effective in classifying images as containing a given object
regardless of its position, scale, and aspect ratio [28, 40]
suggests that the network can effectively manage such nuisance variability.
However, the quest for top performance in benchmark
datasets has led researchers away from letting the CNN
manage all nuisance variability. Instead, the image is first
pre-processed to yield proposals, which are subsets of the
image domain (bounding boxes) to be tested for the presence of a given class (Regions-with-CNN [19]). Proposal
mechanisms aim to remove nuisance variability due to position, scale and aspect ratio, leaving a “Category CNN” to
classify the resulting bounding box as one of a number of
classes it is trained with. Put differently, rather than computing the posterior distribution2 with nuisance transformations automatically marginalized, the CNN is used to compute the conditional distribution of classes given the data
and a sample element that approximates the nuisance trans1 The region of the image the objects projects onto, often approximated
by a bounding box.
2 One can think of the conditional distribution of a class c given
an image x, p(c|x), as defined by a CNN, as the class posterior
R
G p(c|x, g)dP (g|x) marginalized with respect to the nuisance group G.
If the nuisances are known, one can use the class-conditionals p(c|x, gr )
at each nuisance gr ∈ G in order to approximate
p(c|x) with a weighted
P
average of conditionals, i.e., p(c|x) ≃ r p(c|x, gr )p(gr |x).
When a CNN is tested on a proposal r ⊆ x determined by a reference frame xr , it computes p(c|x|r ) (x restricted to r), which is
an approximation of p(c|x, gr ). Then,
explicit marginalization (assum1 P
ing uniform weights) computes |r|
r p(c|x|r ) which is different from
P
1 P
r p(c|x, gr ) which in turn is different from
r p(c|x, gr )p(gr |x).
|r|
This approach is therefore, on average, a lower bound on proper marginalization, and the fact that it would outperform the direct computation of
p(c|x) is worth investigating empirically.

14442

