Mixture of Bilateral-Projection Two-dimensional Probabilistic Principal
Component Analysis
Fujiao Ju1 , Yanfeng Sun1 , Junbin Gao2 , Simeng Liu1 , Yongli Hu1 , Baocai Yin3
1
2

College of Metropolitan Transportation, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China

Discipline of Business Analytics, The University of Sydney Business School, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
3

Faculty of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, College of Computer Science,
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China

{jufujiao2013, smliu}@emails.bjut.edu.cn; {yfsun,huyongli,ybc}@bjut.edu.cn; junbin.gao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
The probabilistic principal component analysis (PPCA)
is built upon a global linear mapping, with which it is insufficient to model complex data variation. This paper proposes a mixture of bilateral-projection probabilistic principal component analysis model (mixB2DPPCA) on 2D data. With multi-components in the mixture, this model can
be seen as a ‘soft’ cluster algorithm and has capability of
modeling data with complex structures. A Bayesian inference scheme has been proposed based on the variational EM (Expectation-Maximization) approach for learning
model parameters. Experiments on some publicly available databases show that the performance of mixB2DPPCA
has been largely improved, resulting in more accurate reconstruction errors and recognition rates than the existing
PCA-based algorithms.

1. Introduction
Principle Component Analysis (PCA) [3] is one of popular dimensionality reduction methods widely used in image analysis [9, 11], pattern recognition [8, 14] and machine
learning [13] for data analysis. It can be derived under algebraic framework. However, algebraic models don’t have
flexibility of providing confidence information of the model when dealing with noisy data. This is due to the absence
of an associated probability density or generative model in
algebraic framework.
To compensate the algebraic PCA drawbacks, Tipping
and Bishop [19] firstly proposed a probabilistic PCA model, called PPCA. Under the probabilistic framework, PPCA
takes advantage of Bayesian learning and inference by combining the likelihood with appropriate priors. As a result,
the observed data are regarded as random variables, generated from a set of latent random variables which follow the

Gaussian distribution of zero mean and identity covariance,
with additive noises following a Gaussian distribution with
zero mean and an isotropic covariance. Under such a probabilistic learning framework, the model parameters in PPCA
can be easily solved by the maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE). Much progress has been made based on PCA and
PPCA in the last couple of decades [2, 5].
PPCA and standard PCA methods can be interpreted in
many ways, one of which assumes that the observed highdimensional data are generated from their low-dimensional
factors through a linear model with the corruption of Gaussian noise. So those algorithms essentially use a linear model for representing the entire data in a low dimensional subspace. It may be insufficient to model data with large variation caused by, for example, pose, expression and lighting
in face recognition. Thus the application scope of PPCA
and PCA-based methods is necessarily somewhat limited
by its global linearity assumption. An alternative improving paradigm is to model the complex manifold with a mixture of local linear PPCA sub-models. Thus the single PCA
model could be extended to a mixture of such sub-models.
A number of ‘mixture of PPCA’ have been proposed in
literature. The first work was done by Ghahramani and Hinton [7]. They presented an exact Expectation-Maximization
(EM) algorithm for fitting the parameters of the mixture of
factor analyzers. By constraining the error covariance to
be a diagonal matrix whose elements are usually equal, the
mixture of factor analyzers became the mixture of PPCA
[20]. Bishop and Tipping [4] extended the mixture of PPCA model to achieve a hierarchical mixture model. Su and
Dy [17] introduced an automated hierarchical mixture of PPCA algorithm, which utilizes the integrated classification
likelihood as a criterion for splitting and stopping the addition of hierarchical levels. Kim et al. [12] proposed a fast
and sub-optimal selection method of model order such as
the number of mixture components and the number of PCA
14462

