Rolling shutter absolute pose problem with known vertical direction
Cenek Albl1
1

Zuzana Kukelova2

Czech Technical University in Prague,
Faculty of Electrical engineering,
166 27 Praha 6, Technicka 2,
Czech Republic

Tomas Pajdla1
2

Microsoft Research Ltd,
21 Station Road,
Cambridge CB1 2FB, UK
zukuke@microsoft.com

{alblcene,pajdla}@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract
We present a solution to the rolling shutter (RS) absolute
camera pose problem with known vertical direction. Our
new solver, R5Pup, is an extension of the general minimal solution R6P, which uses a double linearized RS camera model initialized by the standard perspective P3P. Here,
thanks to using known vertical directions, we avoid double
linearization and can get the camera absolute pose directly
from the RS model without the initialization by a standard
P3P. Moreover, we need only five 2D-to-3D matches while
R6P needed six such matches. We demonstrate in simulated
and real experiments that our new R5Pup is robust, fast and
a very practical method for absolute camera pose computation for modern cameras on mobile devices. We compare
our R5Pup to the state of the art RS and perspective methods and demonstrate that it outperforms them when vertical
direction is known in the range of accuracy available on
modern mobile devices. We also demonstrate that when using R5Pup solver in structure from motion (SfM) pipelines,
it is better to transform already reconstructed scenes into
the standard position, rather than using hard constraints on
the verticality of up vectors.

All that previous work builds on the perspective projection, which is the right model for cameras with global shutter. In this work, we present a solution to the rolling shutter
(RS) [21] absolute camera pose problem with known vertical direction (R5Pup). It is an extension of the very recent
work [2]. We are providing much more practical absolute
camera pose computation than [2] for modern cameras on
mobile devices.
Vast majority of contemporary cameras, including smartphones and DLSR’s, uses the rolling shutter to capture images. Global shutter images are exposed to the light at once,
whereas RS images are captured row (or column) by row at
different times. When an RS camera moves while capturing
an image, smear, skew or wobble distortion often appear.
The most importantly, the perspective camera model is no
longer valid and must be replaced by a new RS camera projection model.

1. Introduction

It has been observed [1, 11, 10] that image distortions
caused by a moving RS camera can break 3D reconstruction
and camera pose estimation down. To alleviate this problem, image rectification has been proposed to remove RS
distortions [14, 24] and a structure from motion method for
videos taken by rolling shutter cameras was developed [10].
It has been demonstrated [19] that using an RS model significantly improves the quality of mapping and tracking on
mobile phones.

Computing camera pose from image points to 3D point correspondences, the Perspective-n-point problem (PnP) [5],
is an important component of structure from motion, object localization, and visual odometry. PnP is one of the
oldest camera calibration problems studied [8]. It can be
formulated as a system of algebraic equations and solved
from three image to 3D point correspondences. Various formulations, numerical stability, computational efficiency and different approaches how to calculate the camera pose from three and more correspondences were studied [22, 26, 30, 3, 23, 28, 18] in the past.

Authors of [1] solved the problem of RS absolute pose
using a non-linear optimization with the initial guess obtained by a linear method using 81/2 points and assuming
planar scenes. A globally optimal solution using polynomial equations and Gloptipoly [13] solver to solve rolling
shutter PnP was developed in [20]. It has been shown that
the method is capable of providing better results than [1] if
seven or more correspondences were used. In [2], the first
minimal, non-iterative solution to the absolute pose problem for images from rolling shutter cameras has been presented. A double linearized rolling shutter camera model
13355

