Canny Text Detector: Fast and Robust Scene Text Localization Algorithm
Hojin Cho

Myungchul Sung

Bongjin Jun

Stradvision, Inc.
{hojin.cho, myungchul.sung, bongjin.jun}@stradvision.com

Abstract
This paper presents a novel scene text detection algorithm, Canny Text Detector, which takes advantage of the
similarity between image edge and text for effective text localization with improved recall rate. As closely related edge
pixels construct the structural information of an object,
we observe that cohesive characters compose a meaningful word/sentence sharing similar properties such as spatial location, size, color, and stroke width regardless of language. However, prevalent scene text detection approaches
have not fully utilized such similarity, but mostly rely on the
characters classified with high confidence, leading to low
recall rate. By exploiting the similarity, our approach can
quickly and robustly localize a variety of texts. Inspired by
the original Canny edge detector, our algorithm makes use
of double threshold and hysteresis tracking to detect texts
of low confidence. Experimental results on public datasets
demonstrate that our algorithm outperforms the state-ofthe-art scene text detection methods in terms of detection
rate.

1. Introduction
Text in scene images usually conveys valuable information, hence detecting and recognizing scene text has been
considered important for a variety of advanced computer
vision applications such as image and video retrieval, multilingual translation, and automotive assistance. Especially,
as most text recognition applications require texts in images
to be localized in advance, there is a significant demand
for text detection algorithms that can robustly localize texts
from a given scene image.
Previous works for scene text detection have utilized the
sliding window method [6, 16, 11, 18] and connected component analysis [8, 5, 35, 37, 38, 12, 21, 22, 23, 28, 41]. The
sliding window based methods detect texts of a given scene
image by shifting a window onto all locations in multiple
scales. This is an exhaustive search, so these methods can
achieve high recall rates. However, heavy computations are

(a) Input

(b) MSERs [20]

(c) ERs after NMS
(d) Our localization result
Figure 1. Canny text detector. Compared to the character candidates of MSERs or ERs, our method localizes characters more
robustly with less false positives.

unavoidable due to the thorough scanning of windows and a
large number of candidates can result in a great deal of false
positives.
On the other hand, connected component based methods first extract character candidates from an input image,
and then refine the candidates to suppress non-text candidates. Stroke width transform (SWT) and maximally stable extremal region (MSER) are two representative techniques for connected component analysis, and these methods have achieved outstanding performance in scene text
detection. But, common constraints used for refining candidates are considered somewhat restrictive to preserve various true characters, leading to low recall rate in practice.
In this paper, we propose a novel scene text detection
algorithm, Canny Text Detector, which takes advantage of
the similarity between image edge and text to provide significantly improved detection rate. As edge pixels construct
the structural information (i.e., contour) of an object, we
observe that cohesive characters compose a word or sentence sharing similar properties such as spatial location,
size, color, and stroke width regardless of language. In the
original Canny edge detector [4], each edge pixel is first
classified as strong edge, weak edge, or non-edge. Then the
algorithm employs edge tracking by hysteresis to find con-

3566

