Studying Very Low Resolution Recognition Using Deep Networks
Zhangyang Wang, Shiyu Chang, Yingzhen Yang, Ding Liu, and Thomas S. Huang∗
Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
{zwang119, chang87, yyang58, dingliu2, t-huang1}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Visual recognition research often assumes a sufficient
resolution of the region of interest (ROI). That is usually violated in practice, inspiring us to explore the Very Low Resolution Recognition (VLRR) problem. Typically, the ROI in
a VLRR problem can be smaller than 16 × 16 pixels, and is
challenging to be recognized even by human experts. We attempt to solve the VLRR problem using deep learning methods. Taking advantage of techniques primarily in super resolution, domain adaptation and robust regression, we formulate a dedicated deep learning method and demonstrate
how these techniques are incorporated step by step. Any
extra complexity, when introduced, is fully justified by both
analysis and simulation results. The resulting Robust Partially Coupled Networks achieves feature enhancement and
recognition simultaneously. It allows for both the flexibility
to combat the LR-HR domain mismatch, and the robustness
to outliers. Finally, the effectiveness of the proposed models
is evaluated on three different VLRR tasks, including face
identification, digit recognition and font recognition, all of
which obtain very impressive performances.

1. Introduction
While object recognition research has witnessed substantial achievements so far, it is often assumed that the
region of interest (ROI) is large enough and contains sufficient information for recognition. However, this assumption usually does not hold in practice. One typical example is face recognition from video surveillance [39]. Due to
the prohibitive costs of installing high-definition cameras all
around, most surveillance systems have to rely on cameras
of very limited definitions. Besides, wide-angle cameras are
normally used in a way that the viewing area is maximized.
In turn, the face region in the scene can be extremely small
and low-quality. In a text recognition system [15], cheap
and versatile cameras make it possible to quickly scan documents, but their low definitions also present challenges for
∗ Zhangyang Wang and Thomas Huang’s research works are supported
in part by US Army Research Office grant W911NF-15-1-0317.

robust character segmentation and recognition. While similar problems are ubiquitous for recognition in the wild, a
principled approach to solve them is highly desirable.
Regrettably, the general Very Low Resolution Recognition (VLRR) problem has been largely overlooked, except
for certain existing efforts in face recognition [39, 26]. Empirical studies [22] in face recognition proved that a minimum face resolution between 32×32 and 64×64 is required
for stand-alone recognition algorithms. An even lower resolution results in a much degraded recognition performance
[22, 12] for conventional recognition models. The severe information loss from HR to LR makes it unlikely to extract
or recover sufficient recognizable features directly from LR
subjects [39]. Typically, the ROI in a VLRR problem can
be smaller than 16 × 16 pixels, and is even difficult (but still
possible) to be recognized by human viewers.
In this paper, we make the first attempt to solve the
VLRR problem using deep learning methods [18]. Starting from the simplest baseline, we perform a step-by-step
model evolution, gradually obtaining more sophisticated
and powerful models. Any extra complexity, when introduced, is fully justified by both analysis and simulation results. The final outcome, named Robust Partially Coupled
Networks, achieves feature enhancement and recognition simultaneously. It is equipped with both the flexibility to
combat the cross-resolution domain mismatch, and the robustness to outliers. The proposed models are applied to
resolving real VLRR problems on three different tasks, including face identification, digit recognition and font recognition, all of which obtain very impressive performances.

1.1. Problem Definition
In real-world settings, VLRR directly recognizes visual
subjects from low-resolution (LR) images, without any predefined high-resolution (HR) image. Here, we introduce
HR images as “auxiliary variables” to our model training,
by assuming each training image has both LR and HR
versions available. As verified by our following experiments, HR images help discover more discriminative features which are prone to be overlooked from LR images. In
testing, there are only LR images available, and the VLRR
14792

