End-to-End Learning of Deformable Mixture of Parts and Deep Convolutional
Neural Networks for Human Pose Estimation
Wei Yang
Wanli Ouyang∗
Hongsheng Li
Xiaogang Wang
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{wyang, wlouyang, hsli, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Recently, Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) have been applied to the task of human pose estimation, and have shown its potential of learning better feature representations and capturing contextual relationships.
However, it is difficult to incorporate domain prior knowledge such as geometric relationships among body parts into
DCNNs. In addition, training DCNN-based body part detectors without consideration of global body joint consistency introduces ambiguities, which increases the complexity of training. In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end
framework for human pose estimation that combines DCNNs with the expressive deformable mixture of parts. We explicitly incorporate domain prior knowledge into the framework, which greatly regularizes the learning process and
enables the flexibility of our framework for loopy models or
tree-structured models. The effectiveness of jointly learning a DCNN with a deformable mixture of parts model is
evaluated through intensive experiments on several widely
used benchmarks. The proposed approach significantly improves the performance compared with state-of-the-art approaches, especially on benchmarks with challenging articulations.

1. Introduction
Articulated human pose estimation is one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision. It solves the problem
of localizing human parts in images, and has many important applications such as action recognition [45], clothing parsing [49, 50], and human tracking [6]. The main
challenges of this task are articulation, occlusion, cluttered
background, and variations in clothing and lighting. Recently, state-of-the-art performance of human pose estimation has been achieved with Deep Convolutional Neural
Networks (DCNNs) [42, 41, 40, 4, 3, 16, 15, 10, 7]. These
approaches primarily fall into two categories: 1) regressing
∗ Wanli Ouyang is the corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. Motivation. Left: Ground-truth locations of head (a) and ankle
(d). Middle: The noisy heat-maps predicted by conventional DCNN during
the training stage. Right: With body joint consistency considered by the
proposed framework, the heat-maps are better predicted.

heat-maps of each body part location with DCNNs [16, 40];
2) learning deep structured output to further model the relationships among body joints [15, 41].
DCNN-based heat-map regression models have shown
the potential of learning better feature representations.
However, geometric constraints among body parts, which
are essential to ensure the joint consistency, are usually
missed in training the DCNNs. As a consequence, during
the training stage, these approaches may produce many imperfect results, as shown in Figure 1 (b, e). For example,
regions with high response to head in Figure 1 (b) are heads
of unannotated persons, which are reasonable but will be
treated as false positives in learning the DCNN. Errors on
these regions will be back propagated to penalize the features correspond to head detection, which is inappropriate.
We observe that this problem could be addressed by considering global joint consistency during the training stage: the
unannotated persons do not have their full bodies appearing
in the image, hence can be suppressed when considering the

3073

