ForgetMeNot: Memory-Aware Forensic Facial Sketch Matching
Shuxin Ouyang†,§
†

Timothy M. Hospedales§

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

Yi-Zhe Song§
§

Queen Mary University of London, UK

{s.ouyang, t.hospedales, yizhe.song}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
We investigate whether it is possible to improve the
performance of automated facial forensic sketch matching
by learning from examples of facial forgetting over time.
Forensic facial sketch recognition is a key capability for
law enforcement, but remains an unsolved problem. It is
extremely challenging because there are three distinct contributors to the domain gap between forensic sketches and
photos: The well-studied sketch-photo modality gap, and
the less studied gaps due to (i) the forgetting process of the
eye-witness and (ii) their inability to elucidate their memory. In this paper, we address the memory problem head on
by introducing a database of 400 forensic sketches created
at different time-delays. Based on this database we build
a model to reverse the forgetting process. Surprisingly, we
show that it is possible to systematically “un-forget” facial
details. Moreover, it is possible to apply this model to dramatically improve forensic sketch recognition in practice:
we achieve the state of the art results when matching 195
benchmark forensic sketches against corresponding photos
and a 10,030 mugshot database.

1. Introduction
Facial sketch recognition is an important law enforcement tool for determining the identity of criminals where
only an eyewitness account of the suspect is available. In
this situation, a forensic sketch artist renders the face of the
suspect by hand or with compositing software based on eyewitness description. The facial sketch is then disseminated
in the media, but the crucial capability is to then identify the
suspect by matching it against a photo mugshot database.
Motivated by this, the computer vision [12] and biometrics [2] fields have extensively studied sketch to photo face
matching. However, practical matching of forensic sketches
to photo databases remains an unsolved question. This is
because studies have primarily focused on matching viewed
sketches rather than the rarer forensic sketches. Viewed
sketches such as those in the popular CUHK [23] database

Xueming Li†

lixm@bupt.edu.cn

are drawn by artists while viewing a photo. As such there is
no forgetting issue, and the sketches are accurate renditions
of the subject. The cross-modal sketch-photo gap is thus
small, and viewed sketches are relatively easy to match – resulting in benchmark performance saturated at near-perfect
[1, 2, 4, 12]. Forensic sketches are drawn based on eyewitness description, possibly days after the event. Despite
being the practically relevant variant of the problem for law
enforcement, forensic sketch matching remains both relatively unstudied and unsolved. It is a much harder and unsolved problem due to the sketch-photo gap being widened
by: (i) forgotten / inaccurate memory of facial details [7],
and (ii) imperfect communication of memory [5] (whether
to a human sketch-artist or software compositor [7]). Nevertheless, it is relatively unstudied largely due to lesser availability of forensic sketch benchmark databases, which is
why we introduce a new forensic sketch database.
In computer vision, facial sketch-photo matching has
been studied extensively using a variety of approaches including invariant feature engineering [1, 2, 4, 12], crossmodal regression/synthesis [22, 23] and shared subspace
learning [20]. These contributions address the sketch/photo
modality gap, but do not address the issue of forgotten or
inaccurately remembered details due to imperfect memory.
In contrast, psychology [25] and forensic psychology [6]
have studied the reliability of different facial features in human face matching, and the fading of memory with time [7].
This has provided some insights into human recognition (internal facial features are more important overall), and the
reliability of human memory, for example that memory fidelity drops rapidly after a few hours [7]. This means that
forensic sketches are very inaccurate in practice, because
they are usually taken days after the event [6, 7]. Thus the
memory gap is the key underlying problem to solve.
Motivated by these studies in human memory and recognition, we investigate here whether it is possible to bring
learning and computer vision techniques to bear to ameliorate the memory gap problem. To disentangle the three
factors (cross-modal, forgetting, and imperfect communication) in the forensic sketch/photo gap, we introduce a new
15571

