Improving Person Re-identification via Pose-aware Multi-shot Matching
Yeong-Jun Cho and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Computer Vision Laboratory, GIST, South Korea
{yjcho, kjyoon}@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Person re-identification is the problem of recognizing people across images or videos from non-overlapping
views. Although there has been much progress in person
re-identification for the last decade, it still remains a challenging task because of severe appearance changes of a person due to diverse camera viewpoints and person poses. In
this paper, we propose a novel framework for person reidentification by analyzing camera viewpoints and person
poses, so-called Pose-aware Multi-shot Matching (PaMM),
which robustly estimates target poses and efficiently conducts multi-shot matching based on the target pose information. Experimental results using public person reidentification datasets show that the proposed methods are
promising for person re-identification under diverse viewpoints and pose variances.

1. Introduction
In recent years, a huge number of surveillance cameras
have been installed in public places (e.g. offices, stations,
airports, and streets) in order to closely monitor the scene
and to give early warning of events such as accidents and
crimes. However, it requires a lot of human efforts for dealing with large camera networks. In order to reduce the
human efforts, an automatic person re-identification, i.e.
re-id, task that associates people across images from nonoverlapping cameras has been widely utilized.
For re-identifying people, most previous works generally
rely on people appearances such as color, shape, and texture, since there is no continuity between non-overlapping
cameras in terms of time and space. For this reason,
many works have been focused on appearance modeling
and learning such as feature learning [7, 25], metric learning [10,18], and saliency learning [24] for the efficient re-id
task. Unfortunately, however, the appearance of a person
can change considerably across images depending on camera viewpoints as well as the pose of a person as shown in
Fig. 1; thus the person re-id task relying only on the appearances is very challenging. Nonetheless, many previous

Figure 1. Challenging in person re-identification due to person appearance changes. Person appearance changes depending on the camera viewpoint and the pose of a person.
re-id frameworks [10, 18, 24] commonly adopt single-shot
matching for measuring similarity (or difference) between
a pair of person image patches. However, it is still hard to
identify people with single-shot appearance matching because of the aforementioned severe appearance changes of
people. In order to overcome the limitation of single-shot
matching, several multi-shot matching methods [7, 13, 19]
have been proposed in recent years; however the ambiguity
owing to the viewpoint and pose variations is still remained.
In real world surveillance scenarios, each target (i.e. person) provides multiple observations along with its moving
path. Furthermore, surveillance videos contain scene structures as well as scene contexts; a ground plane of the scene,
the moving trajectory of a person, etc. In practice, it is possible to estimate the camera viewpoint from the scene information via human height-based auto-calibrations [11, 16]
and vanishing point-based auto-calibrations [17]; then the
difficulties of person re-id become more tractable.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for person re-identification by analyzing camera viewpoints and
person poses, so-called Pose-aware Multi-shot Matching (PaMM). We first calibrate camera viewpoints and robustly estimate target poses based on the proposed target pose estimation method. We then generate a multipose model containing four representative features extracted from four image clusters grouped by person poses
(i.e. f ront, right, back, left). After generating multi-pose
models, we calculate matching scores between multi-pose
models in a weighted summation manner based on the pretrained matching weights. With the proposed person reidentification framework, we can exploit additional cues
11354

