Unsupervised Learning from Narrated Instruction Videos
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac∗ †

Piotr Bojanowski∗

Ivan Laptev∗

Abstract
We address the problem of automatically learning the
main steps to complete a certain task, such as changing a
car tire, from a set of narrated instruction videos. The contributions of this paper are three-fold. First, we develop a
new unsupervised learning approach that takes advantage
of the complementary nature of the input video and the associated narration. The method solves two clustering problems, one in text and one in video, applied one after each
other and linked by joint constraints to obtain a single coherent sequence of steps in both modalities. Second, we collect and annotate a new challenging dataset of real-world
instruction videos from the Internet. The dataset contains
about 800,000 frames for five different tasks1 that include
complex interactions between people and objects, and are
captured in a variety of indoor and outdoor settings. Third,
we experimentally demonstrate that the proposed method
can automatically discover, in an unsupervised manner, the
main steps to achieve the task and locate the steps in the
input videos.

1. Introduction
Millions of people watch narrated instruction videos2
to learn new tasks such as assembling IKEA furniture or
changing a flat car tire. Many of such tasks have large
amounts of videos available on-line. For example, querying for “how to change a tire” results in more than 300,000
hits on YouTube. Most of these videos, however, are made
with the intention to teach other people to perform the task
and do not provide direct supervisory signal for automatic
learning algorithms. Developing unsupervised methods that
could learn tasks from myriads of instruction videos on the
Internet is therefore a key challenge. Such automatic cogni∗ WILLOW project-team, Département d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548, Paris, France.
† SIERRA project-team, Département d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548, Paris, France.
‡ IIIT Hyderabad
1 How to : change a car tire, perform CardioPulmonary resuscitation
(CPR), jump a car, repot a plant and make coffee
2 Some instruction videos on YouTube have tens of millions of views,
e.g. www.youtube.com/watch?v=J4-GRH2nDvw.

Nishant Agrawal ∗ ‡

Josef Sivic∗

Simon Lacoste-Julien†

tive ability would enable constructing virtual assistants and
smart robots that learn new skills from the Internet to, for
example, help people achieve new tasks in unfamiliar situations.
In this work, we consider instruction videos and develop
a method that learns a sequence of steps, as well as their
textual and visual representations, required to achieve a certain task. For example, given a set of narrated instruction
videos demonstrating how to change a car tire, our method
automatically discovers consecutive steps for this task such
as loosen the nuts of the wheel, jack up the car, remove
the spare tire and so on as illustrated in Figure 1. In addition, the method learns the visual and linguistic variability
of these steps from natural videos.
Discovering key steps from instruction videos is a highly
challenging task. First, linguistic expressions for the same
step can have high variability across videos, for example:
“...Loosen up the wheel nut just a little before you start jacking the car...” and “...Start to loosen the lug nuts just enough
to make them easy to turn by hand...”. Second, the visual appearance of each step varies greatly between videos as the
people and objects are different, the action is captured from
a different viewpoint, and the way people perform actions
also vary. Finally, there is also a variability of the overall
structure of the sequence of steps achieving the task. For example, some videos may omit some steps or change slightly
their order.
To address these challenges, in this paper we develop an
unsupervised learning approach that takes advantage of the
complementarity of the visual signal in the video and the
corresponding natural language narration to resolve their
ambiguities. We assume that the same ordered sequence
of steps (also called script in the NLP literature [27]) is
common to all input videos of the same task, but the actual sequence and the individual steps are unknown and are
learnt directly from data. This is in contrast to other existing
methods for modeling instruction videos [20] that assume a
script (recipe) is known and fixed in advance. We address
the problem by first performing temporal clustering of text
followed by clustering in video, where the two clustering
tasks are linked by joint constraints. The complementary
nature of the two clustering problems helps to resolve ambiguities in the two individual modalities. For example, two
video segments with very different appearance but depict14575

