Amplitude Modulated Video Camera - Light Separation in Dynamic Scenes
Amir Kolaman, Maxim Lvov, Rami Hagege, and Hugo Guterman
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
POB 653 Beer-Sheva 8410501, Israel
kolaman@post.bgu.ac.il, lvovmax@post.bgu.ac.il, hagege@ee.bgu.ac.il, hugo@ee.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Controlled light conditions improve considerably the
performance of most computer vision algorithms. Dynamic
light conditions create varying spatial changes in color and
intensity across the scene. These condition, caused by a
moving shadow for example, force developers to create algorithms which are robust to such variations. We suggest a
computational camera which produces images that are not
influenced by environmental variations in light conditions.
The key insight is that many years ago, similar difficulties
were already solved in radio communication; As a result
each channel is immune to interference from other radio
channels. Amplitude Modulated (AM) video camera separates the influence of a modulated light from other unknown
light sources in the scene; Causing the AM video camera
frame to appear the same - independent of the light conditions in which it was taken. We built a prototype of the
AM video camera by using off the shelf hardware and tested
it. AM video camera was used to demonstrate color constancy, shadow removal and contrast enhancement in real
time. We show theoretically and empirically that: 1. the
proposed system can produce images with similar noise levels as a standard camera. 2. The images created by such
camera are almost completely immune to temporal, spatial
and spectral changes in the background light.

Figure 1. AM video camera enable working in stable illumination
conditions independent of the background illumination

1. Introduction
Many image and video analysis algorithms demonstrate
their performance in a dark room with no background lights
[1] [2]. Added dynamic background lights, which vary in
space, time, and spectra, force these algorithms to compensate for the presence of additional lights. A camera, which
creates the same image (Fig.1) anywhere, could solve this
problem and promote the common use of many state of
the art algorithms in consumer products independent of dynamic light conditions.
An example for such dynamic light condition is a casted
shadow upon an object (Fig.2(a)). This generates video

(a) Regular Camera

(b) AM video camera

Figure 2. (a) Image with shadows, low contrast, and color cast.
(b) Proposed method with no shadows, correct color (white wall),
and improved contrast.

frames with changing intensity and color across space and
time. Removing these casted shadows is done by separating
the effect a singlet light source has on the scene. This light
13698

