Jointly Modeling Embedding and Translation to Bridge Video and Language∗
Yingwei Pan † , Tao Mei ‡ , Ting Yao ‡ , Houqiang Li † , and Yong Rui ‡
†

‡

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China

Microsoft Research, Beijing, China

panyw.ustc@gmail.com, {tmei, tiyao, yongrui}@microsoft.com, lihq@ustc.edu.cn

Input Video:

Abstract
Automatically describing video content with natural language is a fundamental challenge of computer vision. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), which models sequence
dynamics, has attracted increasing attention on visual interpretation. However, most existing approaches generate
a word locally with the given previous words and the visual
content, while the relationship between sentence semantics
and visual content is not holistically exploited. As a result,
the generated sentences may be contextually correct but the
semantics (e.g., subjects, verbs or objects) are not true.
This paper presents a novel unified framework, named
Long Short-Term Memory with visual-semantic Embedding
(LSTM-E), which can simultaneously explore the learning of LSTM and visual-semantic embedding. The former aims to locally maximize the probability of generating the next word given previous words and visual content, while the latter is to create a visual-semantic embedding space for enforcing the relationship between the semantics of the entire sentence and visual content. The experiments on YouTube2Text dataset show that our proposed
LSTM-E achieves to-date the best published performance
in generating natural sentences: 45.3% and 31.0% in terms
of BLEU@4 and METEOR, respectively. Superior performances are also reported on two movie description datasets
(M-VAD and MPII-MD). In addition, we demonstrate that
LSTM-E outperforms several state-of-the-art techniques in
predicting Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) triplets.

1. Introduction
Video has become ubiquitous on the Internet, broadcasting channels, as well as personal devices. This has encouraged the development of advanced techniques to analyze
the semantic video content for a wide variety of applications. Recognition of videos has been a fundamental challenge of computer vision for decades. Previous research has
∗ This work was performed when Yingwei Pan was visiting Microsoft Research as a research intern.

...

...

Output Sentence:
· LSTM [30]: a man is riding a horse.
· LSTM-E [ours]: a woman is riding a horse.
· Human: a woman gallops on a horse. / a woman is riding a
horse along a road. / the girl rode her brown horse.

Figure 1. Examples of video description generation.

predominantly focused on recognizing videos with a predefined yet very limited set of individual words. Thanks
to the recent development of Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs), researchers have strived to automatically describe
video content with a complete and natural sentence, which
can be regarded as the ultimate goal of video understanding.
Figure 1 shows the examples of video description generation. Given an input video, the generated sentences are
to describe video content, ideally encapsulating its most informative dynamics. There is a wide variety of video applications based on the description, ranging from editing, indexing, search, to sharing. However, the problem itself has
been taken as a grand challenge for decades in the research
communities, as the description generation model should
be powerful enough not only to recognize key objects from
visual content, but also discover their spatio-temporal relationships and the dynamics expressed in a natural language.
Despite the difficulty of the problem, there have been a
few attempts to address video description generation [5, 30,
34], and image caption generation [6, 13, 16, 31], which are
mainly inspired by recent advances in machine translation
using RNN [1]. Among these successful attempts, most of
them use Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [9], a variant
of RNN, which can capture long-term temporal information
by mapping sequences to sequences. Thus, we follow this
elegant recipe and use LSTM as our RNN model to generate
the video sentence in this paper.
However, existing approaches to video description generation mainly optimize the next word given the input video
and previous words locally, while leaving the relationship
between the semantics of the entire sentence and video content unexploited. As a result, the generated sentences can

4594

