Synthetic Data for Text Localisation in Natural Images
Ankush Gupta
Andrea Vedaldi
Andrew Zisserman
Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{ankush,vedaldi,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper we introduce a new method for text detection in natural images. The method comprises two contributions: First, a fast and scalable engine to generate synthetic
images of text in clutter. This engine overlays synthetic text
to existing background images in a natural way, accounting for the local 3D scene geometry. Second, we use the
synthetic images to train a Fully-Convolutional Regression
Network (FCRN) which efficiently performs text detection
and bounding-box regression at all locations and multiple
scales in an image. We discuss the relation of FCRN to the
recently-introduced YOLO detector, as well as other end-toend object detection systems based on deep learning. The
resulting detection network significantly out performs current methods for text detection in natural images, achieving an F-measure of 84.2% on the standard ICDAR 2013
benchmark. Furthermore, it can process 15 images per second on a GPU.

Synthetic Text in the Wild

real image

detected text

FCRN

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We propose a Fully-Convolutional Regression Network
(FCRN) for high-performance text recognition in natural scenes
(bottom) which detects text up to 45× faster than the current stateof-the-art text detectors and with better accuracy. FCRN is trained
without any manual annotation using a new dataset of synthetic
text in the wild. The latter is obtained by automatically adding text
to natural scenes in a manner compatible with the scene geometry
(top).

Text spotting, namely the ability to read text in natural scenes, is a highly-desirable feature in anthropocentric
applications of computer vision. State-of-the-art systems
such as [20] achieved their high text spotting performance
by combining two simple but powerful insights. The first
is that complex recognition pipelines that recognise text by
explicitly combining recognition and detection of individual characters can be replaced by very powerful classifiers
that directly map an image patch to words [13, 20]. The
second is that these powerful classifiers can be learned by
generating the required training data synthetically [19, 44].
While [20] successfully addressed the problem of recognising text given an image patch containing a word, the process of obtaining these patches remains suboptimal. The
pipeline combines general purpose features such as HoG
[6], EdgeBoxes [48] and Aggregate Channel Features [7]
and brings in text specific (CNN) features only in the later
stages, where patches are finally recognised as specific
words. This state of affair is highly undesirable for two

reasons. First, the performance of the detection pipeline
becomes the new bottleneck of text spotting: in [20] recognition accuracy for correctly cropped words is 98% whereas
the end-to-end text spotting F-score is only 69% mainly due
to incorrect and missed word region proposals. Second, the
pipeline is slow and inelegant.
In this paper we propose improvements similar to [20] to
the complementary problem of text detection. We make two
key contributions. First, we propose a new method for generating synthetic images of text that naturally blends text
in existing natural scenes, using off-the-shelf deep learning
and segmentation techniques to align text to the geometry
of a background image and respect scene boundaries. We
use this method to automatically generate a new synthetic
dataset of text in cluttered conditions (figure 1 (top) and
section 2). This dataset, called SynthText in the Wild (figure 2), is suitable for training high-performance scene text
detectors. The key difference with existing synthetic text
datasets such as the one of [20] is that these only contains

2315

