Cascaded Interactional Targeting Network for Egocentric Video Analysis
Yang Zhou1 , Bingbing Ni2 , Richang Hong3 , Xiaokang Yang2 , and Qi Tian1
1
University of Texas at San Antonio, US
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3
HeFei University of Technology, China
myh511@my.utsa.edu nibingbing@sjtu.edu.cn hongrc@hfut.edu.cn
xkyang@sjtu.edu.cn qi.tian@utsa.edu

Abstract
Knowing how hands move and what object is being manipulated are two key sub-tasks for analyzing first-person
(egocentric) action. However, lack of fully annotated hand
data as well as imprecise foreground segmentation make either sub-task challenging. This work aims to explicitly address these two issues via introducing a cascaded interactional targeting (i.e., infer both hand and active object regions) deep neural network. Firstly, a novel EM-like learning framework is proposed to train the pixel-level deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) by seamlessly integrating weakly supervised data (i.e., massive bounding box annotations) with a small set of strongly supervised data (i.e.,
fully annotated hand segmentation maps) to achieve stateof-the-art hand segmentation performance. Secondly, the
resulting high-quality hand segmentation maps are further
paired with the corresponding motion maps and object feature maps, in order to explore the contextual information
among object, motion and hand to generate interactional
foreground regions (operated objects). The resulting interactional target maps (hand + active object) from our cascaded DCNN are further utilized to form discriminative action representation. Experiments show that our framework
has achieved the state-of-the-art egocentric action recognition performance on the benchmark dataset Activities of
Daily Living (ADL).

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the emergence of firstperson (egocentric) action analysis due to its various applications in assisted daily living, medical surveillance and
smart home [11, 38]. Daily living egocentric videos involve
a large amount of manipulation actions. The key challenges
are irrelevant objects-of-interest and the noisy background
motions. Therefore, the key of addressing these issues is
to successfully segment out hand region and active region
(i.e., the objects-of-interest region).

Prior art [34, 25] in egocentric action analysis have paid
the most attention to these sub-tasks. Ren et al. [34] quantitatively analyzed the feasibilities and challenges of the egocentric recognition of handled objects. It was pointed out
that hand and motion information are the keys to solve the
egocentric video recognition problem. Pirsiavash et al. [31]
used a temporal pyramid for both passive and active objects
as the action representation, and they suggested that the
daily living egocentric video understanding are “all about
the objects being interacted with”. McCandless et al. [25]
applied an “object-centric” scheme to automatically select
some representative spatio-temporal partitions from a pool
of pre-detected partitions.
However, there are two major difficulties in hand and
foreground object segmentation. Firstly, in egocentric
videos, the segmentation map for a non-rigid object like
hand is more helpful in later processing (e.g., motion feature pooling) than object bounding box information. Unfortunately, previous methods for hand detection in egocentric
video analysis mainly adopt the hand detection method (i.e.,
bounding box detection) [26, 16, 15], which is not precise
enough to model hand movements. This is mainly due to the
lack of pixel-level hand annotations for training good hand
segmentation models. In fact, it is not feasible to get a large
scale per-pixel annotated hand dataset because it requires
intensive human labor. Moreover, pixel-level hand detection/segmentation is challenging due to large illumination
changes and hand deformations. Secondly, most of previous
works separately model the hands, foreground objects and
motion information. Due to the noisy background motion,
highly frequent occlusion, and object deformation, jointly
detecting/segmenting these objects is hard. We find the rich
contextual information could be explored to enhance the detection/segmentation. Two important observations are that
the hand information are helpful for localizing the handmanipulated objects, and the motion information are useful
for detecting the foreground objects. Motivated by these observations, we propose a hybrid/cascaded end-to-end deep

1904

