Deep Saliency with Encoded Low level Distance Map and High Level Features
Gayoung Lee
KAIST

Yu-Wing Tai
SenseTime Group Limited

Junmo Kim
KAIST

gylee1103@gmail.com

yuwing@gmail.com

junmo.kim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent advances in saliency detection have utilized deep
learning to obtain high level features to detect salient regions in a scene. These advances have demonstrated superior results over previous works that utilize hand-crafted
low level features for saliency detection. In this paper, we
demonstrate that hand-crafted features can provide complementary information to enhance performance of saliency
detection that utilizes only high level features. Our method
utilizes both high level and low level features for saliency
detection under a unified deep learning framework. The
high level features are extracted using the VGG-net, and
the low level features are compared with other parts of an
image to form a low level distance map. The low level
distance map is then encoded using a convolutional neural network(CNN) with multiple 1 × 1 convolutional and
ReLU layers. We concatenate the encoded low level distance map and the high level features, and connect them
to a fully connected neural network classifier to evaluate
the saliency of a query region. Our experiments show that
our method can further improve the performance of stateof-the-art deep learning-based saliency detection methods.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection aims to detect distinctive regions in
an image that draw human attention. This topic has received a great deal of attention in computer vision and
cognitive science because of its wide range of applications
such as content-aware image cropping [22] and resizing [3],
video summarization [24], object detection [20], and person
re-identification [31]. Various papers such as DRFI [13],
GMR [30], DSR [17], RBD [32], HDCT [15], HS [29]
and GC [7] utilize low level features such as color, texture and location information to investigate characteristics
of salient regions including objectness, boundary convexity,
spatial distribution, and global contrast. The recent success
of deep learning in object recognition and classification [23]
brought to a revolution in computer vision. Inspired by the

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 1: (a) Input images, (b) Ground truth masks, (c)
Fuzzy saliency masks from VGG16 features (HF setting,
described in Section 3.3), (d-f) Results of (d) MDF [16], (e)
MCDL [21], and (f) our method.
human visual system, deep learning builds hierarchical layers of visual representation to extract the high level features
of an image. Using extracted high level features, several recent works [27, 16, 21] have demonstrated state-of-the-art
performance in saliency detection that significantly outperform previous works that utilized only low level features.
As discussed in [9], while high level features are good to
evaluate objectness in an image, they are relatively weak in
for determining precise localization. This is because multiple levels of convolutional and pooling layers “blur” the
object boundaries, and high level features from the output
of the last layer are too coarse spatially for the saliency detection task. This problem is illustrated in Figure 1(c). To
generate a precise saliency mask, previous studies utilized
various methods including object proposal [27] and superpixel classification [16, 21]. Yet, it was still very hard to
differentiate salient regions from their adjacent non-salient
regions because their feature distances were not directly encoded.
In this paper, we introduce the encoded low level distance map (ELD-map), which directly encodes the feature
distance between each pair of superpixels in an image. Our
ELD-map encodes feature distance for various low level
features including colors, color distributions, Gabor filter
responses, and locations. Our ELD-map is unique in that it
uses deep learning as an auto-encoder to encode these low
level feature distances by multiple convolutional layers with
1 × 1 kernels. The encoded feature distance map has strong
1660

