Memory Efficient Max Flow for Multi-label Submodular MRFs
Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, Richard Hartley
Australian National University & NICTA∗
Canberra, Australia

Abstract
Multi-label submodular Markov Random Fields (MRFs)
have been shown to be solvable using max-flow based on an
encoding of the labels proposed by Ishikawa, in which each
variable Xi is represented by ℓ nodes (where ℓ is the number of labels) arranged in a column. However, this method
in general requires 2 ℓ2 edges for each pair of neighbouring
variables. This makes it inapplicable to realistic problems
with many variables and labels, due to excessive memory
requirement. In this paper, we introduce a variant of the
max-flow algorithm that requires much less storage. Consequently, our algorithm makes it possible to optimally solve
multi-label submodular problems involving large numbers
of variables and labels on a standard computer.

1. Introduction
Ishikawa [13] introduced a max-flow-based method to
globally minimize the energy of multi-label MRFs with
convex edge terms. In [22], this method was extended
to energy functions satisfying the multi-label submodularity condition, analogous to the submodularity condition for
MRFs with binary labels. In the general case, however,
this method requires 2 ℓ2 directed edges for each pair of
neighbouring variables. For instance, for a 1000 × 1000, 4connected image with 256 labels, it would require approximately 1000×1000×2×2562 ×2×4 ≈ 1000 GB of memory
to store the edges (assuming 4 bytes per edge). Clearly, this
is beyond the storage capacity of most computers.
In this paper, we introduce a variant of the max-flow algorithm that requires storing only two ℓ-dimensional vectors per variable pair instead of the 2 ℓ2 edge capacities
of the standard max-flow algorithm. In the example discussed above, our algorithm would therefore use only 4 GB
of memory for the edges. As a result, our approach lets us
optimally solve much larger problems.
More specifically, in contrast to the usual augmenting
path algorithm [8], we do not store the residual edge capacities at each iteration. Instead, our algorithm records
∗ NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as represented by the
Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy and
the ARC through the ICT Centre of Excellence program.

Mathieu Salzmann
CVLAB, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland

two ℓ-dimensional flow-related quantities for every pair of
neighbouring variables. We show that, at any stage of the algorithm, the residual edge capacities can be computed from
these flow-related quantities and the initial edge capacities.
This, of course, assumes that the initial capacities can be
computed by some memory-efficient routine, which is almost always the case in computer vision.
The optimality of Ishikawa’s formalism made it a
method of choice as a subroutine in many approximate energy minimization algorithms, such as multi-label
moves [26, 27] and IRGC [1]. Since our approach can
simply replace the standard max-flow algorithm [5] in
Ishikawa-type graphs, it also allows us to minimize the energy of much larger non-submodular MRFs in such approximate techniques. Furthermore, due to the similarity to standard max-flow, our algorithm can easily be extended to handle dynamic MRFs [16] and also be accelerated using the
parallel max-flow technique [24].
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm on
the problems of stereo correspondence estimation and image inpainting. Our experimental evaluation shows that
our method can solve much larger problems than standard max-flow on a standard computer and is an order of
magnitude faster than state-of-the-art message-passing algorithms [17, 18, 19]. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/tajanthan/memf.

2. Preliminaries
Let Xi be a random variable taking label xi ∈ L. A
pairwise MRF defined over a set of such random variables
can be represented by an energy of the form
X
X
θi (xi ) +
E(x) =
θij (xi , xj ) ,
(1)
i∈V

(i,j)∈E

where θi and θij denote the unary potentials (i.e., data costs)
and pairwise potentials (i.e., interaction costs), respectively.
Here, V is the set of vertices, e.g., corresponding to pixels
or superpixels in an image, and E is the set of edges in the
MRF, e.g., encoding a 4-connected or 8-connected grid over
the image pixels.
In this work, we consider a pairwise MRF with an ordered label set L = {0, 1, · · · , ℓ − 1}, and we assume that
15867

