Sparse Coding for Classification via Discrimination Ensemble∗
Yuhui Quan1,3 , Yong Xu1 , Yuping Sun2,3 , Yan Huang1,3 , and Hui Ji3
1
2

School of Computer Science & Engineering, South China Univ. of Tech., Guangzhou 510006, China
School of Automation Science & Engineering, South China Univ. of Tech., Guangzhou 510006, China
3
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117542

{csyhquan@scut.edu.cn, yxu@scut.edu.cn, ausyp@scut.edu.cn, matjh@nus.edu.sg}

Abstract
Discriminative sparse coding has emerged as a promising technique in image analysis and recognition, which couples the process of classifier training and the process of
dictionary learning for improving the discriminability of
sparse codes. Many existing approaches consider only a
simple single linear classifier whose discriminative power
is rather weak. In this paper, we proposed a discriminative sparse coding method which jointly learns a dictionary
for sparse coding and an ensemble classifier for discrimination. The ensemble classifier is composed of a set of
linear predictors and constructed via both subsampling on
data and subspace projection on sparse codes. The advantages of the proposed method over the existing ones are
multi-fold: better discriminability of sparse codes, weaker
dependence on peculiarities of training data, and more expressibility of classifier for classification. These advantages
are also justified in the experiments, as our method outperformed several recent methods in several recognition tasks.

1. Introduction
In recent years, as a promising technique for efficiently
representing high-dimensional data, sparse coding has seen
its successful usages in a variety of recognition tasks, e.g.,
face recognition [31, 36, 3], object classification [32, 17, 3],
texture classification [26, 25], and action recognition [8,
39]. Given a set of input data, sparse coding aims at expressing each input data by a linear combination of only a few
elements from a set of representative patterns. These representative patterns are called atoms, the set of all the atoms is
called dictionary, and the coefficients of the linear combi∗ The corresponding author Yong Xu thanks the supports by National
Nature Science Foundations of China (61273255 and 61070091), Engineering & Technology Research Center of Guangdong Province for Big
Data Analysis and Processing (2013-1589-1-11), Project of High Level
Talents in Higher Institution of Guangdong Province (2013-2050205-47)
and Guangdong Technological Innovation Project (2013KJCX0010).

nations are called sparse codes. More specifically, consider
a set of input signals {y1 , y2 , . . . , yP } ⊂ RN , sparse coding is about determining a set of atoms {d1 , d2 , . . . , dM } ⊂
RN , together with a set of coding vectors {c1 , . . . , cP } ⊂
RM , so that each input vector yj can be approximated by
PM
the linear combination yj ≈
ℓ=1 cj (ℓ)dℓ , where most
entries of cj are zeros or close to zeros. Let k · k0 denote the
pseudo-norm that counts the number of non-zero elements.
Then, the classic sparse coding problem can be formulated
as the following optimization problem (e.g. [1]):
min kY − DCk2F ,

D,C

s.t. ∀i, kci k0 ≤ T,

(1)

where D = [d1 , d2 , . . . , dM ] ∈ RN ×M denotes the dictionary to be learned, Y = [y1 , y2 , . . . , yP ] ∈ RN ×P denotes
a matrix containing the input samples as column vectors,
C = [c1 , . . . , cP ] ∈ RM ×P denotes the matrix containing the corresponding coding vectors, and the parameter T
controls the sparsity degree on each coding vector. Furthermore, the normalization constraint on each atom is often imposed to avoid possible unbounded solutions, which states
kdj k2 = 1 for all j.
It can be seen that the dictionary learned using (1) only
cares about the approximation error between the input data
and the resultant succinct expression. In other words, the
sparse codes obtained under the learned dictionary can be
viewed as the cleaned up version of the input data. One
may use such sparse codes as the features for classification.
However, the additional discriminative information provided by these sparse codes over the original input signals
is limited when being used in complex classification tasks,
as they do not take account of the discriminability needed in
classification. In recent years, there have been an abundant
literature on discriminative sparse coding which is to learn
a dictionary whose resultant sparse codes possess improved
discriminative power; see e.g. [21, 22, 20, 33, 26, 15]. The
basic idea of discriminative sparse coding for classification
is to include some supervised learning processes into sparse
coding. Most existing approaches for discriminative sparse

5839

