Sparse Coding and Dictionary Learning with Linear Dynamical Systems∗
Wenbing Huang1 , Fuchun Sun1 , Lele Cao1 , Deli Zhao2 , Huaping Liu1 and Mehrtash Harandi3
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, State Key Lab. of Intelligent
Technology and Systems, Tsinghua National Lab. for Information Science and Technology (TNList);
3
Australian National University & NICTA, Australia;
1

{huangwb12@mails, fcsun@mail, caoll12@mails, hpliu@mail}.tsinghua.edu.cn,
2

zhaodeli@gmail.com, 3 Mehrtash.Harandi@nicta.com.au,

Abstract
Linear Dynamical Systems (LDSs) are the fundamental
tools for encoding spatio-temporal data in various disciplines. To enhance the performance of LDSs, in this paper,
we address the challenging issue of performing sparse coding on the space of LDSs, where both data and dictionary
atoms are LDSs. Rather than approximate the extended observability with a finite-order matrix, we represent the space of LDSs by an infinite Grassmannian consisting of the
orthonormalized extended observability subspaces. Via a
homeomorphic mapping, such Grassmannian is embedded
into the space of symmetric matrices, where a tractable objective function can be derived for sparse coding. Then, we
propose an efficient method to learn the system parameters of the dictionary atoms explicitly, by imposing the symmetric constraint to the transition matrices of the data and
dictionary systems. Moreover, we combine the state covariance into the algorithm formulation, thus further promoting the performance of the models with symmetric transition
matrices. Comparative experimental evaluations reveal the
superior performance of proposed methods on various tasks
including video classification and tactile recognition.

1. Introduction
Object recognition based on spatio-temporal data is an
active research area across several domains such as machine
learning [3, 18], computer vision [34, 16, 17] and robotics
[28]. The coupling of the spatial texture and the temporal
dynamics makes spatio-temporal data analysis more challenging than static data. A popular method of representing
spatio-temporal data is to model them by Linear Dynamical Systems (LDSs) [9]. To allow the comparison between
∗ This work is jointly supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61327809, 61210013, 91420302 and
91520201.

dynamical processes, a distance metric or kernel function
needs to be defined first. Once the distance or kernel has
been defined, classifiers such as Nearest Neighbors (NNs)
and Support Vector Machines (SVMs) can be used to recognize spatio-temporal sequences. For this purpose, various
kinds of distances or kernels have been proposed, such as
Martin Distance [34, 6], Kullback-Leibler divergence [5],
and Binet-Cauchy kernel [40]. Several recent studies have
been carried out to integrate learning techniques into LDSs;
for instance, Vidal et al. [39] proposed a LDS-based boosting method for time series modeling; and Ravichandran et
al. [33] designed bag-of-systems for video analysis.
Despite the wide applications of LDSs, little attention
has been paid to combining sparse coding with LDS modeling to deliver robust techniques. In the past decade, sparse
coding has been successfully adopted in various tasks such
as image restoration [30], face recognition [43], and texture
classification [31] to name a few. For sparse coding, natural
signals such as images are represented as a combination of
a few atoms in a dictionary that is usually over-complete.
Using sparsity as a prior leads to state-of-the-art results in
many fields [43]. In this paper, we generalize sparse coding
from Euclidean space to the space of LDSs. Specifically, we
attempt to reconstruct a given LDS by using a superposition
of LDS atoms, where the coefficients of the superposition
are enforced to be sparse. Both the codes and the dictionary
atoms are learned to minimize the coding objective function. Sparse coding with the LDS dictionary can then be
seamlessly used for categorizing spatio-temporal data.
However, the space of LDSs, which is non-Euclidean,
has a complicated manifold structure [1, 33]. Carrying out
sparse coding and dictionary learning on this kind of space
is challenging. Recent studies such as [37] proposed to embed LDSs into a finite-dimensional Grassmann manifold.
With this embedding, sparse coding and dictionary learning
with LDSs can then be performed on the finite Grassmannian [23, 21]. The first cornerstone of these models [23, 21]
is to represent each LDS with its finite observability sub-

3938

