Hedgehog Shape Priors for Multi-object Segmentation
Hossam Isack†
habdelka@csd.uwo.ca

Olga Veksler†

Milan Sonka‡

Yuri Boykov†

olga@csd.uwo.ca

milan-sonka@uiowa.edu

yuri@csd.uwo.ca

†Computer Science, University of Western Ontario, Canada
‡Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Iowa, USA

Abstract
Star-convexity prior is popular for interactive single object segmentation due to its simplicity and amenability to
binary graph cut optimization. We propose a more general
multi-object segmentation approach. Moreover, each object can be constrained by a more descriptive shape prior,
“hedgehog”. Each hedgehog shape has its surface normals locally constrained by an arbitrary given vector field,
e.g. gradient of the user-scribble distance transform. In
contrast to star-convexity, the tightness of our normal constraint can be changed giving better control over allowed
shapes. For example, looser constraints, i.e. wider cones
of allowed normals, give more relaxed hedgehog shapes.
On the other hand, the tightest constraint enforces skeleton consistency with the scribbles. In general, hedgehog
shapes are more descriptive than a star, which is only a special case corresponding to a radial vector field and weakest
tightness. Our approach has significantly more applications
than standard single star-convex segmentation, e.g. in medical data we can separate multiple non-star organs with similar appearances and weak edges. Optimization is done by
our modified α-expansion moves shown to be submodular
for multi-hedgehog shapes.

two examples of images with seeds (medical and photo)

multi-object segmentation using Potts model

multi-object segmentation adding our hedgehog shapes prior

1. Introduction
Distinct intensity appearances and smooth contrastaligned boundaries are standard segmentation cues. However, in most real applications of image segmentation there
are multiple objects of interest with similar or overlapping
color appearances. Intensity edges also could be cluttered
or weak. These common practical problems require additional regularization, see the second row in Fig.1.
Our paper proposes a simple and sufficiently general
shape regularization constraint that could be easily integrated into standard MRF methods for segmentation. Shape

Figure 1. Hedgehog shapes prior for multi-object segmentation.

priors have been successfully used in binary graph cut segmentation [15, 23, 11]. While our “hedgehog” shape prior
extends popular star-convexity constraint [23] in ways different from previous related methods [15, 11] and it has
its own merits, our main contribution is a multi-hedgehog
prior in the context of multi-object segmentation problems.
We observe that similarity between object appearances and
edge clutter are particularly problematic in larger multilabel segmentation problems, e.g. in medical imaging. Pre-

2434

