Blockout: Dynamic Model Selection for Hierarchical Deep Networks
Calvin Murdock
Carnegie Mellon University

Zhen Li, Howard Zhou, Tom Duerig
Google Research

cmurdock@cs.cmu.edu

{zhenli,howardzhou,tduerig}@google.com

Abstract
Most deep architectures for image classification–even
those that are trained to classify a large number of diverse
categories–learn shared image representations with a single model. Intuitively, however, categories that are more
similar should share more information than those that are
very different. While hierarchical deep networks address
this problem by learning separate features for subsets of
related categories, current implementations require simplified models using fixed architectures specified via heuristic clustering methods. Instead, we propose Blockout, a
method for regularization and model selection that simultaneously learns both the model architecture and parameters.
A generalization of Dropout, our approach gives a novel
parametrization of hierarchical architectures that allows
for structure learning via back-propagation. To demonstrate its utility, we evaluate Blockout on the CIFAR and ImageNet datasets, demonstrating improved classification accuracy, better regularization performance, faster training,
and the clear emergence of hierarchical network structures.

1. Introduction
Multi-class classification is an important problem in visual understanding with applications ranging from image
retrieval to robot navigation. Due to the vast space of variability, the seemingly simple task of identifying the subject of a photograph is extremely difficult. While once restricted to small label sets and constrained image domains,
recent advances in deep neural networks have allowed image recognition to be applied to real-world collections of
photographs. Effective image classification with thousands
of labels and datasets with millions of images are now commonplace. However, as classification tasks become more
involved, larger networks with more capacity are required,
emphasizing the importance of careful model selection.
While much manual engineering effort has been dedicated
to the task of designing deep architectures that are able to effectively generalize from available training data, model selection is typically performed using subjective heuristics by
experienced practitioners. Furthermore, an appropriate ar-

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Example deep network architectures for multi-class
classification that can be learned using Blockout. Input and output
nodes are shown in green, groups of layers are shown in blue, and
arrows indicate connections between them. (a) Traditional architectures make use of a combined model that computes a single feature vector for predicting a large number of diverse categories. (b)
Hierarchical architectures instead partition the output categories
into clusters and learn separate, high-level feature vectors for each
of them. (c) Unlike previous approaches, Blockout allows for endto-end learning of more complex hierarchical architectures.

chitecture is closely tied to the dataset on which it is trained,
so this work often must be repeated for each new application. Ideally, model selection should be performed automatically, allowing the architecture to adapt to training data. As
a step towards this goal, we propose an automated, end-toend system for model selection within the class of hierarchical deep networks, which have demonstrated excellent
performance on large-scale image classification tasks.
Deep neural networks are known to be organized such
that specificity increases with depth [15, 29]. Lower layers
tend to represent general, low-level image features like lines
and edges while higher layers encode higher-level concepts
like object parts or even objects themselves [4]. Most classification architectures make use of a single shared model
with a flat logistic loss layer. Intuitively, however, categories that are more similar should share more information
than those that are very different.
One solution is to train independent fine-grained models
for these subsets of related labels. This results in specialized features that are tuned to differentiating between subtle visual differences between similar categories. However,
this is often infeasible due to limited training examples. On
the other hand, a combined model for classifying many categories is able to use information common to all training
images to learn shared, low-level representations.

2583

