Large-Scale Semantic 3D Reconstruction: an Adaptive
Multi-Resolution Model for Multi-Class Volumetric Labeling
Maroš Bláha†,1
1

ETH Zurich

Christoph Vogel†,1,2 Audrey Richard1 Jan D. Wegner1
Thomas Pock2,3 Konrad Schindler1
2
3
Graz University of Technology
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology

Abstract
We propose an adaptive multi-resolution formulation of semantic 3D reconstruction. Given a set of images of a scene,
semantic 3D reconstruction aims to densely reconstruct
both the 3D shape of the scene and a segmentation into
semantic object classes. Jointly reasoning about shape and
class allows one to take into account class-specific shape
priors (e.g., building walls should be smooth and vertical,
and vice versa smooth, vertical surfaces are likely to be
building walls), leading to improved reconstruction results.
So far, semantic 3D reconstruction methods have been
limited to small scenes and low resolution, because of their
large memory footprint and computational cost. To scale
them up to large scenes, we propose a hierarchical scheme
which refines the reconstruction only in regions that are
likely to contain a surface, exploiting the fact that both high
spatial resolution and high numerical precision are only
required in those regions. Our scheme amounts to solving
a sequence of convex optimizations while progressively
removing constraints, in such a way that the energy, in
each iteration, is the tightest possible approximation of the
underlying energy at full resolution. In our experiments the
method saves up to 98% memory and 95% computation
time, without any loss of accuracy.

1. Introduction
Geometric 3D reconstruction and semantic interpretation
of the observed scene are two central themes of computer
vision. It is rather obvious that the two problems are not
independent: geometric shape is a powerful cue for semantic interpretation and vice versa. As an example, consider
a simple concrete building wall: the observation that it is
vertical rather than horizontal distinguishes it from a road
of similar appearance; on the other hand the fact that it is a
wall and not a tree crown tells us that it should be flat and
vertical. More generally speaking, jointly addressing 3D re† shared first authorship

Figure 1: Semantic 3D model of the city of Enschede generated with the proposed adaptive multi-resolution approach.
construction and semantic understanding can be expected to
deliver at the same time better 3D geometry, via categoryspecific priors for surface shape, orientation and layout; and
better segmentation into semantic object classes, aided by
the underlying 3D shape and layout. Jointly inferring 3D
geometry and semantics is a hard problem, and has only
recently been tackled in a principled manner [17, 25, 36].
These works have shown promising results, but have high
demands on computational resources, which limits their application to small volumes and/or a small number of images
with limited resolution.
We propose a method for joint 3D reconstruction and semantic labeling, which scales to much larger regions and
image sets. Our target application is the generation of interpreted 3D city models from terrestrial and aerial images, i.e.
we are faced with scenes that contain hundreds of buildings.
Such models are needed for a wide range of tasks in planning, construction, navigation, etc. However, to this day
they are generated interactively, which is slow and costly.
The core idea of our method is to reconstruct the scene
with variable volumetric resolution. We exploit the fact that
the observed surface constitutes only a 2D manifold in 3D
space. Large regions of most scenes need not be modeled at

3176

