Soft-Segmentation Guided Object Motion Deblurring
Jinshan Pan1,2 , Zhe Hu2 , Zhixun Su1,3 , Hsin-Ying Lee4 , and Ming-Hsuan Yang2
1
Dalian University of Technology 2 University of California, Merced
3
National Engineering Research Center of Digital Life 4 University of Southern California
http://vllab.ucmerced.edu/˜jinshan/projects/object-deblur/

Abstract
Object motion blur is a challenging problem as the foreground and the background in the scenes undergo different
types of image degradation due to movements in various directions and speed. Most object motion deblurring methods
address this problem by segmenting blurred images into regions where different kernels are estimated and applied for
restoration. Segmentation on blurred images is difficult due
to ambiguous pixels between regions, but it plays an important role for object motion deblurring. To address these
problems, we propose a novel model for object motion deblurring. The proposed model is developed based on a maximum a posterior formulation in which soft-segmentation is
incorporated for object layer estimation. We propose an
efficient algorithm to jointly estimate object segmentation
and camera motion where each layer can be deblurred well
under the guidance of the soft-segmentation. Experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm performs
favorably against the state-of-the-art object motion deblurring methods on challenging scenarios.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant advances in deblurring [19, 23, 25]. Numerous methods [5, 10, 24, 38, 42,
47, 48, 50] have been proposed to address this problem, but
most of them are designed for camera motion blur. Considerably fewer methods have been proposed to remove image
blur caused by moving objects, panning cameras, or both.
Object motion blur is caused by relative motion between
a camera and objects, which usually results in different blur
effects on moving objects and the background (See Figure 1(a)). Uniform deblurring methods (e.g., [5, 47]) cannot be effectively applied to this problem directly as objects in the scene undergo different motion blurs. Although
non-uniform deblurring methods (e.g., [46, 48]) consider
different blur effects across an image that are caused by
camera rotations and translations, they are less effective for
abrupt blur changes caused by fast moving objects or panning cameras. Several methods [3, 8, 26, 41, 44] have been
proposed to solve the object motion deblurring problem by

(a) Blurred image

(b) Xu and Jia [47]

(c) Kim et al. [21]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Object motion blur caused by a panning camera.

directly segmenting a blurred image into different regions
and deblurring each segmented region. However, it is difficult to identify correct contours of moving objects from a
blurred image. The recent method [21] adopts a novel nonlocal regularization on the residual of estimated results and
blurred image to handle object segmentation for dynamic
scene deblurring. However, it may not segment the objects
undergoing large blurs and affect the deblurred results (See
Figure 1(c)). Although segmentation plays a critical role
in object motion deblurring, existing methods directly consider it as a pre-processing step and its role in object motion
deblurring can be better explored.
In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm for object
motion deblurring in which both segmentation as well as
deblurring are considered and optimized within one framework. The object layer estimation is achieved by a softsegmentation method, and the relationship between the softsegmentation and deblurring is naturally explored and modeled in a maximum a posterior (MAP) framework. Furthermore, we develop an efficient numerical algorithm to solve
the problem. The deblurring component benefits from improving soft-segmentation of the scene, which enables the

1459

