Recursive Recurrent Nets with Attention Modeling for OCR in the Wild
Chen-Yu Lee†
UC San Diego

Simon Osindero
Flickr / Yahoo Inc.

chl260@ucsd.edu

osindero@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract
We present recursive recurrent neural networks with attention modeling (R2 AM) for lexicon-free optical character
recognition in natural scene images. The primary advantages of the proposed method are: (1) use of recursive convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which allow for parametrically efficient and effective image feature extraction;
(2) an implicitly learned character-level language model,
embodied in a recurrent neural network which avoids the
need to use N-grams; and (3) the use of a soft-attention
mechanism, allowing the model to selectively exploit image
features in a coordinated way, and allowing for end-to-end
training within a standard backpropagation framework.
We validate our method with state-of-the-art performance on challenging benchmark datasets: Street View
Text, IIIT5k, ICDAR and Synth90k.

1. Introduction
Photo Optical Character Recognition (photo OCR),
which aims to read scene text in natural images, is an essential step for a wide variety of computer vision tasks, and has
enjoyed significant success in several commercial applications. These include street-sign reading for automatic navigation systems, assistive technologies for the blind (such as
product-label reading), real-time text recognition and translation on mobile phones, and search/indexing the vast corpus of image and video on the web.
The field of photo OCR has been primarily focused on
constrained scenarios with hand-engineered image features.
(Here, constrained means that there is a fixed lexicon or
dictionary and words have known length during inference.).
Specifically, examples of constrained text recognition methods include region-based binarization or grouping [5, 24,
33], pictorial structures with HOG features [47, 46], integer
programming with SIFT descriptor [41], Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) with HOG features [32, 31, 39], Markov
models with binary and connected component features [49].
Some early attempts [26, 53, 10] try to learn local mid-level
† Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.

This work is supported by Flickr Vision and Machine Learning Team.

representation on top of the hand-crafted features, and some
methods in [48, 19, 16] incorporate deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [25, 13] for a better image feature extraction. These methods work very well when candidate
ground-truth word strings are known at testing stage, but do
not generalize to words that are not present in the list of a
lexicon at all.
A recent advance in the state-of-the-art that moves beyond this constrained setting was presented by Jaderberg et
al. in [17]. The authors report results in the unconstrained
setting by constructing two sets of CNNs – one for modeling character sequences and one for N-gram language statistics – followed by a CRF graphical model to combine their
activations. This method achieved great success and set a
new standard in photo OCR field. However, despite these
successes, the system in [17] does have some drawbacks.
For instance, the use of two different CNNs incurs a relatively large memory and computation cost. Furthermore,
the manually defined N-gram CNN model has a large number of output nodes (10k output units for N = 4), which
increases the training complexity – requiring an incremental training procedure and heuristic gradient rescaling based
on N-gram frequencies.
Inspired by [17], we continue to focus our efforts on the
unconstrained scene text recognition task, and we develop a
recursive recurrent neural networks with attention modeling
(R2 AM) system that directly performs image to sequence
(word strings) learning, delivering improvements over their
work. The three main contributions of the work presented
in this paper are:
(1) Recursive CNNs with weight-sharing, for more effective
image feature extraction than a “vanilla” CNN under the
same parametric capacity.
(2) Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) atop of extracted
image features from the aforementioned recursive CNNs,
to perform implicit learning of character-level language
model. RNNs can automatically learn the sequential dynamics of characters that are naturally present in word
strings from the training data without the need of manually
defining N-grams from a dictionary.
(3) A sequential attention-based modeling mechanism that
12231

