Learning Dense Correspondence via 3D-guided Cycle Consistency
Tinghui Zhou
UC Berkeley

Philipp Krähenbühl
UC Berkeley

Mathieu Aubry
ENPC ParisTech

Abstract

Qixing Huang
TTI-Chicago
Fr1 ,r2

real r1

Discriminative deep learning approaches have shown
impressive results for problems where human-labeled
ground truth is plentiful, but what about tasks where labels
are difficult or impossible to obtain? This paper tackles one
such problem: establishing dense visual correspondence
across different object instances. For this task, although we
do not know what the ground-truth is, we know it should be
consistent across instances of that category. We exploit this
consistency as a supervisory signal to train a convolutional
neural network to predict cross-instance correspondences
between pairs of images depicting objects of the same category. For each pair of training images we find an appropriate 3D CAD model and render two synthetic views to
link in with the pair, establishing a correspondence flow
4-cycle. We use ground-truth synthetic-to-synthetic correspondences, provided by the rendering engine, to train a
ConvNet to predict synthetic-to-real, real-to-real and realto-synthetic correspondences that are cycle-consistent with
the ground-truth. At test time, no CAD models are required. We demonstrate that our end-to-end trained ConvNet supervised by cycle-consistency outperforms stateof-the-art pairwise matching methods in correspondencerelated tasks.

1. Introduction
Consistency is all I ask!
T OM S TOPPARD

In the past couple of years, deep learning has swept
though computer vision like wildfire. One needs only to
buy a GPU, arm oneself with enough training data, and turn
the crank to see head-spinning improvements on most computer vision benchmarks. So it is all the more curious to
consider tasks for which deep learning has not made much
inroad, typically due to the lack of easily obtainable training data. One such task is dense visual correspondence –
the problem of estimating a pixel-wise correspondence field
between images depicting visually similar objects or scenes.
Not only is this a key ingredient for optical flow and stereo

Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

real r2

Fs1 ,r1

Fr2 ,s2

synthetic s1

F̃s1 ,s2

synthetic s2

TRAINING TIME
Figure 1. Estimating a dense correspondence flow field Fr1 ,r2 between two images r1 and r2 — essentially, where do pixels of
r1 need to go to bring them into correspondence with r2 — is
very difficult. There is a large viewpoint change and the physical differences between the cars are substantial. We propose to
learn to do this task by training a ConvNet using the concept of
cycle consistency in lieu of ground truth. At training time, we find
an appropriate 3D CAD model and establish a correspondence 4cycle, training to minimize the discrepancy between F̃s1,s2 and
Fs1,r1 ◦Fr1,r2 ◦Fr2,s2 , where F̃s1,s2 is known by construction. At
test time, no CAD models are used.

matching, but many other computer vision tasks, including
recognition, segmentation, depth estimation, etc. could be
posed as finding correspondences in a large visual database
followed by label transfer.
In cases where the images depict the same physical
object/scene across varying viewpoints, such as in stereo
matching, there is exciting new work that aims to use the
commonality of the scene structure as supervision to learn
deep features for correspondence [2, 12, 20, 15, 39]. But
for computing correspondence across different object/scene
instances, no learning method to date has managed to seriously challenge SIFT flow [26], the dominant approach for
this task.
How can we get supervision for dense correspondence
between images depicting different object instances, such
as images r1 and r2 in Figure 1? Our strategy in this paper
is to learn the things we don’t know by linking them up to
the things we do know. In particular, at training time, we
use a large dataset of 3D CAD models [1] to find one that
1117

