Joint Multiview Segmentation and Localization of RGB-D Images using
Depth-Induced Silhouette Consistency
Chi Zhang1,3∗ Zhiwei Li2

Rui Cai2

Hongyang Chao1,3

Yong Rui2

1

3

2
Sun Yat-Sen University
Microsoft Research
SYSU-CMU Shunde International Joint Research Institute, P.R. China

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an RGB-D camera localization
approach which takes an effective geometry constraint, i.e.
silhouette consistency, into consideration. Unlike existing
approaches which usually assume the silhouettes are provided, we consider more practical scenarios and generate
the silhouettes for multiple views on the fly. To obtain a set
of accurate silhouettes, precise camera poses are required
to propagate segmentation cues across views. To perform
better localization, accurate silhouettes are needed to constrain camera poses. Therefore the two problems are intertwined with each other and require a joint treatment. Facilitated by the available depth, we introduce a simple but
effective silhouette consistency energy term that binds traditional appearance-based multiview segmentation cost and
RGB-D frame-to-frame matching cost together. Optimization of the problem w.r.t. binary segmentation masks and
camera poses naturally fits in the graph cut minimization
framework and the Gauss-Newton non-linear least-squares
method respectively. Experiments show that the proposed
approach achieves state-of-the-arts performance on both
tasks of image segmentation and camera localization.

1. Introduction
Object scanning in 3D is an important topic in computer vision with many applications. With the popularity
of consumer-level depth cameras, even untrained users are
able to scan objects at home. However, obtaining accurate
camera poses is a major challenge for existing scanning systems. Typical RGB-D camera tracking systems leverage
on either frame-to-frame matching [14] or frame-to-model
matching [19] to localize cameras. In both cases drift is
a common problem. For frame-to model tracking system
such as KinectFusion [19] where online depth images are
constantly integrated into a truncated signed distance function (TSDF) based volumetric representation [6], even small
∗ The author was partially supported by the NSF of China under Grant
61173081, and the Guangzhou Science and Technology Program, China,
under Grant 201510010165.

errors of camera poses will make the TSDF model blurry
and consequently fine details are lost.
Loop closure detection and pose graph optimization are
effective tools to address the above problem. Additional
features, such as colors [14], local features [23], and occluding contours [28] have been considered in literature.
However, another important type of constraints, i.e. geometric constraints, is overlooked by these approaches. Examples of the geometric constraints include epipolar tangency criterion [26] and silhouette consistency [12], which
has been proved to be very helpful in camera calibration. In
this work, we propose a method to incorporate geometric
constraints in camera localization. Specifically, we jointly
optimize the set of silhouettes and the camera poses, requiring that the silhouettes and the camera poses are consistent.
Existing related approaches [12, 2, 26] usually assume
that a set of accurate silhouettes are provided. However
in practice segmenting object in all viewpoints requires tedious user interactions. On the other hand, automatic multiview segmentation methods may fail in general cases, or
the outputted silhouettes are not accurate enough to provide
useful constraints for localization. To cope with this issue,
our proposed method jointly perform a silhouette-consistent
multiview segmentation on the fly while optimizing camera
localization.
In multiview segmentation, accurate camera poses are
required to propagate segmentation cues across views. In
localization, accurate and silhouettes are needed to provide
useful constraints to camera poses. Therefore the two problems are intertwined with each other and a joint treatment
is preferred. Although both multiview segmentation and
RGB-D camera localization have been intensively studied
in literature, few approaches have modeled the two problems jointly.
To this aim, we describe an RGB-D object scanning
pipeline consisting of two steps, i.e. an online keyframe
collecting step and an offline joint optimization step. At
the online step, a user walks around an object with a depth
camera in hand. Meanwhile a realtime tracker, e.g. KinectFusion [19], evenly captures a set of keyframes covering the
object. At the offline step, the proposed approach is adopted

4031

