Compact Bilinear Pooling
Yang Gao1 , Oscar Beijbom1 , Ning Zhang2∗, Trevor Darrell1 †
1
2
EECS, UC Berkeley
Snapchat Inc.
{yg, obeijbom, trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu

{ning.zhang}@snapchat.com

sketch 1

Abstract
Bilinear models has been shown to achieve impressive
performance on a wide range of visual tasks, such as semantic segmentation, fine grained recognition and face
recognition. However, bilinear features are high dimensional, typically on the order of hundreds of thousands to a
few million, which makes them impractical for subsequent
analysis. We propose two compact bilinear representations
with the same discriminative power as the full bilinear representation but with only a few thousand dimensions. Our
compact representations allow back-propagation of classification errors enabling an end-to-end optimization of the
visual recognition system. The compact bilinear representations are derived through a novel kernelized analysis of
bilinear pooling which provide insights into the discriminative power of bilinear pooling, and a platform for further
research in compact pooling methods. Experimentation illustrate the utility of the proposed representations for image
classification and few-shot learning across several datasets.

1. Introduction
Encoding and pooling of visual features is an integral
part of semantic image analysis methods. Before the influential 2012 paper of Krizhevsky et al. [17] rediscovering
the models pioneered by [19] and related efforts, such methods typically involved a series of independent steps: feature
extraction, encoding, pooling and classification; each thoroughly investigated in numerous publications as the bag of
visual words (BoVW) framework. Notable contributions include HOG [9], and SIFT [24] descriptors, fisher encoding [26], bilinear pooling [3] and spatial pyramids [18],
each significantly improving the recognition accuracy.
Recent results have showed that end-to-end backpropagation of gradients in a convolutional neural network
∗ This work was done when Ning Zhang was in Berkeley.
† Prof. Darrell was supported in part by DARPA; AFRL; DoD MURI
award N000141110688; NSF awards IIS-1212798, IIS-1427425, and IIS1536003, and the Berkeley Vision and Learning Center.

activation
sketch 2

*

compact feature

sum-pooled
compact feature

Figure 1: We propose a compact bilinear pooling method
for image classification. Our pooling method is learned
through end-to-end back-propagation and enables a lowdimensional but highly discriminative image representation.
Top pipeline shows the Tensor Sketch projection applied to
the activation at a single spatial location, with ∗ denoting
circular convolution. Bottom pipeline shows how to obtain
a global compact descriptor by sum pooling.

(CNN) enables joint optimization of the whole pipeline, resulting in significantly higher recognition accuracy. While
the distinction of the steps is less clear in a CNN than in a
BoVW pipeline, one can view the first several convolutional
layers as a feature extractor and the later fully connected
layers as a pooling and encoding mechanism. This has been
explored recently in methods combining the feature extraction architecture of the CNN paradigm, with the pooling &
encoding steps from the BoVW paradigm [23, 8]. Notably,
Lin et al. recently replaced the fully connected layers with
bilinear pooling achieving remarkable improvements for
fine-grained visual recognition [23]. However, their final
representation is very high-dimensional; in their paper the
encoded feature dimension, d, is more than 250, 000. Such
representation is impractical for several reasons: (1) if used
with a standard one-vs-rest linear classifier for k classes,
the number of model parameters becomes kd, which for
e.g. k = 1000 means > 250 million model parameters, (2)
for retrieval or deployment scenarios which require features
to be stored in a database, the storage becomes expensive;
storing a millions samples requires 2TB of storage at dou1317

