Kernel Approximation via Empirical Orthogonal Decomposition
for Unsupervised Feature Learning
Yusuke Mukuta
The University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan

Tatsuya Harada
The University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan

mukuta@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

harada@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Kernel approximation methods are important tools for
various machine learning problems. There are two major methods used to approximate the kernel function: the
Nyström method and the random features method. However,
the Nyström method requires relatively high-complexity
post-processing to calculate a solution and the random features method does not provide sufficient generalization performance. In this paper, we propose a method that has good
generalization performance without high-complexity postprocessing via empirical orthogonal decomposition using
the probability distribution estimated from training data.
We provide a bound for the approximation error of the proposed method. Our experiments show that the proposed
method is better than the random features method and comparable with the Nyström method in terms of the approximation error and classification accuracy. We also show that
hierarchical feature extraction using our kernel approximation demonstrates better performance than the existing
methods.

1. Introduction
Analyzing data with nonlinearity is one of the main tasks
in machine learning. The kernel method maps input data
into a high-dimensional feature space and computes the
similarity in the feature space without computing the coordinates of data in that space. The computational complexity of the kernel method is determined by the size of
data, regardless of the dimension of the feature space. The
kernel method is applied to the classifiers and dimensionality reduction techniques, such as the kernel support vector machine (SVM) [6], kernel principal component analysis (PCA) [23], and kernel canonical correlation analysis
(CCA) [12]. However, the complexity of kernel methods
grows quadratically or cubically with the amount of the
training data, which makes it difficult to scale directly for

large-scale datasets. A method that approximates the kernel function using the inner product of the nonlinear feature
functions, which map data into a relatively low-dimensional
feature space, is useful because it is compatible with fast
linear classifiers.
There are two major methods for approximating the kernel function: the Nyström method [8, 25] and the random
features method [20]. The Nyström method generates lowrank approximations of the Gram matrix calculated from
training data. For the random features method, the kernel
function is expressed as the expectation value of the inner product of feature functions, which are randomly sampled from a proper probability distribution. However, the
Nyström method requires the calculation of a D × D inverse matrix at the learning phase, where D is the feature
dimension, and requires O(D2 ) post-processing at the classifying phase. Hence, we cannot use a high-dimensional
feature when using the Nyström method. To derive greater
generalization ability, the random features method requires
the feature to have the same number of dimensions as the
number of training data, making it difficult to take advantage of the approximation.
In this paper, we propose a method to closely approximate the kernel function via empirical orthogonal decomposition without post-processing for the features. In the proposed method, the kernel function is decomposed using the
probability distribution estimated from training data, which
enables it to have a high approximation ability. As the
proposed method directly approximates the kernel function,
post-processing for the features becomes unnecessary. We
show that the spectral norm of the approximation error of
the Gram matrix is bounded using eigenvalues and the distance between the true and approximate distributions. We
also present the calculation method of the proposed kernel
approximation using the Gaussian kernel.
Kernel approximations are also used to construct a hierarchical image feature by iteratively building kernels between image patches [2, 3, 4, 5, 17]. We combine our
approximation method with convolutional kernel networks

5222

