Needle-Match: Reliable Patch Matching under High Uncertainty
Or Lotan
Michal Irani
Dept. of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics
The Weizmann Institute of Science, ISRAEL

Abstract
Reliable patch-matching forms the basis for many algorithms (super-resolution, denoising, inpainting, etc.) However, when the image quality deteriorates (by noise, blur
or geometric distortions), the reliability of patch-matching
deteriorates as well. Matched patches in the degraded image, do not necessarily imply similarity of the underlying
patches in the (unknown) high-quality image. This restricts
the applicability of patch-based methods. In this paper we
present a patch representation called “Needle”, which consists of small multi-scale versions of the patch and its immediate surrounding region. While the patch at the finest image scale is severely degraded, the degradation decreases
dramatically in coarser needle scales, revealing reliable
information for matching. We show that the Needle is robust to many types of image degradations, leads to matches
faithful to the underlying high-quality patches, and to improvement in existing patch-based methods.

1. Introduction
Finding similar patches is a fundamental component in
many computer vision algorithms. These include super
resolution [12, 14], texture synthesis [11], image completion [16], image retargetting [5, 26], and many more. However, when the image quality undergoes degradation (noise,
blur, geometric deformations, etc.), the reliability of patchmatching decreases dramatically. Finding two “similar”
patches p̃ ≈ q̃ in the degraded image, may no longer imply that their underlying (hidden) clean patches p and q are
similar. This however, is the very basic assumption in most
patch-based methods. For example, unconstrained matching of noisy patches (globally in the noisy image, or in a
database of clean images), was shown to suffer from severe
overfit of the noise [25, 34]. Similarly, severe motion blur or
geometric distortions harm the ability to find good matches
(correspondences) across frames, hence optical flow estimation algorithms tend to fail under such degradations.
Partial solutions have been proposed for this problem,
which offer only a limited remedy. For example, denoising algorithms [4, 7] typically restrict the search space to a
Funded in part by the Israel Science Foundation (Grant 931/14).

small image region around each patch, or use larger patches
which are less prone to noise-overfit. This, however, restricts the ability to recover fine textures. Patch matching
under severe blur was addressed in [3], by pre-processing
the image patches to a normalized frequency range. It addresses only isotropic blur, and does not generalize to other
blur types (motion blur, non-parametric blur).
This paper presents a general framework for reliable
patch matching under severe image degradations. The
“Needle”, a new patch descriptor, comprises of small
patches obtained from multiple image scales, at the same
relative image coordinates (Fig. 1a). While the patch at
the finest image scale is severely degraded, hence cannot
be reliably matched, the degradation decreases dramatically
in coarser Needle scales, revealing reliable information for
matching (Fig. 1(c,d,e)). We show that if N eedle(p̃) ≈
N eedle(q̃) for two distorted patches p̃ and q̃, then with high
likelihood p ≈ q (the hidden high-quality patches).
Our paper has two main contributions: (i) A new patch
descriptor which is resilient to many types of image degradations, (ii) Using NeedleMatch in patch-based algorithms
(e.g., denoising, correspondence-estimation) leads to a substantial improvement under severe image degradations.
The term “Needle” was coined in [35], but for a different purpose. Each noisy patch was matched against coarser
patches inside its own needle, looking for its cleanest version among its own needle patches. In contrast, we employ
the Needle as a ‘descriptor’, which is matched against other
needle-descriptors, to find good matches elsewhere in the
image (or in other images). Contrary to [35], we do not rely
on cross-scale recurrence of patches; our coarser-scale needle patches need not resemble the fine-scale patch (Fig. 1b).
Our Needle is different than other image descriptors
(e.g., SURF, SIFT, Geometric-Blur), as its aim is to represent well the unknown high-quality patch signal hidden under severe degradation. A dense multiscale descriptor was
also developed by [15], based on SIFT computed at multiple
scales. Their aim was different – scale-invariant matching.
Being a gradient-based descriptor, their decriptor is likely
to fail in the presence of severe image degradation.
Incorporating information from multiple scales is commonly used in coarse-to-fine algorithms (optical flow [20],
stereo [24, 33], etc.) However, these methods use multiscale

439

