Split and Match: Example-based Adaptive Patch Sampling for Unsupervised
Style Transfer
Oriel Frigo1,2
1

Neus Sabater1

Julie Delon2
2

Technicolor, Research&Innovation, France

Abstract
This paper presents a novel unsupervised method to
transfer the style of an example image to a source image.
The complex notion of image style is here considered as a
local texture transfer, eventually coupled with a global color
transfer. For the local texture transfer, we propose a new
method based on an adaptive patch partition that captures
the style of the example image and preserves the structure of
the source image. More precisely, this example-based partition predicts how well a source patch matches an example
patch. Results on various images show that our method outperforms the most recent techniques.

Université Paris Descartes, MAP5, France

style transfer. In this case, we are given as example an image containing a mixture of style and content. Hence, patch
dimensions should be large enough to represent the patterns
that characterize the example style, while small enough to
forbid the synthesis of content structures present in the example image. We propose a style transfer method that is
able to meet these requirements by means of an adaptive
patch partition.
Fig. 1 illustrates our method. This paper makes the following contributions:
• We suggest that a correct style transfer can be thought
as a local transfer of texture and a global transfer of
color. A robust method for local texture transfer must
capture the style while preserving the image structure,
and this can be achieved with a spatially adaptive image partition.

1. Introduction
Style transfer is the task of transforming an image in
such a way that it mimics the style of a given example.
This class of computational methods are of special interest in film post-production and graphics, where one could
generate different renditions of the same scene under different “style parameters” [17] [6]. The difficulty of this task
is bound to the complexity of defining the style as a composition of different visual attributes such as color, shading,
texture, lines, strokes and regions.
Example-based methods have been widely employed to
solve problems such as texture synthesis [7], inpainting [5],
and super-resolution [10] with state-of-the-art performance.
These non-local and non-parametric approaches draw on
the principle of self-similarity in natural images: similar
patches (sub-images) are expected to be found at different
locations of a single image.
Despite the practical success of patch-based methods for
inverse problems, the patch dimensionality remains a sensitive parameter to tune in these algorithms. For instance,
to obtain a coherent patch-based texture synthesis, patches
should have approximately the same dimensionality of the
dominant pattern in the example texture. The problem of
patch dimensionality is equally crucial for example-based

Pierre Hellier1

• We show that a relevant partition must incorporate a
prediction of how well an image portion of the source
image will be matched to the example style image.
That naturally leads to an example-based partition,
where the partition is bound to the coupling between
the source image and the example image.

2. Related Work
Style transfer can be related to texture [7] and color
transfer [20, 12]. Texture transfer can be seen as a special
case of texture synthesis, where example-based texture generation is constrained by the geometry of an original image.
Style transfer, for this part, can be seen as a composition of
texture and color transfer, where style is transferred from an
example to an original image, being modeled as a combination of texture and color. Recent methods modeling style
transfer in a color context include [23], where the style of
head shots is mimicked through local image statistics and
[24] where the daytime of an image is transformed relying
on examples. In this work, we approach style mainly from
the textural rather than the color aspect.
Texture synthesis by non-parametric sampling is inspired
by the Markov model of natural language [22], where text
1553

