TGIF: A New Dataset and Benchmark on Animated GIF Description
Yuncheng Li
University of Rochester
Larry Goldberg
Yahoo Research

Yale Song
Yahoo Research

Liangliang Cao
Yahoo Research

Alejandro Jaimes
AiCure

Abstract
With the recent popularity of animated GIFs on social
media, there is need for ways to index them with rich metadata. To advance research on animated GIF understanding,
we collected a new dataset, Tumblr GIF (TGIF), with 100K
animated GIFs from Tumblr and 120K natural language descriptions obtained via crowdsourcing. The motivation for
this work is to develop a testbed for image sequence description systems, where the task is to generate natural language descriptions for animated GIFs or video clips. To ensure a high quality dataset, we developed a series of novel
quality controls to validate free-form text input from crowdworkers. We show that there is unambiguous association
between visual content and natural language descriptions
in our dataset, making it an ideal benchmark for the visual
content captioning task. We perform extensive statistical
analyses to compare our dataset to existing image and video
description datasets. Next, we provide baseline results on
the animated GIF description task, using three representative techniques: nearest neighbor, statistical machine translation, and recurrent neural networks. Finally, we show
that models fine-tuned from our animated GIF description
dataset can be helpful for automatic movie description.

1. Introduction
Animated GIFs have quickly risen in popularity over the
last few years as they add color to online and mobile communication. Different from other forms of media, GIFs are
unique in that they are spontaneous (very short in duration),
have a visual storytelling nature (no audio involved), and
are primarily generated and shared by online users [3]. Despite its rising popularity and unique visual characteristics,
there is a surprising dearth of scholarly work on animated
GIFs in the computer vision community.
In an attempt to better understand and organize the growing number of animated GIFs on social media, we constructed an animated GIF description dataset which consists
of user-generated animated GIFs and crowdsourced natural

Joel Tetreault
Yahoo Research

Jiebo Luo
University of Rochester

Online
Users

GIF Generation

Crowd
Workers

GIF Cleaning

Natural
Language
Descriptions

Language Validation

Figure 1: Our TGIF dataset contains 100K animated GIFs and
120K natural language descriptions. (a) Online users create GIFs
that convey short and cohesive visual stories, providing us with
well-segmented video data. (b) We crawl and filter high quality
animated GIFs, and (c) crowdsource natural language descriptions
ensuring strong visual/textual association.

language descriptions. There are two major challenges to
this work: (1) We need a large scale dataset that captures a
wide variety of interests from online users who produce animated GIFs; (2) We need automatic validation methods
that ensure high quality data collection at scale, in order
to deal with noisy user-generated content and annotations.
While it is difficult to address these two challenges at once,
there has been great progress in recent years in collecting
large scale datasets in computer vision [33, 20, 34, 31]. Our
work contributes to this line of research by collecting a new
large scale dataset for animated GIF description, and by presenting automatic validation methods that ensure high quality visual content and crowdsourced annotations.
Our dataset, Tumblr GIF (TGIF), contains 100K animated GIFs collected from Tumblr, and 120K natural language sentences annotated via crowdsourcing. We developed extensive quality control and automatic validation
methods for collecting our dataset, ensuring strong and unambiguous association between GIF and sentence. In addition, we carefully evaluate popular approaches for video
description and report several findings that suggest future
research directions. It is our goal that our dataset and baseline results will serve as useful resources for future video
description and animated GIF research.1
Our work is in part motivated by the recent work on im1 We use video description, image sequence description, and animated
GIF description interchangeably, as they all contain sequences of images.

14641

