Yin and Yang: Balancing and Answering Binary Visual Questions
Peng Zhang∗†
†

Yash Goyal∗† Douglas Summers-Stay‡ Dhruv Batra†
†
Virginia Tech ‡ Army Research Laboratory
‡

{zhangp, ygoyal, dbatra, parikh}@vt.edu

Devi Parikh†

douglas.a.summers-stay.civ@mail.mil

Abstract
The complex compositional structure of language makes
problems at the intersection of vision and language challenging. But language also provides a strong prior that can
result in good superficial performance, without the underlying models truly understanding the visual content. This
can hinder progress in pushing state of art in the computer
vision aspects of multi-modal AI.
In this paper, we address binary Visual Question Answering (VQA) on abstract scenes. We formulate this problem
as visual verification of concepts inquired in the questions.
Specifically, we convert the question to a tuple that concisely summarizes the visual concept to be detected in the
image. If the concept can be found in the image, the answer to the question is “yes”, and otherwise “no”. Abstract
scenes play two roles (1) They allow us to focus on the highlevel semantics of the VQA task as opposed to the low-level
recognition problems, and perhaps more importantly, (2)
They provide us the modality to balance the dataset such
that language priors are controlled, and the role of vision
is essential. In particular, we collect fine-grained pairs of
scenes for every question, such that the answer to the question is “yes” for one scene, and “no” for the other for the
exact same question. Indeed, language priors alone do not
perform better than chance on our balanced dataset. Moreover, our proposed approach matches the performance of a
state-of-the-art VQA approach on the unbalanced dataset,
and outperforms it on the balanced dataset.

1. Introduction
Problems at the intersection of vision and language are increasingly drawing more attention. We are witnessing a
move beyond the classical “bucketed” recognition paradigm
(e.g. label every image with categories) to rich compositional tasks involving natural language. Some of these
problems concerning vision and language have proven surprisingly easy to take on with relatively simple techniques.
Consider image captioning, which involves generating a
∗ The first two authors contributed equally.

Figure 1: We address the problem of answering binary
questions about images. To eliminate strong language priors that shadow the role of detailed visual understanding in
visual question answering (VQA), we use abstract scenes to
collect a balanced dataset containing pairs of complementary scenes: the two scenes have opposite answers to the
same question, while being visually as similar as possible.
We view the task of answering binary questions as a visual
verification task: we convert the question into a tuple that
concisely summarizes the visual concept, which if present,
result in the answer of the question being “yes”, and otherwise “no”. Our approach attends to relevant portions of the
image when verifying the presence of the visual concept.
sentence describing a given image [12, 6, 10, 26, 21, 19, 35].
It is possible to get state of the art results with a relatively
coarse understanding of the image by exploiting the statistical biases (inherent in the world and in particular datasets)
that are captured in standard language models.
For example, giraffes are usually found in grass next to a
tree in the MS COCO dataset images [22]. Because of this,
the generic caption “A giraffe is standing in grass next to a
tree” is applicable to most images containing a giraffe in the
dataset. The machine can confidently generate this caption
just by recognizing a “giraffe”, without recognizing “grass”,
or “tree”, or “standing”, or “next to”. In general, captions
borrowed from nearest neighbor images result in a surprisingly high performance [8].
15014

