Tensor Power Iteration for Multi-Graph Matching
Xinchu Shi1 , Haibin Ling2∗ , Weiming Hu1 , Junliang Xing1 , Yanning Zhang3
1

CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation, CAS, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia, USA
3
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian, China
{xcshi, wmhu, jlxing}nlpr.ia.ac.cn, hbling@temple.edu, ynzhang@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to its wide range of applications, matching between
two graphs has been extensively studied and remains an active topic. By contrast, it is still under-exploited on how
to jointly match multiple graphs, partly due to its intrinsic
combinatorial intractability. In this work, we address this
challenging problem in a principled way under the rank-1
tensor approximation framework. In particular, we formulate multi-graph matching as a combinational optimization
problem with two main ingredients: unary matching over
graph vertices and structure matching over graph edges,
both of which across multiple graphs. Then we propose an
efficient power iteration solution for the resulting NP-hard
optimization problem. The proposed algorithm has several advantages: 1) the intrinsic matching consistency across
multiple graphs based on the high-order tensor optimization; 2) the free employment of powerful high-order node
affinity; 3) the flexible integration between various types of
node affinities and edge/hyper-edge affinities. Experiments
on diverse and challenging datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed approach in comparison with state-ofthe-arts.

1. Introduction
Finding the correspondences across multiple sets of visual features is an essential problem in computer vision, and
has a wide spectrum of applications such as object categorization [14, 23], shape analysis [4], feature tracking [24],
and action recognition [5, 36]. A large amount of graph
matching algorithms have been proposed in past decades,
most of them are designed for the matching between two graphs, while multiple graph matching (MGM) is left
under-exploited. Many scenarios in computer vision in∗ Correspondence author.

Figure 1. Matching consistency illustration (with 3-graph matching as an example). Left: inconsistency arises with the contradictory node matches such as b ↔ l, l ↔ j and i ↔ b. Right: the
consistent matching triple b ↔ l, l ↔ j and j ↔ b. Note that the
implicit assumption of the one-to-one mapping constraint is used.

volve sets of multiple similar/same targets, thus MGM has
wide perspectives in multi-view geometry and 3D reconstruction [15, 2], 3D shape matching [18, 17], cross temporal object analysis [28, 35], pattern recognition [6, 30, 26],
and so on.
A simple strategy for multi-graph matching is to first perform pairwise graph matching for graph pairs independently and then merge the results. However, such strategy meets
the known matching inconsistency problem which is illustrated in Figure 1. Most existing multi-graph matching approaches use pairwise matching as the key building block.
These methods inherit advantages of off-the-shelf pairwise
graph matching algorithms, but meanwhile suffer from the
matching inconsistency problem.
Some recent studies aim to address issues in both pairwise matching optimization and matching consistency. For
example, Pachauri et al. [26] apply spectral analysis for smoothing the matching inconsistency and Yan et al. [33]
design an elegant iterative solution to balance the matching score and consistency. More examples are provided in
the Sec. 2. While two-graph matching leverages pairwise
between-object affinities, MGM deals with affinities of order higher than two. In many cases, such high order affinity can not be decomposed into, or even approximated by,
pairwise ones. Previous MGM algorithms, however, often
15062

