ReconNet: Non-Iterative Reconstruction of Images from Compressively Sensed
Measurements
Kuldeep Kulkarni1,2 , Suhas Lohit1 , Pavan Turaga1,2 , Ronan Kerviche3 , and Amit Ashok3
1

School of Electrical, Computer, and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
2
School of Arts, Media and Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
3
College of Optical Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ
Ground Truth

25% measurements

4% measurements

1% measurements

Figure 1: Given the block-wise compressively sensed (CS) measurements, our non-iterative algorithm is capable of high quality reconstructions. Notice
how fine structures like tiger stripes or letter ‘A’ are recovered from only 4% measurements. Despite the expected degradation at measurement rate of
1%, the reconstructions retain rich semantic content in the image. For example, one can easily see that there are two tigers resting on rocks, although the
stripes are blurry. This clearly points us to the possibility of CS based imaging becoming a resource-efficient solution in applications, where the final goal
is high-level image understanding rather than exact reconstruction.

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to present a non-iterative and
more importantly an extremely fast algorithm to reconstruct
images from compressively sensed (CS) random measurements. To this end, we propose a novel convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture which takes in CS measurements of an image as input and outputs an intermediate reconstruction. We call this network, ReconNet. The intermediate reconstruction is fed into an off-the-shelf denoiser to
obtain the final reconstructed image. On a standard dataset
of images we show significant improvements in reconstruction results (both in terms of PSNR and time complexity)
over state-of-the-art iterative CS reconstruction algorithms
at various measurement rates. Further, through qualitative
experiments on real data collected using our block single
pixel camera (SPC), we show that our network is highly robust to sensor noise and can recover visually better quality
images than competitive algorithms at extremely low sensing rates of 0.1 and 0.04. To demonstrate that our algorithm

can recover semantically informative images even at a low
measurement rate of 0.01, we present a very robust proof of
concept real-time visual tracking application.

1. Introduction
The easy availability of vast amounts of image data and
the ever increasing computational power has triggered the
resurgence of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in the
past three years and consolidated their position as one of the
most powerful machineries in computer vision. Researchers
have shown CNNs to break records in the two broad categories of long-standing vision tasks, namely: 1) high-level
inference tasks such as image classification , object detection, scene recognition , fine-grained categorization and
pose estimation [19, 13, 37, 35, 36] and 2) pixel-wise output
tasks like semantic segmentation, depth mapping, surface
normal estimation, image super resolution and dense optical
flow estimation [21, 11, 32, 6, 31]. However, the benefits of
CNNs have not been explored for one such important task
belonging to the latter category, namely reconstruction of

449

