Visual Word2Vec (vis-w2v): Learning Visually Grounded
Word Embeddings Using Abstract Scenes
Satwik Kottur1∗
1

Ramakrishna Vedantam2∗ José M. F. Moura1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Virginia Tech

skottur@andrew.cmu.edu,moura@ece.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose a model to learn visually grounded word embeddings (vis-w2v) to capture visual notions of semantic
relatedness. While word embeddings trained using text have
been extremely successful, they cannot uncover notions of
semantic relatedness implicit in our visual world. For instance, although “eats” and “stares at” seem unrelated in
text, they share semantics visually. When people are eating
something, they also tend to stare at the food. Grounding
diverse relations like “eats” and “stares at” into vision remains challenging, despite recent progress in vision. We
note that the visual grounding of words depends on semantics, and not the literal pixels. We thus use abstract scenes
created from clipart to provide the visual grounding. We
find that the embeddings we learn capture fine-grained, visually grounded notions of semantic relatedness. We show
improvements over text-only word embeddings (word2vec)
on three tasks: common-sense assertion classification, visual paraphrasing and text-based image retrieval. Our code
and datasets are available online.

1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is an inherently multi-modal
problem: understanding and reasoning about multiple
modalities (as humans do), seems crucial for achieving artificial intelligence (AI). Language and vision are two vital
interaction modalities for humans. Thus, modeling the rich
interplay between language and vision is one of fundamental problems in AI.
Language modeling is an important problem in natural
language processing (NLP). A language model estimates
the likelihood of a word conditioned on other (context)
words in a sentence. There is a rich history of works on ngram based language modeling [4, 17]. It has been shown
that simple, count-based models trained on millions of sentences can give good results. However, in recent years, neural language models [3, 32] have been explored. Neural
language models learn mappings (W : words → Rn ) from
∗ Equal contribution

2

Devi Parikh2

{vrama91,parikh}@vt.edu

w2v : farther

eats
stares at
vis-w2v : closer

eats
stares at
Word Embedding

girl
eats
ice cream

girl
stares at
ice cream

Figure 1: We ground text-based word2vec (w2v) embeddings into vision to capture a complimentary notion of visual relatedness. Our method (vis-w2v) learns to predict
the visual grounding as context for a given word. Although
“eats” and “stares at” seem unrelated in text, they share semantics visually. Eating involves staring or looking at the
food that is being eaten. As training proceeds, embeddings
change from w2v (red) to vis-w2v (blue).
words (encoded using a dictionary) to a real-valued vector space (embedding), to maximize the log-likelihood of
words given context. Embedding words into such a vector space helps deal with the curse of dimensionality, so
that we can reason about similarities between words more
effectively. One popular architecture for learning such an
embedding is word2vec [31, 33]. This embedding captures
rich notions of semantic relatedness and compositionality
between words [33].
For tasks at the intersection of vision and language,
it seems prudent to model semantics as dictated by both
text and vision. It is especially challenging to model finegrained interactions between objects using only text. Consider the relations “eats” and “stares at” in Fig. 1. When
reasoning using only text, it might prove difficult to realize
that these relations are semantically similar. However, by
14985

