Coherent Parametric Contours for Interactive Video Object Segmentation
Yao Lu1 , Xue Bai2 , Linda Shapiro1 , and Jue Wang2
1

University of Washington , {luyao, shapiro}@cs.washington.edu
2
Adobe , {xubai, juewang}@adobe.com

Abstract
Interactive video segmentation systems aim at producing
sub-pixel-level object boundaries for visual effect applications. Recent approaches mainly focus on using sparse user
input (i.e. scribbles) for efficient segmentation; however, the
quality of the final object boundaries is not satisfactory for
the following reasons: (1) the boundary on each frame is
often not accurate; (2) boundaries across adjacent frames
wiggle around inconsistently, causing temporal flickering;
and (3) there is a lack of direct user control for fine tuning.
We propose Coherent Parametric Contours, a novel
video segmentation propagation framework that addresses
all the above issues. Our approach directly models the
object boundary using a set of parametric curves, providing direct user controls for manual adjustment. A spatiotemporal optimization algorithm is employed to produce
object boundaries that are spatially accurate and temporally stable. We show that existing evaluation datasets are
limited and demonstrate a new set to cover the common
cases in professional rotoscoping. A new metric for evaluating temporal consistency is proposed. Results show that
our approach generates higher quality, more coherent segmentation results than previous methods.

1. Introduction
Interactive, or supervised video object segmentation
[17, 26, 4, 19] is an essential step in professional video
production, enabling numerous post-processing possibilities such as background replacement. The standard industrial approach for this task is rotoscoping, where boundaries
of the foreground objects are first annotated manually at
sparse keyframes, using parametric and controllable shapes
such as Bézier curves. These curves are then smoothly interpolated for the in-between frames. Given the high precision and controllability of parametric curves, rotoscoping
can achieve highly accurate and temporally stable results by

artists; however it is an extremely labor-intensive process
and requires professional expertise.
Recently, interactive video object segmentation based on
sparse user input (i.e. foreground and background scribbles) has gained considerable attention given its ability to
quickly generate reasonable segmentation results with a
small amount of user input [22, 4, 7, 28]. While these
scribble-based methods greatly improve the segmentation
efficiency, they often suffer from inaccurate and/or inconsistent segmentation boundaries that prevent them from real
production. Most of these approaches generate the segmentation results from pixels in single frames through a global
optimization method such as graph cuts, which is easily affected by background clutter, image noise and edge pixelation. Furthermore, the factors affecting the global optimization often change across frames; thus even for a rigid object,
there is no guarantee of the temporal shape consistency. Resulting boundaries often wiggle around across frames, causing temporal boundary jitter as shown in Figure 1. Manipulating the pixel-wise boundaries frame-by-frame in such
non-parametric systems is practically not possible.
In this project, we propose a new method called Coherent Parametric Contours (CPC), which explicitly models the object boundary as a set of evolving Bézier curves
for interactive video object segmentation. These curves
are initialized by the user on the first frame, and automatically propagated to the following frames through a
spatio-temporal optimization algorithm that seeks both spatial accuracy and temporal shape consistency. Since object
boundaries are represented as parametric curves, users have
the full access to local boundary shapes; manipulating the
curves is therefore straightforward.
Previously, the evaluation datasets proposed in [4, 19]
do not provide ground-truth labeling with professional-level
accuracy; they are not suitable for evaluating parametric
algorithms as well, due to the ambiguity in parameterizing shapes with complex topology. Besides, there is also a
lack of evaluation metric that focuses on temporal boundary
consistency. We analyze the requirements for professional

642

