Quantized Convolutional Neural Networks for Mobile Devices
Jiaxiang Wu, Cong Leng, Yuhang Wang, Qinghao Hu, Jian Cheng∗
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jiaxiang.wu, cong.leng, yuhang.wang, qinghao.hu, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNN) have
demonstrated impressive performance in various computer
vision tasks. However, high performance hardware is typically indispensable for the application of CNN models
due to the high computation complexity, which prohibits
their further extensions. In this paper, we propose an efficient framework, namely Quantized CNN, to simultaneously
speed-up the computation and reduce the storage and memory overhead of CNN models. Both filter kernels in convolutional layers and weighting matrices in fully-connected
layers are quantized, aiming at minimizing the estimation
error of each layer’s response. Extensive experiments on
the ILSVRC-12 benchmark demonstrate 4 ∼ 6× speed-up
and 15 ∼ 20× compression with merely one percentage
loss of classification accuracy. With our quantized CNN
model, even mobile devices can accurately classify images
within one second.

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed the great success
of convolutional neural networks (CNN) [19] in a wide
range of visual applications, including image classification
[16, 27], object detection [10, 9], age estimation [24, 23],
etc. This success mainly comes from deeper network architectures as well as the tremendous training data. However, as the network grows deeper, the model complexity is
also increasing exponentially in both the training and testing
stages, which leads to the very high demand in the computation ability. For instance, the 8-layer AlexNet [16] involves
60M parameters and requires over 729M FLOPs1 to classify
a single image. Although the training stage can be offline
carried out on high performance clusters with GPU acceleration, the testing computation cost may be unaffordable for
common personal computers and mobile devices. Due to
the limited computation ability and memory space, mobile
∗ The corresponding author.

Original
15

Time Consumption (s)

Q-CNN
400

Storage Consumption (MB)

300

10

200
5

100

0

0
AlexNet

500

CNN-S

Memory Consumption (MB)

AlexNet

25

400

20

300

15

200

10

100

5

0

CNN-S

Top-5 Error Rate (%)

0
AlexNet

CNN-S

AlexNet

CNN-S

Figure 1. Comparison on the efficiency and classification accuracy
between the original and quantized AlexNet [16] and CNN-S [1]
on a Huawei R Mate 7 smartphone.

devices are almost intractable to run deep convolutional networks. Therefore, it is crucial to accelerate the computation
and compress the memory consumption for CNN models.
For most CNNs, convolutional layers are the most timeconsuming part, while fully-connected layers involve massive network parameters. Due to the intrinsical difference between them, existing works usually focus on improving the efficiency for either convolutional layers or
fully-connected layers. In [7, 13, 32, 31, 18, 17], lowrank approximation or tensor decomposition is adopted to
speed-up convolutional layers. On the other hand, parameter compression in fully-connected layers is explored in
[3, 7, 11, 30, 2, 12, 28]. Overall, the above-mentioned algorithms are able to achieve faster speed or less storage.
However, few of them can achieve significant acceleration
and compression simultaneously for the whole network.
In this paper, we propose a unified framework for con1 FLOPs: number of FLoating-point OPerations required to classify one
image with the convolutional network.

4820

