What Players do with the Ball: A Physically Constrained Interaction Modeling
Andrii Maksai
Xinchao Wang
Pascal Fua
Computer Vision Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
{andrii.maksai, xinchao.wang, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Tracking the ball is critical for video-based analysis of
team sports. However, it is difficult, especially in lowresolution images, due to the small size of the ball, its speed
that creates motion blur, and its often being occluded by
players.
In this paper, we propose a generic and principled approach to modeling the interaction between the ball and
the players while also imposing appropriate physical constraints on the ball’s trajectory.
We show that our approach, formulated in terms of a
Mixed Integer Program, is more robust and more accurate
than several state-of-the-art approaches on real-life volleyball, basketball, and soccer sequences.

1. Introduction
Tracking the ball accurately is critically important to analyze and understand the action in sports ranging from tennis to soccer, basketball, volleyball, to name but a few.
While commercial video-based systems exist for the first,
automation remains elusive for the others. This is largely
attributable to the interaction between the ball and the players, which often results in the ball being either hard to detect
because someone is handling it or even completely hidden
from view. Furthermore, since the players often kick it or
throw it in ways designed to surprise their opponents, its
trajectory is largely unpredictable.
There is a substantial body of literature about dealing
with these issues, but almost always using heuristics that
are specific to a particular sport such as soccer [32], volleyball [10], or basketball [6]. A few more generic approaches explicitly account for the interaction between the
players and the ball [29] while others impose physics-based
constraints on ball motion [23]. However, neither of these
things alone suffices in difficult cases, such as the one depicted by Fig. 1.
In this paper, we, therefore, introduce an approach to
simultaneously accounting for ball/player interactions and
imposing appropriate physics-based constraints. Our ap-

proach is generic and applicable to many team sports. It
involves formulating the ball tracking problem in terms of a
Mixed Integer Program (MIP) in which we account for the
motion of both the players and the ball as well as the fact the
ball moves differently and has different visibility properties
in flight, in possession of a player, or while rolling on the
ground. We model the ball locations in R3 and impose first
and second-order constraints where appropriate. The resulting MIP describes the ball behaviour better than previous
approaches [29, 23] and yields superior performance, both
in terms of tracking accuracy and robustness to occlusions.
Fig. 1(c) depicts the improvement resulting from doing this
rather than only modeling the interactions or only imposing
the physics-based constraints.
In short, our contribution is a principled and generic formulation of the ball tracking problem and related physical
constraints in terms of a MIP. We will demonstrate that it
outperforms state-of-the-art approaches [28, 29, 23, 10] in
soccer, volleyball, and basketball.

2. Related work
While there are approaches to game understanding, such
as [16, 19, 20, 11, 7, 15], which rely on the structured nature
of the data without any explicit reference to the location
of the ball, most others either take advantages of knowing
the ball position or would benefit from being able to [7].
However, while the problem of automated ball tracking can
be considered as solved for some sports such as tennis or
golf, it remains difficult for team sports. This is particularly
true when the image resolution is too low to reliably detect
the ball in individual frames in spite of frequent occlusions.
Current approaches to detecting and tracking can be
roughly classified as those that build physically plausible
trajectory segments on the basis of sets of consecutive detections and those that find a more global trajectory by minimizing an objective function. We briefly review both kinds
below.

2.1. Fitting Tracjectory Segments
Many ball-tracking approaches for soccer [21, 18], basketball [6], and volleyball [5, 10, 4] start with a set of suc-

972

