Single-Image Crowd Counting via Multi-Column Convolutional Neural Network
Yingying Zhang

Desen Zhou Siqin Chen Shenghua Gao
Shanghaitech University

Yi Ma

{zhangyy2,zhouds,chensq,gaoshh,mayi}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper aims to develop a method than can accurately
estimate the crowd count from an individual image with arbitrary crowd density and arbitrary perspective. To this end,
we have proposed a simple but effective Multi-column Convolutional Neural Network (MCNN) architecture to map the
image to its crowd density map. The proposed MCNN allows the input image to be of arbitrary size or resolution.
By utilizing filters with receptive fields of different sizes, the
features learned by each column CNN are adaptive to variations in people/head size due to perspective effect or image
resolution. Furthermore, the true density map is computed accurately based on geometry-adaptive kernels which do
not need knowing the perspective map of the input image. Since exiting crowd counting datasets do not adequately cover all the challenging situations considered in our work,
we have collected and labelled a large new dataset that
includes 1198 images with about 330,000 heads annotated. On this challenging new dataset, as well as all existing
datasets, we conduct extensive experiments to verify the effectiveness of the proposed model and method. In particular, with the proposed simple MCNN model, our method
outperforms all existing methods. In addition, experiments
show that our model, once trained on one dataset, can be
readily transferred to a new dataset.

1. Introduction
In the new year eve of 2015, 35 people were killed in
a massive stampede in Shanghai, China. Unfortunately, since then, many more massive stampedes have taken place
around the world which have claimed many more victims. Accurately estimating crowds from images or videos has
become an increasingly important application of computer
vision technology for purposes of crowd control and public
safety. In some scenarios, such as public rallies and sports
events, the number or density of participating people is an
essential piece of information for future event planning and
space design. Good methods of crowd counting can also be
extended to other domains, for instance, counting cells or

bacteria from microscopic images, animal crowd estimates
in wildlife sanctuaries, or estimating the number of vehicles
at transportation hubs or traffic jams, etc.
Related work. Many algorithms have been proposed in
the literature for crowd counting. Earlier methods [29]
adopt a detection-style framework that scans a detector over
two consecutive frames of a video sequence to estimate the
number of pedestrians, based on boosting appearance and
motion features. [19, 30, 31] have used a similar detectionbased framework for pedestrian counting. In detectionbased crowd counting methods, people typically assume a
crowd is composed of individual entities which can be detected by some given detectors [13, 34, 18, 10]. The limitation of such detection-based methods is that occlusion among people in a clustered environment or in a very dense
crowd significantly affects the performance of the detector
hence the final estimation accuracy.
In counting crowds in videos, people have proposed to
cluster trajectories of tracked visual features. For instance,
[24] has used highly parallelized version of the KLT tracker and agglomerative clustering to estimate the number of
moving people. [3] has tracked simple image features and
probabilistically group them into clusters representing independently moving entities. However, such tracking-based
methods do not work for estimating crowds from individual
still images.
Arguably the most extensively used method for crowd
counting is feature-based regression, see [4, 7, 5, 27, 15,
20]. The main steps of this kind of method are: 1) segmenting the foreground; 2) extracting various features from
the foreground, such as area of crowd mask [4, 7, 27, 23],
edge count [4, 7, 27, 25], or texture features [22, 7]; 3) utilizing a regression function to estimate the crowd count.
Linear [23] or piece-wise linear [25] functions are relatively
simple models and yield decent performance. Other more
advanced/effective methods are ridge regression (RR) [7],
Gaussian process regression (GPR) [4], and neural network
(NN) [22].
There have also been some works focusing on crowd
counting from still images. [12] has proposed to leverage
1589

