Mining Discriminative Triplets of Patches for Fine-Grained Classification
Yaming Wang† , Jonghyun Choi‡ , Vlad I. Morariu† , Larry S. Davis†
†
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
‡
Comcast Labs DC, Washington, DC 20005, USA
{wym, jhchoi, morariu, lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Fine-grained classification involves distinguishing between similar sub-categories based on subtle differences in
highly localized regions; therefore, accurate localization of
discriminative regions remains a major challenge. We describe a patch-based framework to address this problem.
We introduce triplets of patches with geometric constraints
to improve the accuracy of patch localization, and automatically mine discriminative geometrically-constrained
triplets for classification. The resulting approach only requires object bounding boxes. Its effectiveness is demonstrated using four publicly available fine-grained datasets,
on which it outperforms or achieves comparable performance to the state-of-the-art in classification.

1. Introduction
The task of fine-grained classification is to recognize sub-ordinate categories belonging to the same superordinate category [42, 39, 32, 25]. The major challenge
is that fine-grained objects share similar overall appearance and only have subtle differences in highly localized
regions. To effectively and accurately find these discriminative regions, some previous approaches utilize humansin-the-loop [4, 7, 40], or require semantic part annotations
[30, 2, 1, 3, 12, 47, 48] or 3D models [29, 25]. These methods are effective, but they require extra keypoint/part/3D
annotations from humans, which are often expensive to obtain. On the other hand, recent research on discriminative
mid-level visual elements mining [9, 36, 8, 21, 27] automatically finds discriminative patches or regions from a huge
pool and uses the responses of those discriminative elements as a mid-level representation for classification. However, this approach has mainly been applied to scene classification and not typically to fine-grained classification. This
is probably due to the fact that the discriminative patches
needed for fine-grained categories need to be more accurately localized than for scene classification.
To avoid the cost of extra annotations, we propose a

Triplet
Initialization

Triplet
Mining

Mid-Level
Representation

SVM

Figure 1. Summary of our discriminative triplet mining framework. Candidate triplets are initialized from sets of neighboring
images and selected by how discriminative they are across the
training set. The mid-level representation consists of the maximum responses of the selected triplets with geometric constraints,
which is fed into a linear SVM for classification.

patch-based approach for fine-grained classification that
overcomes the difficulties of previous discriminative midlevel approaches. Our approach requires only object bounding box annotations and belongs to the category of weaklyannotated fine-grained classification [44, 45, 16, 34, 5, 43,
28, 24].
Two issues need to be addressed. The first issue is accurately localizing discriminative patches without requiring extra annotations. Localizing a single patch based only
on its appearance remains challenging due to noisy backgrounds, ambiguous repetitive patterns and pose variations.
Instead, we localize triplets of patches with the help of geometric constraints. Previously, triple or higher-order constraints have been used in image matching and registration
[10, 22, 46], but they have not been integrated into a patchbased classification framework. Our triplets consist of three
appearance descriptors and two simple, but efficient, geometric constraints, which can be used to remove accidental
detections that would be encountered if patches were localized individually. One attractive property of triplets over
simpler models (e.g., pairs) is that they can be used to model
rich geometric relationships while providing additional invariance (e.g., to rotation) or robustness (e.g., to perspective
changes).
The second issue is automatically discovering discriminative geometrically-constrained triplets from the huge pool
of all possible triplets of patches. The key insight is
that fine-grained objects share similar overall appearance.
Therefore, if we retrieve the nearest neighbors of a training
image, we obtain samples from different classes with al-

1163

