Convolutional Pose Machines
Shih-En Wei

Varun Ramakrishna

Takeo Kanade

Yaser Sheikh

shihenw@cmu.edu

vramakri@cs.cmu.edu

Takeo.Kanade@cs.cmu.edu

yaser@cs.cmu.edu

The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Pose Machines provide a sequential prediction framework for learning rich implicit spatial models. In this work
we show a systematic design for how convolutional networks can be incorporated into the pose machine framework for learning image features and image-dependent spatial models for the task of pose estimation. The contribution
of this paper is to implicitly model long-range dependencies between variables in structured prediction tasks such
as articulated pose estimation. We achieve this by designing
a sequential architecture composed of convolutional networks that directly operate on belief maps from previous
stages, producing increasingly refined estimates for part locations, without the need for explicit graphical model-style
inference. Our approach addresses the characteristic difficulty of vanishing gradients during training by providing a
natural learning objective function that enforces intermediate supervision, thereby replenishing back-propagated gradients and conditioning the learning procedure. We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance and outperform competing methods on standard benchmarks including the MPII,
LSP, and FLIC datasets.

1. Introduction
We introduce Convolutional Pose Machines (CPMs) for
the task of articulated pose estimation. CPMs inherit the
benefits of the pose machine [29] architecture—the implicit
learning of long-range dependencies between image and
multi-part cues, tight integration between learning and inference, a modular sequential design—and combine them
with the advantages afforded by convolutional architectures: the ability to learn feature representations for both
image and spatial context directly from data; a differentiable architecture that allows for globally joint training
with backpropagation; and the ability to efficiently handle
large training datasets.
CPMs consist of a sequence of convolutional networks
that repeatedly produce 2D belief maps 1 for the location
1 We use the term belief in a slightly loose sense, however the belief

Input Image

(a) Stage 1

(b) Stage 2

(c) Stage 3

Figure 1: A Convolutional Pose Machine consists of a sequence of predictors trained to make dense predictions at each image location. Here we
show the increasingly refined estimates for the location of the right elbow
in each stage of the sequence. (a) Predicting from local evidence often
causes confusion. (b) Multi-part context helps resolve ambiguity. (c) Additional iterations help converge to a certain solution.

of each part. At each stage in a CPM, image features and
the belief maps produced by the previous stage are used
as input. The belief maps provide the subsequent stage
an expressive non-parametric encoding of the spatial uncertainty of location for each part, allowing the CPM to
learn rich image-dependent spatial models of the relationships between parts. Instead of explicitly parsing such belief maps either using graphical models [28, 38, 39] or specialized post-processing steps [38, 40], we learn convolutional networks that directly operate on intermediate belief
maps and learn implicit image-dependent spatial models of
the relationships between parts. The overall proposed multistage architecture is fully differentiable and therefore can be
trained in an end-to-end fashion using backpropagation.
At a particular stage in the CPM, the spatial context of
part beliefs provide strong disambiguating cues to a subsequent stage. As a result, each stage of a CPM produces
belief maps with increasingly refined estimates for the locations of each part (see Figure 1). In order to capture longrange interactions between parts, the design of the network
in each stage of our sequential prediction framework is motivated by the goal of achieving a large receptive field on
both the image and the belief maps. We find, through experiments, that large receptive fields on the belief maps are
crucial for learning long range spatial relationships and remaps described are closely related to beliefs produced in message passing
inference in graphical models. The overall architecture can be viewed as
an unrolled mean-field message passing inference algorithm [31] that is
learned end-to-end using backpropagation.

14724

