ScribbleSup: Scribble-Supervised Convolutional Networks
for Semantic Segmentation
Di Lin1∗
Jifeng Dai2
Jiaya Jia1
Kaiming He2
Jian Sun2
1
2
The Chinese Univeristy of Hong Kong
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Large-scale data is of crucial importance for learning
semantic segmentation models, but annotating per-pixel
masks is a tedious and inefficient procedure. We note that
for the topic of interactive image segmentation, scribbles
are very widely used in academic research and commercial software, and are recognized as one of the most userfriendly ways of interacting. In this paper, we propose to
use scribbles to annotate images, and develop an algorithm to train convolutional networks for semantic segmentation supervised by scribbles. Our algorithm is based on a
graphical model that jointly propagates information from
scribbles to unmarked pixels and learns network parameters. We present competitive object semantic segmentation results on the PASCAL VOC dataset by using scribbles
as annotations. Scribbles are also favored for annotating
stuff (e.g., water, sky, grass) that has no well-defined shape,
and our method shows excellent results on the PASCALCONTEXT dataset thanks to extra inexpensive scribble annotations. Our scribble annotations on PASCAL VOC are
available at http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/
people/jifdai/downloads/scribble_sup.

1. Introduction
Recent success of semantic segmentation lies on the
end-to-end training of convolutional networks (e.g., [21])
and large-scale segmentation annotations (e.g., [18]). Even
though semantic segmentation models are being improved
rapidly, large-scale training data still have apparent benefits
for accuracy, as evidenced in [5, 31, 24, 7, 20].
But it is painstaking to annotate precise, mask-level labels on large-scale image data. For example, powerful interactive tools [1] are adopted for annotating the MS COCO
dataset [18], but it still takes minutes for an experienced
annotator labeling one image [18]. The interactive tools of
[1] require annotators to draw polygons along object boundaries, and the number of polygon vertexes in an image can
∗ This work was done when Di Lin was an intern at Microsoft Research.

be a few tens. This time-consuming task may limit the
amount of data that have mask-level labels.
The procedure of annotating segmentation masks is very
similar to interactive image segmentation [4], which has
been a widely studied problem in the past decade [4, 26, 17,
11, 16, 19, 6]. Among various forms of user interactions,
scribbles are particularly popular [4, 17, 11, 16, 19, 6] and
have been recognized as a user-friendly way of interacting.
A commercial implementation of scribble-based interactive
segmentation is the Quick Selection1 tool in Adobe Photoshop, which is a prevalent tool for selecting complicated
regions in user photos.
Driven by the popularity of using scribbles for interactive image segmentation, we believe that it is more efficient
to use scribbles to annotate images. By dragging the cursor
in the center of the objects, the annotators need not carefully outline the object boundaries. It is also easier to use
scribbles to annotate “stuff” (water, sky, grass, etc.) that
may have ambiguous boundaries and no well-defined shape.
Fig. 1 shows an example of scribble annotations.
An obvious way of using scribbles to ease annotating is
to perform interactive image segmentation (e.g., Quick Selection) when the annotators are interacting. But we argue
that to obtain precise masks that play as ground truth, the
annotators may still have to do many “touch-ups” on the
imperfect outcome, which are inefficient. Instead of doing so, we consider to directly use the sparse scribbles for
training semantic segmentation models. The annotators just
need to provide a few scribbles on the regions which they
feel confident and easy to draw.
With this scenario, in this paper we develop an algorithm
that exploits scribble annotations to train convolutional networks for semantic segmentation. This problem belongs to
the category of weakly-supervised learning, and occupies a
middle ground between image-level supervision and boxlevel supervision. Comparing with image-level annotations
[24], scribbles provide location information at a few pixels,
which should lead to better results; comparing with boxlevel annotations [24, 7], scribbles are lack of determinate
1 https://helpx.adobe.com/photoshop/using/
making-quick-selections.html

13159

