InterActive: Inter-Layer Activeness Propagation
Lingxi Xie1† ∗
Liang Zheng2† Jingdong Wang3 Alan Yuille4 Qi Tian5
1,4
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA
3
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
4
Departments of Cognitive Science and Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
2,5
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA
1
3

198808xc@gmail.com

jingdw@microsoft.com

4

2

liangzheng06@gmail.com

alan.l.yuille@gmail.com

Abstract
An increasing number of computer vision tasks can be
tackled with deep features, which are the intermediate outputs of a pre-trained Convolutional Neural Network. Despite the astonishing performance, deep features extracted
from low-level neurons are still below satisfaction, arguably
because they cannot access the spatial context contained in
the higher layers. In this paper, we present InterActive, a
novel algorithm which computes the activeness of neurons
and network connections. Activeness is propagated through
a neural network in a top-down manner, carrying highlevel context and improving the descriptive power of lowlevel and mid-level neurons. Visualization indicates that
neuron activeness can be interpreted as spatial-weighted
neuron responses. We achieve state-of-the-art classification
performance on a wide range of image datasets.

1. Introduction
We have witnessed a big revolution in computer vision
brought by the deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). With powerful computational resources and a large
amount of labeled training data [8], a differentiable function
for classification is trained [23] to capture different levels of
visual concepts organized by a hierarchical structure. A pretrained deep network is also capable of generating deep features for various tasks, such as image classification [20][9],
image retrieval [38][48] and object detection [15].
Although deep features outperform conventional image representation models such as Bag-of-Visual-Words
∗ This work was partly done when Lingxi Xie and Liang Zheng were
interns at MSR. They contributed equally. This work was supported
by NIH Grant 5R01EY022247-03, ONR N00014-12-1-0883 and ARO
grant W911NF-15-1-0290, Faculty Research Gift Awards by NEC Labs of
America and Blippar, and NSFC 61429201. We thank John Flynn, Xuan
Dong, Jianyu Wang, Junhua Mao and Zhuotun Zhu for discussions.

5

qitian@cs.utsa.edu

(BoVW), we note that the deep feature extraction process
only involves forward propagation: an image is rescaled
into a fixed size, input into a pre-trained network, and the
intermediate neuron responses are summarized as visual
features. As we shall see in Section 3.1, such a method
ignores important high-level visual context, causing both
a “big” problem and a “small” problem (see Figure 1).
These problems harm the quality of the deep features, and,
consequently, visual recognition accuracy.
In this paper, we present InterActive, a novel deep
feature extraction algorithm which integrates high-level visual context with low-level neuron responses. For this,
we measure the activeness of neuron connections for each
specified image, based on the idea that a connection is more
important if the network output is more sensitive to it. We
define an unsupervised probabilistic distribution function
over the high-level neuron responses, and compute the score
function (a concept in statistics) with respect to each connection. Each neuron obtains its activeness by collecting the
activeness of the related connections. InterActive increases
the receptive field size of low-level neurons by allowing the
supervision of the high-level neurons. We interpret neuron
activeness in terms of spatial-weighted neuron responses,
and the visualization of neuron weights demonstrates that
visually salient regions are detected in an unsupervised
manner. More quantitatively, using the improved InterActive features, we achieve state-of-the-art image classification performance on several popular benchmarks.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 briefly introduces related works. The InterActive
algorithm is presented in Section 3. Experiments are shown
in Section 4, and we conclude this work in Section 5.

2. Related Works
Image classification is a fundamental problem in computer vision. In recent years, researchers have extended
1270

