Detecting events and key actors in multi-person videos
Vignesh Ramanathan1 , Jonathan Huang2 , Sami Abu-El-Haija2 , Alexander Gorban2 ,
Kevin Murphy2 , and Li Fei-Fei1
1

Stanford University, 2 Google

∗

vigneshr@cs.stanford.edu , jonathanhuang@google.com, haija@google.com, gorban@google.com,
kpmurphy@google.com, feifeili@cs.stanford.edu

Looking at the wrong people is uninformative

Abstract
Multi-person event recognition is a challenging task, often with many people active in the scene but only a small
subset contributing to an actual event. In this paper, we
propose a model which learns to detect events in such videos
while automatically “attending” to the people responsible
for the event. Our model does not use explicit annotations
regarding who or where those people are during training
and testing. In particular, we track people in videos and
use a recurrent neural network (RNN) to represent the track
features. We learn time-varying attention weights to combine these features at each time-instant. The attended features are then processed using another RNN for event detection/classification. Since most video datasets with multiple people are restricted to a small number of videos, we
also collected a new basketball dataset comprising 257 basketball games with 14K event annotations corresponding to
11 event classes. Our model outperforms state-of-the-art
methods for both event classification and detection on this
new dataset. Additionally, we show that the attention mechanism is able to consistently localize the relevant players.

1. Introduction
Event recognition and detection in videos has hugely
benefited from the introduction of recent large-scale
datasets [22, 55, 23, 41, 14] and models. However, this
is mainly confined to the domain of single-person actions
where the videos contain one actor performing a primary activity. Another equally important problem is event recognition in videos with multiple people. In our work, we present
a new model and dataset for this specific setting.
Videos captured in sports arenas, market places or other
∗ This work was done while Vignesh Ramanathan was an intern at
Google

Our

odel atte ds to the key people at each ti e-step

Figure 1. Looking at the wrong people in a multi-person event can
be very uninformative as seen in the basketball video in the first
row. However, by observing the correct people in the same video,
we can easily identify the event as a “2-pointer success” based on
the shooter and the player throwing the ball into play. We use the
same intuition to recognize the key players for event recognition.

outdoor areas typically contain multiple people interacting
with each other. Most people are doing “something”, but
not all of them are involved in the main event. The main
event is dominated by a smaller subset of people. For instance, a “shot” in basketball is determined by one or two
people (see Figure 1). In addition to recognizing the event,
it is also important to isolate these key actors. This is a significant challenge which differentiates multi-person videos
from single-person videos.
Identifying the people responsible for an event is thus an
interesting task in its own right. However acquiring such
annotations is expensive and it is therefore desirable to use
models that do not require annotations for identifying these
key actors during training. This can also be viewed as a
problem of weakly supervised key person identification. In
this paper, we propose a method to classify events by using
13043

