SPDA-CNN: Unifying Semantic Part Detection and Abstraction
for Fine-grained Recognition
Han Zhang∗1 , Tao Xu∗2 , Mohamed Elhoseiny1 ,
Xiaolei Huang2 , Shaoting Zhang3 , Ahmed Elgammal1 , Dimitris Metaxas1
1

Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh University
3
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
2

Abstract
Most convolutional neural networks (CNNs) lack midlevel layers that model semantic parts of objects. This limits CNN-based methods from reaching their full potential in
detecting and utilizing small semantic parts in recognition.
Introducing such mid-level layers can facilitate the extraction of part-specific features which can be utilized for better
recognition performance. This is particularly important in
the domain of fine-grained recognition.
In this paper, we propose a new CNN architecture that
integrates semantic part detection and abstraction (SPDACNN) for fine-grained classification. The proposed network
has two sub-networks: one for detection and one for recognition. The detection sub-network has a novel top-down
proposal method to generate small semantic part candidates for detection. The classification sub-network introduces novel part layers that extract features from parts detected by the detection sub-network, and combine them for
recognition. As a result, the proposed architecture provides
an end-to-end network that performs detection, localization of multiple semantic parts, and whole object recognition within one framework that shares the computation of
convolutional filters. Our method outperforms state-of-theart methods with a large margin for small parts detection
(e.g. our precision of 93.40% vs the best previous precision
of 74.00% for detecting the head on CUB-2011). It also
compares favorably to the existing state-of-the-art on finegrained classification, e.g. it achieves 85.14% accuracy on
CUB-2011.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained recognition aims to distinguish among subordinate categories, such as identifying product models [31,
∗ Indicates equal contribution. Email: han.zhang@rutgers.edu

26, 30] and discriminating animal and plant species [37,
23]. Compared to generic object recognition, this task is
more challenging since the subtle visual differences can
be easily overwhelmed by the other factors such as poses
and viewpoints. Humans typically refer to the difference in
some semantic parts to distinguish subordinate categories.
Thus, detecting and fully utilizing object parts is extremely
important in fine-grained object recognition.
A majority of fine-grained recognition methods have incorporated part localization. State-of-the-art methods apply convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to detect part
regions [41, 28]. However, they do not model or utilize
small semantic parts. For example, on the CUB-2011 bird
dataset [37], both methods [41, 28] only localized the head
and body, i.e., large parts, and they did not utilize other
smaller parts such as the tail and wings although these parts
can be very useful for recognition [9]. The head and body
detection results by these two methods also show that the
results for the head are consistently worse than that of the
body because of the head’s smaller size. To the best of our
knowledge, existing CNN-based fine-grained classification
methods have not focused on the detection and utilization
of small semantic parts.
Traditional CNNs lack mid-level layers that model semantic parts of objects. In order to introduce such layers
to facilitate the extraction of part-specific features, several
works proposed part-based CNN methods [41, 5, 28, 39].
These methods define and train a separate CNN network
for each part. Features extracted from each part are then
concatenated into a long vector and used to train a separate classifier (e.g., SVM) for the final classification. This
framework has several limitations, however. It makes training and testing a multi-stage process, and makes the sharing
of convolutional filters among the separate part networks
difficult. Furthermore, it limits the ability of the overall architecture to learn correlations among different parts, which

1143

