Weakly Supervised Object Localization with Progressive Domain Adaptation
Dong Li1 , Jia-Bin Huang2 , Yali Li1 , Shengjin Wang1∗, and Ming-Hsuan Yang3
1
Tsinghua University, 2 University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 3 University of California, Merced

Abstract

1. Introduction
Object localization is an important task for image understanding. It aims to identify all instances of particular object categories (e.g., person, cat, and car) in images. The fundamental challenge in object localization
lies in constructing object appearance models for handling
large intra-class variations and complex background clutters. The state-of-the-art approaches typically train object
detectors from a large set of training images [11, 14] in a
fully supervised manner. However, this strongly supervised
learning paradigm relies on instance-level annotations, e.g.,
tight bounding boxes, which are time-consuming and laborintensive. In this paper, we focus on the weakly supervised
object localization problem where only binary image-level
labels indicating the presence or absence of an object category are available for training. Figure 1 illustrates the prob∗ Corresponding author

Dog

Aero

Testing

Bike

Car

Person

Horse

Person

…

We address the problem of weakly supervised object localization where only image-level annotations are available
for training. Many existing approaches tackle this problem through object proposal mining. However, a substantial amount of noise in object proposals causes ambiguities
for learning discriminative object models. Such approaches
are sensitive to model initialization and often converge to an
undesirable local minimum. In this paper, we address this
problem by progressive domain adaptation with two main
steps: classification adaptation and detection adaptation.
In classification adaptation, we transfer a pre-trained network to our multi-label classification task for recognizing
the presence of a certain object in an image. In detection adaptation, we first use a mask-out strategy to collect
class-specific object proposals and apply multiple instance
learning to mine confident candidates. We then use these selected object proposals to fine-tune all the layers, resulting
in a fully adapted detection network. We extensively evaluate the localization performance on the PASCAL VOC and
ILSVRC datasets and demonstrate significant performance
improvement over the state-of-the-art methods.

Training

Motorbike

Object Detectors

Figure 1. Weakly supervised object localization problem setting.
Given a collection of training images with image-level annotations, our goal is to train object detectors for localizing objects
in unseen images.

lem setting. This particular setting is important for largescale practical applications because image-level annotations
are often readily available from the Internet, e.g., through
text tags [15], GPS tags [8], and image search queries [23].
Most existing methods [36, 4, 3, 2, 33, 35, 37, 34] formulate the weakly supervised localization (WSL) task as a
multiple instance learning (MIL) problem. Recent efforts
include leveraging convolutional neural networks (CNN) to
extract discriminative appearance features [41, 36, 37, 2, 3]
and transferring knowledge from strongly supervised detectors to other categories without bounding box annotations [27, 16, 17, 31]. While existing methods have shown
promising results, these methods have three main drawbacks. First, it’s hard to select correct object proposals
because the collection of candidate proposals contains too
much noise. Typically, only a few out of several thousands
of proposals are actual object instances. Second, many approaches use a pre-trained CNN as a feature extractor and
do not adapt the weights from whole-image classification
to object detection. Third, existing methods often require
either auxiliary strongly annotated data or pre-trained detectors for domain adaptation.

3512

