MCMC Shape Sampling for Image Segmentation with Nonparametric Shape
Priors
Ertunc Erdil, Sinan Yıldırım, Müjdat Çetin
Sabanci University,
Tuzla 34956, Istanbul, Turkey

Tolga Tasdizen
Utah University
Salt Lake City, UT, USA

{ertuncerdil, sinanyildirim, mcetin}@sabanciuniv.edu

tolga@sci.utah.edu

Test Images

Abstract
Segmenting images of low quality or with missing data
is a challenging problem. Integrating statistical prior information about the shapes to be segmented can improve
the segmentation results significantly. Most shape-based
segmentation algorithms optimize an energy functional and
find a point estimate for the object to be segmented. This
does not provide a measure of the degree of confidence in
that result, neither does it provide a picture of other probable solutions based on the data and the priors. With a statistical view, addressing these issues would involve the problem of characterizing the posterior densities of the shapes of
the objects to be segmented. For such characterization, we
propose a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) samplingbased image segmentation algorithm that uses statistical
shape priors. In addition to better characterization of the
statistical structure of the problem, such an approach would
also have the potential to address issues with getting stuck
at local optima, suffered by existing shape-based segmentation methods. Our approach is able to characterize the posterior probability density in the space of shapes through its
samples, and to return multiple solutions, potentially from
different modes of a multimodal probability density, which
would be encountered, e.g., in segmenting objects from multiple shape classes. We present promising results on a variety of data sets. We also provide an extension for segmenting shapes of objects with parts that can go through independent shape variations. This extension involves the use of
local shape priors on object parts and provides robustness
to limitations in shape training data size.

Samples

Figure 1. Examples of MCMC sampling. First row: on an object
with a unimodal shape density. Second row: on an object with a
multimodal shape density.

timodal”) and the algorithm does not know the class of the
object in the scene. For example, in the problem of segmenting objects in a natural scene (e.g., cars, planes, trees,
etc.), a segmentation algorithm should contain a training
set of objects from different classes. Another example of
a multimodal density is the shape density of multiple handwritten digits, e.g., in an optical character segmentation and
recognition problem. In this paper, we consider segmentation problems that involve limited and challenging image data together with complex and potentially multimodal
shape prior densities.
The shape-based segmentation approach of Tsai et al.
[20] uses a parametric model for an implicit representation
of the segmenting curve by applying principal component
analysis to a training data set. Such techniques can handle only unimodal, Gaussian-like shape densities and cannot deal with “multimodal” shape densities. Kim et al. [12]
and Cremers et al. [6] propose nonparametric methods for
handling multimodal shape densities by extending Parzen
density estimation to the space of shapes. These methods
minimize an energy function containing both data fidelity
and shape terms, and find a solution at a local optimum.
Having such a point estimate does not provide any measure of the degree of confidence/uncertainty in that result

1. Introduction
Prior knowledge about the shapes to be segmented is
required for segmentation of images involving limited and
low quality data. In many applications, object shapes come
from multiple classes (i.e., the prior shape density is “mul-

411

