PatchBatch: a Batch Augmented Loss for Optical Flow
David (Dedi) Gadot
Lior Wolf
The Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University

Abstract
We propose a new pipeline for optical flow computation,
based on Deep Learning techniques. We suggest using a
Siamese CNN to independently, and in parallel, compute
the descriptors of both images. The learned descriptors
are then compared efficiently using the L2 norm and do
not require network processing of patch pairs. The success of the method is based on an innovative loss function
that computes higher moments of the loss distributions for
each training batch. Combined with an Approximate Nearest Neighbor patch matching method and a flow interpolation technique, state of the art performance is obtained on
the most challenging and competitive optical flow benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation is a classical problem in computer vision. In recent works, there has been a shift from
using engineered descriptors to using Convolution Neural
Networks (CNNs) [24] that are trained on pairs of patches
that either match or do not match. Yet, the newly proposed
architectures usually suffer from significant computation requirements following the tendency of using Neural Network
layers as a matching function instead of traditional distance
functions such as the Euclidean (L2) distance.
To support rapid computation when comparing pairs of
patches, it is extremely beneficial to work in a feed-forward
pipeline that encodes each patch separately and then uses
conventional vector norms for comparing patches. This
poses a design restriction on our method that is not shared
with recent CNN approaches, which are optimized for accuracy at the cost of significant computation time.
In order to achieve state of the art results despite this
restriction, half a dozen novelties are brought to the field
of deep patch representation. Some of the novelties arise
from borrowing design choices from CNNs used for object
recognition and stereo matching.
A second group of novelties are general and introduced
here for the first time. We have designed new metric learn-

ing losses by augmenting the DrLIM [18] method. Two
orthogonal augmentations are studied: the first replaces the
loss of DrLIM, which is based on the potential of a spring,
with a loss that is based on the potential of a centrifuge.
This leads to a marked improvement on the very competitive KITTI benchmarks and in some of our synthetic experiments. The other type of augmentation is obtained by
adding, to both spring and centrifuge variants of the DrLIM
loss, a term that minimizes the Standard Deviation (SD)
of the two distributions: L2 distances between matching
patches, and L2 distances between non-matching patches.
The two SDs are computed on the samples from each
training batch and a new type of loss for training CNNs
emerges. While in conventional loss functions per-sample
losses are aggregated per batch, in the new type of losses
the samples of the entire batch contribute jointly to the loss.
In another contribution, centered around per-batch computations, we propose a new variant of batch normalization [21] which is more fine-grained than previously proposed. The new method improves performance but comes
at a cost: the addition of these layers is not compatible with
a fully convolutional deployment of the network.

1.1. Method overview
The optical flow solution described below is comprised
of a series of well established building blocks, where at the
heart of the pipeline lies a novel way to compute descriptors
and compare patches.
First, a pair of gray-level input images is normalized by
subtracting from each image its mean and dividing by its
SD. We then compute, independently and in parallel, descriptors per each pixel of each image. These descriptors
are learned from examples using a Siamese Deep Neural
Network architecture.
The PatchMatch [2] (PM) method is then used as an Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) algorithm on top of the
learned descriptors. The conventional L2 metric is used,
thus simplifying the ANN computation, as opposed to previous works which use Neural Network layers to compute
the matching score.
We then employ a bidirectional consistency check and
14236

