Groupwise Tracking of Crowded Similar-Appearance Targets from
Low-Continuity Image Sequences
∗

∗

Hongkai Yu1 , Youjie Zhou1 , Jeff Simmons2 , Craig P. Przybyla2 ,
Yuewei Lin1 , Xiaochuan Fan1 , Yang Mi1 , and Song Wang1, †
1
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, 2 Air Force Research Lab, Dayton, OH 45433

Abstract
Automatic tracking of large-scale crowded targets are
of particular importance in many applications, such as
crowded people/vehicle tracking in video surveillance, fiber
tracking in materials science, and cell tracking in biomedical imaging. This problem becomes very challenging
when the targets show similar appearance and the interslice/inter-frame continuity is low due to sparse sampling,
camera motion and target occlusion. The main challenge
comes from the step of association which aims at matching
the predictions and the observations of the multiple targets.
In this paper we propose a new groupwise method to explore
the target group information and employ the within-group
correlations for association and tracking. In particular, the
within-group association is modeled by a nonrigid 2D ThinPlate transform and a sequence of group shrinking, group
growing and group merging operations are then developed
to refine the composition of each group. We apply the proposed method to track large-scale fibers from microscopy
material images and compare its performance against several other multi-target tracking methods. We also apply the
proposed method to track crowded people from videos with
poor inter-frame continuity.

1. Introduction
Automatic tracking of large-scale crowded targets has
been attracting more and more attention in the computer
vision community for its important applications. In video
surveillance, tracking of all the individual persons in a
crowd can promote the public security [29] by detecting
the group behaviors and individual anomalies. In materials science, accurate tracking of large-scale fibers from a
sequence of serial sectioned slices of a composite material
can facilitate the fast characterization of its underlying microstructure and accelerate the new material design and de∗ Indicates

equal contribution.

† Corresponding author: songwang@cec.sc.edu.

velopment [23]. In biomedical imaging, accurately tracking
the motion paths of the large-scale cells can provide important information for computer aided diagnosis [18].
One main challenge of the crowded target tracking lies in
the step of association, which aims at matching the predictions and the observations of the multiple targets at a new
slice/frame. In many applications, such as cell and fiber
tracking [23], different targets may share similar appearance, which increases the chances of the mis-association.
In addition, many of the above applications may generate
image sequences with low inter-frame/inter-slice continuity, which increases the gap between a prediction and its
corresponding observation and further increases the misassociation rate. For example, in both biomedical and material imaging, it is highly desired to perform sparse sampling
along the image sequence for fast imaging. In crowded human tracking, sudden movement of the camera, which is
common when using wearable cameras, together with target occlusions, may also produce video clips with low interframe continuity.
In this paper, we develop a new groupwise association
method to enable the tracking of large-scale crowded targets with similar appearance from low continuity image sequences. We explore the target groups in a way that the
targets in a same group show relatively consistent motions
and therefore, the tracking of the targets in a same group
shows high level of correlation. Specifically, we utilize a
2D nonrigid Thin-Plate Splines (TPS) transform to describe
the mapping between the predictions and the associated observations within a same group. However, the group composition of the targets are unknown priorly. To address this
issue, we develop a new algorithm that clusters the targets
into groups, following by three steps of group refinement:
shrinking, growing and merging. The proposed method can
handle false positives and false negatives in the observations, i.e., the numbers of predictions and observations may
be different in the association.
In this paper we choose the task of fiber tracking from a
sequence of microscopy material images for algorithm development. The fiber tracking is a typical crowded track1952

