A Text Detection System for Natural Scenes
with Convolutional Feature Learning and Cascaded Classification
Siyu Zhu
Center for Imaging Science
Rochester Institute of Technology, NY, USA

Richard Zanibbi
Department of Computer Science
Rochester Institute of Technology, NY, USA

zhu siyu@hotmail.com

rlaz@cs.rit.edu

Abstract
We propose a system that finds text in natural scenes using a variety of cues. Our novel data-driven method incorporates coarse-to-fine detection of character pixels using
convolutional features (Text-Conv), followed by extracting
connected components (CCs) from characters using edge
and color features, and finally performing a graph-based
segmentation of CCs into words (Word-Graph). For TextConv, the initial detection is based on convolutional feature
maps similar to those used in Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), but learned using Convolutional k-means.
Convolution masks defined by local and neighboring patch
features are used to improve detection accuracy. The WordGraph algorithm uses contextual information to both improve word segmentation and prune false character/word
detections. Different definitions for foreground (text) regions are used to train the detection stages, some based on
bounding box intersection, and others on bounding box and
pixel intersection. Our system obtains pixel, character, and
word detection f-measures of 93.14%, 90.26%, and 86.77%
respectively for the ICDAR 2015 Robust Reading Focused
Scene Text dataset, out-performing state-of-the-art systems.
This approach may work for other detection targets with
homogenous color in natural scenes.

1. Introduction
In natural scenes, text detection is made difficult by high
variation in character color, font, size, and orientation. In
addition, light sources introduce highlight, shadow, reflection and color offset in images, while cameras introduce additional noise, blurring, and viewing angle distortion. In
the past, many text detection systems addressed this using strong prior knowledge and carefully engineered features [24]. More recently, machine learning methods are
preferred over heuristic rules, with parameters and thresholds inferred automatically from training data. This requires

less human intervention, and generally increases the accuracy and robustness of text detection.
As described by Ye et al. [24], step-wise text detection
is composed of different components, including localization, verification, segmentation and sometimes recognition.
‘Holistic’ methods combine results from different stages,
often applying OCR results for use in lexicon matching.
In this paper, we present a highly accurate text detection
system for natural scenes utilizing only visual features.1
Our system is composed of the Text-Conv algorithm for
character patch detection, region growing to obtain Connected Components (CCs) corresponding to characters, and
then word segmentation using the Word-Graph algorithm.
Contributions. The contributions of this work include:
(1) defining ground truth character patches differently for
coarse vs. fine character detection, first using constraints
on bounding box intersection, and then bounding box and
foreground pixel intersection; (2) using ‘contextual’ detection windows to improve discrimination based on adjacent
and/or missing characters; (3) multi-stage generation and
validation of character detections using convolutional, geometric and contextual features. Our system also obtains
state-of-the-art performance for the challenging 2015 ICDAR Robust Reading Focused Scene Text dataset [12].
In Section 2, we briefly review state-of-the-art text detection systems, and the ICDAR Robust Reading Competition. In Section 3, we describe our system. In Section 4 we
present experimental results, and then conclude and identify
ways to accelerate and improve our system in Section 5.

2. Previous Work
In recent years, new discriminative features have been
proposed for text detection, including the Stroke Width
Transform (SWT) [7] and Maximal Stable Extremal Regions (MSER) [14], both of which have been used widely.
Most characters have a narrow and uniform stroke width,
1 Source code:
https://www.cs.rit.edu/˜dprl/Software.html.

625

