Inside-Outside Net: Detecting Objects in Context with Skip Pooling and
Recurrent Neural Networks
Sean Bell1

C. Lawrence Zitnick2
Cornell University

1

2

Kavita Bala1
Ross Girshick2
∗
Microsoft Research

{sbell,kb}@cs.cornell.edu

{rbg,zitnick}@fb.com

conv1 conv2

conv3

conv4

4-dir
IRNN

conv5

Abstract
It is well known that contextual and multi-scale representations are important for accurate visual recognition.
In this paper we present the Inside-Outside Net (ION), an
object detector that exploits information both inside and
outside the region of interest. Contextual information outside the region of interest is integrated using spatial recurrent neural networks. Inside, we use skip pooling to extract information at multiple scales and levels of abstraction. Through extensive experiments we evaluate the design
space and provide readers with an overview of what tricks
of the trade are important. ION improves state-of-the-art on
PASCAL VOC 2012 object detection from 73.9% to 77.9%
mAP. On the new and more challenging MS COCO dataset,
we improve state-of-the-art from 19.7% to 33.1% mAP. In
the 2015 MS COCO Detection Challenge, our ION model
won “Best Student Entry” and finished 3rd place overall. As
intuition suggests, our detection results provide strong evidence that context and multi-scale representations improve
small object detection.

1. Introduction
Reliably detecting an object requires a variety of information, including the object’s fine-grained details and the
context surrounding it. Current state-of-the-art detection
approaches [8, 32] only use information near an object’s
region of interest (ROI). This places constraints on the type
and accuracy of objects that may be detected.
We explore expanding the approach of [9] to include two
additional sources of information. The first uses a multiscale representation [20] that captures fine-grained details
by pooling from multiple lower-level convolutional layers
in a ConvNet [37]. These skip-layers [36, 25, 26, 13] span
multiple spatial resolutions and levels of feature abstraction.
The information gained is especially important for small objects, which require the higher spatial resolution provided
by lower-level layers.
Our second addition is the use of contextual informa∗ R. Girshick and C. L. Zitnick are now at Facebook AI Research.

4-dir context
IRNN features

ROI Pooling
fc
L2 normalize
scale
concat

1x1
conv

fc

fc

softmax

fc bbox
For each ROI

Figure 1. Inside-Outside Net (ION). In a single pass, we extract
VGG16 [37] features and evaluate 2000 proposed regions of interest (ROI). For each proposal, we extract a fixed-size descriptor from several layers using ROI pooling [9]. Each descriptor is
L2-normalized, concatenated, scaled, and dimension-reduced (1x1
convolution) to produce a fixed-length feature descriptor for each
proposal of size 512x7x7. Two fully-connected (fc) layers process
each descriptor and produce two outputs: a one-of-K class prediction (“softmax”), and an adjustment to the bounding box (“bbox”).

tion. It is well known in the study of human and computer
vision that context plays an important role in visual recognition [39, 28, 6]. To gather contextual information we explore the use of spatial Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs).
These RNNs pass spatially varying contextual information
both horizontally and vertically across an image. The use of
at least two RNN layers ensures information may be propagated across the entire image. We compare our approach to
other common methods for adding contextual information,
including global average pooling and additional convolutional layers. Global average pooling provides information
about the entire image, similar to the features used for scene
or image classification [27, 22].
Following previous approaches [10], we use object proposal detectors [17, 40, 43] to identify ROIs in an image.
Each ROI is then classified as containing one or none of
the objects of interest. Using dynamic pooling [14] we can
efficiently evaluate thousands of different candidate ROIs
with a single forwards pass of the network. For each candidate ROI, the multi-scale and context information is concatenated into a single layer and fed through several fully
connected layers for classification.
We demonstrate that both sources of additional infor-

2874

