DeepCut: Joint Subset Partition and Labeling for Multi Person Pose Estimation
Leonid Pishchulin1 , Eldar Insafutdinov1 , Siyu Tang1 , Bjoern Andres1 ,
Mykhaylo Andriluka1,3 , Peter Gehler2 , and Bernt Schiele1
1

2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Germany
3
Stanford University, USA

Abstract
This paper considers the task of articulated human pose
estimation of multiple people in real world images. We propose an approach that jointly solves the tasks of detection
and pose estimation: it infers the number of persons in a
scene, identifies occluded body parts, and disambiguates
body parts between people in close proximity of each other.
This joint formulation is in contrast to previous strategies,
that address the problem by first detecting people and subsequently estimating their body pose. We propose a partitioning and labeling formulation of a set of body-part hypotheses
generated with CNN-based part detectors. Our formulation,
an instance of an integer linear program, implicitly performs
non-maximum suppression on the set of part candidates and
groups them to form configurations of body parts respecting geometric and appearance constraints. Experiments on
four different datasets demonstrate state-of-the-art results
for both single person and multi person pose estimation1 .

1. Introduction
Human body pose estimation methods have become increasingly reliable. Powerful body part detectors [29] in
combination with tree-structured body models [30, 7] show
impressive results on diverse datasets [18, 3, 26]. These
benchmarks promote pose estimation of single pre-localized
persons but exclude scenes with multiple people. This problem definition has been a driver for progress, but also falls
short on representing a realistic sample of real-world images.
Many photographs contain multiple people of interest (see
Fig 1) and it is unclear whether single pose approaches generalize directly. We argue that the multi person case deserves
more attention since it is an important real-world task.
Key challenges inherent to multi person pose estimation
1 Models and code available at http://pose.mpi-inf.mpg.de

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Method overview: (a) initial detections (= part candidates)
and pairwise terms (graph) between all detections that (b) are jointly
clustered belonging to one person (one colored subgraph = one
person) and each part is labeled corresponding to its part class
(different colors and symbols correspond to different body parts);
(c) shows the predicted pose sticks.

are the partial visibility of some people, significant overlap
of bounding box regions of people, and the a-priori unknown
number of people in an image. The problem thus is to infer the number of persons, assign part detections to person
instances while respecting geometric and appearance constraints. Most strategies use a two-stage inference process
[23, 15, 28] to first detect and then independently estimate
poses. This is unsuited for cases when people are in close
14929

