Where To Look: Focus Regions for Visual Question Answering

Kevin J. Shih, Saurabh Singh, and Derek Hoiem
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{kjshih2, ss1, dhoiem}@illinois.edu

Abstract
We present a method that learns to answer visual questions by selecting image regions relevant to the text-based
query. Our method maps textual queries and visual features
from various regions into a shared space where they are
compared for relevance with an inner product. Our method
exhibits significant improvements in answering questions
such as “what color,” where it is necessary to evaluate
a specific location, and “what room,” where it selectively
identifies informative image regions. Our model is tested
on the recently released VQA [1] dataset, which features
free-form human-annotated questions and answers.

Is it raining?

What color is the walk light?

1. Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) is the task of answering a natural language question about an image. VQA
includes many challenges in language representation and
grounding, recognition, common sense reasoning, and specialized tasks like counting and reading. In this paper, we
focus on a key problem for VQA and other visual reasoning
tasks: knowing where to look. Consider Figure 1. It’s easy
to answer “What color is the walk light?” if the light bulb is
localized, while answering whether it’s raining may be dealt
with by identifying umbrellas, puddles, or cloudy skies. We
want to learn where to look to answer questions supervised
by only images and question/answer pairs. For example, if
we have several training examples for “What time of day is
it?” or similar questions, the system should learn what kind
of answer is expected and where in the image it should base
its response.
Learning where to look from question-image pairs has
many challenges. Questions such as “What sport is this?”
might be best answered using the full image. Other questions such as “What is on the sofa?” or “What color is
the woman’s shirt?” require focusing on particular regions.
Still others such as “What does the sign say?” or “Are the

Figure 1. Our goal is to identify the correct answer for a natural
language question, such as “What color is the walk light?” or “Is it
raining?” We particularly focus on the problem of learning where
to look. This is a challenging problem as it requires grounding language with vision and learning to recognize objects, use relations,
and determine relevance. For example, whether it is raining may
be determined by detecting the presence of puddles, gray skies, or
umbrellas in the scene, whereas the color of the walk light requires
focused attention on the light alone. The above figure shows example attention regions produced by our proposed model.

man and woman dating?” require specialized knowledge
or reasoning that we do not expect to achieve. The system
needs to learn to recognize objects, infer spatial relations,
determine relevance, and find correspondence between natural language and visual features. Our key idea is to learn a
non-linear mapping of language and visual region features
into a common latent space to determine relevance. The
relevant regions are then used to score a specific questionanswer pairing. The latent embedding and the scoring function are learned jointly using a margin-based loss supervised solely by question-answer pairings. We perform ex-

4613

