Multi-view People Tracking via Hierarchical Trajectory Composition∗
Yuanlu Xu1 , Xiaobai Liu2 , Yang Liu1 and Song-Chun Zhu1
1
Dept. Computer Science and Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)
2
Dept. Computer Science, San Diego State University (SDSU)
yuanluxu@cs.ucla.edu, xiaobai.liu@mail.sdsu.edu, yangliu2014@ucla.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a hierarchical composition approach for multi-view object tracking. The key idea is to
adaptively exploit multiple cues in both 2D and 3D, e.g.,
ground occupancy consistency, appearance similarity, motion coherence etc., which are mutually complementary
while tracking the humans of interests over time. While feature online selection has been extensively studied in the past
literature, it remains unclear how to effectively schedule
these cues for the tracking purpose especially when encountering various challenges, e.g. occlusions, conjunctions,
and appearance variations. To do so, we propose a hierarchical composition model and re-formulate multi-view
multi-object tracking as a problem of compositional structure optimization. We setup a set of composition criteria,
each of which corresponds to one particular cue. The hierarchical composition process is pursued by exploiting different criteria, which impose constraints between a graph node and its offsprings in the hierarchy. We learn the composition criteria using MLE on annotated data and efficiently
construct the hierarchical graph by an iterative greedy pursuit algorithm. In the experiments, we demonstrate superior
performance of our approach on three public datasets, one
of which is newly created by us to test various challenges in
multi-view multi-object tracking.

1. Introduction
Multi-view multi-object tracking has attracted lots of attentions in the literature [22]. Tracking objects from multiple views is by nature a composition optimization problem. For example, a 3D trajectory of a human can be hierarchically decomposed into trajectories of individual views,
trajectory fragments, and bounding boxes. While existing trackers have exploited the above principles more or
less, they enforced strong assumptions over the validity of
∗ This work is supported by DARPA SIMPLEX Award N66001-15-C4035, ONR MURI project N00014-16-1-2007, and NSF IIS 1423305. Correspondence author is Xiaobai Liu.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(Ğ)

Figure 1. An illustration of utilizing different cues at different periods for the task multi-view multi-object tracking.

a particular cue, e.g. appearance similarity [1], motion
consistency [9], sparsity [30, 50], 3D localization coincidence [24], etc., which are not always correct. Actually,
different cues may dominate different periods over object
trajectories, especially for complicated scenes. In this paper, we are interested in automatically discovering the optimal compositional hierarchy for object trajectories from
various cues, in order to handle a wider variety of tracking
scenarios.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, suppose we would like to track
the highlighted subject and obtain its complete trajectory
(e). The optimal strategy for tracking may vary over space
and time. For example, in (a), since the subject shares the
same appearance within certain time period, we apply an
appearance based tracker to get a 2D tracklet; in (b) and (c),
since the subject can be fully observed from two different views, we can group these two boxes into a 3D tracklet
by testing the proximity of their 3D locations; in (d), since
the subject is fully occluded in this view, we consider sampling its position from the 3D trajectory curve constrained
by background occupancy.
In this work, we formulate multi-view multi-object
tracking as a structure optimization problem described by
a hierarchical composition model. As illustrated in Fig. 2,
our objective is to discover composition gradients of each

4256

