Unbiased Photometric Stereo for Colored Surfaces: A Variational Approach
Yvain Quéau
IRIT, Université de Toulouse
France

Roberto Mecca∗
Department of Engineering,
University of Cambridge, UK

Jean-Denis Durou
IRIT, Université de Toulouse
France

yvain.queau@enseeiht.fr

roberto.mecca@eng.cam.ac.uk

durou@irit.fr

Abstract
3D shape recovery using photometric stereo (PS) gained
increasing attention in the computer vision community in
the last three decades due to its ability to recover the
thinnest geometric structures. Yet, the reliabiliy of PS
for color images is difficult to guarantee, because existing
methods are usually formulated as the sequential estimation
of the colored albedos, the normals and the depth. Hence,
the overall reliability depends on that of each subtask. In
this work we propose a new formulation of color photometric stereo, based on image ratios, that makes the technique
independent from the albedos. This allows the unbiased 3Dreconstruction of colored surfaces in a single step, by solving a system of linear PDEs using a variational approach.

1. Introduction
The photometric stereo (PS) technique [54] consists in
inferring the shape (and, optionally, the reflectance) of a surface from a set of m images obtained from the same point of
view, while changing the illumination. It is a classical computer vision task which has caught the attention of many
researchers, one of the reasons being the simplicity of its
formulation.
Achieving 3D-reconstruction by PS requires inverting a
known photometric model. Formulating this inverse problem brings out to play important factors influencing the actual physics involved in the formation of digital images.
These factors are the surface shape, its material, the lighting
and the camera. To provide high-quality shape reconstruction, both latter factors are usually calibrated [55], hence PS
is mainly a technique for laboratory purposes which is used
in very controlled environment [51].
In most of works on PS, the surface reflectance is supposed to be Lambertian. The m lightings are usually modelled by known vectors si ∈ R3 , i ∈ [1, m], considering
∗ Marie Curie fellow of the Istituto Nazionale di Alta Matematica, Italy.

the directional model. It is also frequently assumed that the
camera captures graylevels. Under these assumptions, the
PS problem can be formulated as the inversion of the following linear photometric model:
I i (u, v) = ρ(u, v)n(u, v) ·si , i ∈ [1, m]
{z
}
|

(1)

m(u,v)

where I i (u, v) is the graylevel, ρ(u, v) the albedo, and
n(u, v) the unit outward normal to the surface. As long
as m ≥ 3 non-coplanar lightings are used, system (1) is a
full-rank linear system in m(u, v), which can be estimated
before deducing the albedo and the normal.
Current research on PS includes relaxing the assumptions above on the Lambertian reflectance [46], the directionality of the lightings [57], and the need for lighting calibration [38], as well as robustness enforcement [21], depth
inference from the estimated normals [16], outdoor photometric stereo [23], and scattering medium modelling [33].
In this work, we propose an unbiased variational formulation of PS for colored surfaces, while also considering extensions to perspective projection and non-directional lightings, and avoiding the need for normal integration. An example of result obtained using this new approach is presented in Figure 1.
Overview of the contribution. With the aim to provide
an unbiased solution to the PS problem, we derive a new
framework exploiting all the photometric clues available in
color images. In particular, we move beyond the classical
approach to PS by suggesting a simple formulation that is
independent from surface color and provides us with a single step procedure for approximating the depicted surface.
After showing the limits of existing color PS methods in
Section 2, we show in Section 3 how to use image ratios to
eliminate the dependency on the albedo, yielding a single
system of linear PDEs having the depth as unknown. We
suggest in Section 4 an efficient variational method for the
resolution of these PDEs. Eventually, we show in Section 5
the ductility of the new formulation, extending our framework to realistic acquisition setups such as perspective projection and non-directional lightings.
14359

