Learning Temporal Regularity in Video Sequences
Mahmudul Hasan

Jonghyun Choi†

UC Riverside

Jan Neumann†

Comcast Labs, DC†

University of Maryland, College Park‡

{mhasa004@,amitrc@ece.}ucr.edu {jonghyun choi,jan neumann}@cable.comcast.com

Abstract
Perceiving meaningful activities in a long video sequence is a challenging problem due to ambiguous definition of ‘meaningfulness’ as well as clutters in the scene. We
approach this problem by learning a generative model for
regular motion patterns (termed as regularity) using multiple sources with very limited supervision. Specifically, we
propose two methods that are built upon the autoencoders
for their ability to work with little to no supervision. We
first leverage the conventional handcrafted spatio-temporal
local features and learn a fully connected autoencoder on
them. Second, we build a fully convolutional feed-forward
autoencoder to learn both the local features and the classifiers as an end-to-end learning framework. Our model can
capture the regularities from multiple datasets. We evaluate our methods in both qualitative and quantitative ways showing the learned regularity of videos in various aspects
and demonstrating competitive performance on anomaly
detection datasets as an application.

1. Introduction
The availability of large numbers of uncontrolled videos
gives rise to the problem of watching long hours of meaningless scenes [1]. Automatic segmentation of ‘meaningful’ moments in such videos without supervision or with
very limited supervision is a fundamental problem for various computer vision applications such as video annotation [2], summarization [3, 4], indexing or temporal segmentation [5], anomaly detection [6], and activity recognition [7]. We address this problem by modeling temporal regularity of videos with limited supervision, rather than
modeling the sparse irregular or meaningful moments in a
supervised manner.
Learning temporal visual characteristics of meaningful
or salient moments is very challenging as the definition of
such moments is ill-defined i.e., visually unbounded. On
the other hand, learning temporal visual characteristics of
ordinary moments is relatively easier as they often exhibit
temporally regular dynamics such as periodic crowd motions. We focus on learning the characteristics of regular

Larry S. Davis‡

Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury

Learned Regularity

†

lsd@umiacs.umd.edu‡

Irregularity

Frame 122
Frame 630

Frame 1060
Frame 362

Regular Crowd
Dynamics

Loitering
Opposite Direction

Figure 1. Learned regularity of a video sequence. Y-axis refers
to regularity score and X-axis refers to frame number. When there
are irregular motions, the regularity score drops significantly (from
CUHK-Avenue dataset [8]).

temporal patterns with a very limited form of labeling - we
assume that all events in the training videos are part of the
regular patterns. Especially, we use multiple video sources,
e.g., different datasets, to learn the regular temporal appearance changing pattern of videos in a single model that can
then be used for multiple videos.
Given the training data of regular videos only, learning
the temporal dynamics of regular scenes is an unsupervised
learning problem. A state-of-the-art approach for such unsupervised modeling involves a combination of sparse coding and bag-of-words [8–10]. However, bag-of-words does
not preserve spatio-temporal structure of the words and requires prior information about the number of words. Additionally, optimization involved in sparse coding for both
training and testing is computationally expensive, especially with large data such as videos.
We present an approach based on autoencoders. Its
objective function is computationally more efficient than
sparse coding and it preserves spatio-temporal information
while encoding dynamics. The learned autoencoder reconstructs regular motion with low error but incurs higher reconstruction error for irregular motions. Reconstruction error has been widely used for abnormal event detection [6],
since it is a function of frame visual statistics and abnormalities manifest themselves as deviations from normal visual
patterns. Figure 1 shows an example of learned regularity, which is computed from the reconstruction error by a
learned model (Eq.3 and Eq.4).
1733

