Actor-Action Semantic Segmentation with Grouping Process Models
Chenliang Xu and Jason J. Corso
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{cliangxu,jjcorso}@umich.edu

Abstract
Actor-action semantic segmentation made an important
step toward advanced video understanding: what action is
happening; who is performing the action; and where is the
action happening in space-time. Current methods based on
layered CRFs for this problem are local and unable to capture the long-ranging interactions of video parts. We propose a new model that combines the labeling CRF with a
supervoxel hierarchy, where supervoxels at various scales
provide cues for possible groupings of nodes in the CRF
to encourage adaptive and long-ranging interactions. The
new model defines a dynamic and continuous process of
information exchange: the CRF influences what supervoxels in the hierarchy are active, and these active supervoxels, in turn, affect the connectivities in the CRF; we hence
call it a grouping process model. By further incorporating
the video-level recognition, the proposed method achieves a
large margin of 60% relative improvement over the state of
the art on the recent A2D large-scale video labeling dataset,
which demonstrates the effectiveness of our modeling.

1. Introduction
Advances in modern high-level computer vision have
helped usher in a new era of capable, perceptive physical
platforms, such as automated vehicles. As the performance
of these systems improves, the expectations of their capabilities and tasks will also increase, commensurately, with
platforms moving from the highways into our homes, for
example. The need for these platforms to understand not
only what action is happening, but also who is doing the action and where is the action happening in space-time, will
be increasingly critical to extracting semantics from videos
and, ultimately, to interacting with humans in our complex
world. For example, a home kitchen robot must distinguish
and locate adult-eating, dog-eating and baby-crying in order to decide how to prepare and when to serve food.
Despite the recent successes in many aspects of this
problem, such as action recognition [8, 15, 19, 30, 33, 37,

38], action segmentation [11, 22] and video object segmentation [7, 20, 21, 26, 28, 46], the collective problem had not
been codified until [40], which posed a new actor-action semantic segmentation task on a large-scale YouTube video
dataset called A2D. This dataset contains seven classes of
actors including both articulated (e.g. baby, cat and dog)
and rigid (e.g. car and ball) ones, and eight classes of actions (e.g. flying, walking and running). The task is to label
each pixel in a video with a pair of actor and action labels
or a null actor/action; one third of the A2D videos contain
multiple actors and actions.
This task is challenging—the benchmarked leading
method, the trilayer model, only achieves a 26.46% perclass accuracy for the joint actor-action video labeling [40].
The method builds a large three-layer CRF on video supervoxels, where random variables are defined for sets of actor,
actor-action, and action labels, respectively. It connects layers with potential functions that capture conditional probabilities (e.g. conditional distribution of actions given a specific actor class). Although the model accounts for the interplay of actors and actions, the interactions are restricted
to the local CRF neighborhoods, which, based on the low
absolute performance, is insufficient to solve this unique
actor-action problem for three reasons.
First, we believe the pixel-level model must be married to a secondary process that captures instance-level or
video-level global information in order to properly model
the actors performing actions. Lessons learned from images strongly supports this argument—the performance of
semantic image segmentation on the MSRC dataset seems
to hit a plateau [31] until information from secondary processes, such as context [16, 25], object detectors [17] and
a holistic scene model [43], are added. However, to the
best of our knowledge, there is no method in video semantic segmentation that directly leverages the recent successes
in action recognition.
Second, the two sets of labels, actors and actions, exist
at different granularities. For example, we want to label
adult-clapping in a video. The actor, adult, can probably be
recognized by looking only at the lower human body, e.g.
13083

