Sparsifying Neural Network Connections for Face Recognition
Yi Sun1

Xiaogang Wang2,4
1

2
3

Xiaoou Tang3,4

SenseTime Group

Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

sunyi@sensetime.com

xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper proposes to learn high-performance deep
ConvNets with sparse neural connections, referred to as sparse ConvNets, for face recognition. The sparse ConvNets
are learned in an iterative way, each time one additional
layer is sparsified and the entire model is re-trained given
the initial weights learned in previous iterations. One
important finding is that directly training the sparse ConvNet from scratch failed to find good solutions for face
recognition, while using a previously learned denser model
to properly initialize a sparser model is critical to continue
learning effective features for face recognition. This paper
also proposes a new neural correlation-based weight selection criterion and empirically verifies its effectiveness in
selecting informative connections from previously learned
models in each iteration. When taking a moderately sparse
structure (26%-76% of weights in the dense model), the
proposed sparse ConvNet model significantly improves the
face recognition performance of the previous state-of-theart DeepID2+ models given the same training data, while
it keeps the performance of the baseline model with only
12% of the original parameters.

1. Introduction
The number of parameters in a deep neural network
is restricted by the amount of training data. To reduce
model parameters, we introduce a new weight sparsifying
algorithm for deep convolutional neural networks, and the
learned models are referred to as sparse ConvNets. The sparse ConvNet is derived from a baseline high-performance
VGG-like deep neural network [21]. When trained on the
same approximately 300, 000 face images as DeepID2+
[24], the baseline VGG-like model achieves 98.95% face
verification accuracy on LFW [12] taking an entire face
region (and its horizontally flipped counterpart) as input.

xtang@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

When the sparsity is introduced to this baseline model, we
could significantly improve the performance from 98.95%
to 99.30%, reducing the error rate by 33%. Moreover, there
is a trade-off between model sizes and the performance, and
the performance of our baseline model can be kept with
only 12% of the original model sizes/parameters. A small
model size is preferred on some platforms such as mobile
devices.
The idea of reducing neural connections has been taken
in designing GoogLeNet [25], which achieved great success
on the ImageNet challenge [19]. GoogLeNet reduced
neural connections by using very small convolution kernels
of sizes 1 × 1 and 3 × 3. We further improve the degree of
sparsity by dropping connections in the already very small
3 × 3 convolution kernels in our base model and dropping
across different input feature maps. Moreover, the degree of
sparsity in our sparse ConvNets can be well controlled by a
single sparsity parameter, which makes it easier to make the
tradeoff between the performance and model sizes.
Inspired by the Hebbian rule that “neurons that fire
together wire together” [1], we drop more connections
between weekly correlated neurons than those between
strongly correlated neurons. The correlation between
two connected neurons are defined by the magnitude of
the correlation between their neural activations. On the
other hand, neurons in the previous layer which are more
correlated (either positively or negatively) to a given neuron
in the current layer are more helpful to predict the activities
of the latter.
We first train the baseline convolutional model, and
then dropping connections layer-wisely from the last to
the previous layers, each time only one additional layer is
sparsified and the entire model is re-trained. The previously
trained models are used to calculate the neural correlations
and initialize the subsequent sparser models. It is found
that directly train a sparsely connected model is difficult
and lead to inferior performance. We conjecture this is
because without the help of denser models, a sparse model
14856

