Online Multi-Object Tracking via Structural Constraint Event Aggregation
Ju Hong Yoon
KETI

Chang-Ryeol Lee
CV Lab., GIST

Ming-Hsuan Yang
UC Merced

Kuk-Jin Yoon
CV Lab., GIST

jhyoon@keti.re.kr

crlee@gist.ac.kr

mhyang@ucmerced.edu

kjyoon@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Multi-object tracking (MOT) becomes more challenging
when objects of interest have similar appearances. In that
case, the motion cues are particularly useful for discriminating multiple objects. However, for online 2D MOT in
scenes acquired from moving cameras, observable motion
cues are complicated by global camera movements and thus
not always smooth or predictable. To deal with such unexpected camera motion for online 2D MOT, a structural
motion constraint between objects has been utilized thanks
to its robustness to camera motion. In this paper, we propose a new data association method that effectively exploits
structural motion constraints in the presence of large camera motion. In addition, to further improve the robustness of
data association against mis-detections and false positives,
a novel event aggregation approach is developed to integrate structural constraints in assignment costs for online
MOT. Experimental results on a large number of datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm for
online 2D MOT.

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) aims to estimate object trajectories according to the identities in image sequences. Recently, thanks to the advances of object detectors [6, 24],
numerous tracking-by-detection approaches have been developed for MOT. In this type of approaches, target objects are detected first and tracking algorithms estimate their
trajectories using detection results. Tracking-by-detection
methods can be broadly categorized into online and offline (batch or semi-batch) tracking methods. Offline MOT
methods generally utilize detection results from past and future frames. Tracklets are first generated by linking individual detections in a number of frames, and then iteratively
associated to construct long trajectories of objects in the entire sequence, or in a time-sliding window with a temporal
delay (e.g., [22, 27]). On the other hand, online MOT algorithms estimate object trajectories using only detections
from the current as well as past frames (e.g. [4]), and online

MOT algorithms are more applicable to real-time applications such as advanced driving assistant systems and robot
navigation.
In MOT, object appearances are used as important cues
for data association which solves the assignment problems of detections-to-detections, detections-to-tracklets,
and tracklets-to-tracklets. However, appearance cues alone
are not sufficient to discriminate multiple objects, especially
for tracking similar objects (e.g., pedestrians, faces, and
vehicles). Tracking-by-detection methods typically exploit
motion as well as appearance cues, and use certain (e.g.,
linear or turn) models to describe the object movements.
However, for online 2D MOT in scenes acquired from moving cameras, observable motion cues are complicated by
global camera movements and not always smooth or predictable. In other words, even when the individual object
motion model is updated with consecutive detections, it is
not reliable enough to predict the next location of an object
when the camera moves severely. The situation becomes
worse when objects are not correctly detected since, without correct detections, object motion models cannot be updated to take camera motion into account. While significant
advances on batch (or semi-online) trackers have been made
(e.g., [5, 14, 20, 28]), online MOT using motion constraints
from detection results has not yet been much explored.
In this paper, we propose a new data association method
for effectively exploiting the structural motion constraints
between objects for online 2D MOT, which considers camera motion as well as ambiguities caused by the frequent
mis-detections. The structural constraints are represented
by the location and velocity differences between objects.
Using these constraints, we introduce a new cost function
which takes global camera motion into account to associate
multiple objects. In addition, to reduce the assignment ambiguities caused by mis-detections as shown in Figure 1, we
propose the event aggregation approach which considers the
structural constraints and assignment events.
We incorporate the proposed data association and the
structural constraints into a two-step online 2D MOT framework, which consists of two data association steps. In the
first step, by using the proposed structural constraint event
11392

