Automated 3D Face Reconstruction from Multiple Images
using Quality Measures
Marcel Piotraschke and Volker Blanz
Institute for Vision and Graphics, University of Siegen, Germany
piotraschke@nt.uni-siegen.de, blanz@informatik.uni-siegen.de

Abstract
Automated 3D reconstruction of faces from images is
challenging if the image material is difficult in terms of
pose, lighting, occlusions and facial expressions, and if the
initial 2D feature positions are inaccurate or unreliable. We
propose a method that reconstructs individual 3D shapes
from multiple single images of one person, judges their
quality and then combines the best of all results. This is
done separately for different regions of the face. The core
element of this algorithm and the focus of our paper is a
quality measure that judges a reconstruction without information about the true shape. We evaluate different quality measures, develop a method for combining results, and
present a complete processing pipeline for automated reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Algorithms that reconstruct 3D faces from images by
fitting a deformable face model, such as a 3D Morphable
Model (3DMM), rely on a relatively precise initial positioning of the face [7] or on a set of feature point coordinates
[8]. For an automated procedure, it is straight-forward to
combine these algorithms with automatic face and landmark
detection, such as the algorithm by Zhu and Ramanan [33]
or other feature detectors [11]. In practice, however, this
combination has turned out to be more challenging than expected, posing a number of fundamental questions. The feature point detection is a non-trivial task, especially if the image material includes complex lighting, facial expressions,
wrinkles, eye glasses or facial hair. Therefore, the features
may be inaccurate, and some may even be outliers. Moreover, the optimal set of features for 3DMM fitting includes
points that are not easy to detect, such as the facial silhouette and the ears. Those points are necessary for the 3DMM
to converge to the correct pose angle, and this in turn affects
the shape estimate.
Therefore, a simple combination of existing methods

Figure 1: A segment-based, weighted linear combination is
used to create the final head shape. The weight decreases
with the rank. Implausible segments are discarded. Note
that each facial segment is handled separately. Optionally
the texture can be extracted from one of the input images.

produces results that are substantially worse than those obtained with manually labeled features. Attempts to make
3DMM fitting more robust [10] are promising but still not
sufficient. Instead, we argue that in many real-world applications more than one image of a person is available, so an
automated algorithm can exploit redundant data from multiple images to gain robustness and reliability. Our algorithm
outperforms existing methods of simultaneous 3D reconstruction from multiple images [7] significantly, which may
be due to the fact that outliers in feature positions adversely
affect the simultaneous least squares solution.
In contrast, our algorithm calculates separate reconstructions from each input image, and then combines them to an
optimal overall solution. We propose a method that selects
the most plausible reconstructions, operates on different region of the face separately, and merges them into a single
3D face.
The key component of our algorithm is a new measure

3418

