Learning Action Maps of Large Environments via First-Person Vision
Nicholas Rhinehart, Kris M. Kitani
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
{nrhineha, kkitani}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
When people observe and interact with physical spaces,
they are able to associate functionality to regions in the
environment. Our goal is to automate dense functional
understanding of large spaces by leveraging sparse activity demonstrations recorded from an ego-centric viewpoint.
The method we describe enables functionality estimation
in large scenes where people have behaved, as well as
novel scenes where no behaviors are observed. Our method
learns and predicts “Action Maps”, which encode the ability for a user to perform activities at various locations. With
the usage of an egocentric camera to observe human activities, our method scales with the size of the scene without the
need for mounting multiple static surveillance cameras and
is well-suited to the task of observing activities up-close. We
demonstrate that by capturing appearance-based attributes
of the environment and associating these attributes with activity demonstrations, our proposed mathematical framework allows for the prediction of Action Maps in new environments. Additionally, we offer a preliminary glance of the
applicability of Action Maps by demonstrating a proof-ofconcept application in which they are used in concert with
activity detections to perform localization.

1. Introduction
The goal of this work is to endow intelligent systems
with the ability to understand the functional attributes of
their environment. Such functional understanding of spaces
is a crucial component of holistic understanding and decision making by any agent, human or robotic. Functional
understanding of a scene can range from the immediate environment to the distant. For example, at the scale of a single room, a person can perceive the arrangement of tables,
chairs, and computers in an office environment, and reason
that they could sit down and type at the computer. People
can also reason about the functionality about nearby rooms,
for example, the presence of a kitchen down the hall from
the office is useful functional and spatial information for
when the person decides to prepare a meal. The goal of this

Figure 1: Action Map prediction for the sit activity by using
our method to combine appearance data and activity observations.
Activity and appearance information from the top scene in combination with only appearance information (no activity observations)
from the bottom scene is used to model the relationship between
activities, scene information, and object information to make predictions for both scenes. Areas in the scenes where a person can
sit are estimated by our method, such as the chairs and couches in
both views.

work is to learn a computational model of the functionality
of large environments, called Action Maps (AMs), by observing human interactions and the visual context of those
1580

