Efficient Large-Scale Similarity Search Using Matrix Factorization
Ahmet Iscen
Inria
Rennes, France

Michael Rabbat
McGill University
Montréal, Canada

Teddy Furon
Inria
Rennes, France

ahmet.iscen@inria.fr

michael.rabbat@mcgill.ca

teddy.furon@inria.fr

Abstract
We consider the image retrieval problem of finding the
images in a dataset that are most similar to a query image. Our goal is to reduce the number of vector operations
and memory for performing a search without sacrificing accuracy of the returned images. We adopt a group testing
formulation and design the decoding architecture using either dictionary learning or eigendecomposition. The latter
is a plausible option for small-to-medium sized problems
with high-dimensional global image descriptors, whereas
dictionary learning is applicable in large-scale scenarios. We evaluate our approach for global descriptors obtained from both SIFT and CNN features. Experiments
with standard image search benchmarks, including the Yahoo100M dataset comprising 100 million images, show that
our method gives comparable (and sometimes superior) accuracy compared to exhaustive search while requiring only
10% of the vector operations and memory. Moreover, for
the same search complexity, our method gives significantly
better accuracy compared to approaches based on dimensionality reduction or locality sensitive hashing.

1. Introduction
This paper is about image retrieval and similarity search
for large datasets. Image retrieval aims to find the images
in a large scale dataset that are most similar to a given
query image. Recent approaches [16, 24] aggregate local
SIFT [17] features or use deep-learning networks [4] to create a global descriptor vector for each image. Visual similarity is then quantified by measuring the similarity of these
vectors (e.g., cosine similarity). If the dataset has N images
each represented by a d-dimensional feature vector, then an
exhaustive search for each query requires dN operations.
A common approach to accelerate image search is indexing, which operates in sub-linear time [20]. Indexing
partitions the feature space Rd into clusters and computes
similarities between the query and dataset vectors that fall
in the same or neighboring clusters. Yet, as the dimension

d grows, the chance that similar images are assigned to different clusters increases, and the efficiency of these methods
collapses [20, 31]. This is problematic in computer vision
since most state-of-the-art image descriptors have high intrinsic dimensionality. A recent work tries to solve this by
indexing descriptors based on sparse approximation [5].
Another popular approach to efficient image search performs a linear scan over the dataset, computing approximate
similarities using compact codes [2, 3, 6, 8, 14, 32]. These
techniques have a complexity of d′ N where d′ < d is the
reduced dimensionality of the compact code. The similarity between vectors in Rd is approximated by the distance
between their compact codes. State-of-the-art large scale
search algorithms combine indexing strategies with approximated similarities [14].
Recently, a complementary approach inspired by group
testing has emerged [11, 27]. Here the goal is to reduce
the number of vectors against which the query is compared. The full dataset of N vectors is first summarized
by M ≪ N group vectors, where each group vector is also
d-dimensional. As the name suggests, each group vector
represents a small subset of images in the original dataset.
These groups are composed by a random partition of the
dataset. Computation of the group vectors is performed
offline under a specific construction such that a comparison group vector vs query vector measures how likely the
group contains query matching vectors. Then, when presented with a query, the system compares the query with
the group vectors instead of individual image vectors. This
reduces the complexity from dN to dM .
Initial attempts [11, 27] considered an adaptive group
testing approach. M groups are composed from the dataset,
and querying proceeds in two stages. In the first stage,
the scores between group vectors and the query are computed. They measure how likely their group contains some
matching images. Then, in the second stage, the query
is compared with individual image vectors for only the
mostly likely positive groups. If the groups are roughly balanced in size and the query only matches a small number
of group vectors, then the complexity is reduced from dN

2073

