Single Image Camera Calibration with Lenticular Arrays for Augmented Reality
Ian Schillebeeckx
Washington University in St. Louis
1 Brookings Dr, St. Louis, MO 63130

Robert Pless
Washington University in St. Louis
1 Brookings Dr, St. Louis, MO 63130

ischillebeeckx@wustl.edu

pless@wustl.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of camera pose estimation for
a scenario where the camera may have continuous and unknown changes in its focal length. Understanding frame by
frame changes in camera focal length is vital to accurately
estimating camera pose and vital to accurately rendering
virtual objects in a scene with the correct perspective. However, most approaches to camera calibration require geometric constraints from many frames or the observation of
a 3D calibration object — both of which may not be feasible in augmented reality settings. This paper introduces a
calibration object based on a flat lenticular array that creates a color coded light-field whose observed color changes
depending on the angle from which it is viewed. We derive
an approach to estimate the focal length of the camera and
the relative pose of an object from a single image. We characterize the performance of camera calibration across various focal lengths and camera models, and we demonstrate
the advantages of the focal length estimation in rendering a
virtual object in a video with constant zooming.

1. Introduction
Camera calibration is often the first step for Computer
Vision and Augmented Reality (AR) applications because
it defines how the scene is projected onto an image by the
camera. Calibration characterizes the photometric and geometric properties of the camera, that define, respectively,
how the pixels of the camera report color and intensity of
the scene, and where scene elements appear on the image.
Typically, camera calibration techniques are based on
images of a recognizable object at different views. Constraints on the camera geometry are created by finding 3D
points on the object and corresponding them to 2D image
points. When it is necessary to calibrate the intrinsic camera parameters such as the camera focal length, it is often
necessary to user either multiple images of a planar object,
or an object with substantial 3D extent. This is because the
image of a single flat object may look similar in an image

Figure 1. A calibration object made from 3 lenticular arrays. Each
lenticular array has an observed color that changes depending on
its viewing angle. (Left) When viewed from reasonably far away,
the arrays have relatively consistent colors because they are being
viewed from approximately the same angle. (Right) A wide angle view from much closer has significant color variation because
the direction from the camera to different parts of the object varies
substantially. This paper uses this color variation to derive strong
geometric constraints for simultaneous, single-image pose estimation and camera calibration.

taken from a wide angle camera near the object or a more
zoomed in camera far away.
This creates a challenge for augmented reality applications that are required to work with dynamic scenes and
changing camera parameters such as a movie shot that requires camera zooming. This paper offers a new approach
to geometric calibration of a camera that requires a single
image of a calibration object that may lie within a larger
scene. The calibration object that we propose is shown in
Figure 1.
This calibration object is based on several lenticular arrays. A lenticular array is a sheet of plastic which is comprised of many tiny parallel cylindrical lenses. Figure 2 de13290

