Gravitational Approach for Point Set Registration
Vladislav Golyanik1,2

Sk Aziz Ali1

Didier Stricker1,2

vladislav.golyanik@dfki.de

saali@rhrk.uni-kl.de

didier.stricker@dfki.de

1

2

University of Kaiserslautern, Germany
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Germany

Abstract
In this paper a new astrodynamics inspired rigid point
set registration algorithm is introduced — the Gravitational
Approach (GA). We formulate point set registration as a
modified N -body problem with additional constraints and
obtain an algorithm with unique properties which is fully
scalable with the number of processing cores. In GA, a template point set moves in a viscous medium under gravitational forces induced by a reference point set. Pose updates
are completed by numerically solving the differential equations of Newtonian mechanics. We discuss techniques for
efficient implementation of the new algorithm and evaluate
it on several synthetic and real-world scenarios. GA is compared with the widely used Iterative Closest Point and the
state of the art rigid Coherent Point Drift algorithms. Experiments evidence that the new approach is robust against
noise and can handle challenging scenarios with structured
outliers.

Figure 1: Point set registration with the Gravitational Approach: template
moves in the gravitational field induced by the reference. Coordinates of
the template points are individually updated by solving equations of particle motion in a viscous medium, whereupon rigidity constraints are applied. Left: initial misalignment of the helix point sets [8] and the induced
gravitational field; right: registration result after 150 iterations.

1. Introduction
We enter the era of pervasive 3D technologies. This development is accompanied by a clear tendency: as 3D acquisition devices become ubiquitous, the need for reliable
point cloud processing algorithms including those for alignment grows. Point set registration is an actively researched
area with applications in different domains of computer
science and engineering such as shape recognition, action
transfer, 3D reconstruction and animation, computer-aided
design, industrial quality control and robotics.
In the point set registration problem, the objective is to
find an optimal alignment between two (generally several)
point sets and recover transformation parameters. Thereby
an optimal transformation of the template point set to the
reference point set as well as point affiliations are sought,
so that both point sets coincide in an optimal way. Several
optimality criteria are possible. In the case of rigid point
set registration, a transformation is entirely described by pa-

Figure 2: Registration results of ICP [6], CPD [24] and our approach on
real data with introduced clustered outliers. (a) Initialization; template
(shown in blue) is located between the reference human scan and outliers
arranged as a sphere (shown in red). (b) ICP registration result — the
algorithm is trapped into a local minimum; (c) GA registration results (left:
an optimal parameter; right: a suboptimal parameter); (d) CPD registration
results (left: an optimal parameter; right: a suboptimal parameter).

rameters of the rigid body motion, i.e. rotation and translation applied to all points simultaneously. Often scaling is
15802

