Deep Relative Distance Learning: Tell the Difference Between Similar Vehicles
Hongye Liu1,3 , Yonghong Tian1,3∗ , Yaowei Wang2∗, Lu Pang1,3 , Tiejun Huang1,3
1
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, Peking University, Beijing
2
School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing
3
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, China
{hongyeliu, yhtian, panglu, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn, yaoweiwang@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
The growing explosion in the use of surveillance cameras in public security highlights the importance of vehicle search from a large-scale image or video database.
However, compared with person re-identification or face
recognition, vehicle search problem has long been neglected by researchers in vision community. This paper
focuses on an interesting but challenging problem, vehicle
re-identification (a.k.a precise vehicle search). We propose
a Deep Relative Distance Learning (DRDL) method which
exploits a two-branch deep convolutional network to project
raw vehicle images into an Euclidean space where distance
can be directly used to measure the similarity of arbitrary
two vehicles. To further facilitate the future research on
this problem, we also present a carefully-organized largescale image database “VehicleID”, which includes multiple images of the same vehicle captured by different realworld cameras in a city. We evaluate our DRDL method on
our VehicleID dataset and another recently-released vehicle model classification dataset “CompCars” in three sets
of experiments: vehicle re-identification, vehicle model verification and vehicle retrieval. Experimental results show
that our method can achieve promising results and outperforms several state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, there is an explosive growing requirement
of vehicle search and re-identification (Re-ID) from largescale surveillance image and video database in public security systems. License plate naturally is an unique ID of a
vehicle, and license plate recognition has already been used
widely in transportation management applications. Unfortunately, we can not identify a vehicle simply by its plate
in some cases. First, most surveillance cameras are not in∗ Corresponding author:Yonghong Tian and Yaowei Wang (email: yhtian@pku.edu.cn, yaoweiwang@bit.edu.cn).

stalled for license plate capturing, thus, plate recognition
performance drops dramatically on images/video data captured by these cameras. Furthermore, license plates are often occluded, removed, or even faked in a large number
of previous security events. Therefore, vision-based vehicle re-identification has a great practical value in realworld surveillance applications. Specifically, vehicle reidentification is the problem of identifying the same vehicle
across different surveillance camera views. Fig. 1 gives a
straightforward description of it.

Figure 1. Given multiple candidates as the gallery set, the vehicle
re-identification task is to find the matched one for each probe image. Notice that the illumination and viewpoint in different cameras can be varied a lot and different vehicles could be quite similar
if they are of the same model.

Though the problem of vehicle re-identification has already been discussed for many years, most of the existed
works rely on a various of different sensors [18, 10, 12].
To our knowledge, there is no previous attempt on the vehicle re-identification task purely by vehicle’s visual appearance yet and the primary reason could be the lack of highquality and large-scale vehicle Re-ID datasets. Existed vehicle datasets [9, 21] are usually designed for vehicle at12167

