Fine-grained Categorization and Dataset Bootstrapping using Deep Metric
Learning with Humans in the Loop
Yin Cui1,2
1

Feng Zhou3

Yuanqing Lin3
2

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
1,2

{ycui, sjb}@cs.cornell.edu

3

Serge Belongie1,2

Cornell Tech

3

NEC Labs America

{feng, ylin}@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Existing fine-grained visual categorization methods often suffer from three challenges: lack of training data,
large number of fine-grained categories, and high intraclass vs. low inter-class variance. In this work we propose a generic iterative framework for fine-grained categorization and dataset bootstrapping that handles these three
challenges. Using deep metric learning with humans in the
loop, we learn a low dimensional feature embedding with
anchor points on manifolds for each category. These anchor points capture intra-class variances and remain discriminative between classes. In each round, images with
high confidence scores from our model are sent to humans
for labeling. By comparing with exemplar images, labelers
mark each candidate image as either a “true positive” or
a “false positive.” True positives are added into our current dataset and false positives are regarded as “hard negatives” for our metric learning model. Then the model is retrained with an expanded dataset and hard negatives for the
next round. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
framework, we bootstrap a fine-grained flower dataset with
620 categories from Instagram images. The proposed deep
metric learning scheme is evaluated on both our dataset and
the CUB-200-2001 Birds dataset. Experimental evaluations
show significant performance gain using dataset bootstrapping and demonstrate state-of-the-art results achieved by
the proposed deep metric learning methods.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) has received
increased interest from the computer vision community in
recent years. By definition, FGVC, as a sub-field of object recognition, aims to distinguish subordinate categories
within an entry-level category. For example, in fine-grained
flower categorization [33, 34, 3], we want to identify the
species of a flower in an image, such as “nelumbo nucifera

Dataset Expansion

lotus ﬂower

Candidate ﬂower images
tulip

Fine-grained ﬂower classiﬁer
trained with deep metric learning
input

u13

…
True positives

False positives

lotus ﬂower

“hard negatives”
for lotus ﬂower

tulip

“hard negatives”
for tulip

u23
u11

u22

u12

…

u21
“lotus ﬂower”
manifold

“tulip”
manifold

…

…

…

Conﬁdence > 50%

…

exemplar lotus ﬂowers
and description
lotus ﬂower?
yes!

“lotus ﬂower”
candidates

“tulip”
candidates

…

Human labeling

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed framework. Using deep metric
learning with humans in the loop, we learn a low dimensional feature embedding for each category that can be used for fine-grained
visual categorization and iterative dataset bootstrapping.

(lotus flower),” “tulip” or “cherry blossom.” Other examples include classifying different types of plants [28], birds
[7, 6], dogs [24], insects [30], galaxies [13, 11]; recognizing brand, model and year of cars [26, 46, 48]; and face
identification [39, 36].
Most existing FGVC methods fall into a classical twostep scheme: feature extraction followed by classification
[1, 5, 8, 35]. Since these two steps are independent, the
performance of the whole system is often suboptimal compared with an end-to-end system using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) that can be globally optimized via
back-propagation [6, 50, 25, 32]. Therefore, in this work,
we focus on developing an end-to-end CNN-based method
for FGVC. However, compared with general purpose visual
categorization, there are three main challenges arising when
11153

