Dictionary Pair Classifier Driven Convolutional Neural Networks
for Object Detection
Keze Wang1,3 ,
1
2

Liang Lin1∗,

Wangmeng Zuo2 ,

Shuhang Gu3 ,

Lei Zhang3

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
3

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

linliang@ieee.org; {kezewang, cswmzuo}@gmail.com; {cssgu, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk.

Abstract
Feature representation and object category classification are two key components of most object detection methods. While significant improvements have been
achieved for deep feature representation learning, traditional SVM/softmax classifiers remain the dominant methods for the final object category classification. However,
SVM/softmax classifiers lack the capacity of explicitly exploiting the complex structure of deep features, as they are
purely discriminative methods. The recently proposed discriminative dictionary pair learning (DPL) model involves
a fidelity term to minimize the reconstruction loss and a discrimination term to enhance the discriminative capability
of the learned dictionary pair, and thus is appropriate for
balancing the representation and discrimination to boost
object detection performance. In this paper, we propose
a novel object detection system by unifying DPL with the
convolutional feature learning. Specifically, we incorporate
DPL as a Dictionary Pair Classifier Layer (DPCL) into the
deep architecture, and develop an end-to-end learning algorithm for optimizing the dictionary pairs and the neural
networks simultaneously. Moreover, we design a multi-task
loss for guiding our model to accomplish the three correlated tasks: objectness estimation, categoryness computation, and bounding box regression. From the extensive
experiments on PASCAL VOC 2007/2012 benchmarks, our
approach demonstrates the effectiveness to substantially improve the performances over the popular existing object detection frameworks (e.g., R-CNN [13] and FRCN [12]), and
achieves new state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Aiming at finding instances of real-world objects from
images or video sequences, object detection has been at∗ Corresponding author is Liang Lin (Email: linliang@ieee.org).

tracting great interests in computer vision community. Although its performance has been improved substantially in
the past decade [31, 34, 21, 8, 30, 33, 13, 16], object detection remains a challenge problem under complex and unconstrained environments.
Recently, ground breaking progress on object detection
has been made due to the advances in deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [19, 28] and the increasing size
of training dataset [5]. The state-of-the-art object detection
methods generally adopt the region-based CNN framework
which includes three components: region proposal, feature
extraction and object category classification. By far, many
region proposal methods [31, 3, 24] and deep CNN architectures [13, 26, 28, 27, 16, 12] have been proposed, but not
too many methods have been proposed for object category
classification, where the SVM/softmax classifiers are dominantly used. Several complex classifiers, such as network
on convolutional feature maps (NoCs) [25] and structured
SVM [38], have been developed to improve the accuracy
and robustness of object detection. These classifiers, however, are fully discriminative methods which directly learn
an optimal mapping from the CNN features to the desired
classification output.
Combining of discriminative learning with representation or generative modeling is beneficial to exploit the complex structure of CNN features for improving object detection. As an extension of the reconstructive dictionary learning proposed in image and signal modeling, discriminative
dictionary learning (DDL) has achieved great success in the
last decade [22, 9, 36, 18]. DDL aims to learn a dictionary by considering both its representation accuracy and
discriminative capability, and thus it is more suitable to act
as a classifier for object category classification. However,
the existing DDL methods cannot achieve state-of-the-art
performance for large scale image classification and object
detection, partially due to that the DDL models have only
been evaluated with conventional handcrafted features (e.g.,
12138

