Variable Aperture Light Field Photography:
Overcoming the Diffraction-limited Spatio-angular Resolution Tradeoff
Julie Chang1
1

Isaac Kauvar1
Stanford University

Xuemei Hu1,2
Gordon Wetzstein1
2
Tsinghua University
Small-f-number

Abstract

1. Introduction
Although the principles of light field photography have
been known for more than a century [22], only recently have
these concepts been implemented in practical digital imaging systems [29]. Today, light fields are widely used for 3D
imaging applications [16, 35, 40, 21], in robotic [6] and machine vision1 , for digital re-focus in consumer electronics2 ,
and for instantaneous 3D fluorescence microscopy [19, 31].
In all of these applications, the primary benefits that light
fields offer stem from the angular variation, or perspective,
in the individual light field views.
One of the major remaining challenges of light field
imaging is image resolution. In particular, existing schemes
for measuring the light field inherently trade away spatial
resolution, the ability to resolve two points in space, for angular resolution, the ability to distinguish between incoming
light from two incidence angles. Whereas a conventional
camera uses all of its sensor pixels for spatial sampling
1 http://www.raytrix.de/
2 https://www.lytro.com/

Depth-of-Field
10

Blur-size-[mm]

Light fields have many applications in machine vision,
consumer photography, robotics, and microscopy. However, the prevalent resolution limits of existing light field
imaging systems hinder widespread adoption. In this paper, we analyze fundamental resolution limits of light field
cameras in the diffraction limit. We propose a sequential, coded-aperture-style acquisition scheme that optimizes
the resolution of a light field reconstructed from multiple
photographs captured from different perspectives and fnumber settings. We also show that the proposed acquisition scheme facilitates high dynamic range light field imaging and demonstrate a proof-of-concept prototype system.
With this work, we hope to advance our understanding of
the resolution limits of light field photography and develop
practical computational imaging systems to overcome them.

Large-f-number

f/2
f/5.6
f/22
5

0
100

200

300

400

Distance-from-Camera-Lens-[mm]

Figure 1. Photographs captured with different f-number settings
exhibit different depths of field and also diffraction-limited resolution for in-focus objects (top row). This effect is most pronounced
for macro photography, such as illustrated for a 50 mm lens focused at 200 mm (bottom plot). Using multiple photographs captured from different perspectives and with different f-number settings, the proposed method seeks to recover a light field with the
highest possible in-focus and out-of-focus information.

with zero angular resolution, lenslet-based light field cameras, for example, gain angular information directly at the
expense of a reduced spatial sampling rate. The set-point
of this tradeoff is determined by the size of the lenslets, or
equivalently, by the number of pixels behind a single lenslet.
One might argue that use of a sensor with more pixels would
enable adequate spatial sampling with spare pixels to dedicate for angular sampling [28]; it turns out, however, that
the spatio-angular tradeoff is fundamental to lenslet-based
and related techniques for measuring the light field, and it
is ultimately limited not by the number of available sensor
pixels, but by the wave nature of light [37]. Using wavebased models of phase space [47], it can be shown that the
spatio-angular resolution of light field cameras is bound by
properties made famous by Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle. Because spatial and angular dimensions are Fourier
conjugate variables, localizing the information of a signal
along one dimension at a point in time will necessarily lead
to a loss of information in the other dimension at that time

3737

