Online Collaborative Learning for Open-Vocabulary Visual Classifiers
Hanwang Zhang† , Xindi Shang† , Wenzhuo Yang† , Huan Xu† , Huanbo Luan‡ , Tat-Seng Chua†
†

National University of Singapore, ‡ Tsinghua University

{hanwangzhang,xindi1992,luanhuanbo}@gmail.com; {wenzhuo,mpexuh,dcscts}@nus.edu.sg

In recent years, we have witnessed the impressive
progress of visual classiﬁers that help to move a large variety of visual applications from academic prototypes into
industrial products [27, 41]. However, when we communicate with vision systems using natural language, those classiﬁers with a predeﬁned vocabulary (e.g., ImageNet [35])
generally fail due to vocabulary discrepancy and scarcity.
For example, “dolphin” is usually used instead of “grampus griseus” [33] and adjective classiﬁers like “romantic” or
“exciting” are usually scarce as compared to nouns [28, 19].
Recently, much attention has been paid to scale up visual
classiﬁers to open-vocabulary, which covers the full range
of vocabulary in natural language [18, 16, 46].
One major limitation of the scale-up is the difﬁculty
in acquiring sufﬁcient well-labeled datasets with many
classes, e.g., even the full ImageNet only contains images

Reagan in pink
striped dress in
front yard - 82

some colorful
fish by the dock

car
racer
bmw

Labels

C

la N-w
ss
ifi ay
ca
tio
n

Label

1
0
1
0

Traditional Classifiers

Label Embedding
Label

1
0
1
0

Image
Embedding

1. Introduction

2 pretty girl and
the old school bus
in Thammasart U.

Label
Embedding

We focus on learning open-vocabulary visual classifiers,
which scale up to a large portion of natural language vocabulary (e.g., over tens of thousands of classes). In particular, the training data are large-scale weakly labeled Web
images since it is difficult to acquire sufficient well-labeled
data at this category scale. In this paper, we propose a
novel online learning paradigm towards this challenging
task. Different from traditional N-way independent classifiers that generally fail to handle the extremely sparse
and inter-related labels, our classifiers learn from continuous label embeddings discovered by collaboratively decomposing the sparse image-label matrix. Leveraging on
the structure of the proposed collaborative learning formulation, we develop an efficient online algorithm that can
jointly learn the label embeddings and visual classifiers.
The algorithm can learn over 30,000 classes of 1,000 training images within 1 second on a standard GPU. Extensively
experimental results on four benchmarks demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method.

Out walking home
early in the morning, i
see this. A Macintosh
Plus in a tree.. Briljant!

Frequency (Log)

Abstract

regression

Collaborative Classifier

Figure 1. Top: Web images are usually noisy and incomplete.
These examples are from SBU 1M Flickr image dataset [34],
which is used as the training data. Middle: The power-law distribution of labels suggests that the images are sparsely labeled.
We transform such extreme sparsity to continuous label space that
preserve semantic relations. Different colors suggest various semantic clusters by K-means. Bottom: As compared to traditional
classiﬁers, ours are learned from the latent embeddings.

of around 20K nouns. Fortunately, a promising method to
acquire more labels has been recently studied on learning
concepts from millions of noisy Web images. This method
utilizes user-generated textual descriptions as labels and can
naturally accommodate an open vocabulary [34, 29, 49].
However, learning open-vocabulary classiﬁers from a large
weakly-labeled dataset is not a trivial extension to the conventional N-way classiﬁcation (e.g., one-vs-all SVM or
softmax that treats the N classes independently), due to the
following three challenges:
Extreme Sparse Labels. Web images are usually weakly
annotated, i.e., an image is usually described by only a
small number of words as compared to the whole vocabulary. This results in extreme sparse labels, where the miss12809

