Pairwise Linear Regression Classification for Image Set Retrieval
Qingxiang Feng, Yicong Zhou∗, Rushi Lan
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
Avenida da Universidade, Taipa, Macau, China
fengqx1988@gmail.com, yicongzhou@umac.mo, rslan2012@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper proposes the pairwise linear regression classification (PLRC) for image set retrieval. In PLRC, we first
define a new concept of the unrelated subspace and introduce two strategies to constitute the unrelated subspace. In
order to increase the information of maximizing the query
set and the unrelated image set, we introduce a combination
metric for two new classifiers based on two constitution strategies of the unrelated subspace. Extensive experiments
on six well-known databases prove that the performance of
PLRC is better than that of DLRC and several state-of-theart classifiers for different vision recognition tasks: clusterbased face recognition, video-based face recognition, object recognition and action recognition.

1. Introduction
In pattern recognition and computer vision fields, images
classification tasks (e.g., face recognition, object recognition and action recognition) attract a lot of researchers’ attention. Good performance is known to be highly reply on
classifiers. A number of classifiers were proposed, such as
the nearest neighbor (NN) [4], SVM classifier [15], sparse
representation-based classifications (SRC) [20] and linear
regression classification (LRC) [13]. These classifiers use
a single test sample for classification. Their classification
performance, however, is generally dependent on the base
or representation of individual test samples. Recently, researchers paid more attention to the image-set-based classification that is a generalization of video-based classification. They both use multiple test samples. In [8], the imageset based face recognition is considered as the same category as video-based face recognition. Several image set-based
methods use only benchmarks of video databases for their
evaluation [1, 17, 19, 21]. However, the video-based classification is not suitable for some applications. For example, the real-time recognition systems may have difficulty

to always obtain videos with a proper length and sufficient
detectable images. Therefore, the limited-sample-query-set
based classification becomes significative.
For similar classification tasks, dual linear regression classification (DLRC) [3] was proposed as a non-parametric approach. It borrows the idea of LRC [13] and extends LRC
from the single-query-sample based method to the imageset-based method. DLRC has a demonstrated better performance than a few well-known methods. However, DLRC
considers only the related class-subspace for classification.
That is to say, it pays attention only to minimizing the distance between the query set and the related train set.
In the paper, we proposed the pairwise linear regression
classification (PLRC) for image set retrieval. As an improved version of DLRC, PLRC introduces the new unrelated subspace to maximize the distance between the query
set and the unrelated images set, and utilizes a new combined metric that integrates a related metric and a new unrelated metric for classification. The effectiveness of the
proposed PLRC is assessed on six popular databases. They
include LFW face database [25], AR face database [12] for
cluster-based face recognition, Honda/UCSD database [11],
CMU Mobo database [6] for video-based face recognition,
the Caltech101 object database [5] for object recognition,
UCF50 action database [14] for action recognition.
The main contributions of the paper are as follows:
• We propose the unrelated subspace concept to improve
the traditional of DLRC method.
• Using this concept, we introduce two strategies to constitute the unrelated subspace. The optimization problem in (18) of the first strategy is based on the imageset, which is different from the previous optimization
problem based on the single test sample in SRC [20]
and CRC [24].
• We propose the new unrelated metric, related metric
and the combination metric for classification.
• Based on new metrics and two different methods of

∗ Corresponding author.

4865

