Learning Deep Structure-Preserving Image-Text Embeddings
Svetlana Lazebnik∗

Liwei Wang∗

Yin Li†

lwang97@illinois.edu

yli440@gatech.edu

∗

Abstract
This paper proposes a method for learning joint embeddings of images and text using a two-branch neural network with multiple layers of linear projections followed
by nonlinearities. The network is trained using a largemargin objective that combines cross-view ranking constraints with within-view neighborhood structure preservation constraints inspired by metric learning literature. Extensive experiments show that our approach gains significant improvements in accuracy for image-to-text and textto-image retrieval. Our method achieves new state-of-theart results on the Flickr30K and MSCOCO image-sentence
datasets and shows promise on the new task of phrase localization on the Flickr30K Entities dataset.

1. Introduction
Computer vision is moving from predicting discrete, categorical labels to generating rich descriptions of visual data,
for example, in the form of natural language. There is a
surge of interest in image-text tasks such as image captioning [10, 22, 23, 25, 31, 43, 46, 50] and visual question answering [2, 12, 52]. A core problem for these applications is
how to measure the semantic similarity between visual data
(e.g., an input image or region) and text data (a sentence
or phrase). A common solution is to learn a joint embedding for images and text into a shared latent space where
vectors from the two different modalities can be compared
directly. This space is usually of low dimension and is very
convenient for cross-view tasks such as image-to-text and
text-to-image retrieval.
Several recent embedding methods [14, 15, 26] are based
on Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) [17], which finds
linear projections that maximize the correlation between
projected vectors from the two views. Kernel CCA [17]
is an extension of CCA in which maximally correlated nonlinear projections, restricted to reproducing kernel Hilbert
spaces with corresponding kernels, are found. Extensions
of CCA to a deep learning framework have also been proposed [1, 33]. However, as pointed out in [30], CCA is hard

slazebni@illinois.edu

†

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Georgia Institute of Technology

to scale to large amounts of data. In particular, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) techniques cannot guarantee a
good solution to the original generalized eigenvalue problem, since covariance estimated in each small batch (due to
the GPU memory limit) is extremely unstable.
An alternative to CCA is to learn a joint embedding
space using SGD with a ranking loss. WSABIE [49] and
DeVISE [11] learn linear transformations of visual and textual features to the shared space using a single-directional
ranking loss that applies a margin-based penalty to incorrect annotations that get ranked higher than correct ones
for each training image. Compared to CCA-based methods, this ranking loss easily scales to large amounts of data
with stochastic optimization in training. As a more powerful objective function, a few other works have proposed a
bi-directional ranking loss that, in addition to ensuring that
correct sentences for each training image get ranked above
incorrect ones, also ensures that for each sentence, the image described by that sentence gets ranked above images
described by other sentences [22, 23, 25, 43]. However, to
date, it has proven frustratingly difficult to beat CCA with
an SGD-trained embedding: Klein et al. [26] have shown
that properly normalized CCA [14] on top of state-of-the-art
image and text features can outperform considerably more
complex models.
Another strand of research on multi-modal embeddings
is based on deep learning [3, 24, 25, 31, 35, 44], utilizing such techniques as deep Boltzmann machines [44],
autoencoders [35], LSTMs [8], and recurrent neural networks [31, 45]. By making it possible learn nonlinear mappings, deep methods can in principle provide greater representational power than methods based on linear projections [11, 15, 26, 49].
In this work, we propose to learn an image-text embedding using a two-view neural network with two layers of
nonlinearities on top of any representations of the image and
text views (Figure 1). These representations can be given by
the outputs of two pre-trained networks, off-the-shelf feature extractors, or trained jointly end-to-end with the embedding. To train this network, we use a bi-directional loss
function similar to [22, 23, 25, 43], combined with con-

5005

