Learning to Co-Generate Object Proposals with a Deep Structured Network
Zeeshan Hayder1,2 , Xuming He2,1
1
Australian National University & 2 NICTA ∗

Mathieu Salzmann1,3
3
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland

{zeeshan.hayder, xuming.he}@anu.edu.au

mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Abstract
Generating object proposals has become a key component of modern object detection pipelines. However, most
existing methods generate the object candidates independently of each other. In this paper, we present an approach to co-generating object proposals in multiple images, thus leveraging the collective power of multiple object
candidates. In particular, we introduce a deep structured
network that jointly predicts the objectness scores and the
bounding box locations of multiple object candidates. Our
deep structured network consists of a fully-connected Conditional Random Field built on top of a set of deep Convolutional Neural Networks, which learn features to model both
the individual object candidates and the similarity between
multiple candidates. To train our deep structured network,
we develop an end-to-end learning algorithm that, by unrolling the CRF inference procedure, lets us backpropagate
the loss gradient throughout the entire structured network.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on two
benchmark datasets, showing significant improvement over
state-of-the-art object proposal algorithms.

1. Introduction
Generating object proposals has recently become one
of the key components of modern object detection techniques [7, 9, 10, 6]. By filtering out the irrelevant portions
of the input image, these proposals hugely reduce the search
space of object detectors, which has proven beneficial for
both speed an accuracy.
Existing object proposal methods [1, 4, 15, 18, 22, 25,
12], however, all generate candidate detections one by one,
independently of each other. By contrast, in a parallel
line of research, object co-detection [2, 8, 10, 11] has
emerged as an effective approach to leveraging the information jointly contained in multiple images to improve detection accuracy. Unfortunately, to model the similarity
∗ NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as represented by the

Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy and
the ARC through the ICT Centre of Excellence program. The Tesla K40
used for this research was donated by the NVIDIA Corporation.

of multiple objects, existing methods rely on either handcrafted features [2, 8, 20, 11], or features learned for object
recognition [10]. As a consequence, they are ill-suited to
handle general object proposals, whose appearance is subject to much larger variations than specific object classes.
In this paper, we introduce an approach to co-generating
object proposals in multiple images. To this end, we propose a deep structured network that lets us learn features
to model (i) the appearance of individual object candidates;
and (ii) the similarity between multiple object candidates.
As a result, our model is able to leverage the collective
power of multiple object candidates, while coping with the
large appearance variability of general object proposals.
More specifically, given an initial pool of object candidates, our model consists of a fully-connected Conditional
Random Field (CRF) built on top of a set of deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), one for each candidate. The CNN module of each candidate predicts (i) an
objectness score; (ii) a bounding box location; and (iii) a
low-dimensional feature vector employed in the pairwise
term of the CRF. This pairwise term takes the form of a
Gaussian kernel, which allows us to perform inference efficiently [13], even for large numbers of candidates. Altogether, the resulting deep structured model jointly produces
improved objectness scores for multiple candidates and refined locations for the foreground objects.
We introduce an end-to-end learning algorithm to estimate the weights of our deep structured network. To this
end, we follow a stochastic gradient descent procedure using mini-batches on which we define the CRF. By unrolling
the iterations of our CRF inference strategy, we can backpropagate the gradient of our loss function throughout the
entire structured network. This lets us learn the similarity of
pairs of candidates, thus effectively benefitting from multiple candidates to co-generate high-quality object proposals.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on two
benchmark datasets for object proposal generation: Pascal
VOC 2007 [5] and MS COCO [17]. Our experiments evidence the benefits of leveraging multiple images for object
proposal generation over state-of-the-art methods that generate the proposals individually.
12565

