Structural Correlation Filter for Robust Visual Tracking
Si Liu1 Tianzhu Zhang2 Xiaochun Cao1 ∗ Changsheng Xu2
1

State Key Laboratory Of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel structural correlation
filter (SCF) model for robust visual tracking. The proposed
SCF model takes part-based tracking strategies into account in a correlation filter tracker, and exploits circular
shifts of all parts for their motion modeling to preserve target object structure. Compared with existing correlation filter trackers, our proposed tracker has several advantages:
(1) Due to the part strategy, the learned structural correlation filters are less sensitive to partial occlusion, and have
computational efficiency and robustness. (2) The learned
filters are able to not only distinguish the parts from the
background as the traditional correlation filters, but also
exploit the intrinsic relationship among local parts via spatial constraints to preserve object structure. (3) The learned
correlation filters not only make most parts share similar
motion, but also tolerate outlier parts that have different motion. Both qualitative and quantitative evaluations on
challenging benchmark image sequences demonstrate that
the proposed SCF tracking algorithm performs favorably against several state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is one of the most fundamental problems in computer vision with various applications in video
surveillance, human computer interaction and vehicle navigation. Although great progress has been made in recent years, it remains a challenging problem due to factors
such as illumination changes, geometric deformations, partial occlusions, fast motions and background clutters.
Tracking algorithms can be generally categorized as
either generative or discriminative methods. Generative
trackers typically formulate tracking problem as searching
for the best image regions which are similar to the tracked
targets [25, 38, 17, 34]. Different from generative trackers, discriminative approaches cast tracking as a classification problem that distinguishes tracked targets from back∗ Indicates corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparisons of our approach with state-of-the-art correlation filter trackers in challenging situations of partial occlusion
on the Lemming sequence [30]. Our SCF tracker takes part-based
tracking strategy into account for translation estimation, and performs robustly to partial occlusion after the 361th frame than the
DSST [7] and KCF [13] methods.

grounds [2, 3, 16, 11, 32]. Recently, correlation filter based
discriminative tracking methods have been proven to be
able to achieve fairly high speed and robust tracking performance [5, 7, 13, 33, 12, 8, 14, 22, 21, 19]. Conventionally,
correlation filters are designed to produce correlation peaks for each interested target in the scene while yielding low
responses to background, which are usually used to detect
expected patterns. As proved by Convolution Theorem, the
correlation in time domain corresponds to an element-wise
multiplication in Fourier domain. Thus, the intrinsic idea
of correlation filter is that the correlation can be calculated in Fourier domain in order to avoid the time-consuming
convolution operation. Due to its computational efficiency, correlation filters have attracted considerable attention
to visual tracking. Although achieved the appealing results both in accuracy and robustness, these correlation filter
based trackers cannot deal with partial occlusion well. Figure 1 shows one example about the tracking results on the
lemming sequence of two correlation filter based trackers, namely DSST [7] and KCF [13], which have achieved
state-of-art results and have beaten all other attended track14312

