Incremental Object Discovery in Time-Varying Image Collections
Theodora Kontogianni
Markus Mathias
Bastian Leibe
Visual Computing Institute, Computer Vision Group
RWTH Aachen University
{kontogianni, mathias, leibe}@vision.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of object discovery
in time-varying, large-scale image collections. A core part
of our approach is a novel Limited Horizon Minimum Spanning Tree (LH-MST) structure that closely approximates the
Minimum Spanning Tree at a small fraction of the latter’s
computational cost. Our proposed tree structure can be created in a local neighborhood of the matching graph during image retrieval and can be efficiently updated whenever
the image database is extended. We show how the LH-MST
can be used within both single-link hierarchical agglomerative clustering and the Iconoid Shift framework for object
discovery in image collections, resulting in significant efficiency gains and making both approaches capable of incremental clustering with online updates. We evaluate our
approach on a dataset of 500k images from the city of Paris
and compare its results to the batch version of both clustering algorithms.

1. Introduction
Social media platforms have become favorite storage and
sharing sites for all kinds of images. A large part of those
images are touristic photos, resulting in a dense image coverage of famous monuments and landmarks up to the scale
of entire cities [8, 2]. This has created a call for computer
vision algorithms that can perform efficient object discovery [16, 15, 22], clustering, and matching in image collections for applications such as large-scale 3D reconstruction
[13, 1, 7], scene summarization [19], automatic image annotation [8], or visual search [24, 2].
However, the content of large-scale image repositories is
never static. Millions of images are added to such repositories each day, while others are withdrawn or deleted. Current object discovery algorithms [16, 15, 24, 2, 22] do not
yet address this issue. They typically operate in a static setting, making it necessary to re-run the entire clustering process whenever the underlying image database changes, even
though only a small part of the clusters may be affected

by the changes. Image retrieval and recognition web services using those algorithms waste thousands of core hours
of computation because of this.
Even leading providers of visual search engines such as
Google are bound to rebuild the clustering from scratch
every week [personal communication] due to changes in
the image database. Currently this problem of dynamic
database changes is not well researched in the community
despite its large effect on practical applications.
In this paper, we address the image clustering and object
discovery problem in an incremental setting. We propose a
novel clustering method that allows for efficient reuse of the
stored data. A key idea of this paper is that many clustering methods can be efficiently implemented with the help of
a spanning tree. In order to enable incremental clustering,
we therefore propose efficient techniques for incrementally
constructing and updating the spanning tree. Because of the
incremental updates, information about unaffected clusters
can be preserved and only those clusters need to be recomputed that contain updated parts of the spanning tree.
At the core of our approach is a novel Limited Horizon Minimum Spanning Tree (LH-MST) data structure that
closely approximates a Minimum Spanning Tree (MST),
while being significantly faster to construct and to update
whenever new images are added to the matching graph.
The LH-MST can be used in any object discovery approach
that operates on spanning trees, such as single-link clustering [16, 8, 24] or Iconoid-Shift mode estimation [22, 23].
In contrast to a regular MST that always requires the full
matching graph to be known a priori, an LH-MST can be
computed starting from a local seed, making it suitable for
local exploration of a matching graph through Query Expansion [5]. We experimentally verify that in realistic use
cases, the differences to a regular MST are minimal, making
our algorithm an efficient alternative for parallel and distributed clustering applications.
We demonstrate our approach’s practical feasibility for
large-scale incremental object discovery by applying it to
the Iconoid Shift (IS) object discovery approach [22, 23].
As our results will show, replacing the MST by an LH-MST
12082

