Harnessing Object and Scene Semantics for Large-Scale Video Understanding
Zuxuan Wu† , Yanwei Fu§ , Yu-Gang Jiang† , Leonid Sigal§
†
Shanghai Key Lab of Intel. Info. Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
§
Disney Research
{zxwu, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn, {yanwei.fu, lsigal}@disneyresearch.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
The ubiquitous availability and use of devices that can
capture and share videos on social platforms is astounding;
an estimated 1 − 5 hours of videos are being uploaded to
YouTube per second by the users. Such growth in visual
media requires robust and scalable approaches for video indexing, search and summarization. However, general video
understanding in unconstrained and, often, user-generated
videos is extremely challenging. Videos vary greatly in
terms of both the semantic content (e.g., concert) and appearance of that content (e.g., as observed from audience or
backstage). The same or similar content can be recorded
from a variety of views (e.g., front-row or obstructed-view
seat in the back), under a breadth of viewing conditions
(e.g., natural or stage lighting), and can be of nearly arbi-

Zero-Shot
Learning

Cello Performance

…

Large-scale action recognition and video categorization
are important problems in computer vision. To address
these problems, we propose a novel object- and scene-based
semantic fusion network and representation. Our semantic
fusion network combines three streams of information using a three-layer neural network: (i) frame-based low-level
CNN features, (ii) object features from a state-of-the-art
large-scale CNN object-detector trained to recognize 20K
classes, and (iii) scene features from a state-of-the-art CNN
scene-detector trained to recognize 205 scenes. The trained
network achieves improvements in supervised activity and
video categorization in two complex large-scale datasets ActivityNet and FCVID, respectively. Further, by examining
and back propagating information through the fusion network, semantic relationships (correlations) between video
classes and objects/scenes can be discovered. These video
class-object/video class-scene relationships can in turn be
used as semantic representation for the video classes themselves. We illustrate effectiveness of this semantic representation through experiments on zero-shot action/video classification and clustering.

Mining Relationships

Flute
Perfermance

Skiing

Symphony Performance

Classification

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed Object-Scene semantic Fusion (OSF) network and its application on several tasks.

trary length (e.g., an hour long professional recoding, egocentric snippet, or iPhone highlight). Hence appearance
variability within a given topic is often greater than variability across topics making recognition difficult.
In computer vision, video understanding is often addressed in the form of action/activity recognition or localization (this limits the scope to human-centric events and
video content); generic video categorization [12] has been
much less thoroughly explored. In both domains the focus,
over the years, has been largely on learning video-based
representations (e.g. HoG, HoF or MBH [35]), combined
with supervised (or weakly supervised [5, 25, 29]) classifiers for recognition/categorization. Recent successes in
deep learning, particularly Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), opened opportunities for learning discriminative
hierarchical frame-based [13] or spatio-temporal representations [31, 34] jointly with the classifiers in an end-toend fashion. Recent CNN approaches have shown remarkable improvements in performance on datasets where large
amount of labeled data is available [31]. However, ability to
learn from limited labeled data or scale such approaches up
from at most few hundred classes to thousands, if not tens of
thousands, of classes, presents significant challenges for the
community; the latter, in particular, due to insurmountable

3112

