ReD-SFA: Relation Discovery Based Slow Feature Analysis
for Trajectory Clustering
Zhang Zhang, Kaiqi Huang, Tieniu Tan, Peipei Yang
CRIPAC & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
zzhang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, kqhuang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, tnt@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, ppyang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Jun Li
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology Sydney
Jun.Li@uts.edu.au

Abstract
For spectral embedding/clustering, it is still an open
problem on how to construct an relation graph to reflect the
intrinsic structures in data. In this paper, we proposed an
approach, named Relation Discovery based Slow Feature
Analysis (ReD-SFA), for feature learning and graph construction simultaneously. Given an initial graph with only
a few nearest but most reliable pairwise relations, new reliable relations are discovered by an assumption of reliability
preservation, i.e., the reliable relations will preserve their
reliabilities in the learnt projection subspace. We formulate
the idea as a cross entropy (CE) minimization problem to
reduce the discrepancy between two Bernoulli distributions parameterized by the updated distances and the existing
relation graph respectively. Furthermore, to overcome the
imbalanced distribution of samples, a Boosting-like strategy is proposed to balance the discovered relations over all
clusters. To evaluate the proposed method, extensive experiments are performed with various trajectory clustering
tasks, including motion segmentation, time series clustering and crowd detection. The results demonstrate that ReDSFA can discover reliable intra-cluster relations with high
precision, and competitive clustering performance can be
achieved in comparison with state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Trajectory clustering provides benefits for many vision
tasks, such as motion segmentation [24], object detection
[4], action recognition [31] and scene modeling [32]. As
trajectories often lie in a low dimensional subspace, spectral methods have been widely used, where trajectories will
be firstly embedded into a low dimensional feature space
before clustering. However, it is still an open problem to
construct an appropriate relation graph by which the intrinsic structures in data can be well encoded.

With original (x, y) sequence representation of trajectories, the most straightforward way to construct relation
graph is to calculate the distance (e.g., Euclidian distance)
between all pairs of samples, and remain a number of pairwise relations with the smallest distances through K nearest neighbor (K-NN) criterion or ε-ball neighbor criterion.
However, it is difficult to capture the true reliable relations by setting a constant k or ε for all samples and different
datasets. A large k or ε may induce wrong relations due to
the high dimensionality and variant distribution densities of
samples, while a small one may miss true relations.
From another aspect, if efficient features can be extracted
in advance, it will be much easier to construct reliable relation graph. For trajectory clustering, some hand-crafted features, such as velocity [8] and high-order derivatives [14],
have been adopted before graph construction. Thus, it may
be better to do feature learning and relation discovery jointly, instead of the one-step graph construction.
In this paper, given a small number of initial reliable relations which can be obtained by selecting the nearest neighborhood relations in original space X, we will discover new
relations with ε-ball neighbor criterion in the low dimensional feature space Y , where the ε can be estimated by an
assumption of reliability preservation, i.e., the reliable relations will preserve their reliabilities in the feature space.
The process is illustrated in Fig.1. The left two figures
show the data samples of two clusters (denoted by blue and
green stars) in original space X, and the dash line indicates
the projection direction learnt by the current relations (red
links). In projection space Y (right figures), some pairwise
relations are enhanced greatly, as their distances in feature
space Y are even smaller than the distances of some initial
reliable relations. Thus, the enhanced relations can be discovered as new reliable relations based on which the projection direction can be further corrected (left bottom). With
such progress, the samples of intra-cluster will be concen1752

