Uncertainty-Driven 6D Pose Estimation of Objects and Scenes
from a Single RGB Image
Eric Brachmann*, Frank Michel, Alexander Krull, Michael Ying Yang, Stefan Gumhold, Carsten Rother
TU Dresden
Dresden, Germany
*eric.brachmann@tu-dresden.de

Abstract
In recent years, the task of estimating the 6D pose of
object instances and complete scenes, i.e. camera localization, from a single input image has received considerable
attention. Consumer RGB-D cameras have made this feasible, even for difficult, texture-less objects and scenes. In
this work, we show that a single RGB image is sufficient
to achieve visually convincing results. Our key concept is
to model and exploit the uncertainty of the system at all
stages of the processing pipeline. The uncertainty comes
in the form of continuous distributions over 3D object coordinates and discrete distributions over object labels. We
give three technical contributions. Firstly, we develop a
regularized, auto-context regression framework which iteratively reduces uncertainty in object coordinate and object
label predictions. Secondly, we introduce an efficient way
to marginalize object coordinate distributions over depth.
This is necessary to deal with missing depth information.
Thirdly, we utilize the distributions over object labels to detect multiple objects simultaneously with a fixed budget of
RANSAC hypotheses. We tested our system for object pose
estimation and camera localization on commonly used data
sets. We see a major improvement over competing systems.

1. Introduction
This work considers the task of estimating the 6D pose
of object instances from a single RGB image. A solution to
this problem is of high relevance in a variety of application
scenarios such as robotics and augmented reality. The range
of applications is even broader when considering camera localization as a special case of object pose estimation, where
the object represents the entire 3D scene.
For sufficiently textured objects, pose estimation is,
more or less, considered to be solved. Solutions are based
on the work of Lowe [17], where objects are represented

Figure 1. (Left) Result of our method. The pose of the lamp is
estimated sufficiently well for augmented realty. (Right) Result
of a state-of-the-art system [13] that uses an RGB-D input image.
The pose is less well suited for augmented reality.

by a sparse set of features. With the arrival of depth cameras, solutions have been developed for texture-less objects
[7] or difficult scenes with repetitive or texture-less structures [23]. Many of these approaches are based on machine
learning. In this work, we revisit the scenario of having
RGB information only, and show that we can transfer the
success story of machine learning-based approaches to this
setting. This is especially interesting for practical applications, since many mobile devices are only equipped with a
single RGB camera. Furthermore, current consumer depth
sensors do not work with direct sunlight and reflective materials. Fig. 1 shows a result of our system, with augmented
reality. This is a challenging case and the state-of-the-art
method of [13], which operates on an RGB-D image, is not
able to get a visually pleasing result. We show experimentally that our method can deliver a visually pleasing quality
in 74% of test cases. Our approach surpasses competing
RGB-based systems. Furthermore, an RGB-D variant of
our system exceeds the state-of-the-art for object pose estimation and is on-par for camera localization.
Our method is inspired by the learning-based approaches
[2] and [29], which achieve state-of-the-art results for
RGB-D images. The idea is to utilize an intermediate repre-

3364

