Context-Aware Gaussian Fields for Non-rigid Point Set Registration
Gang Wang, Zhicheng Wang, Yufei Chen, Qiangqiang Zhou, Weidong Zhao
CAD Research Center, College of Electronics and Information Engineering
Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China
gwang.cv@gmail.com,{zhichengwang,yufeichen,wd}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Point set registration (PSR) is a fundamental problem in
computer vision and pattern recognition, and it has been
successfully applied to many applications. Although widely
used, existing PSR methods cannot align point sets robustly
under degradations, such as deformation, noise, occlusion,
outlier, rotation, and multi-view changes. This paper proposes context-aware Gaussian fields (CA-LapGF) for nonrigid PSR subject to global rigid and local non-rigid geometric constraints, where a laplacian regularized term is
added to preserve the intrinsic geometry of the transformed
set. CA-LapGF uses a robust objective function and the
quasi-Newton algorithm to estimate the likely correspondences, and the non-rigid transformation parameters between two point sets iteratively. The CA-LapGF can estimate non-rigid transformations, which are mapped to reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces, accurately and robustly in
the presence of degradations. Experimental results on synthetic and real images reveal that how CA-LapGF outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms for non-rigid PSR.

1. Introduction
Point set registration (PSR) has been widely applied
in computer vision and pattern recognition to solve many
problems such as robot navigation, motion tracking,
biomedical image registration [25], and face recognition.
The main purpose of the registration problem is to estimate
likely correspondences between two point sets and recover
the underlying transformation which can align the corresponding point pairs perfectly.
Generally speaking, point set registration can be categorized into rigid and non-rigid depending on the transformation pattern. The former one is relatively easy to estimate,
while the non-rigid transformation is hard to estimate due
to the underlying transformation model is usually unknown
and difficult to approximate. Moreover, as a key component
in point set registration, the non-rigid transformation exists
in numerous applications, including hand-written character

recognition, and facial-expression recognition.
However, point set registration becomes increasingly difficult, because of some challenges: (1) the sensitive registration accuracy in the presence of large degree of degradations such as deformation, noise, occlusion, outlier, rotation, and multi-view changes, which make the distribution
of point set more complex, where noisy data means the feature points cannot be matched precisely, and the data with
occlusion and outliers mean some points cannot find their
underlying correspondences in the corresponding point set;
(2) the numerical optimization often falls into local minima; (3) the high computational complexity when handling
a large number of points.
In face of these challenges, numerous registration algorithms have been proposed recently. The Iterative Closest
Point (ICP) algorithm [3] is with simplicity and low computational complexity, which uses the nearest-neighbor distance criterion to assign binary correspondences, and the
least squares to estimate the rigid transformation iteratively.
However, ICP requires an initial position, such as an adequately close distance between two point sets.
For non-rigid transformation, Chui and Rangarajan [6]
introduced a soft assignment technique and the deterministic annealing to construct a general framework to estimate
the fuzzy correspondences and recover the non-rigid transformation parameterized by Thin Plate Spline (TPS) iteratively. Then a robust point set registration algorithm (TPSRPM) has been presented. Although it is more robust than
ICP when confronting some degree of degradations, it is
with high computational complexity. Zheng et al. [30] proposed a robust point matching by preserving local neighborhood structures (RPM-PLNS) for non-rigid shape registration, where graph matching technique is used to preserve
local neighborhood structures, but it is still sensitive to outliers. Kernel correlation (KC) [22] considers the correlation
between two point set kernel densities, where the underlying transformation parameters can be estimated by maximizing the correlation based on the M-estimator. Based on
the theory of the KC, a robust point set registration approach
using Gaussian mixture models (GMMReg) [10] has been

5811

