Multi-Cue Zero-Shot Learning with Strong Supervision
Zeynep Akata, Mateusz Malinowski, Mario Fritz and Bernt Schiele
Max-Planck Institute for Informatics

Abstract
Scaling up visual category recognition to large numbers
of classes remains challenging. A promising research direction is zero-shot learning, which does not require any training data to recognize new classes, but rather relies on some
form of auxiliary information describing the new classes.
Ultimately, this may allow to use textbook knowledge that
humans employ to learn about new classes by transferring
knowledge from classes they know well. The most successful zero-shot learning approaches currently require a particular type of auxiliary information – namely attribute annotations performed by humans – that is not readily available for most classes. Our goal is to circumvent this bottleneck by substituting such annotations by extracting multiple pieces of information from multiple unstructured text
sources readily available on the web. To compensate for
the weaker form of auxiliary information, we incorporate
stronger supervision in the form of semantic part annotations on the classes from which we transfer knowledge.
We achieve our goal by a joint embedding framework that
maps multiple text parts as well as multiple semantic parts
into a common space. Our results consistently and significantly improve on the state-of-the-art in zero-short recognition and retrieval.

NAD1

Black-footed Albatross

Uses
NAD2

Uses
NAD3

Cardinal
Visual Parts
(Expert Annotation)

Uses
Language Parts

Figure 1: We propose to jointly embed multiple language
representations and multiple semantic visual parts for finegrained zero-shot recognition. Our novel Noun-AttributeDifference (NAD) representations are based on differences
and distances between vectors in the word2vec space.

1. Introduction
The acquisition of visual concepts in humans and machines is still very different. It is hypothesized that early
concept acquisition in children mostly follows a learning
by example approach where visual concepts are directly
grounded in sensory information and linked across modalities [40]. However, this alone does not explain the diverse
visual knowledge of an adult. A lot of our knowledge is
preserved and conveyed via text and nowadays online resources. This enables humans to recognize objects without
ever having seen a single instance of that object. Therefore
the knowledge of the class is no longer solely grounded in
sensory information, but rather transferred from prior experiences to new classes. A practical example includes field

guides that describe different animal species via a range of
categorizations and part descriptions [45] and allow to recognize an animal without expert knowledge.
Recent work on zero-shot learning for visual recognition aims at equipping computer vision systems to recognize novel classes without a single training example. The
required “knowledge” for the recognition task is transferred
via auxiliary information of different types. The most successful techniques utilize human annotations of attributes
for each class. This is a particular type of auxiliary information that is not readily available in large quantities. This limitation hampers the progress of large-scale zero-shot learning. We argue that ultimately zero-shot learning techniques
1 59

