Identifying Good Training Data for Self-Supervised Free Space Estimation
Ali Harakeh, Daniel Asmar, Elie Shammas
Department of Mechanical Engineering, VRL Lab
American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon
ash18@mail.aub.edu, da20@aub.edu.lb, es34@aub.edu.lb

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel technique to extract training data from free space in a scene using a stereo camera.
The proposed technique exploits the projection of planes in
the v-disparity image paired with Bayesian linear regression to reliably identify training image pixels belonging to
free space in a scene. Unlike other methods in the literature, the algorithm does not require any prior training, has
only one free parameter, and is shown to provide consistent
results over a variety of terrains without the need for any
manual tuning. The proposed method is compared to two
other data extraction methods from the literature. Results
of Support Vector classifiers using training data extracted
by the proposed technique are superior in terms of quality and consistency of free space estimation. Furthermore,
the computation time required by the proposed technique is
shown to be smaller and more consistent than that of other
training data extraction methods.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding and modeling is a vital condition
for the success of any unmanned autonomous system exploration. In its most basic form, this understanding reduces
to delineating occupied space from free space and is essential for a system to safely navigate its environment. Furthermore, knowledge of freespace could provide significant
insight in difficult scene understanding problems [1].
The problem of estimating free space in structured and
static environments is usually solved by exploiting properties of certain well defined structures. Two examples of
free space estimation solutions are that of Hedau et al. [2]
and Labayrade et al. [3]. While the first exploits the box
like geometry of furniture to estimate free space in indoor
scenes from a single camera image, the second uses the planar geometry of a road and identifiable lane markings to estimate the free space in urban road scenes. In unstructured
or unknown environments such as forest areas, the lack of
structure of the scene causes methods relying on static scene

properties to fail.
To account for the ever changing properties of free space
in unstructured scenes, it is natural to resort to learning
based systems, which usually require a training phase in
which training data representing free space is used as an
input to the learning algorithm. The extraction and classification of training data is usually performed through direct human supervision; unfortunately, this becomes impractical and time consuming as the range of properties to
be learned becomes larger. Furthermore, the resulting system cannot extend classification beyond the environments it
learned during training, thereby restricting its autonomy.
Recent free space estimation approaches tackle this
problem through self-supervision, where one classifier directly supervises input to a second classifier. The first classifier uses data it is confident about to label parts of the environment as free space; this data is then provided as input to the second classifier that extends the labeling over
the whole environment. The proposed system in this paper lies within this framework, allowing long range fully
autonomous free space estimation without relying on any
rigid assumptions such as a planar ground or bootstrapping
methods. The main contribution in this paper is a novel
training data extraction method that is fast, accurate, and
can be applied in structured and unstructured environments.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a brief summary of previous systems employing self supervision. Section 3 explains in details the
training data extraction algorithm proposed in the paper.
Section 4 briefly presents the second classification stage
based on a one-class Support Vector Classifier (ν-SVC),
which is a necessary tool to assess the goodness of the training data extraction algorithms. Section 5 presents the results
and analysis of the ν-SVC using our proposed method for
training data extraction versus two other training data extraction methods. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

2. Related Work
The first part of this section presents a sample of previous work on free space estimation with an emphasis on

3530

