Temporal Action Detection using a Statistical Language Model
Alexander Richard, Juergen Gall
University of Bonn, Germany
{richard,gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
While current approaches to action recognition on presegmented video clips already achieve high accuracies,
temporal action detection is still far from comparably good
results. Automatically locating and classifying the relevant
action segments in videos of varying lengths proves to be a
challenging task. We propose a novel method for temporal
action detection including statistical length and language
modeling to represent temporal and contextual structure.
Our approach aims at globally optimizing the joint probability of three components, a length and language model
and a discriminative action model, without making intermediate decisions. The problem of finding the most likely
action sequence and the corresponding segment boundaries
in an exponentially large search space is addressed by dynamic programming. We provide an extensive evaluation of
each model component on Thumos 14, a large action detection dataset, and report state-of-the-art results on three
datasets.

1. Introduction
Action recognition is a major research topic in computer
vision since decades due to its applications in various fields
like video understanding, human-computer-interaction, or
surveillance. In recent years, there has been a major
progress on classifying pre-segmented video clips. On challenging large-scale datasets like UCF-101 [23], current approaches for video-clip classification already achieve accuracies of eighty percent and more [28, 10, 22]. However,
when the videos are not pre-segmented and the task requires
the temporal segmentation of the activities in a video, as it
is required for the temporal action detection task of Thumos
14 [8], current approaches struggle to achieve good results.
One reason is that an action class can be arbitrarily long,
e.g., a background class, but it can also take only a few
frames in a video. Without a pre-segmentation of the video,
the duration of the action classes needs to be well modeled. Another difference between video clip classification
and temporal action detection is the relevance of the con-

text. While video clips can already be well recognized by
using only spatial [22] or context information [10], the differences between the frames where an activity occurs and
the rest of the video are more subtle. For this task, the context of the temporal change is more important than the spatial context.
The most successful methods for temporal action detection on a dataset like Thumos 14 [8] follow a two step approach. They first extract segments from the video using a
sliding temporal window and classify each segment in a second step. The final segmentation is then achieved by greedily selecting the segments with the highest scores [17, 19].
In this paper, we present an approach to temporal action
detection that avoids a greedy approximation and aims to
find the globally most likely action sequence in a single step
by solving the segmentation and classification task jointly.
Our model incorporates information about the duration of
an action class by a length model and the temporal context by a language model. The length and language model
are combined with a discriminative model for recognizing
actions. We further show how inference can be efficiently
performed using dynamic programming.
In our experiments, we provide an extensive analysis of
our approach on three datasets where we evaluate the impact of the length and language model in detail. Our model
achieves state-of-the-art accuracy for temporal action detection on the challenging Thumos 14 benchmark [8].

2. Related Work
Recent action recognition systems, which combine
Fisher vectors of improved dense trajectories [28] or CNN
features [10, 22, 7] with a classifier like a support vector
machine (SVM), achieve very good performances for video
clip classification on various real world datasets.
For temporal action detection, most approaches incorporate these classifiers into the detector. For instance, a sliding
temporal window approach with a greedy non-maximum
suppression can be applied to locate the action segments
[19, 17, 29, 9]. In the context of spatio-temporal action detection, the number of windows can be reduced by finding
good action proposals [6, 26] or optimal action tubes using
13131

