Do It Yourself Hyperspectral Imaging with Everyday Digital Cameras
Seoung Wug Oh1
Michael S. Brown2
Marc Pollefeys3
1
2
Yonsei University
National University of Singapore

Seon Joo Kim1
3
ETH Zurich

Abstract

1. Introduction
Color is the visual perception or interpretation of light.
Light is a continuous electromagnetic radiation over a range
of spectrum (visible light ranges from 400nm to 700nm).
The human vision system, as well as most cameras, sense
this physical light through a tri-stimulus mechanism where
three channels respond differently to the incoming light as
follows:
Z
(1)
pk = o(λ)ck (λ)dλ,
Ω

where pk is the output of the k th channel, Ω is the range
of the visible spectrum, o is the incoming light, and ck
represents the spectral response of the k th sensor channel.
For the vast majority of cameras, these three channels have
spectral sensitivity that fall into the red, green, and blue
ranges of the visible spectrum.
While this three channel tri-stimulus representation is
good for representing perceived color, it falls short of ex-

RGB Camera 1

Optimization

Capturing hyperspectral images requires expensive and
specialized hardware that is not readily accessible to most
users. Digital cameras, on the other hand, are significantly
cheaper in comparison and can be easily purchased and
used. In this paper, we present a framework for reconstructing hyperspectral images by using multiple consumer-level
digital cameras. Our approach works by exploiting the different spectral sensitivities of different camera sensors. In
particular, due to the differences in spectral sensitivities of
the cameras, different cameras yield different RGB measurements for the same spectral signal. We introduce an
algorithm that is able to combine and convert these different RGB measurements into a single hyperspectral image
for both indoor and outdoor scenes. This camera-based approach allows hyperspectral imaging at a fraction of the
cost of most existing hyperspectral hardware. We validate
the accuracy of our reconstruction against ground truth hyperspectral images (using both synthetic and real cases)
and show its usage on relighting applications.

RGB Camera 2

RGB Camera 3

Reconstruct
ngth
Wavele

( λ)

Hyperspectral Image

Figure 1. This image shows an overview of our system. We reconstruct hyperspectral images by capturing images of a scene
with multiple consumer cameras. Our system exploits the different
spectral sensitivities of different cameras and convert their different color measurements into hyperspectral signals.

plaining the full physical nature of light. For example, when
different cameras are used, the same light spectral power
distribution may result in different colors due to the different spectral responses ck of the cameras. In addition,
two distinct spectral power distributions may result in the
same R, G, B values on the same camera due to projection
of the light onto only three color channels. Hyperspectral
imaging (HSI), on the other hand, records a more accurate
representation of physical light as it captures dense spectral
samples across the visible wave lengths. The difference between multispectral imaging and hyperspectral imaging is
the number of bands captured. Multispectral imaging generally captures a small number of bands (3 to 10 channels),
while hyperspectral imaging usually records higher number of channels. We refer to our approach as hyperspectral
imaging as our goal is to sample the visible spectrum with

2461

