Detecting Repeating Objects using Patch Correlation Analysis
Inbar Huberman
Raanan Fattal
School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel

1.
Abstract
In this paper we describe a new method for detecting and
counting a repeating object in an image. While the method
relies on a fairly sophisticated deformable part model, unlike existing techniques it estimates the model parameters
in an unsupervised fashion thus alleviating the need for a
user-annotated training data and avoiding the associated
specificity. This automatic fitting process is carried out by
exploiting the recurrence of small image patches associated
with the repeating object and analyzing their spatial correlation. The analysis allows us to reject outlier patches,
recover the visual and shape parameters of the part model,
and detect the object instances efficiently.
In order to achieve a practical system which is able to
cope with diverse images, we describe a simple and intuitive active-learning procedure that updates the object
classification by querying the user on very few carefully
chosen marginal classifications. Evaluation of the new
method against the state-of-the-art techniques demonstrates
its ability to achieve higher accuracy through a better user
experience.

2. Introduction
High object-count tasks are often encountered in industrial and scientific applications such as product inspection
in manufacturing lines and cell counting for research and
clinical purposes. These tasks typically require a considerable amount of repetitive human effort, and in many cases,
a high degree of expertise. Automating the detection of
objects using computerized vision is a highly challenging
problem due to the visual complexity arising from irregular
arrangement of the objects, variability in shape and illumination, mutual occlusions and similarity to other elements
in the scene.
The object recognition literature in this context divides
into two approaches. The first class of methods detect objects instances based on the raw response of various visual

descriptors [11, 16, 18, 24] or on more detailed and generative object models [23, 13, 30, 4, 1, 20]. These methods assume the objects are well-resolved and identifiable
in the image. The second class of methods [9, 8, 21, 17]
is geared towards massively-populated images, e.g., human
crowds, where individual objects consist of very few pixels.
These methods typically regress the object density based
on various texture descriptors, and estimate the count by
integrating the density. Unlike the previous category, typically these methods do not localize individual objects. Both
classes, however, involve training and typically require a
large number of example images along with the locations
or number of the objects they contain. The learnt models
often show a high degree of specificity to the trained data,
e.g, for a particular type of cell culture, and hence offer a
limited use with more diversity scenarios.
In this paper we present a new method for localizing and
counting one or more distinct objects in an image with no
prior training stage. The method can operate on as little
data as the input image itself, thus alleviating the need for
large annotated training sets and offering a wider applicability compared to data-specific trained systems. The method
relies on the deformable part-based model (DPM) [15, 13]
to detect the object of interest and enjoys the model’s tolerance to moderate geometric deformations. While this model
is rich in parameters and requires non-trivial training efforts, the key idea behind our approach is to exploit the
sheer number of object appearances in the image to automatically recover its parameters.
Similarly to other patch-based similarity measures [5]
we abstract the image content by considering small image
patches as visual descriptors for the object parts and identify the ones associated with the repeating object by extracting highly-recurring windows in the image. Thus, we
avoid the need to manually choose or pre-learn specific visual descriptors for the DPM. While the recurrent patches
are likely to be part of the repeating object and can serve
for its detection, some of the patches found may not be related to the object of interest and, at the same time, a single object occurrence is likely to stimulate the response of
several patches. Thus, in order to disambiguate the occur-

2903

