Egocentric Future Localization
Hyun Soo Park

Jyh-Jing Hwang
Yedong Niu
University of Pennsylvania

Jianbo Shi

{hypar,jyh,yedniu,jshi}@seas.upenn.edu

Future localization

Abstract
We presents a method for future localization: to predict plausible future trajectories of ego-motion in egocentric stereo images. Our paths avoid obstacles, move between objects, even turn around a corner into space behind
objects. As a byproduct of the predicted trajectories, we
discover the empty space occluded by foreground objects.
One key innovation is the creation of an EgoRetinal map,
akin to an illustrated tourist map, that ‘rearranges’ pixels
taking into accounts depth information, the ground plane,
and body motion direction, so that it allows motion planning and perception of objects on one image space. We
learn to plan trajectories directly on this EgoRetinal map
using first person experience of walking around in a variety
of scenes. In a testing phase, given an novel scene, we find
multiple hypotheses of future trajectories from the learned
experience. We refine them by minimizing a cost function
that describes compatibility between the obstacles in the
EgoRetinal map and trajectories. We quantitatively evaluate our method to show predictive validity and apply to
various real world daily activities including walking, shopping, and social interactions.

1. Introduction
Consider a dynamic scene such as Figure 1 where you, as
the camera wearer, plan to pass through the corridor in the
shopping mall while others walk in different directions. You
need to plan your trajectory to avoid collisions with others
and objects such as walls and fence. Looking ahead, you
would plan a trajectory that enters into the shop by turning left at the corner although such space cannot be seen
directly from your perspective.
The fundamental problem we are interested in is future
localization: where am I supposed to be after 5, 10, and
15 seconds? This challenging task requires understanding
of the scene in terms of a long term temporal human behaviors, with missing data due to occlusions. We solve this
future path prediction problem by learning from our experiences of walking around (in different scenes) with egocen-

Occluded space discovery

Figure 1. Where am I supposed to be after 5, 10, and 15 seconds?
We present a method to predict a set of plausible future trajectories given a pair of egocentric stereo images. As a byproduct of
the predicted trajectories, the occluded space by foreground objects such as the space inside of the shop or behind the ladies are
discovered.

tric stereo cameras1 as shown in Figure 2(a).
How past experiences lead to future path prediction into
a novel scene?2 There are two forms of learning signals:
1) what we see in egocentric visual images (on 2D retinal
space), and 2) where we go through physical movements
(on a 3D ground space). Learning from retinal visual images tell us about ’walking affordance’: what are the walkable surfaces, which objects we can should avoid, which
gap between objects we can pass through. Learning from
physical movement tell us about ‘spatial preferences’: what
is our sense of personal spaces with people, how we navigate around people and objects, and how we ‘parse’ a clutter
scene and walk through it.
While ‘walking affordance’ and ‘spatial preferences’ can
be learned in isolation, can we learn them jointly and use
that information directly to effect path planning in a novel
scene? Our goal of direct learning/reasoning is contrast
to first extracting object semantic information then project
them onto the 3D ground plane for motion planning (as
done in robotics), which is sensitive to over-simplified semantic abstraction (not all icy roads are hard to walk on).
This is also in contrast to directly learning paths in the image space then remap it to the 3D ground plane, which is
sensitive to 3D geometrical alignment of the ground plane
and objects in the novel scene.
We unify the spatial and perceptual learning signals by
1 Any RGBD sensor such as Kinect is complimentary to our depth measurement.
2 Note that a camera resectioning method such as perspective-n-point
algorithms [22] does not apply as we predict a trajectory for a novel scene.

14697

