Min Norm Point Algorithm for Higher Order MRF-MAP Inference
Ishant Shanu
Chetan Arora
IIIT Delhi, India

Abstract
Many tasks in computer vision and machine learning can
be modelled as the inference problems in an MRF-MAP
formulation and can be reduced to minimizing a submodular function. Using higher order clique potentials to model
complex dependencies between pixels improves the performance but the current state of the art inference algorithms
fail to scale for larger clique sizes. We adapt a well known
Min Norm Point algorithm from mathematical optimization
literature to exploit the sum of submodular structure found
in the MRF-MAP formulation. Unlike some contemporary
methods, we do not make any assumptions (other than submodularity) on the type of the clique potentials. Current
state of the art inference algorithms for general submodular function takes many hours for problems with clique size
16, and fail to scale beyond. On the other hand, our algorithm is highly efficient and can perform optimal inference
in few seconds even on clique size an order of magnitude
larger. The proposed algorithm can even scale to clique
sizes of many hundreds, unlocking the usage of really large
size cliques for MRF-MAP inference problems in computer
vision. We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach by experimenting on synthetic as well as real datasets.

1. Introduction
Many problems in computer vision and machine learning
can be reduced to assigning a label on each pixel. The label
may denote different quantities depending upon the application, for example depth, in the stereo matching problem
or pixel intensity in the image denoising problem. Finding
the best labeling configuration can be formulated as finding
the minimum of the following energy equation:
X
Wc (lc ).
(1)
E(lP ) = min
lP

c∈C

Here, c, also called a clique, is defined as the set of pixels
whose labels are contextually dependent on each other. A
labeling configuration on a clique c is denoted as lc . P
denotes the set of all pixels and C denotes the set of all
cliques. The size of the maximal clique k = maxc |c| is

Parag Singla
IIT Delhi, India

known as the order of the problem. Each term, Wc (lc ),
also called the clique potential, measures the cost of the
labeling configuration lc of a clique c depending on how
consistent the labeling is with respect to the observation
and prior knowledge. The formulation is popularly known
as MRF-MAP inference in computer vision and structured
prediction in the machine learning community. Over the last
decade many computer vision problems ranging from image restoration [14], segmentation of videos [5] and images
[40], super resolution [30], texture synthesis [28], stereo
matching [3] to object detection [16] have been formulated
as the MRF-MAP inference problems.
The focus of this paper is on efficient inference in MRFMAP problems with 2 labels. Apart from having applications in its own right, inference for multi label problems is
often formulated as a series of inference on 2-label problems [3, 10]. Optimal inference even for a 2-label MRFMAP problem is NP hard in general. However, given the
importance of the problem, researchers have focussed on
various subsets of the problems for which efficient inference
is possible. Submodularity is one such property which can
naturally capture commonly occurring constraints in problems from computer vision, machine learning and signal
processing. A set function f : 2V →R on a set V is called
submodular if for all subsets S, T ⊆ V : f (S ∪ T ) + f (S ∩
T ) ≤ f (S) + f (T ). Note that for a 2-label problem each
clique potential function can also be seen as a set function
where a label 1 implies inclusion in the set and 0 implies exclusion. Hence, the 2-label case can be seen as the problem
minimizing a sum of submodular functions.
Our focus in this paper is on problems with higher order
clique potentials (k > 2) which can encode various structural and complex dependencies between pixels. It has been
adequately shown by various authors [17, 22, 27, 38, 39, 47]
that using such complex dependencies greatly improves the
solution quality.
There have been many algorithms proposed for inference
in higher order problems during last few years. Some notable work in this area includes Message Passing and variations of Dual Decomposition [7, 15, 20, 24, 27, 34, 36, 43,
45] or reduction techniques [8, 11, 13, 17, 18, 21, 26, 37, 39]
which convert higher order cliques to pairwise ones and
15365

