Object Detection from Video Tubelets with Convolutional Neural Networks
Kai Kang Wanli Ouyang Hongsheng Li Xiaogang Wang
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{kkang,wlouyang,hsli,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Deep Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) have shown
impressive performance in various vision tasks such as image classification, object detection and semantic segmentation. For object detection, particularly in still images,
the performance has been significantly increased last year
thanks to powerful deep networks (e.g. GoogleNet) and detection frameworks (e.g. Regions with CNN features (RCNN)). The lately introduced ImageNet [6] task on object detection from video (VID) brings the object detection task into the video domain, in which objects’ locations at each frame are required to be annotated with
bounding boxes. In this work, we introduce a complete
framework for the VID task based on still-image object detection and general object tracking. Their relations and
contributions in the VID task are thoroughly studied and
evaluated. In addition, a temporal convolution network
is proposed to incorporate temporal information to regularize the detection results and shows its effectiveness for
the task. Code is available at https://github.com/
myfavouritekk/vdetlib.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been widely applied to various computer vision tasks such as image classification [17, 29, 30],
object detection [10, 9, 28, 30, 23, 24], semantic segmentation [21, 16], human pose estimation [33, 32, 37, 4], etc.
Over the past few years, the performance of object detection in ImageNet and PASCAL VOC has been increased by
a significant margin with the success of deep Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN). State-of-the-art methods for object detection train CNNs to classify region proposals into
background or one of the object classes. However, these
methods focus on detecting objects in still images. The
lately introduced ImageNet challenge on object detection
from video brings up a new question on how to solve the
object detection problem for videos effectively and robustly.
At each frame of a video, the algorithm is required to annotate bounding boxes and confidence scores on objects of

Video
(a)

Detection
Score

Video
(b)
Tracking
Confidence

Figure 1. Challenges in object detection from video. Red boxes are
ground truth annotations. (a) Still-image object detection methods have large temporal fluctuations across frames even on ground
truth bounding boxes. The fluctuations may result from motion
blur, video defocus, part occlusion and bad pose. Information of
boxes of the same object on adjacent frames need to be utilized for
object detection in video. (b) Tracking is able to relate boxes of the
same object. However, due to occlusions, appearance changes and
pose variations, the tracked boxes may drift to non-target objects.
Object detectors should be incorporated into tracking algorithm to
constantly start new tracks when drifting occurs.

each class. Although there have been methods on detecting
objects in videos, they mainly focus on detecting one specific class of objects, such as pedestrians [31], cars [19], or
humans with actions [13, 11]. The ImageNet challenge defines a new problem on detecting general objects in videos,
which is worth studying. Similar to object detection in still
images being able to assist tasks including image classification [29], object segmentation [5], and image captioning
[8], accurately detecting objects in videos could possibly
boost the performance of video classification, video captioning and related surveillance applications. By locating
objects in the videos, the semantic meaning of a video could
also be described more clearly, which results in more robust
performance for video-based tasks.
Existing methods for general object detection cannot be
applied to solve this problem effectively. Their performance
may suffer from large appearance changes of objects in
videos. For instance in Figure 1 (a), if a cat faces the camera at first and then turns back. Its back image cannot be
effectively recognized as a cat because it contains little texture information and is not likely to be included in training

817

