Joint Unsupervised Learning of Deep Representations and Image Clusters
Jianwei Yang, Devi Parikh, Dhruv Batra
Virginia Tech
{jw2yang, parikh, dbatra}@vt.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a recurrent framework for
joint unsupervised learning of deep representations and
image clusters. In our framework, successive operations
in a clustering algorithm are expressed as steps in a recurrent process, stacked on top of representations output
by a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). During training, image clusters and representations are updated jointly:
image clustering is conducted in the forward pass, while
representation learning in the backward pass. Our key
idea behind this framework is that good representations are
beneficial to image clustering and clustering results provide supervisory signals to representation learning. By integrating two processes into a single model with a unified weighted triplet loss function and optimizing it endto-end, we can obtain not only more powerful representations, but also more precise image clusters. Extensive
experiments show that our method outperforms the stateof-the-art on image clustering across a variety of image
datasets. Moreover, the learned representations generalize well when transferred to other tasks. The source
code can be downloaded from https://github.com/
jwyang/joint-unsupervised-learning.

(a) Initial stage

(b) Middle stage

Figure 1: Clustering outputs for MNIST [32] test set at different stages of the proposed method. We conduct PCA on
the image representations and then choose the first three dimensions for visualization. Different colors correspond to
different clusters. Samples are grouped together gradually
and more discriminative representations are obtained.
I = {I1 , ..., Ins }, the global objective function for learning
image representations and clusters can be written as:
argmin L(y, θ|I)

We are witnessing an explosion in visual content. Significant recent advances in machine learning and computer vision, especially via deep neural networks, have relied on supervised learning and availability of copious annotated data.
However, manually labelling data is a time-consuming, laborious, and often expensive process. In order to make better use of available unlabeled images, clustering and/or unsupervised learning is a promising direction.
In this work, we aim to address image clustering and representation learning on unlabeled images in a unified framework. It is a natural idea to leverage cluster ids of images as
supervisory signals to learn representations and in turn the
representations would be beneficial to image clustering. At
a high-level view, given a collection of ns unlabeled images

(1)

y,θ

where L(·) is a loss function, y denotes the cluster ids for all
images, and θ denotes the parameters for representations. If
we hold one in {y, θ} to be fixed, the optimization can be
decomposed into two alternating steps:
argmin L(y|I, θ)

(2a)

y

argmin L(θ|I, y)

1. Introduction

(c) Final stage

(2b)

θ

Intuitively, (2a) can be cast as a conventional clustering
problem based on fixed representations, while (2b) is a standard supervised representation learning process.
In this paper, we propose an approach that alternates between the two steps – updating the cluster ids given the current representation parameters and updating the representation parameters given the current clustering result. Specifically, we cluster images using agglomerative clustering[16]
and represent images via activations of a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN).
The reason to choose agglomerative clustering is threefold: 1) it begins with an over-clustering, which is more
reliable in the beginning when a good representation has
not yet been learned. Intuitively, clustering with representations from a CNN initialized with random weights are not
15147

