Piecewise-planar 3D approximation from wide-baseline stereo
C. Verleysen and C. De Vleeschouwer
ICTEAM institute, Université catholique de Louvain (UCL), Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
{cedric.verleysen, christophe.devleeschouwer}@uclouvain.be

Abstract
This paper approximates the 3D geometry of a scene by
a small number of 3D planes. The method is especially
suited to man-made scenes, and only requires two calibrated
wide-baseline views as inputs. It relies on the computation of a dense but noisy 3D point cloud, as for example
obtained by matching DAISY descriptors [35] between the
views. It then segments one of the two reference images,
and adopts a multi-model fitting process to assign a 3D
plane to each region, when the region is not detected as
occluded. A pool of 3D plane hypotheses is first derived
from the 3D point cloud, to include planes that reasonably
approximate the part of the 3D point cloud observed from
each reference view between randomly selected triplets of
3D points. The hypothesis-to-region assignment problem is
then formulated as an energy-minimization problem, which
simultaneously optimizes an original data-fidelity term, the
assignment smoothness over neighboring regions, and the
number of assigned planar proxies. The synthesis of intermediate viewpoints demonstrates the effectiveness of our
3D reconstruction, and thereby the relevance of our proposed data fidelity-metric.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 3D model of a scene from images
captured by widely separated cameras offers two
advantages compared to its estimation from smallbaseline stereo. First, the 3D estimated from triangulation in wide-baseline setups is less impacted by
unprecise correspondences or calibration inaccuracies
than in small-baseline ones [17]. Second, 3D reconstruction from widely separated views results in 3D
models that are consistent with a wider range of viewpoints, thereby enabling to synthesize a larger range
of virtual views of the scene. However, the large occlusions and strong (projective) deformations affecting wide-baseline views make the determination of
a dense matching much more challenging than in its
small-baseline counterpart. For this reason, most of

the state-of-the-art multi-view stereo (MVS) methods
still rely on a dense network of small-baseline stereo
pairs [1] [23] [36] to estimate the 3D, even if the two
outermost cameras might form a wide-baseline stereo
pair. Due to cost or practical deployment constraints,
it is however not always possible to install many cameras around the scene. To address the reconstruction
problem in sparse acquisition setups, our paper promotes the use of prior knowledge about the 3D geometry of the scene. Namely, it proposes a solution to reconstruct a scene from only two wide-baseline views,
in cases for which the 3D scene exhibits a piecewiseplanar geometry, as often encountered in man-made1
scenes.
Our piecewise-planar reconstruction is formulated
as a 3D planes assignment problem over the 2D regions that are obtained in one of the two reference images based on a color segmentation [40]2 . In contrast
to most previous works dealing with wide-baseline
setups [4] [1] [27], our method builds upon a dense
3D point cloud3 , instead of a sparse set of correspondences between keypoints. Although dense point
clouds offer the advantage to provide 3D cues for
challenging surfaces, e.g., textureless or with repetitive patterns such as paved ﬂoors, they are generally
much more corrupted by noise and 3D outliers than
sparse ones. This noise makes it ineffective to directly
ﬁt planar models to the cloud. Therefore, our method
ﬁrst derives a set of planar hypotheses from the cloud,
and then assigns them to the image regions. The assignment is done by optimizing an energy function
that favors (i) assignment smoothness across neighboring regions, (ii) consistency between the assigned
models and the dense point cloud, and (iii) sparsity
of plane models. The success of our approach funda1 A man-made scene is composed of manufactured 3D objects,
which are observed by real cameras.
2 In practice, the parameters of the segmentation are tuned to
oversegment the image, so that it becomes unlikely that pixels that
belong to the same region lie on distinct planar surfaces.
3 We deﬁne a dense point cloud as a set of 3D points whose projection fully covers (at least one of) the reference images.

3327

