Accumulated Stability Voting:
A Robust Descriptor from Descriptors of Multiple Scales

1

Tsun-Yi Yang1,2
Academia Sinica, Taiwan

Yen-Yu Lin1
Yung-Yu Chuang2
2
National Taiwan University, Taiwan

{shamangary,yylin}@citi.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel local descriptor through accumulated stability voting (ASV). The stability of feature dimensions is measured by their differences across scales. To
be more robust to noise, the stability is further quantized by
thresholding. The principle of maximum entropy is utilized
for determining the best thresholds for maximizing discriminant power of the resultant descriptor. Accumulating stability renders a real-valued descriptor and it can be converted
into a binary descriptor by an additional thresholding process. The real-valued descriptor attains high matching accuracy while the binary descriptor makes a good compromise between storage and accuracy. Our descriptors are
simple yet effective, and easy to implement. In addition, our
descriptors require no training. Experiments on popular
benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our descriptors and their superiority to the state-of-the-art descriptors.

1. Introduction
Feature matching has gained significant attention because it has a wide variety of applications such as object
detection [10, 12], scene categorizing [20], image alignment [22, 17], image matching [9, 8], co-segmentation [28,
7] and many others. The performance of feature matching heavily relies on accurate feature localization and robust
feature description. This paper focuses on the latter issue on
feature descriptors. A good feature descriptor is often local,
distinctive and invariant. Local descriptors help combating
with problems of occlusion and clutter. Distinctive descriptors allow matching with high confidence. Finally, descriptors need to be invariant to various variations that one could
run into in real-world applications, including orientations,
scales, perspectives, and lighting conditions.
Most descriptors only represent the local neighborhood
of the detected feature at a particular scale (or the domain
size as called by Dong et al. [11]). The scale is often deter-

cyy@csie.ntu.edu.tw

mined by the feature detection algorithm. The selection of
the scale could be inaccurate and lead to bad matching performance. Previous methods address this issue by finding a
low-dimensional linear approximation for a set of descriptors extracted at different scales [15] or performing pooling
on them [11]. Inspired by these methods, we propose the
accumulated stability voting (ASV) framework for synthesizing a more robust descriptor from descriptors at multiple scales. Figure 1 illustrates the framework. Our framework starts with sampling the scale space around the detected scale. With a set of baseline descriptors extracted at
the sampled scales, we find the difference of two baseline
descriptors for each scale pair. These differences reveal the
stability (insensitivity) of each dimension of the baseline
descriptor with respect to scales. By applying thresholding,
we classify each dimension as “stable” or “unstable.” Using multiple thresholding, the stability levels can be refined
if necessary. To maximize the discriminant power of the
descriptor, the principle of maximum entropy is explored
for determining the best thresholds. By accumulating the
stability votes from all scale pairs, we obtain a real-valued
descriptor (called ASV-SIFT if SIFT is used as the baseline
descriptor). The descriptor can be converted into a binary
descriptor by performing the second-stage thresholding.
The main contribution of the paper is the overall design
of the ASV framework. Along this way, we have (1) used
differences of descriptors for measuring stability of feature
dimensions across scales, (2) utilized the principle of maximum entropy for effective quantization of stability, and (3)
demonstrated the effectiveness of our descriptors by thorough experiments and comparisons.

2. Related Work
Scale Invariant Feature Transformation (SIFT) [23] provides procedures for both feature detection and description
with good performance. It locates features and estimates
their scales by finding extrema of a Difference-of-Gaussian
pyramid [24] in the scale space. A carefully designed procedure is used to collect a histogram of gradients within
1327

