Rain Streak Removal Using Layer Priors
Yu Li1 Robby T. Tan2,3 Xiaojie Guo4 Jiangbo Lu1 Michael S. Brown3
1

Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore 2 Yale-NUS College, Singapore
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore
4
State Key Lab of Information Security, IIE, CAS, China

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of rain streak removal
from a single image. Rain streaks impair visibility of an image and introduce undesirable interference that can severely affect the performance of computer vision algorithms.
Rain streak removal can be formulated as a layer decomposition problem, with a rain streak layer superimposed on a
background layer containing the true scene content. Existing decomposition methods that address this problem employ either dictionary learning methods or impose a low
rank structure on the appearance of the rain streaks. While
these methods can improve the overall visibility, they tend
to leave too many rain streaks in the background image
or over-smooth the background image. In this paper, we
propose an effective method that uses simple patch-based
priors for both the background and rain layers. These priors are based on Gaussian mixture models and can accommodate multiple orientations and scales of the rain streaks. This simple approach removes rain streaks better than
the existing methods qualitatively and quantitatively. We
overview our method and demonstrate its effectiveness over
prior work on a number of examples.

1. Introduction
Most computer vision algorithms assume that the input
image is of scene content that are clear and visible. However, for outdoor images, undesirable interference from rainy
weather is often inevitable. Rain introduces several different types of visibility degradation. Raindrops that fall and
flow on a camera lens or a windscreen can obstruct, deform
and/or blur the imagery of the background scenes. Distant rain streaks accumulated throughout the scene reduce the
visibility in a manner similar to fog, namely by scattering
light out and into the line of sight, creating a veiling phenomenon. Nearby rain streaks, where the individual rain
streaks are visible can also significantly degrade visibility
due to their specular highlights, scattering, and blurring ef-

Input

Background

Rain patch

Rain streaks

Figure 1: Upper Row: An example rain image and a
zoomed-in patch that mainly contains annoying effect of
rain streaks. Our method learns a rain streak layer prior
on this region and used it for layer separation. Lower Row:
The background and rain layers recovered by our proposed
method, respectively.

fect. Figure 1 shows an example of visibility degradation
due to rain streaks and our attempt to remove them.
Mathematically, the observed rain image O ∈ RM ×N
can be modeled as a linear superimposition [2, 11] of the
desired background layer B ∈ RM ×N and the rain streak
layer R ∈ RM ×N , expressed as O = B + R. The goal
of rain streak removal is to decompose the rain-free background B and the rain streak layer R from an input image
O, and hence enhance the visibility of the image. This layer
separation problem is an ill-posed one as the number of unknowns to be recovered is twice as many as that of the input.
One common strategy is to use multiple images, or a video
sequence, to mitigate the difficulty of the background scene
recovery given the rich temporal information. In this paper,

2736

