DeepHand: Robust Hand Pose Estimation
by Completing a Matrix Imputed with Deep Features
Ayan Sinha∗

Chiho Choi∗
Karthik Ramani
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA

{sinha12, chihochoi, ramani}@purdue.edu

Abstract
We propose DeepHand to estimate the 3D pose of a hand
using depth data from commercial 3D sensors. We discriminatively train convolutional neural networks to output a low
dimensional activation feature given a depth map. This activation feature vector is representative of the global or local joint angle parameters of a hand pose. We efﬁciently
identify ’spatial’ nearest neighbors to the activation feature, from a database of features corresponding to synthetic
depth maps, and store some ’temporal’ neighbors from previous frames. Our matrix completion algorithm uses these
’spatio-temporal’ activation features and the corresponding
known pose parameter values to estimate the unknown pose
parameters of the input feature vector. Our database of activation features supplements large viewpoint coverage and
our hierarchical estimation of pose parameters is robust to
occlusions. We show that our approach compares favorably to state-of-the-art methods while achieving real time
performance (≈ 32 FPS) on a standard computer.

1. Introduction
Robust hand tracking is central to human-computer interaction interfaces and augmented reality applications. Although, there exists robust and accurate methods for full
body tracking, hand tracking is far more challenging [10,
11, 26, 23, 29, 16, 14, 17, 18]. This is due to several reasons:
(i) the hand pose exists in a high dimensional space because
each ﬁnger and the palm is associated with several degrees
of freedom, (ii) the ﬁngers exhibit self similarity, are ﬂexible and often occlude each other, (iii) noise in acquired data
coupled with fast ﬁnger articulations confounds continuous
hand tracking. Multi camera setups or GPU acceleration
eases some of these challenges, but limits deployment to
the general public.
We present a robust method for hand tracking with a
∗ These authors made an equal contribution.

single depth camera which achieves real time performance
without a GPU. Speciﬁcally, we propose a novel matrix
completion method to estimate the joint angle parameters
on a per frame basis. Our method is ﬂexible to operate with
or without temporal information. This alleviates the need
for explicit pose initialization if the method loses track or
the hand disappears from the camera’s view frustum. Furthermore, our pre-compiled database supports large viewpoint coverage and our hierarchical pose estimation from
global to local parameters is robust to severe ﬁnger occlusions.
At the core of our approach lies a convolutional neural net (ConvNet) architecture to discriminatively reduce
the dimensionality of the depth map. ConvNets have
achieved ground-breaking performance in image classiﬁcation [2, 24] and video recognition [8, 9]. A naive strategy
to replace the classiﬁcation layer in a deep neural net with a
regression layer leads to errors, as the objective function often gets stuck in a local minima. Previous approaches have
shown that this error decreases by incorporating a prior [15]
or a intermediate heat map features [29] into the ConvNet
architecture. Different from these approaches, we train several ConvNets to output a discriminative low dimensional
activation feature in the penultimate fully connected layer.
This activation vector represents either the global hand orientation or the local articulations of the ﬁve ﬁngers, given
a depth map. Our main insight is that a pool of (spatially
or temporally) nearby activation features to an activation
feature can better represent the hand pose. For generating a population of activation features from which such a
pool is extracted, we render realistic depth maps covering a
large range of hand articulations and feed them into a deep
ConvNet. The ConvNets automatically learn the scope of
training (local or global), the ﬁnger type (thumb, ring, index, middle or little), and prevalent occlusions by simply
inputting the discretized class of the pose parameter values, and do not require any additional information. We
then store the activation features from the ConvNets for
each depth map in the training data to create a population

4150

