Human Pose Estimation with Iterative Error Feedback
João Carreira∗
carreira@eecs.berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley
Katerina Fragkiadaki†
katef@eecs.berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Hierarchical feature extractors such as Convolutional
Networks (ConvNets) have achieved impressive performance on a variety of classification tasks using purely feedforward processing. Feedforward architectures can learn
rich representations of the input space but do not explicitly model dependencies in the output spaces, that are quite
structured for tasks such as articulated human pose estimation or object segmentation. Here we propose a framework
that expands the expressive power of hierarchical feature
extractors to encompass both input and output spaces, by
introducing top-down feedback. Instead of directly predicting the outputs in one go, we use a self-correcting model
that progressively changes an initial solution by feeding
back error predictions, in a process we call Iterative Error
Feedback (IEF). IEF shows excellent performance on the
task of articulated pose estimation in the challenging MPII
and LSP benchmarks, matching the state-of-the-art without
requiring ground truth scale annotation.

1. Introduction
Feature extractors such as Convolutional Networks
(ConvNets) [23] represent images using a multi-layered hierarchy of features and are inspired by the structure and
functionality of the visual pathway of the human brain
[13, 1]. Feature computation in these models is purely feedforward, however, unlike in the human visual system where
feedback connections abound [11, 21, 22]. Feedback can be
used to modulate and specialize feature extraction in early
layers in order to model temporal and spatial context (e.g.
priming [42]), to leverage prior knowledge about shape for
segmentation and 3D perception, or simply for guiding visual attention to image regions relevant for the task under
∗ Now at Google DeepMind.
† Now at Google.

Pulkit Agrawal
pulkitag@eecs.berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley
Jitendra Malik
malik@eecs.berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley

consideration.
Here we are interested in using feedback to build predictors that can naturally handle complex, structured output
spaces. We will use as running example the task of 2D human pose estimation [48, 39, 37, 28], where the goal is to
infer the 2D locations of a set of keypoints such as wrists,
ankles, etc, from a single RGB image. The space of 2D
human poses is highly structured because of body part proportions, left-right symmetries, interpenetration constraints,
joint limits (e.g. elbows do not bend back) and physical connectivity (e.g. wrists are rigidly related to elbows), among
others. Modeling this structure should make it easier to pinpoint the visible keypoints and make it possible to estimate
the occluded ones.
Our main contribution is in providing a generic framework for modeling rich structure in both input and output
spaces by learning hierarchical feature extractors over their
joint space. We achieve this by incorporating top-down
feedback – instead of trying to directly predict the target
outputs, as in feedforward processing, we predict what is
wrong with their current estimate and correct it iteratively.
We call our framework Iterative Error Feedback, or IEF.
In IEF, a feedforward model f operates on the augmented input space created by concatenating (denoted by
⊕) the RGB image I with a visual representation g of the
estimated output yt to predict a “correction” (ǫt ) that brings
yt closer to the ground truth output y. The correction signal ǫt is applied to the current output yt to generate yt+1
and this is converted into a visual representation by g, that
is stacked with the image to produce new inputs xt+1 = I
⊕ g(yt ) for f , and so on iteratively. This procedure is initialized with a guess of the output (y0 ) and is repeated until
a predetermined termination criterion is met. The model
is trained to produce bounded corrections at each iteration,
e.g. ||ǫt ||2 < L. The motivation for modifying yt by a
bounded amount is that the space of xt is typically highly
non-linear and hence local corrections should be easier to
14733

