Weakly Supervised Object Boundaries
Anna Khoreva1

Rodrigo Benenson1
1

Mohamed Omran1

Matthias Hein2

Bernt Schiele1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany

Abstract
State-of-the-art learning based boundary detection
methods require extensive training data. Since labelling object boundaries is one of the most expensive types of annotations, there is a need to relax the requirement to carefully
annotate images to make both the training more affordable
and to extend the amount of training data. In this paper we
propose a technique to generate weakly supervised annotations and show that bounding box annotations alone suffice
to reach high-quality object boundaries without using any
object-specific boundary annotations. With the proposed
weak supervision techniques we achieve the top performance on the object boundary detection task, outperforming
by a large margin the current fully supervised state-of-theart methods.

(a) Image

(b) SE(VOC)

(c) Det.+SE (VOC)

(d) SE(BSDS)

(e) SE (weak)

(f) Det.+SE (weak)

Figure 1: Object-specific boundaries 1a differ from generic
boundaries (such as the ones detected in 1d). The proposed
weakly supervised approach drives boundary detection towards the objects of interest. Example results in 1e and 1f.
Red/green indicate false/true positive pixels, grey is missing
recall. All methods shown at 50% recall.

1. Introduction
Boundary detection is a classic computer vision problem. It is an enabling ingredient for many vision tasks such
as image/video segmentation [1, 12], object proposals [17],
object detection [37], and semantic labelling [2]. Rather
than image edges, many of these tasks require class specific
objects boundaries. These are the external boundaries of
object instances belonging to a specific class (or class set).
State-of-the-art boundary detection is obtained via machine learning which requires extensive training data. Yet,
instance-wise boundaries are amongst the most expensive
types of annotations. Compared to two clicks for a bounding box, delineating an object requires a polygon with
20~100 points, i.e. at least 10× more effort per object.
In order to make the training of new object classes affordable, and/or to increase the size of the models we train,
there is a need to relax the requirement of high-quality image annotations. Hence the starting point of this paper is the
following question: is it possible to obtain object-specific
boundaries without having any object boundary annotations
at training time?
In this paper we focus on learning object boundaries in a
weakly supervised fashion and show that high quality object
boundary detection can be obtained without using any classspecific boundary annotations. We propose several ways of
generating object boundary annotations with different levels

of supervision, from just using a bounding box oriented
object detector to using the boundary detector trained on
generic boundaries. For generating weak object boundary
annotations we consider different sources, fusing unsupervised image segmentation [11] and object proposal methods [32, 25] with object detectors [14, 27]. We show that
bounding box annotations alone suffice to achieve objects
boundary estimates with high quality.
We present results using a decision forest [9] and a convnet edge detector [35]. We report top performance on
Pascal object boundary detection [16, 10] with our weaksupervision approaches already surpassing previously reported fully supervised results.
Our main contributions are summarized below:
• We introduce the problem of weakly supervised objectspecific boundary detection.
• We show that good performance can be obtained on
BSDS, PascalVOC12, and SBD boundary estimation using
only weak-supervision (leveraging bounding box detection
annotations without the need of instance-wise object boundary annotations).
• We report best known results on PascalVOC12, and
SBD datasets. Our weakly supervised results alone improve
over the previous fully supervised state-of-the-art.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 3
1183

