Unconstrained Face Alignment via Cascaded Compositional Learning
Shizhan Zhu1,2 Cheng Li2 Chen Change Loy1,3 Xiaoou Tang1,3
1
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Group Limited
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
zs014@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, chengli@sensetime.com, ccloy@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, xtang@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We present a practical approach to address the problem
of unconstrained face alignment for a single image. In our
unconstrained problem, we need to deal with large shape
and appearance variations under extreme head poses and
rich shape deformation. To equip cascaded regressors with
the capability to handle global shape variation and irregular appearance-shape relation in the unconstrained scenario, we partition the optimisation space into multiple domains of homogeneous descent, and predict a shape as a
composition of estimations from multiple domain-specific
regressors. With a specially formulated learning objective
and a novel tree splitting function, our approach is capable of estimating a robust and meaningful composition. In
addition to achieving state-of-the-art accuracy over existing approaches, our framework is also an efficient solution
(350 FPS), thanks to the on-the-fly domain exclusion mechanism and the capability of leveraging the fast pixel feature.

1. Introduction
Face alignment [8, 1, 7, 28, 29, 31, 42, 25, 35, 21] aims
to automatically localise facial parts locations, which are
essential for many subsequent processing modules, such
as face recognition [24], face attributes prediction [10],
and robust face frontalisation [16]. The objective of this
study is to devise an effective and efficient face alignment method to handle faces with unconstrained variations.
AFLW dataset [20] provides a good example of images typically found in unconstrained scenarios. The dataset is extremely challenging given the shape and appearance variations – it contains in-the-wild faces obtained from Flickr,
with rich face expressions, and head poses up to ±120◦ for
yaw and ±90◦ for pitch and roll. Some examples of faces
are shown in Fig. 1.
The study of face alignment has made rapid progresses in

recent years. But how effective can existing methods handle
unconstrained faces? To gain a preliminary insight, we plot
the error distribution of existing methods on the full AFLW
dataset. We first select the Supervised Descent Method
(SDM) [36], a representative method among the mainstream cascaded regression approaches [11, 5, 36, 27, 33].
As shown in Fig. 1(a), even the approach is retrained on
AFLW, its effective scope is confined within frontally biased faces, and it has difficulty to cover an enlarged shape
parameter space due to large head rotations and face deformations caused by rich expressions. Xiong and De la
Torre [37] have the same observation – a cascaded regressor
such as Supervised Descent Method (SDM) is only effective
within a specific domain of homogeneous descent (DHD)1 .
We make a second attempt with an intuitive multi-view
approach – first estimating head poses then followed by
face alignment on a specific view2 . The performance improves but as revealed in Fig. 1(b), the heuristic partitioning with respect to only the head pose is still suboptimal
because it neglects other shape deformation or appearance
variations, e.g. large mouth, large face scale or sunglasses.
Moreover, it assumes independence between different view
models without considering their inter-complementary and
regularisation role. Hence, the error caused by head pose
estimation could easily be propagated and amplified to the
final shape estimation, reducing the overall robustness.
The preliminary tests show the difficulties of covering
a wider range of shape and appearance variations beyond
frontal faces, either with a single or multiple models. A
few recent studies [37, 34, 18, 17, 32] have started to work
on this important and relatively unexplored problem of face
alignment. These studies mainly resort to three-dimensional
(3D) face modelling [18] or constrain the problem with additional assumptions, e.g., adding temporal prior [37] or
1 A DHD refers to optimisation spaces of a function that share similar
directions of gradients.
2 We adopt a state-of-the-art head pose estimator [15]. Given a test face
image, we use the estimated head pose to select the best-match from a set
of view-specific SDM cascaded regressors and the associated initial shape
for alignment.

3409

