Non-Local Image Dehazing
Dana Berman
Tel Aviv University

Tali Treibitz
University of Haifa

Shai Avidan
Tel Aviv University

danamena@post.tau.ac.il

ttreibitz@univ.haifa.ac.il

avidan@eng.tau.ac.il

Abstract

200

B

Haze limits visibility and reduces image contrast in outdoor images. The degradation is different for every pixel
and depends on the distance of the scene point from the
camera. This dependency is expressed in the transmission
coefficients, that control the scene attenuation and amount
of haze in every pixel. Previous methods solve the single
image dehazing problem using various patch-based priors.
We, on the other hand, propose an algorithm based on a
new, non-local prior. The algorithm relies on the assumption that colors of a haze-free image are well approximated
by a few hundred distinct colors, that form tight clusters in
RGB space. Our key observation is that pixels in a given
cluster are often non-local, i.e., they are spread over the entire image plane and are located at different distances from
the camera. In the presence of haze these varying distances
translate to different transmission coefficients. Therefore,
each color cluster in the clear image becomes a line in RGB
space, that we term a haze-line. Using these haze-lines, our
algorithm recovers both the distance map and the haze-free
image. The algorithm is linear in the size of the image, deterministic and requires no training. It performs well on a
wide variety of images and is competitive with other stateof-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Outdoor images often suffer from low contrast and limited visibility due to haze, small particles in the air that scatter the light in the atmosphere. Haze is independent of scene
radiance and has two effects on the acquired image: it attenuates the signal of the viewed scene, and it introduces an
additive component to the image, termed the ambient light,
or airlight (the color of a scene point at infinity). The image degradation caused by haze increases with the distance
from the camera, since the scene radiance decreases and
the airlight magnitude increases. Thus, hazy images can be
modeled as a per-pixel convex combination of a haze-free
image and the global airlight.
Our goal is to recover the RGB values of the haze-free
image and the transmission (the coefficient of the convex
combination) for each pixel. This is an ill-posed problem
that has an under-determined system of three equations and

100

0
0

100

200

0

(a) Haze-free image

100

200

G

R

(b) Corresponding clusters
200

B
100

0
0

100

R

(c) Synthetic hazy image.

200

0

100

200

G

(d) Corresponding haze-lines

Figure 1. Non-Local Image Dehazing. (a) Pixels of a haze free
color image are clustered using K-means. Pixels belonging to four
of the clusters are marked. Note that the pixels are non-local and
are spread all over the image plane. (b) The four color clusters
are depicted in RGB space. Colors of the clusters correspond to
the highlighted pixels in (a). (c) Synthetic haze is added to (a).
The same clustered pixels are marked, but their observed colors
are affected by different amounts of haze. (d) The hazy pixels
depicted in RGB color space. They are distributed along lines,
termed haze-lines, passing through the airlight, marked in black.

at least four unknowns per pixel, with inherent ambiguity
between haze and object radiance. To handle this ambiguity,
some previous works used additional information such as
more images, while others assumed an image prior to solve
the problem from a single image (see Sec. 2).
Here, we use the observation that colors of a haze-free
image can be well approximated by a few hundred distinct
colors [14]. This implies that pixels in a hazy image can
be modeled by lines in RGB space that pass through the
airlight coordinates. We term these lines haze-lines to stress
this characteristic (Figs. 1, 2). Pixels along a haze-line come
from objects that have similar radiance colors, located over
the entire image plane. These objects can be and indeed are
located at different distances from the camera. Since their
acquired color can be modeled by a convex combination of
the radiance color and the airlight color, such objects will
span a line in RGB space. We use these lines to estimate the
per-pixel transmission based on the pixel’s position along
the line it belongs to.
As opposed to recent state-of-the-art methods our
11674

