Robust Optical Flow Estimation of Double-Layer Images
under Transparency or Reflection
Jiaolong Yang∗
BIT & ANU

Hongdong Li
ANU & ACRV

Abstract
This paper deals with a challenging, frequently encountered, yet not properly investigated problem in two-frame
optical flow estimation. That is, the input frames are compounds of two imaging layers – one desired background
layer of the scene, and one distracting, possibly moving
layer due to transparency or reflection. In this situation, the
conventional brightness constancy constraint – the cornerstone of most existing optical flow methods – will no longer
be valid. In this paper, we propose a robust solution to this
problem. The proposed method performs both optical flow
estimation, and image layer separation. It exploits a generalized double-layer brightness consistency constraint connecting these two tasks, and utilizes the priors for both of
them. Experiments on both synthetic data and real images
have confirmed the efficacy of the proposed method. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt towards handling generic optical flow fields of two-frame images containing transparency or reflection.

Yuchao Dai
CECS, ANU

modeled as a superposition of two constituting layers, denoted as I = L1 ⊕ L2 , where ⊕ denotes some suitable layer
combination operator. Without loss of generality, we call
L1 the background scene layer, which corresponds to the
image of the desired scene that we intend to capture, and
L2 the foreground distracting layer, which corresponds to
the semi-transparent media (e.g. a glass window with dirt or
reflections on it) or the semi-reflected image.
The main goal of this paper is to robustly estimate the
optical flow field of the scene objects (i.e. the background
layer), which is of concern for vision systems. We consider
two general cases: the foreground distracting layer is stationary, or dynamically changing.
Let I and I′ be two time-consecutive frames of a scene
containing the aforementioned two layers. In the presence
of a dynamic foreground layer, there are two legitimate optical flow fields – one for the foreground layer and one for
the background layer. Denote the two flow fields generated
by the movements of the two layers as U and V respectively. The relationships among the observed images, the
image layers and the optical flow fields can be given as
I = L1 ⊕


yU

1. Introduction
Most optical flow methods assume that there is only one
imaging layer on the observed image with the brightness of
scene objects, and use the brightness constancy constraint
(BCC) to estimate the optical flow for scene objects. This
single imaging layer assumption, however, can be often violated in real-world situations, especially in cases involving
transparency or reflection. Transparencies and reflections
are frequently met in imaging process, e.g., when one is
looking at street scene from inside a car through a stained
windscreen, or seeing through a thin layer of rain, looking into a window with semi-reflections on the window surface etc. The BCC will generally not hold for the resultant
double-layer images, even in ideal noise-free cases.
In all the above examples, the observed image I can be
∗ J. Yang is with Beijing Lab of Intelligent Information Technology,

Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT), and with College of Engineering and Computer Science, the Australian National University (ANU).
Email: jiaolong.yang@anu.edu.au

Robby T. Tan
Yale-NUS College

L2


yV

I′ = L′1 ⊕ L′2

When V ≡ 0 and L2 ≡ L′2 , i.e. the foreground layer is
static, our task is to estimate a single flow field U for background layer, and also estimate the layers L1 , L′1 , L2 . Otherwise when a dynamic foreground layer exists, we will estimate two flow fields U, V as well as the layers L1 , L′1 ,
L2 , L′2 . As we explicitly perform image layer separation
(i.e. estimating L1 , L′1 , L2 , L′2 ), an appealing byproduct of
our method is the restoration of the clear scene images.
For either of the two cases with a static or dynamic foreground layer, this is a highly ill-posed problem, especially
considering optical flow estimation and image layer separation problems per se are known to be ill-posed. From only
two input images, our task is to recover one or two optical
fields, as well as the two unknown layers.
Little work has been reported in the literature concerning

1410

