Recurrent Convolutional Network for Video-based Person Re-Identification
Niall McLaughlin, Jesus Martinez del Rincon, Paul Miller
Centre for Secure Information Technologies (CSIT)
Queen’s University Belfast
n.mclaughlin@qub.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper we propose a novel recurrent neural network architecture for video-based person re-identification.
Given the video sequence of a person, features are extracted
from each frame using a convolutional neural network that
incorporates a recurrent final layer, which allows information to flow between time-steps. The features from all timesteps are then combined using temporal pooling to give an
overall appearance feature for the complete sequence. The
convolutional network, recurrent layer, and temporal pooling layer, are jointly trained to act as a feature extractor for
video-based re-identification using a Siamese network architecture. Our approach makes use of colour and optical
flow information in order to capture appearance and motion
information which is useful for video re-identification. Experiments are conduced on the iLIDS-VID and PRID-2011
datasets to show that this approach outperforms existing
methods of video-based re-identification.

1. Introduction
The re-identification problem entails associating different tracks of a person as they move between nonoverlapping cameras [7]. Accurate re-identification is crucial for robust wide-area tacking, where persons are tracked
as they move through a camera-network, and may be useful for single-camera tracking, where short tracklets must
be linked into longer more reliable tracks [24]. In the general case, person re-identification is difficult due to large
appearance changes caused by environmental and geometric variations as a person moves between cameras.
In this work we address the problem of person reidentification in the video setting, which occurs when a
video of a person as seen in one camera must be matched
against a gallery of videos captured by a different nonoverlapping camera. The problem of re-identification
has been extensively explored for still images, however
the video-based re-identification problem has not had the
same attention, perhaps due to a lack of large video re-

Figure 1. Our proposed video-based re-identification system.

identification datasets in the past [43].
The use of video for re-identification has several advantages over still images. The video setting is a more natural
way to perform re-identification, as a person’s image will
normally be captured by a video camera, producing a sequence of images rather than a single still image. Given the
availability of sequences of images, temporal information
related to a person’s motion, such as their gait, and perhaps
even the way their clothing moves, is captured, which may
help to disambiguate difficult cases that arise when trying to
recognise a person in a different camera. Lastly, sequences
of images provide a larger number of samples of a person’s
appearance, where each sample may have a different pose,
viewpoint, and background, thus allowing a better model of
the person’s appearance to be built. The existence of a large
number of samples makes it easier to train machine learning algorithms in general, and neural networks in particular.
However, the use of video also creates several new challenges for re-identification, such as dealing with video sequences of arbitrary length and/or different frame-rates, the
difficulty of creating an accurate appearance model given
unknown partial or full occlusions within the sequences to
be recognised, and the possibility of tracking inaccuracy
that may arise when extracting the sequences. This final
11325

