Deep Supervised Hashing for Fast Image Retrieval
Haomiao Liu1,2 , Ruiping Wang1 , Shiguang Shan1 , Xilin Chen1
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
haomiao.liu@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present a new hashing method to learn
compact binary codes for highly efficient image retrieval
on large-scale datasets. While the complex image appearance variations still pose a great challenge to reliable retrieval, in light of the recent progress of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) in learning robust image representation on various vision tasks, this paper proposes a novel
Deep Supervised Hashing (DSH) method to learn compact
similarity-preserving binary code for the huge body of image data. Specifically, we devise a CNN architecture that
takes pairs of images (similar/dissimilar) as training inputs and encourages the output of each image to approximate
discrete values (e.g. +1/-1). To this end, a loss function is
elaborately designed to maximize the discriminability of the
output space by encoding the supervised information from
the input image pairs, and simultaneously imposing regularization on the real-valued outputs to approximate the
desired discrete values. For image retrieval, new-coming
query images can be easily encoded by propagating through
the network and then quantizing the network outputs to binary codes representation. Extensive experiments on two
large scale datasets CIFAR-10 and NUS-WIDE show the
promising performance of our method compared with the
state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
In recent years, hundreds of thousands of images are uploaded to the Internet every day, making it extremely difficult to find relevant images according to different users’ request. For example, content based image retrieval retrieves images that are similar to a given query image, where
“similar” may refer to visually similar or semantically similar. Suppose that both the images in the database and the
query image are represented by real-valued features, the
simplest way of looking for relevant images is by ranking
the database images according to their distances to the query

image in the feature space, and returning the closest ones.
However, for a database with millions of images, which is
quite common nowadays, even a linear search through the
database would cost a great deal of time and memory.
To address the inefficiency of real-valued features, hashing approaches are proposed to map images to compact
binary codes that approximately preserve the data structure in the original space, [27, 9, 17] for example. Since
the images are represented by binary codes instead of realvalued features, the time and memory costs of searching can
be greatly reduced. However, the retrieval performance of
most existing hashing methods heavily depends on the features they use, which are basically extracted in an unsupervised manner, thus more suitable for dealing with the visual
similarity search rather than the semantic similarity search.
On the other hand, recent progress in image classification
[12, 25, 8], object detection [26], face recognition [24], and
many other vision tasks [18, 2] demonstrate the impressive
learning power of CNNs. In these different tasks, the CNNs
can be viewed as a feature extractor guided by the objective functions specifically designed for the individual tasks.
The successful applications of CNNs in various tasks imply
that the features learned by CNNs can well capture the underlying semantic structure of images in spite of significant
appearance variations.
Inspired by the robustness of CNN features, we propose
a binary code learning framework by exploiting the CNN
structure, named Deep Supervised Hashing (DSH). In our
method, first we devise a CNN model which takes image
pairs along with labels indicating whether the two images
are similar as training inputs, and produces binary codes
as outputs, as shown in Figure 1. In practice, we generate image pairs online so that many more image pairs can
be utilized in the training stage. The loss function is designed to pull the network outputs of similar images together and push the outputs of dissimilar ones far away, so that
the learned Hamming space can well approximate the semantic structure of images. To avoid optimizing the nondifferentiable loss function in Hamming space, the network

2064

