Towards Open Set Deep Networks
Abhijit Bendale*, Terrance E. Boult
University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
{abendale,tboult}@vast.uccs.edu ∗

Abstract
Deep networks have produced significant gains for various visual recognition problems, leading to high impact
academic and commercial applications. Recent work in
deep networks highlighted that it is easy to generate images
that humans would never classify as a particular object
class, yet networks classify such images high confidence
as that given class – deep network are easily fooled with
images humans do not consider meaningful. The closed set
nature of deep networks forces them to choose from one of
the known classes leading to such artifacts. Recognition in
the real world is open set, i.e. the recognition system should
reject unknown/unseen classes at test time. We present a
methodology to adapt deep networks for open set recognition, by introducing a new model layer, OpenMax, which
estimates the probability of an input being from an unknown
class. A key element of estimating the unknown probability is adapting Meta-Recognition concepts to the activation
patterns in the penultimate layer of the network. OpenMax allows rejection of “fooling” and unrelated open set
images presented to the system; OpenMax greatly reduces
the number of obvious errors made by a deep network. We
prove that the OpenMax concept provides bounded open
space risk, thereby formally providing an open set recognition solution. We evaluate the resulting open set deep networks using pre-trained networks from the Caffe Model-zoo
on ImageNet 2012 validation data, and thousands of fooling
and open set images. The proposed OpenMax model significantly outperforms open set recognition accuracy of basic
deep networks as well as deep networks with thresholding
of SoftMax probabilities.

1 Introduction
Computer Vision datasets have grown from few hundred
images to millions of images and from few categories to
thousands of categories, thanks to research advances in
∗ Research performed at Univ. of Colorado at Colorado Springs funded
in part by NSF IIS-1320956. Abhijit Bendale is currently with Samsung
Research America, Mountain View, CA

vision and learning. Recent research in deep networks has
significantly improved many aspects of visual recognition
[26, 3, 11]. Co-evolution of rich representations, scalable
classification methods and large datasets have resulted in
many commercial applications [5, 28, 16, 6]. However, a
wide range of operational challenges occur while deploying
recognition systems in the dynamic and ever-changing real
world. A vast majority of recognition systems are designed
for a static closed world, where the primary assumption is
that all categories are known a priori. Deep networks, like
many classic machine learning tools, are designed to perform closed set recognition.
Recent work on open set recognition [20, 21] and
open world recognition [1], has formalized processes for
performing recognition in settings that require rejecting
unknown objects during testing. While one can always
train with an “other” class for uninteresting classes (known
unknowns), it is impossible to train with all possible examples of unknown objects. Hence the need arises for designing visual recognition tools that formally account for the
“unknown unknowns”[18]. Altough a range of algorithms
has been developed to address this issue [4, 20, 21, 25, 2],
performing open set recognition with deep networks has
remained an unsolved problem.
In the majority of deep networks [11, 26, 3], the output of
the last fully-connected layer is fed to the SoftMax function,
which produces a probability distribution over the N known
class labels. While a deep network will always have a mostlikely class, one might hope that for an unknown input all
classes would have low probability and that thresholding on
uncertainty would reject unknown classes. Recent papers
have shown how to produce “fooling” [14] or “rubbish”
[8] images that are visually far from the desired class but
produce high-probability/confidence scores. They strongly
suggests that thresholding on uncertainty is not sufficient
to determine what is unknown. In Sec. 3, we show that
extending deep networks to threshold SoftMax probability improves open set recognition somewhat, but does not
resolve the issue of fooling images. Nothing in the theory/practice of deep networks, even with thresholded probabilities, satisfies the formal definition of open set recog11563

