Learning Compact Binary Descriptors with Unsupervised Deep Neural Networks
Kevin Lin† , Jiwen Lu‡ , Chu-Song Chen† , Jie Zhou‡
†
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
‡
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
kevinlin311.tw@iis.sinica.edu.tw; lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn;
song@iis.sinica.edu.tw; jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Objectives

In this paper, we propose a new unsupervised deep learning approach called DeepBit to learn compact binary descriptor for efficient visual object matching. Unlike most
existing binary descriptors which were designed with random projections or linear hash functions, we develop a deep
neural network to learn binary descriptors in an unsupervised manner. We enforce three criterions on binary codes
which are learned at the top layer of our network: 1) minimal loss quantization, 2) evenly distributed codes and 3)
uncorrelated bits. Then, we learn the parameters of the networks with a back-propagation technique. Experimental results on three different visual analysis tasks including image
matching, image retrieval, and object recognition clearly
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Feature descriptor plays an important role in computer
vision [28], which has been widely used in numerous computer vision tasks such as object recognition [10, 26, 42],
image classification [15, 52] and panorama stitching [5]. A
desirable feature descriptor should fulfill two essential properties: (1) high quality representations, and (2) low computational cost. A feature descriptor is desired to capture important and distinctive information in an image [26, 28] and
also to be robust to various image transformations [26, 27].
On the other hand, highly efficient descriptor enables machines to run in real-time, which is also important for retrieving image in a large corpus [37], or detecting objects
with mobile devices [43, 50].
Over the past decade, high quality descriptors such as the
rich features learned from the deep Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) [20, 32], and the representative SIFT descriptor [26], have been widely explored. These descriptors
demonstrate superior discriminability, and bridge the gap
between low-level pixels and high-level semantic informa-

Minimal
Quantization Loss

Unlabeled Image

Evenly Distributed
Codes

Uncorrelated Bits

1
0
1
0
1

Figure 1: The basic idea of our proposed method. We enforce three criterions on the binary descriptors, and optimize the parameters of the network with back-propagation.
Our approach dose not require labeled training data and is
more practical to real-world applications in comparison to
supervised binary descriptors.

tion [44]. However, they are high-dimensional real-valued
descriptors, and usually require high computational cost.
In order to reduce the computational complexity, several lightweight binary descriptors have been recently proposed such as BRIEF [6], ORB [33], BRISK [22], and
FREAK [1]. These binary descriptors are highly efficient
to storing and matching. Given compact binary descriptors, one can rapidly measure the similarity of the images
by computing the Hamming distance between binary descriptors via XOR bitwise operations. Since these early binary descriptors are computed by simple intensity comparisons, they are usually unstable and sensitive to scales, rotations, and noises. Some previous works [9, 40, 48, 53, 54]
improved the binary descriptors by encoding the similarity
relationship during optimization. However, the success of
11183

