Pose-Aware Face Recognition in the Wild
Iacopo Masi1
Stephen Rawls2
Gérard Medioni1
Prem Natarajan2
1
USC Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Systems (IRIS), Los Angeles, CA
2
USC Information Sciences Institute (ISI), Marina Del Rey, CA
{iacopo.masi,medioni}@usc.edu

{srawls,pnataraj}@isi.edu

Abstract
(a) LFW faces

(b) IJB-A faces
0.07

0.07

0.06

0.06

0.05

0.05
Frequency

Frequency

We propose a method to push the frontiers of unconstrained face recognition in the wild, focusing on the problem of extreme pose variations. As opposed to current techniques which either expect a single model to learn pose
invariance through massive amounts of training data, or
which normalize images to a single frontal pose, our method
explicitly tackles pose variation by using multiple posespecific models and rendered face images. We leverage deep
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to learn discriminative representations we call Pose-Aware Models (PAMs)
using 500K images from the CASIA WebFace dataset. We
present a comparative evaluation on the new IARPA Janus
Benchmark A (IJB-A) and PIPA datasets. On these datasets
PAMs achieve remarkably better performance than commercial products and surprisingly also outperform methods
that are specifically fine-tuned on the target dataset.

0.04
0.03
0.02

0.03
0.02

0.01
0
−100 −80 −60 −40 −20
0
20
Yaw angle

0.04

0.01
40

60

80

(c) Pose distribution in LFW

100

0
−100 −80 −60 −40 −20
0
20
Yaw angle

40

60

80

100

(d) Pose distribution in IJB-A

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Top: images with increasing yaw angle from left
to right in LFW (blue) and IJB-A (red). Bottom: Pose distributions (yaw angle) in the two datasets.

There has been a flurry of advances in face recognition
in recent years, with some techniques claiming to have met
[29] or even surpassed [18, 25] human face verification performance. It is common to see saturated accuracy under
certain conditions on the standard LFW benchmark.
Recognizing that current face verification systems still
have shortcomings under real-world conditions, a new
benchmark (IJB-A) has been proposed in [13]. This is
a publicly available benchmark to encourage researchers
to focus on novel issues in face recognition in the wild.
The IJB-A dataset focuses especially on variations in pose
and represents a more challenging benchmark compared to
LFW. Fig. 1 shows the distribution of yaw angles in LFW
and in the newly released IJB-A dataset. As can be seen, the
IJB-A dataset encompasses a wider variety of face poses
than LFW and for this reason in this work we propose a
method that is entirely designed to overcome variations in
pose. In addition, the IJB-A dataset introduces a new testing
protocol which more closely matches real-world use cases.

Instead of evaluating image pairs, the IJB-A protocol evaluates template pairs, where a template is a set of one or more
images. This could represent the more realistic use-case
where end-users have multiple images of a single subject.
Since templates can contain images of a subject over multiple poses, it becomes important to consider how to handle
template matching and how the pose variation takes part in
the matching process. To the best of our knowledge, as also
pointed out in [23], none have addressed pose variation in
IJB-A.
The contribution of this paper is that we propose to
take into account pose variability by training multiple posespecific models, and exploiting those models when matching images of varying poses. While most previous approaches rely only on a single frontal-pose model [30, 5],
possibly normalizing images via frontalization [29], we
propose to handle pose variability by learning Pose-Aware
Models (PAMs) for frontal, half-profile and full-profile

4838

