Efficient Large-scale Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search on the GPU
Patrick Wieschollek1,4

Oliver Wang2
Alexander Sorkine-Hornung3
Hendrik P.A. Lensch1

1

University of Tübingen 2 Adobe Systems Inc.
3
Disney Research
4
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Abstract
We present a new approach for efficient approximate
nearest neighbor (ANN) search in high dimensional spaces,
extending the idea of Product Quantization. We propose
a two level product and vector quantization tree that reduces the number of vector comparisons required during
tree traversal. Our approach also includes a novel highly
parallelizable re-ranking method for candidate vectors by
efficiently reusing already computed intermediate values.
Due to its small memory footprint during traversal the
method lends itself to an efficient, parallel GPU implementation. This Product Quantization Tree (PQT) approach significantly outperforms recent state of the art methods for
high dimensional nearest neighbor queries on standard reference datasets. Ours is the first work that demonstrates
GPU performance superior to CPU performance on high
dimensional, large scale ANN problems in time-critical
real-world applications, like loop-closing in videos.

1. Introduction
Finding the nearest neighbors (NN) of a query vector
in a high dimensional space is a fundamental task in computer vision. For a given query vector y ∈ RD , the nearest
neighbor problem consists of finding an element N (y) ∈ X
from a predefined fixed set X ⊂ RD , which minimizes
a distance metric, most commonly the Euclidean distance
2
d(·) := k·k . This NN-problem can be written as
N (y) = arg min d(y, x).

(1)

x∈X

In many computer vision tasks these query vectors represent visual descriptors, meaning both D as well as X are
often large, leading to NN searches being a significant computational bottleneck in many applications. This is due to
the necessity of computing exact distances in a high dimensional space between many pairs of vectors, a problem ex-

acerbated by the phenomenon known as the curse of dimensionality. More precisely, consider a D-dimensional hyper
unit-cube enclosing X . To explore a ν fraction of the volume, we need to visit a ν 1/D percent of each hyper-cube
edge. This means that to explore 10% of a set of SIFTvectors (D = 128) in a hypercube, one has to search an
interval covering ≈ 98% of the possible values per coordinate.
Due to this computational complexity, most applications
rely on approximate nearest-neighbor (ANN) search techniques, which try to find the nearest neighbor with a high
probability. There exists many CPU-approaches for computing ANN in the literature, the most common of which
are KD-trees [6], which hierarchically subdivide the vector
space. While these methods are widely used in graphics
and vision, it has been shown that KD-trees are no more efficient than brute force searches when D is large [9]. The
FLANN software package [16] proposes randomized KDforests and K-Means trees, which prune the overall search
space by identifying small regions around the query vectors, yielding better performance with higher dimensional
vectors.
Another family of approaches are based on Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [5]. These methods hash database
vectors with a number of random projections, and perform
nearest distance checks only on vectors that are hashed to
the same bin. The speed and accuracy of such methods
depends on the hashing function used. Andoni and Indyk [1] describe a family of hashing functions which are
near-optimal. These ideas have since been extended into
the image domain for patch-based nearest neighbor computation [13]. While these methods work well, they have
not yet achieved the same performance as space partitioning methods [16].
While leveraging GPU parallelism seems obvious, in
practice accelerating ANN search techniques using GPU
parallelism is notoriously difficult, largely due to the memory restrictions of GPUs when compared to the amount
12027

