Equiangular Kernel Dictionary Learning with Applications to
Dynamic Texture Analysis
Yuhui Quan1,2 , Chenglong Bao2 , and Hui Ji2
1

School of Computer Science & Engineering, South China Univ. of Tech., Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117542
{csyhquan@scut.edu.cn, matbc@nus.edu.sg, matjh@nus.edu.sg}

Abstract
Most existing dictionary learning algorithms consider a
linear sparse model, which often cannot effectively characterize the nonlinear properties present in many types
of visual data, e.g. dynamic texture (DT). Such nonlinear
properties can be exploited by the so-called kernel sparse
coding. This paper proposed an equiangular kernel dictionary learning method with optimal mutual coherence
to exploit the nonlinear sparsity of high-dimensional visual data. Two main issues are addressed in the proposed method: (1) coding stability for redundant dictionary
of infinite-dimensional space; and (2) computational efficiency for computing kernel matrix of training samples of
high-dimensional data. The proposed kernel sparse coding
method is applied to dynamic texture analysis with both local DT pattern extraction and global DT pattern characterization. The experimental results showed its performance
gain over existing methods.

1. Introduction
In recent years, sparse dictionary learning has become
one important tool in computer vision. Most existing methods for sparse dictionary learning consider a sparse linear
model, which assumes that most local or global patterns
of data, can be represented by the linear combinations of
a small number of atoms from a dictionary. In other words,
the underlying assumption of these linear model based dictionary learning methods is that the data for processing is
dominated by the stationary patterns generated by some linear process. Clearly, such approaches will be less efficient
when processing the data whose main structures are driven
by nonlinear stochastic systems.
Indeed, there are many types of visual data, especially
those high-dimensional ones, showing strong nonlinear behaviors in terms of visual features. One such representative
data is dynamic texture (DT). DTs are referred to as the se-

quences of moving textures with certain stationary temporal
changes in pixel intensities. The spatio-temporal behaviors
of DTs are nonlinear in general. For instance, various distinguishable shapes may be observed from flickering fires
with changes in wind, which implies multiple modalities
of spatio-temporal appearance. Likewise, turbulent water
exhibits chaotic behaviors with non-smooth motion, where
pixel intensities do not change smoothly. Moreover, camera motion is likely to further aggregate the nonlinearities
of correlations among the frames of a DT sequence.
In order to exploit the nonlinear properties existing in
high-dimensional visual data, the so-called kernel sparse
coding has been proposed in the literature which considers
a nonlinear sparse model; see e.g. [12, 12, 44, 37, 11, 18,
25].The basic idea of kernel sparse coding is linearizing the
nonlinear patterns existing in data in some implicit space
and then studying the resultant linear structures by sparse
coding under an implicit kernel dictionary.

1.1. Motivations
By considering a linear sparse model in implicit infinitedimensional feature space, this paper aims at developing
a nonlinear sparse model for high-dimensional visual data
and investigating its applications in DT analysis and recognition. The motivations of applying kernel sparse coding
to processing high-dimensional visual data are three-fold.
Firstly, sparse coding is able to automatically discover the
multiple modalities of patterns and distinguish the mixture
of linear subspaces [1]. Secondly, sparse coding with dictionary learning adapts to the data and thus can better encode the stationary behaviors of data than the handcrafted
features [39]. Thirdly, the nonlinearity of local structures
could be partially linearized in a proper feature space induced by certain kernels, which improves both the accuracy
and discriminability of sparse coding; see e.g. Fig. 2.
A direct call of existing kernel sparse coding approaches
is not suitable for the tasks of processing high-dimensional
visual data, such as DT analysis and recognition. Most existing kernel sparse coding methods do not consider the is-

308

