Group MAD Competition − A New Methodology to Compare
Objective Image Quality Models
Kede Ma1,4 , Qingbo Wu1,2 , Zhou Wang1 , Zhengfang Duanmu1
Hongwei Yong3,4 , Hongliang Li2 and Lei Zhang4
1
University of Waterloo, 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University, 4 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Abstract
Objective image quality assessment (IQA) models aim
to automatically predict human visual perception of image
quality and are of fundamental importance in the field of
image processing and computer vision. With an increasing number of IQA models proposed, how to fairly compare
their performance becomes a major challenge due to the
enormous size of image space and the limited resource for
subjective testing. The standard approach in literature is
to compute several correlation metrics between subjective
mean opinion scores (MOSs) and objective model predictions on several well-known subject-rated databases that
contain distorted images generated from a few dozens of
source images, which however provide an extremely limited
representation of real-world images. Moreover, most IQA
models developed on these databases often involve machine
learning and/or manual parameter tuning steps to boost
their performance, and thus their generalization capabilities are questionable. Here we propose a novel methodology to compare IQA models. We first build a database that
contains 4,744 source natural images, together with 94,880
distorted images created from them. We then propose a
new mechanism, namely group MAximum Differentiation
(gMAD) competition, which automatically selects subsets
of image pairs from the database that provide the strongest
test to let the IQA models compete with each other. Subjective testing on the selected subsets reveals the relative
performance of the IQA models and provides useful insights on potential ways to improve them. We report the gMAD
competition results between 16 well-known IQA models, but
the framework is extendable, allowing future IQA models to
be added into the competition.

1. Introduction
Digital images undergo many transformations in their
lifetime during acquisition, processing, compression, storage, transmission and reproduction. Any transformation

may introduce distortions that result in degradations in visual quality [24, 30]. Being able to assess image quality
is of fundamental importance in many image processing
and computer vision applications. Since the human visual
system (HVS) is the ultimate receiver in most applications,
subjective evaluation is the most reliable way of quantifying image quality but is time-consuming, cumbersome and
expensive. In recent years, there has been a rapidly growing interest in developing objective image quality assessment (IQA) models that can automate the process [30, 31].
Depending on the availability of a distortion-free reference
image, objective IQA models may be categorized into fullreference (FR), reduced-reference (RR) and no-reference
(NR) approaches, where the reference image is fully, partially, and completely not accessible.
With a signiﬁcant number of IQA models proposed recently, how to fairly compare their performance becomes
a challenge. The standard approach in the literature is
to ﬁrst build databases of images with various content
and distortions, and then collect subjective evaluation scores for all images. Widely recognized image databases
with subjective ratings include LIVE [27], TID2008 [23],
TID2013 [22], CSIQ [12], IVC [13], Toyama-MICT [9]
and VCL@FER [41]. Crowdsourcing techniques [2, 15]
were also adopted to construct subjective databases of real
world Internet images [4]. Given these databases, correlations between subjective mean opinion scores (MOSs) and
objective model predictions can then be computed. Higher
correlations suggest better model performance.
A major problem with this conventional evaluation
methodology is the conﬂict between the enormous size of
the image space and the limited scale of affordable subjective testing. Subjective testing is expensive and timeconsuming. As a result, a typical “large-scale” subjective
test allows for a maximum of several hundreds or a few thousands of test images to be rated. Given the combination
of source images, distortion types and distortion levels, realistically only a few dozens of source images (if not fewer) can be included, which is the case in all well-known
11664

