Social LSTM:
Human Trajectory Prediction in Crowded Spaces
Alexandre Alahi∗ , Kratarth Goel∗, Vignesh Ramanathan, Alexandre Robicquet, Li Fei-Fei, Silvio Savarese
Stanford University
{alahi,kratarth,vigneshr,arobicqu,feifeili,ssilvio}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Pedestrians follow different trajectories to avoid obstacles and accommodate fellow pedestrians. Any autonomous
vehicle navigating such a scene should be able to foresee
the future positions of pedestrians and accordingly adjust
its path to avoid collisions. This problem of trajectory prediction can be viewed as a sequence generation task, where
we are interested in predicting the future trajectory of people based on their past positions. Following the recent success of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) models for sequence prediction tasks, we propose an LSTM model which
can learn general human movement and predict their future
trajectories. This is in contrast to traditional approaches
which use hand-crafted functions such as Social forces. We
demonstrate the performance of our method on several public datasets. Our model outperforms state-of-the-art methods on some of these datasets . We also analyze the trajectories predicted by our model to demonstrate the motion
behaviour learned by our model.

1. Introduction
Humans have the innate ability to “read” one another.
When people walk in a crowed public space such as a sidewalk, an airport terminal, or a shopping mall, they obey a
large number of (unwritten) common sense rules and comply with social conventions. For instance, as they consider
where to move next, they respect personal space and yield
right-of-way. The ability to model these rules and use them
to understand and predict human motion in complex real
world environments is extremely valuable for a wide range
of applications - from the deployment of socially-aware
robots [41] to the design of intelligent tracking systems [43]
in smart environments.
Predicting the motion of human targets while taking into
account such common sense behavior, however, is an extremely challenging problem. This requires understanding
∗ indicates equal contribution

Figure 1. The goal of this paper is to predict the motion dynamics in crowded scenes - This is, however, a challenging task as
the motion of each person is typically affected by their neighbors.
We propose a new model which we call ”Social” LSTM (SocialLSTM) which can jointly predict the paths of all the people in
a scene by taking into account the common sense rules and social conventions that humans typically utilize as they navigate in
shared environments. The predicted distribution of their future trajectories is shown in the heat-map.

the complex and often subtle interactions that take place between people in crowded spaces. Recent research in computer vision has successfully addressed some of these challenges. Kitani et. al. [32] have demonstrated that the inferred knowledge about the semantics of the static environment (e.g., location of sidewalks, extension of grass areas,
etc) helps predict the trajectory of pedestrians in future instants more accurately than a model which ignores the scene
information. Pioneering works by [24, 50, 35] have also
proposed ways to model human-human interactions (often
called ”social forces”) to increase robustness and accuracy
in multi-target tracking problems.
However, most of these works are limited by the following two assumptions. i) They use hand-crafted functions
to model ”interactions” for specific settings rather than inferring them in a data-driven fashion. This results in fa1961

