In Defense of Sparse Tracking: Circulant Sparse Tracker
Tianzhu Zhang1,2 , Adel Bibi1 , and Bernard Ghanem1
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), China
tianzhu.zhang@kaust.edu.sa, adel.bibi@kaust.edu.sa, bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Sparse representation has been introduced to visual
tracking by finding the best target candidate with minimal reconstruction error within the particle filter framework. However, most sparse representation based trackers
have high computational cost, less than promising tracking
performance, and limited feature representation. To deal
with the above issues, we propose a novel circulant sparse
tracker (CST), which exploits circulant target templates.
Because of the circulant structure property, CST has the following advantages: (1) It can refine and reduce particles
using circular shifts of target templates. (2) The optimization can be efficiently solved entirely in the Fourier domain.
(3) High dimensional features can be embedded into CST
to significantly improve tracking performance without sacrificing much computation time. Both qualitative and quantitative evaluations on challenging benchmark sequences
demonstrate that CST performs better than all other sparse
trackers and favorably against state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is a fundamental research topic
in computer vision and is related to a wide range of applications including video surveillance, auto-control systems,
and human computer interaction. Given the initial state of
a target in the first frame, the goal of tracking is to predict
states of the target over time. Despite very promising advances over the past decade, it remains a challenging problem to design a fast and robust tracker due to factors such as
illumination changes, deformations, partial occlusions, fast
motion, and background clutter.
Recently, sparse representation has been developed for
object tracking [26, 25, 22, 28, 27, 36, 4, 19, 41, 18]. The
seminal work in [27] was the first to successfully apply
sparse representation to visual tracking using particle filtering. Here, the tracker represents each target candidate as
a sparse linear combination of dictionary templates that can
be dynamically updated to maintain an up-to-date target ap-

Figure 1. Comparison of our CST tracker with state-of-the-art
methods (KCF, Struck, SCM, ASLA, L1APG, and TLD) on two
videos from a visual tracking benchmark [32]. On the Jogging
sequence, only TLD and CST can track well when partial occlusion happens. On the Tiger sequence, our CST can track the target
throughout the whole sequence, while other trackers suffer from
drift. The sparse trackers (ASLA, L1APG, SCM) fail to track these
sequences. Overall, the proposed CST method performs favorably
against the state-of-the-art trackers.

pearance model. This representation has been shown to be
robust against partial occlusions, thus, leading to improved
tracking performance. However, sparse trackers generally
suffer from the following drawbacks: (1) They remain computationally expensive, despite recent speedup attempts [5].
Sparse trackers perform computationally expensive ℓ1 minimization at each frame. In a particle filter framework, computational cost grows linearly with the number of particles
sampled. It is this computational bottleneck that precludes
the use of these trackers in real-time scenarios. (2) They
have limited overall performance. Based on results in the
VOT2014 challenge [24] and the visual tracking benchmark [32], sparse trackers do not achieve a better accuracy than other types of trackers, such as KCF [16] and
Struck [15]. (3) They are limited in the features they can use
for representation. Due to the high computational cost, most
sparse trackers make use of gray-scale pixel appearance and
cannot adopt more representative features, such as, HOG
13880

