We Are Humor Beings: Understanding and Predicting Visual Humor
Arjun Chandrasekaran1 Ashwin K. Vijayakumar1 Stanislaw Antol1
Dhruv Batra1 C. Lawrence Zitnick3 Devi Parikh1
1
1

Virginia Tech

2

3

TTI-Chicago

Mohit Bansal2

Facebook AI Research

{carjun, ashwinkv, santol, dbatra, parikh}@vt.edu

2

mbansal@ttic.edu

3

zitnick@fb.com

Abstract
Humor is an integral part of human lives. Despite being tremendously impactful, it is perhaps surprising that we
do not have a detailed understanding of humor yet. As interactions between humans and AI systems increase, it is
imperative that these systems are taught to understand subtleties of human expressions such as humor. In this work,
we are interested in the question – what content in a scene
causes it to be funny? As a first step towards understanding
visual humor, we analyze the humor manifested in abstract
scenes and design computational models for them. We collect two datasets of abstract scenes that facilitate the study
of humor at both the scene-level and the object-level. We
analyze the funny scenes and explore the different types of
humor depicted in them via human studies. We model two
tasks that we believe demonstrate an understanding of some
aspects of visual humor. The tasks involve predicting the
funniness of a scene and altering the funniness of a scene.
We show that our models perform well quantitatively, and
qualitatively through human studies. Our datasets are publicly available.

1. Introduction
An adult laughs 18 times a day [25] on average. A
good sense of humor is related to communication competence [13, 14], helps raise an individual’s social status
[43], popularity [17, 26], and helps attract compatible mates
[8, 10, 35]. Humor in the workplace improves camaraderie
and helps workers cope with daily stresses [38] and loneliness [52]. fMRI [40] studies of the brain reveal that humor
activates the components of the brain that are involved in
reward processing [53]. This probably explains why we actively seek to experience and create humor [33].
Despite the tremendous impact that humor has on our
lives, the lack of a rigorous definition of humor has hindered humor-related research in the past [4, 46]. While verbal humor is better understood today [41, 44], visual humor
remains unexplored. As vision and AI researchers we are
interested in the following question – what content in an
image causes it to be funny? Our work takes a step in the

(a) Funny scene: Raccoons
are drunk at a picnic.

(b) Funny scene: Dogs feast
while the girl sits in a pet bed.

(c) Funny scene: Rats steal
food while the cats are asleep.

(d) Funny Object Replaced
(unfunny) counterpart: Rats
in (c) are replaced by food.

Figure 1: (a), (b) are selected funny scenes in the Abstract
Visual Humor dataset. (c) is an originally funny scene in the
Funny Object Replaced dataset. The objects contributing to
humor in (c) are replaced by a human with other objects, to
create an unfunny counterpart.
direction of building computational models for visual humor. Computational visual humor is useful for a number
of applications: to create better photo editing tools, smart
cameras that pick the right moment to take a (funny) picture, recommendation tools that rate funny pictures higher
(say, to post on social media), video summarization tools
that summarize only the funny frames, automatically generating funny scenes for entertainment, identifying and catering to personalized humor, etc. As AI systems interact more
with humans, it is vital that they understand subtleties of human emotions and expressions. In that sense, being able to
identify humor can contribute to their common sense.
Understanding visual humor is fraught with challenges
such as having to detect all objects in the scene, observing the interactions between objects, and understanding context, which are currently unsolved problems. In
this work, we argue that, by using scenes made from clipart [1, 2, 15, 22, 23, 50, 57, 58], we can study visual humor
without having to wait for these detailed recognition prob-

4603

