Isometric Non-Rigid Shape-from-Motion in Linear Time
Shaifali Parashar1 , Daniel Pizarro2,1 and Adrien Bartoli1
1
ALCoV-ISIT, UMR 6284 CNRS / Université d’Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand, France
2
Geintra Research Group, Universidad de Alcalá, Alcalá de Henares, Spain
shaifali.parashar@gmail.com,dani.pizarro@gmail.com,adrien.bartoli@gmail.com

Abstract
We study Isometric Non-Rigid Shape-from-Motion (IsoNRSfM): given multiple intrinsically calibrated monocular
images, we want to reconstruct the time-varying 3D shape
of an object undergoing isometric deformations. We show
that Iso-NRSfM is solvable from the warps (the inter-image
geometric transformations). We propose a new theoretical framework based on Riemmanian manifolds to represent the unknown 3D surfaces, as embeddings of the camera’s retinal planes. This allows us to use the manifolds’
metric tensor and Christoffel Symbol fields, which we prove
are related across images by simple rules depending only
on the warps. This forms a set of important theoretical results. Using the infinitesimal planarity formulation, it then
allows us to derive a system of two quartics in two variables
for each image pair. The sum-of-squares of these polynomials is independent of the number of images and can be
solved globally, forming a well-posed problem for N ≥ 3
images, whose solution directly leads to the surface’s normal field. The proposed method outperforms existing work
in terms of accuracy and computation cost on synthetic and
real datasets.

1. Introduction
One of the main problems in 3D vision is to reconstruct an object’s 3D shape from multiple views. This has
been solved for the specific case of rigid objects from interimage visual motion, and is known as Shape-from-Motion
(SfM) [13]. However, SfM breaks down for non-rigid objects. Two ways to exploit visual motion for non-rigid
object reconstruction have been proposed: Shape-fromTemplate (SfT) [2, 3, 26, 5] and Non-Rigid Shape-fromMotion (NRSfM) [4, 17, 1, 16, 25]. The latter is a direct
extension of SfM to the non-rigid case. The former however, is not. Indeed, the inputs of SfT are a single image
and the object’s template, and its output is the object’s deformed shape. The template is a very strong object-specific
prior, as it includes a reference shape, a texture map and a

deformation model. Most SfT methods use physics-based
deformation models such as isometry [3, 26]. This is because isometry is a very good approximation to the deformation of many real objects. The inputs of NRSfM are
multiple images and its output is the object’s 3D shape for
every image. In NRSfM, the rigidity constraint of SfM is
replaced by constraints on the object’s deformation model.
NRSfM methods were proposed for a variety of deformation models: the low-rank shape basis [17], the trajectory
basis [20, 8], isometry [4, 25] and elasticity [7]. Existing
methods suffer one or several limitations amongst solution
ambiguities, low accuracy, ill-posedness, inability to handle
missing data and high computation cost. NRSfM thus still
exists as an open research problem.
We present a solution to NRSfM with the isometric deformation model, that we hereinafter denote Iso-NRSfM.
We model Iso-NRSfM using concepts from Riemannian
geometry. Our framework relates the 3D shape to the
inter-image warps, which we simply call warps. These
may be computed from keypoint correspondences in several ways [10, 22], and we assume they are known. More
specifically, we model the object’s 3D shape for each image
by a Riemmanian manifold and deformations as isometric
mappings. We parameterize each manifold by embedding
the corresponding retinal plane. This allows us to reason
on advanced surface properties, namely the metric tensor
and Christoffel Symbols, directly in retinal coordinates, and
in relationship to the warps. We prove two new theorems
showing that the metric tensor and Christoffel Symbols may
be transferred between views using only the warp. For an
infinitesimally planar surface, we obtain a system of two
quartics in two variables that involves up to second order
derivatives of the warps. This system holds at each point.
Its solution gives an estimate of the metric tensor, and thus
of the surface’s normal, in all views. The shape is finally
recovered by integrating the normal fields for each view.
The proposed method has the following features. 1) It
has a linear complexity in the number of views and number of points. 2) It uses a well-posed point-wise solution
from N ≥ 3 views, thus covering the minimum data case.

4679

