Seeing through the Human Reporting Bias:
Visual Classifiers from Noisy Human-Centric Labels
Ishan Misra1 ∗
C. Lawrence Zitnick3
Margaret Mitchell2
Ross Girshick3
1
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
Microsoft Research
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
When human annotators are given a choice about what
to label in an image, they apply their own subjective judgments on what to ignore and what to mention. We refer to
these noisy “human-centric” annotations as exhibiting human reporting bias. Examples of such annotations include
image tags and keywords found on photo sharing sites, or
in datasets containing image captions. In this paper, we
use these noisy annotations for learning visually correct image classiﬁers. Such annotations do not use consistent vocabulary, and miss a signiﬁcant amount of the information
present in an image; however, we demonstrate that the noise
in these annotations exhibits structure and can be modeled.
We propose an algorithm to decouple the human reporting
bias from the correct visually grounded labels. Our results
are highly interpretable for reporting “what’s in the image”
versus “what’s worth saying.” We demonstrate the algorithm’s efﬁcacy along a variety of metrics and datasets, including MS COCO and Yahoo Flickr 100M. We show significant improvements over traditional algorithms for both image classiﬁcation and image captioning, doubling the performance of existing methods in some cases.

(a) A woman standing next
to a bicycle with basket.

Human Label

(b) A city street filled with lots
of people walking in the rain.

Visual Label

Human Label

Visual Label

Bicycle

Bicycle

(c) A yellow Vespa parked
in a lot with other cars.

(d) A store display that has a
lot of bananas on sale.

Human Label
Yellow

Visual Label

Human Label

Visual Label

Yellow

1. Introduction
Visual concept recognition is a fundamental computer
vision task with a broad range of applications in science,
medicine, and industry. Supervised learning of visual concept classiﬁers has been highly successful partly due to the
use of large-scale, high-quality datasets (e.g., [8, 11, 29]).
Depending on the complexity of the supported task, these
datasets generally include annotations for 100s to 1000s of
‘typical’ concepts. To support an even broader range of applications, it is necessary to train classiﬁers for tens or even
hundreds of thousands of visual concepts that may not be
typical. Since supervised learning methods require exhaustive and clean annotations, one would require high quality
datasets with orders of magnitude more annotations to train
∗ Work done during internship at Microsoft Research.

Figure 1: Human descriptions capture only some of the visual concepts present in an image. For instance, the bicycle
in (a) is described, while the bicycle in (b) is not mentioned.
The Vespa in (c) is described as “yellow”, while the bananas
in (d) are not, as being yellow is typical for bananas.
such methods. However, creating such datasets is expensive. An alternative approach is to relax this requirement
of pristinely labeled data. The learning algorithm can be
enabled to use readily-available sources of annotated data,
such as user-generated image tags or captions from social
media services like Flickr or Instagram. Such datasets easily scale to hundreds of millions of photos with hundreds of
thousands of distinct tags [49].
12930

