Improving Human Action Recognition by Non-action Classification
Yang Wang and Minh Hoai
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
{wang33, minhhoai}@cs.stonybrook.edu

1. Introduction
The ability to recognize human actions in video has
many potential applications in a wide range of fields,
ranging from entertainment and robotics to security and
health-care. However, human action recognition [1, 8, 13–
15, 29, 37] is tremendously challenging for computers due
to the complexity of video data and the subtlety of human
actions. Most current recognition systems flounder on the
inability to separate human actions from the irrelevant factors that usually dominate subtle human actions. This is
particularly problematic for human action recognition in
TV material, where a single human action may be dispersedly portrayed in a video clip that also contains video shots
for setting the scene and advancing dialog. For example,
consider the video clips from the Hollywood2 dataset [22]
depicted in Figure 1. These video clips are considered as
‘clean’ examples for their portrayed actions, but 3 out of 6
shots do not depict the actions of interest at all. Although
recognizing human actions in TV material is an important
and active area of research, existing approaches often assume the contiguity of human action in video clip and ignore the existence of irrelevant video shots.
In this paper, we first present out findings on the benefits
of having purified action clips where irrelevant video shots
are removed. We will then propose a dataset and a method

non-action

Clip 2

In this paper we consider the task of recognizing human
actions in realistic video where human actions are dominated by irrelevant factors. We first study the benefits of removing non-action video segments, which are the ones that
do not portray any human action. We then learn a nonaction classifier and use it to down-weight irrelevant video
segments. The non-action classifier is trained using ActionThread, a dataset with shot-level annotation for the occurrence or absence of a human action. The non-action classifier can be used to identify non-action shots with high precision and subsequently used to improve the performance of
action recognition systems.

Clip 1

Abstract

non-action

non-action

Figure 1. Examples of non-action shots in typical video clips of
human actions. This shows two video clips from the Hollywood2
dataset. Clip 1: the second shot contains no human; Clip 2: the
first two shots depict a dialog and exhibit little motion.

to learn a non-action classifier, one that can be used to remove or down-weight the contribution of video segments
that are unlikely to depict a human action.
Of course, identifying all non-action video segments is
an ill-posed problem. First, there is no definition for what
a general human action is. Second, even for the classes
of actions that are commonly considered such as hug and
handshake, the temporal extent of an action is highly ambiguous. For example, when is the precise moment of a
hug? When two people start opening their arms or when
the two bodies are in contact? Because of the ambiguities
in human actions, our aim in this paper is to identify video
segments that are unlikely related to the actions of our interest. Many of those segments can be unarguably identified,
e.g., video shots that contain no people, show the close-up
face of a character, exhibit little motion, or are a part of a
dialog (some examples are shown in Figure 1). However,
instead of manually defining what a non-action segment
should be, in this paper we will use supervised learning and
train a non-action classifier using video data that has shotlevel annotation. The classifier is based on Support Vector
Machines [34] and appearance and motion features. More
specifically, we will combine Fisher Vector encoding [27]
of Dense Trajectory Descriptors [37] and the deep learning
features of a Two-stream ConvNet [29].
It should be noted that we propose to learn a non-action
classifier for generic human actions. This has several benefits over an action-specific classifier that only aims to identify video segments that are irrelevant to a specific action.

2698

