Simultaneous Estimation of Near IR BRDF and Fine-Scale Surface Geometry
Gyeongmin Choe1
Srinivasa G. Narasimhan2 In So Kweon1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)1
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU)2
gmchoe@rcv.kaist.ac.kr

srinivas@cs.cmu.edu

iskweon77@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Near-Infrared (NIR) images of most materials exhibit
less texture or albedo variations making them beneﬁcial
for vision tasks such as intrinsic image decomposition and
structured light depth estimation. Understanding the reflectance properties (BRDF) of materials in the NIR wavelength range can be further useful for many photometric
methods including shape from shading and inverse rendering. However, even with less albedo variation, many materials e.g. fabrics, leaves, etc. exhibit complex ﬁne-scale
surface detail making it hard to accurately estimate BRDF.
In this paper, we present an approach to simultaneously estimate NIR BRDF and ﬁne-scale surface details by imaging
materials under different IR lighting and viewing directions.
This is achieved by an iterative scheme that alternately estimates surface detail and NIR BRDF of materials. Our setup
does not require complicated gantries or calibration and we
present the ﬁrst NIR dataset of 100 materials including a
variety of fabrics (knits, weaves, cotton, satin, leather), and
organic (skin, leaves, jute, trunk, fur) and inorganic materials (plastic, concrete, carpet). The NIR BRDFs measured
from material samples are used with a shape-from-shading
algorithm to demonstrate ﬁne-scale reconstruction of objects from a single NIR image.

1. Introduction
Since the introduction of active 3D sensors like Microsoft Kinect, NIR imaging is becoming increasingly popular. Compared to the images in visible spectrum, NIR
images of most materials exhibit much less texture (or
albedo) variations making them suitable for tasks such as
shadow detection [32], intrinsic image decomposition [21]
and structured light based depth recovery [6]. However, the
precise reﬂectance properties (i.e. BRDF [28]) of materials
in the NIR wavelength range are not well understood. Measuring and modeling the BRDFs of materials will additionally make NIR imaging useful for a range of photometry
based approaches such as shape from shading and inverse
rendering.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Fine-scale shape reconstruction from a single NIR image
of a sweater made of cotton and polyester. We simultaneously
estimate the surface detail and BRDF of over 100 material samples
and use the BRDF obtained in a shape-from-shading method. (a)
Input NIR image. (b) Rotated view of the 3D mesh. (c) Surface
details on the chest. (d) Surface details on the arm. Both types of
knits are well reconstructed.

BRDF estimation is well studied in the visible domain
using both parametric [37, 30] and non-parametric approaches [8, 27, 2, 1]. Several datasets such as CURET
[8] and MERL [27] have had a strong impact on photometry based research. In our work, Instead of using simple or
known (spheres, planar patches, etc.) [26] objects, we target
natural objects with ﬁne surface geometries.
Our goal is to build a NIR database of real-world materials which contains NIR images captured under various
lighting directions, corresponding surface normal maps and
the BRDF models. The NIR domain offers both advantages
and challenges. Since materials like fabrics appear (mostly)
textureless, the BRDF remains constant spatially over at
least small patches of materials. Both organic materials like
leaves, tree trunks, and inorganic materials like knit and woven fabrics all show complex random or structural surface
detail. These ﬁne-scale surface height variations are difﬁ12452

