Unconstrained Salient Object Detection via Proposal Subset Optimization
Jianming Zhang1

Stan Sclaroff1 Zhe Lin2 Xiaohui Shen2 Brian Price2
1
2
Boston University
Adobe Research

Radomı́r Mĕch2

1. Introduction
In this paper, we aim at detecting generic salient objects
in unconstrained images, which may contain multiple salient objects or no salient object. Solving this problem entails generating a compact set of detection windows that
matches the number and the locations of salient objects.
To be more specific, a satisfying solution to this problem
should answer the following questions:
1. (Existence) Is there any salient object in the image?
2. (Localization) Where is each salient object, if any?
These two questions are important not only in a theoretic aspect, but also in an applicative aspect. First of all,
a compact and clean set of detection windows can significantly reduce the computational cost of the subsequent process (e.g. object recognition) applied on each detection window [22, 36]. Furthermore, individuating each salient object (or reporting that no salient object is present) can critically alleviate the ambiguity in the weakly supervised or
unsupervised learning scenario [10, 26, 55], where object
appearance models are to be learned with no instance level
annotation.

Output

We aim at detecting salient objects in unconstrained images. In unconstrained images, the number of salient objects (if any) varies from image to image, and is not given.
We present a salient object detection system that directly
outputs a compact set of detection windows, if any, for an
input image. Our system leverages a Convolutional-NeuralNetwork model to generate location proposals of salient objects. Location proposals tend to be highly overlapping and
noisy. Based on the Maximum a Posteriori principle, we
propose a novel subset optimization framework to generate
a compact set of detection windows out of noisy proposals.
In experiments, we show that our subset optimization formulation greatly enhances the performance of our system,
and our system attains 16-34% relative improvement in Average Precision compared with the state-of-the-art on three
challenging salient object datasets.

Input

Abstract

Figure 1: Our system outputs a compact set of detection
windows (shown in the bottom row) that localize each salient object in an image. Note that for the input image in the
right column, where no dominant object exists, our system
does not output any detection window.
However, many previous methods [1, 11, 41, 30, 25, 6,
54] only solve the task of foreground segmentation, i.e. generating a dense foreground mask (saliency map). These
methods do not individuate each object. Moreover, they do
not directly answer the question of Existence. In this paper,
we will use the term salient region detection when referring
to these methods, so as to distinguish from the salient object detection task solved by our approach, which includes
individuating each of the salient objects, if there are any, in
a given input image.
Some methods generate a ranked list of bounding box
candidates for salient objects [21, 43, 52], but they lack an
effective way to fully answer the questions of Existence and
Localization. In practice, they just produce a fixed number
of location proposals, without specifying the exact set of
detection windows. Other salient object detection methods
simplify the detection task by assuming the existence of one
and only one salient object [48, 45, 32]. This overly strong
assumption limits their usage on unconstrained images.
In contrast to previous works, we present a salient object detection system that directly outputs a compact set of
detections windows for an unconstrained image. Some example outputs of our system are shown in Fig. 1.
Our system leverages the high expressiveness of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model to generate a set
of scored salient object proposals for an image. Inspired by
15733

