Face2Face: Real-time Face Capture and Reenactment of RGB Videos
Justus Thies1 Michael Zollhöfer2 Marc Stamminger1 Christian Theobalt2 Matthias Nießner3
1
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg 2 Max-Planck-Institute for Informatics 3 Stanford University

Proposed online reenactment setup: a monocular target video sequence (e.g., from Youtube) is reenacted based on the expressions of a source actor who is recorded live with a commodity webcam.

Abstract
We present a novel approach for real-time facial reenactment of a monocular target video sequence (e.g., Youtube
video). The source sequence is also a monocular video
stream, captured live with a commodity webcam. Our goal
is to animate the facial expressions of the target video by a
source actor and re-render the manipulated output video in
a photo-realistic fashion. To this end, we first address the
under-constrained problem of facial identity recovery from
monocular video by non-rigid model-based bundling. At
run time, we track facial expressions of both source and target video using a dense photometric consistency measure.
Reenactment is then achieved by fast and efficient deformation transfer between source and target. The mouth interior that best matches the re-targeted expression is retrieved
from the target sequence and warped to produce an accurate fit. Finally, we convincingly re-render the synthesized
target face on top of the corresponding video stream such
that it seamlessly blends with the real-world illumination.
We demonstrate our method in a live setup, where Youtube
videos are reenacted in real time.

1. Introduction
In recent years, real-time markerless facial performance
capture based on commodity sensors has been demonstrated. Impressive results have been achieved, both based

on RGB [8, 6] as well as RGB-D data [31, 10, 21, 4, 16].
These techniques have become increasingly popular for the
animation of virtual CG avatars in video games and movies.
It is now feasible to run these face capture and tracking algorithms from home, which is the foundation for many VR
and AR applications, such as teleconferencing.
In this paper, we employ a new dense markerless facial performance capture method based on monocular RGB
data, similar to state-of-the-art methods. However, instead
of transferring facial expressions to virtual CG characters,
our main contribution is monocular facial reenactment in
real-time. In contrast to previous reenactment approaches
that run offline [5, 11, 13], our goal is the online transfer
of facial expressions of a source actor captured by an RGB
sensor to a target actor. The target sequence can be any
monocular video; e.g., legacy video footage downloaded
from Youtube with a facial performance. We aim to modify the target video in a photo-realistic fashion, such that it
is virtually impossible to notice the manipulations. Faithful photo-realistic facial reenactment is the foundation for a
variety of applications; for instance, in video conferencing,
the video feed can be adapted to match the face motion of
a translator, or face videos can be convincingly dubbed to a
foreign language.
In our method, we first reconstruct the shape identity
of the target actor using a new global non-rigid modelbased bundling approach based on a prerecorded training
sequence. As this preprocess is performed globally on a set
of training frames, we can resolve geometric ambiguities
12387

