Sparse to Dense 3D Reconstruction from Rolling Shutter Images
Olivier Saurer1 , Marc Pollefeys1 , Gim Hee Lee2
Department of Computer Science1
ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Department of Mechanical Engineering2
National University of Singapore

{saurero, marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

mpelgh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
It is well known that the rolling shutter effect in images
captured with a moving rolling shutter camera causes inaccuracies to 3D reconstructions. The problem is further aggravated with weak visual connectivity from wide baseline
images captured with a fast moving camera. In this paper,
we propose and implement a pipeline for sparse to dense
3D construction with wide baseline images captured from a
fast moving rolling shutter camera. Specifically, we propose
a cost function for Bundle Adjustment (BA) that models the
rolling shutter effect, incorporates GPS/INS readings, and
enforces pairwise smoothness between neighboring poses.
We optimize over the 3D structures, camera poses and velocities. We also introduce a novel interpolation scheme for
the rolling shutter plane sweep stereo algorithm that allows
us to achieve a 7× speed up in the depth map computations
for dense reconstruction without losing accuracy. We evaluate our proposed pipeline over a 2.6km image sequence
captured with a rolling shutter camera mounted on a moving car.

1. Introduction
The majority of image sensors on the market today
(found in mobile phones, and compact cameras etc.) are
CMOS sensors. In contrast to standard CCD sensors which
have global sensor readout, classical CMOS sensors have
sequential readout. This leads to sequential exposures of
each image row or column - commonly known as rolling
shutter. For example, typical readout times in todays mobile phones are around 10-40ms [23, 28]. Given such a
delay, significant deformations appear in the image when
the camera is in motion. Assuming a camera with a readout time of 35ms and moving at 5km/h, objects which are
closer than 25m will show deformations due to the rolling
shutter [26] effects.
In the last decade, Structure from Motion (SfM) techniques have been used to build 3D models from both ordered and unordered image sequences [29, 1, 9, 16]. These

Figure 1. Sparse and dense 3D reconstructions from wide baseline images captured with a rolling shutter camera mounted on a
moving car.

SfM techniques rely on a global shutter camera model and
become brittle when used on rolling shutter images [18, 19].
Hedbors [12] introduced a BA method which provides accurate structure and motion from a rolling shutter video stream
by using a continuous time parametrization of the camera
pose. It is however limited to continuous image streams
with small baselines and does not work on sparse images
with wide baselines. Moreover, none of the existing works
showed a full pipeline that does full sparse to dense 3D reconstruction from rolling shutter images with wide baselines.
In this paper, we propose and implement a pipeline for
sparse to dense 3D construction with wide baseline images
captured from a fast moving rolling shutter camera. Fig. 1
shows an example of the sparse and dense 3D reconstructions obtained from our proposed pipeline. Wide baseline
images are captured at a low frame rate of 4Hz by a rolling
shutter camera mounted on a moving car, driven at 17km/h.
13337

