Instance-level video segmentation from object tracks
Guillaume Seguin1,∗ Piotr Bojanowski2,∗ Rémi Lajugie2,† Ivan Laptev2,∗
1

École Normale Supérieure

2

Inria

Abstract
We address the problem of segmenting multiple object
instances in complex videos. Our method does not require
manual pixel-level annotation for training, and relies instead on readily-available object detectors or visual object
tracking only. Given object bounding boxes at input, we
cast video segmentation as a weakly-supervised learning
problem. Our proposed objective combines (a) a discriminative clustering term for background segmentation, (b) a
spectral clustering one for grouping pixels of same object
instances, and (c) linear constraints enabling instance-level
segmentation. We propose a convex relaxation of this problem and solve it efficiently using the Frank-Wolfe algorithm.
We report results and compare our method to several baselines on a new video dataset for multi-instance person segmentation.

1. Introduction
Semantic object segmentation in images and videos is a
challenging computer vision task [24, 29, 31, 39, 45]. Common difficulties arise from frequent occlusions [43] and
background clutter, as well as variations in object shape
and appearance. Video object segmentation also requires
accurate tracking of object boundaries over time in the
presence of possibly fast and non-rigid motions. An additional challenge addressed by several recent works is in
segmentation of individual instances of the same object
class [18, 19, 45, 44, 51]. Indeed, while it may be easy
to segment a herd of cows from a grass field, segmenting
each cow separately is a much harder task.
Instance-level object segmentation in video is an interesting and understudied problem at the intersection of semantic and motion-based video segmentation. Solutions to
this problem can benefit from class-specific object models
and motion cues. Segmentation of static and/or partially
occluded objects of the same class, however, pose additional challenges, difficult to solve with existing methods of
∗ WILLOW project-team, Département d’Informatique de l’École Normale Supérieure, ENS/Inria/CNRS UMR 8548, Paris, France.
† SIERRA project-team, Département d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548, Paris, France.

Figure 1: Results of our method applied to multi-person segmentation in a sample video from our database. Given an input
video together with the tracks of object bounding boxes (left),
our method finds pixel-wise segmentation for each object instance
across video frames (right).

motion-based and semantic segmentation. Meanwhile, successful solutions to instance-level video segmentation can
serve in several tasks such as video editing and dynamic
scene understanding.
Given recent advances in object detection [36] and visual
object tracking [11], coarse object localization in the form
of object bounding boxes can now be used as input for solving other problems. In particular, we address in this paper
the problem of instance-level video segmentation given object tracks. We assume that prior (weak) knowledge about
objects is available in the form of tracked object bounding
boxes, obtained by a separate process. For instance, pretrained object detectors or visual object tracking algorithms
as the ones cited above can be used.
Segmentation methods typically optimize carefully designed objective functions combining data terms and prior
knowledge. Object prior knowledge in such methods is often encoded by higher-order potentials [26, 27, 38], which
enable richer modeling but lead to hard optimization problems. Here we take an alternative approach and build on the
discriminative clustering framework [3, 17]. Following previous work on co-segmentation [24] and weakly-supervised
classification [6], we formulate our problem as a quadratic
program under linear constraints. We use object tracks as
constraints to guide segmentation, but other forms of prior
knowledge could easily be integrated in our method. Our final segmentation is obtained by solving a convex relaxation
of our objective with the Frank-Wolfe algorithm [15].
We compare our method to the state of the art and show
competitive results on a new dataset for instance-level video
segmentation. In contrast to most previous methods, our approach segments multiple instances of the same object class
13678

