Recovering 6D Object Pose and Predicting Next-Best-View in the Crowd
Andreas Doumanoglou1,2 , Rigas Kouskouridas1 , Sotiris Malassiotis2 , Tae-Kyun Kim1
1

2

Imperial College London
Center for Research & Technology Hellas (CERTH)

Abstract
Object detection and 6D pose estimation in the crowd
(scenes with multiple object instances, severe foreground
occlusions and background distractors), has become an important problem in many rapidly evolving technological areas such as robotics and augmented reality. Single shotbased 6D pose estimators with manually designed features
are still unable to tackle the above challenges, motivating the research towards unsupervised feature learning and
next-best-view estimation. In this work, we present a complete framework for both single shot-based 6D object pose
estimation and next-best-view prediction based on Hough
Forests, the state of the art object pose estimator that performs classification and regression jointly. Rather than using manually designed features we a) propose an unsupervised feature learnt from depth-invariant patches using a
Sparse Autoencoder and b) offer an extensive evaluation
of various state of the art features. Furthermore, taking
advantage of the clustering performed in the leaf nodes of
Hough Forests, we learn to estimate the reduction of uncertainty in other views, formulating the problem of selecting the next-best-view. To further improve pose estimation,
we propose an improved joint registration and hypotheses
verification module as a final refinement step to reject false
detections. We provide two additional challenging datasets
inspired from realistic scenarios to extensively evaluate the
state of the art and our framework. One is related to domestic environments and the other depicts a bin-picking scenario mostly found in industrial settings. We show that our
framework significantly outperforms state of the art both on
public and on our datasets.

1. Introduction
Detection and pose estimation of everyday objects is a
challenging problem arising in many practical applications,
such as robotic manipulation [18], tracking and augmented
reality. Low-cost availability of depth data facilitates pose
estimation significantly, but still one has to cope with many
challenges such as viewpoint variability, clutter and oc-

a)

b)

c)

d)

Figure 1: Sample photos from our dataset. a) Scene containing
objects from a supermarket, b) our system’s evaluation on a), c)
Bin-picking scenario with multiple objects stacked on a bin, d)
our system’s evaluation on c).

clusions. When objects have sufficient texture, techniques
based on key-point matching [22, 30] demonstrate good results, yet when there is a lot of clutter in the scene they
depict many false positive matches which degrades their
performance. Also, holistic template-based techniques provide superior performance when dealing with texture-less
objects [14], but suffer in cases of occlusions and changes
in lighting conditions, while the performance also degrades
when objects have not significant geometric detail. In order to cope with the above issues, a few approaches use
patches [31] or simpler pixel based features [5] along with
a Random Forest classifier. Although promising, these techniques rely on manually designed features which are difficult to make discriminative for the large range of everyday
objects. Last, even when the above difficulties are partly
solved, multiple objects present in the scene, occlusions and
distructors can make the detection very challenging from a
single viewpoint, resulting in many ambiguous hypotheses.
When the setup permits, moving the camera can be proved
very beneficial for accuracy increase. The problem is how
13583

