Simultaneous Clustering and Model Selection for Tensor Affinities
Zhuwen Li1 , Shuoguang Yang2∗, Loong-Fah Cheong1 and Kim-Chuan Toh1
1

National University of Singapore 2 Columbia University

Abstract
Estimating the number of clusters remains a difficult
model selection problem. We consider this problem in
the domain where the affinity relations involve groups of
more than two nodes. Building on the previous formulation
for the pairwise affinity case, we exploit the mathematical
structures in the higher order case. We express the original
minimal-rank and positive semi-definite (PSD) constraints
in a form amenable for numerical implementation, as the original constraints are either intractable or even undefined
in general in the higher order case. To scale to large problem sizes, we also propose an alternative formulation, so
that it can be efficiently solved via stochastic optimization
in an online fashion. We evaluate our algorithm with different applications to demonstrate its superiority, and show it
can adapt to varying levels of unbalancedness of clusters.

1. Introduction
In graph clustering that is conventionally set forth, it is
assumed that relationship between data points can be captured by a pairwise measure of affinity. However, in many
graph systems from computer vision, it does not make sense
to talk about affinities between a pair of data points. We can
best illustrate the issue with the classic problem of vanishing point estimation [26]: two lines trivially define a point
and thus there does not seem to exist any useful measure
of affinity between two lines, whereas the degree to which
three lines are coincident conceivably constitutes a much
more useful measure of affinity for this estimation problem.
Other examples in computer vision include multi-structure
fitting [34], texture segmentation [14], etc. In all these problems, clustering must be performed on the basis of higher
order affinities. Therefore, hypergraph clustering has been
increasingly gaining attention. Hypergraphs are made up of
hyperedges, which encode higher order affinities among a
subset of data whereby the set size can be more than two.
In spite of this increased interest, the problem of model
selection connected with any clustering problem has generally received less attention partly because it is very hard to
∗ S. Yang worked on this project as a research engineer at NUS.

provide a formal definition of what a cluster is. This lacuna
is even more glaring in the case of the higher order setting.
Recently Li et al. [18] has proposed a simultaneous clustering and model selection (SCAMS) method to solve this
problem for the case of pairwise affinities. This is based on
an indicator matrix formulation, together with the generic
low rank and sparsity constraints that capture the notion of
good clusters without making overly strong domain-specific
assumptions about the clusters. In this paper, we will develop a non-obvious generalization of SCAMS to hypergraphs.
Before that, we briefly review its essential points.
Given an affinity matrix A with non-negative entries, SCAMS introduces the following problem:
min − ⟨A, G⟩,
s.t. G ∈ S+ , diag(G) = 1,

(1)

rank(G) = R, G ∈ {0, 1}N ×N ,

where ⟨·, ·⟩ is the
∑Frobenius inner product, which is defined
as ⟨A, G⟩ =
i,j A(i, j)G(i, j), S+ is the PSD cone,
diag(·) are the diagonal entries of the matrix, R is the number of clusters, and G is a binary relationship matrix encoding the pairwise relationships between elements. More
specifically, if the i-th and j-th elements belong to the same
cluster, G(i, j) = 1; otherwise, G(i, j) = 0. G can be factorized as G = ZZT , where Z is an indicator matrix whose
rows indicate to which group a point belongs. Intuitively,
given A, we approximate it with G with ideal attributes, in
which ”1” means similar and ”0” means different.
With the group number R being unknown, SCAMS instead solves the following problem:
min − ⟨A, G⟩ + λrank(G) + γ||G||0 ,
s.t. G ∈ S+ , diag(G) = 1, G ∈ {0, 1}N ×N ,

(2)

where || · ||0 is the ℓ0 norm, which counts the number of
nonzero elements. In this problem, the first term −⟨A, G⟩
keeps G as close to the affinity matrix A as possible; the
second term rank(G) seeks a simplest model, i.e. the clustering result with the smallest cluster number; the third term reflects the sparse nature of an ideal affinity matrix and
avoids the trivial solution of G with entries being all ones;
the PSD constraint and {0, 1} integer constraint help to discover the authentic sparse structure underlying the data, removing spurious connections and filling in missing links.
15347

