BoxCars: 3D Boxes as CNN Input
for Improved Fine-Grained Vehicle Recognition
Jakub Sochor∗, Adam Herout, Jiřı́ Havel
Graph@FIT, Brno University of Technology
Brno, Czech Republic
{isochor,herout,ihavel}@fit.vutbr.cz

Abstract
We are dealing with the problem of fine-grained vehicle make & model recognition and verification. Our contribution is showing that extracting additional data from the
video stream – besides the vehicle image itself – and feeding it into the deep convolutional neural network boosts the
recognition performance considerably. This additional information includes: 3D vehicle bounding box used for “unpacking” the vehicle image, its rasterized low-resolution
shape, and information about the 3D vehicle orientation.
Experiments show that adding such information decreases
classification error by 26 % (the accuracy is improved from
0.772 to 0.832) and boosts verification average precision
by 208 % (0.378 to 0.785) compared to baseline pure CNN
without any input modifications. Also, the pure baseline
CNN outperforms the recent state of the art solution by
0.081. We provide an annotated set “BoxCars” of surveillance vehicle images augmented by various automatically
extracted auxiliary information. Our approach and the
dataset can considerably improve the performance of traffic
surveillance systems.

1. Introduction
We are developing a system for traffic surveillance from
roadside cameras. It is meant to be fully automatic (not
requiring manual per-camera configuration) and tolerant to
sub-optimal camera placement (the cameras will not be
placed above the lanes, but on the road side, wherever it
is naturally possible).
One important component of such a system is recognition of vehicle make & model – as accurate as possible.
This fine-grained recognition serves multiple purposes. Besides obvious collection of statistics and demographic information and verification of license plate authenticity, recog∗ Jakub Sochor is a Brno Ph.D. Talent Scholarship Holder — Funded
by the Brno City Municipality. This work was supported by TACR project
“RODOS”, TE01020155.

3

96

256

384

55x55

384

256
3

1

#classes

27x27
13x13

3x3
5x5

4096

11x11
6
6

227
6
227

6

Figure 1. We take advantage of the surveillance camera being
fixed, use its automatically obtained calibration to unpack the input image so that it is better aligned, and we add additional inputs
to the CNN. These modified inputs boost the performance of vehicle recognition and especially vehicle make & model verification.

nition of dominant and characteristic types can establish
a highly accurate scale calibration of the camera, much
more precise than a statistic of undifferentiated cars [8].
The system should also be able to adapt to new models
of cars on its own. It should therefore not only recognize
the pre-trained set of models, but also verify whether two
given vehicle samples are of the same make & model or not
– without previously seeing these particular vehicle types.
Fine-grained vehicle recognition has been receiving increased research attention recently. Many works and datasets focus on recognition of “web images” shot from a limited set of viewpoints, typically from eye-level views [43,
16, 19, 13, 25, 36]. Some works also deal with data of
surveillance nature [43, 22, 14].
Our work goes beyond a recent work by Yang et al. [43].
They collected presumably the first dataset of sufficient
proportion for training convolutional neural networks (the

3006

