Composition-preserving Deep Photo Aesthetics Assessment
Long Mai
Portland State University

Hailin Jin
Adobe Research

Feng Liu
Portland State University

mtlong@cs.pdx.edu

hljin@adobe.com

fliu@cs.pdx.edu

Abstract
Photo aesthetics assessment is challenging. Deep convolutional neural network (ConvNet) methods have recently
shown promising results for aesthetics assessment. The performance of these deep ConvNet methods, however, is often
compromised by the constraint that the neural network only
takes the fixed-size input. To accommodate this requirement, input images need to be transformed via cropping,
scaling, or padding, which often damages image composition, reduces image resolution, or causes image distortion,
thus compromising the aesthetics of the original images. In
this paper, we present a composition-preserving deep ConvNet method that directly learns aesthetics features from the
original input images without any image transformations.
Specifically, our method adds an adaptive spatial pooling
layer upon the regular convolution and pooling layers to
directly handle input images with original sizes and aspect
ratios. To allow for multi-scale feature extraction, we develop the Multi-Net Adaptive Spatial Pooling ConvNet architecture which consists of multiple sub-networks with different adaptive spatial pooling sizes and leverage a scenebased aggregation layer to effectively combine the predictions from multiple sub-networks. Our experiments on the
large-scale aesthetics assessment benchmark (AVA [29])
demonstrate that our method can significantly improve the
state-of-the-art results in photo aesthetics assessment.

1. Introduction
Subjective photo quality and aesthetics assessment is
challenging. Existing photo aesthetics assessment methods extract visual features and then employ various machine learning algorithms to predict photo aesthetic values [2, 5, 7, 12, 13, 17, 25, 27, 28, 31, 32, 42, 48, 51].
Feature extraction is a critical step for aesthetics assessment. Early methods manually design aesthetics features
according to people’s aesthetics perception and photography rules [2, 5, 7, 17]. Manually designing effective aesthetics features, however, is still a challenging task although
these features have shown encouraging results. Other approaches have been developed to leverage more generic im-

(a) Cropping

(b) Scaling

(c) Padding plus scaling

Figure 1: Effect on image transformation on photo aesthetics. (a): Cropping compromises the composition of
the originally well-composed image that follows rule of
thirds. (b): Scaling distorts the important object. (c): While
padding and scaling keeps the original aspect ratio, it sometimes leads to the loss of the image clarity. In this example,
the spots on the ladybug is difficult to see in the padding
result. The added boundaries between the image and the
padding area can also confuse a deep learning algorithm.
age features such as Fisher Vector [28, 35, 36] and bag of visual words [42] to predict photo aesthetics. While obtaining
promising performance, the image representation provided
by those generic features may not be optimal for photo aes1497

