Efficient Piecewise Training of Deep Structured Models for Semantic
Segmentation
Guosheng Lin, Chunhua Shen, Anton van den Hengel, Ian Reid
The University of Adelaide; and Australian Centre for Robotic Vision

Deep structured model: contextual deep CRF

Abstract
Recent advances in semantic image segmentation have
mostly been achieved by training deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs). We show how to improve semantic segmentation through the use of contextual information; specifically, we explore ‘patch-patch’ context between image regions, and ‘patch-background’ context. For learning from
the patch-patch context, we formulate Conditional Random
Fields (CRFs) with CNN-based pairwise potential functions to capture semantic correlations between neighboring
patches. Efficient piecewise training of the proposed deep
structured model is then applied to avoid repeated expensive CRF inference for back propagation. For capturing the
patch-background context, we show that a network design
with traditional multi-scale image input and sliding pyramid pooling is effective for improving performance. Our experimental results set new state-of-the-art performance on a
number of popular semantic segmentation datasets, including NYUDv2, PASCAL VOC 2012, PASCAL-Context, and
SIFT-flow. In particular, we achieve an intersection-overunion score of 78.0 on the challenging PASCAL VOC 2012
dataset.

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation aims to predict a category
label for every image pixel, which is an important yet challenging task for image understanding. Recent approaches
have applied convolutional neural network (CNNs) [13, 32,
3] to this pixel-level labeling task and achieved remarkable
success. Among these CNN-based methods, fully convolutional neural networks (FCNNs) [32, 3] have become a
popular choice, because of their computational efficiency
for dense prediction and end-to-end style learning.
Contextual relationships are ubiquitous and provide important cues for scene understanding tasks. Spatial context
can be formulated in terms of semantic compatibility relations between one object and its neighboring objects or
image patches (stuff), in which a compatibility relation is
an indication of the co-occurrence of visual patterns. For

Unary potential net:
Multi-scale CNN

...

Prediction refinement stage:
up-sample & boundary refine

Pairwise potential net
Multi-scale CNN

...

Coarse-level prediction stage:
inference on contextual CRF

Low-resolution
prediction

Figure 1. An illustration of the prediction process of our method.
Both our unary and pairwise potentials are formulated as multiscale CNNs for capturing semantic relations between image regions. Our method outputs low-resolution prediction after CRF
inference, then the prediction is up-sampled and refined in a standard post-processing stage to output the final prediction.

example, a car is likely to appear over a road, and a glass
is likely to appear over a table. Context can also encode incompatibility relations. For example, a car is not likely to be
surrounded by sky. These relations also exist at finer scales,
for example, in object part-to-part relations, and part-toobject relations. In some cases, contextual information is
the most important cue, particularly when a single object
shows significant visual ambiguities. A more detailed discussion of the value of spatial context can be found in [21].
We explore two types of spatial context to improve the
segmentation performance: patch-patch context and patchbackground context. The patch-patch context is the semantic relation between the visual patterns of two image
patches. Likewise, patch-background context is the semantic relation between a patch and a large background region.
Explicitly modeling the patch-patch contextual relations
has not been well studied in recent CNN-based segmentation methods. In this work, we propose to explicitly model
the contextual relations using conditional random fields
(CRFs). We formulate CNN-based pairwise potential functions to capture semantic correlations between neighboring

3194

