Unsupervised Learning of Discriminative Attributes and Visual Representations
Chen Huang1,2
1

Chen Change Loy1,3

Xiaoou Tang1,3

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
3

SenseTime Group Limited

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{chuang,ccloy,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
V

Attributes offer useful mid-level features to interpret visual data. While most attribute learning methods are supervised by costly human-generated labels, we introduce a simple yet powerful unsupervised approach to learn and predict
visual attributes directly from data. Given a large unlabeled
image collection as input, we train deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to output a set of discriminative, binary attributes often with semantic meanings. Specifically,
we first train a CNN coupled with unsupervised discriminative clustering, and then use the cluster membership as a
soft supervision to discover shared attributes from the clusters while maximizing their separability. The learned attributes are shown to be capable of encoding rich imagery
properties from both natural images and contour patches.
The visual representations learned in this way are also
transferrable to other tasks such as object detection. We
show other convincing results on the related tasks of image
retrieval and classification, and contour detection.

le
ic
eh mal
ni
A
Sh
o
Lo rt l
ng egs
leg
s
ed
d
p
a
ape
sh
l sh
Big
ova
l
l
a
Sm

Large Small
sized sized
Marine
Aero

Birds
and frogs

Sin
Do gle
ub -lin
e
lelin d
ed

Stra
ight
Non
-str
aigh
t

Small deer

Curved
Junctional

1. Introduction
Attributes [16] offer important mid-level cues for many
visual tasks like image retrieval. Shared attributes can also
generalize across categories to define the unseen object
from a new category [28]. Most supervised attribute learning methods [7, 16, 28, 48] require large amounts of human
labeling (e.g., “big”, “furry”), which is expensive to scale
up to rapidly growing data. Alternatives [3, 38] leverage
texts on the web that are narrow or biased in scope [35].
To discover attributes from numerous potentially uninteresting images is much like finding needles in a haystack.
It is more challenging to find those ideal attributes that are
shared across certain categories and meanwhile can distinguish them from others. The above supervised methods reduce such a large searching space by directly using humangenerated labels or semantic text. Besides costing substantial human effort, the major drawback of these methods is

ple
Sim plex
Fence-like
m
Co

Polyline

Figure 1. 2D feature space of our unsupervisedly learned attributes
for natural images on CIFAR-10 [26] and binary contour patches
on BSDS500 [2]. The colored lines delineate the approximate separation borderlines of the binary attributes, which are discriminative and easily interpreted semantically in both cases. In the first
case, it is obvious that many attributes are shared across categories,
and they together can help distinguish the categories of interest.

that they cannot guarantee the manually defined attributes
are sufficiently predictable or discriminative in the feature
space. Recent works [33, 35, 37] address this drawback
15175

