Mining 3D Key-Pose-Motifs for Action Recognition
Chunyu Wang1 , Yizhou Wang1 , and Alan L. Yuille2
1

Nat’l Eng. Lab. for Video Technology, Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), Sch’l of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
{wangchunyu, Yizhou.Wang}@pku.edu.cn
2

Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), USA
Departments of Cognitive Science and Computer Science, John Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218
yuille@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
Recognizing an action from a sequence of 3D skeletal
poses is a challenging task. First, different actors may perform the same action in various styles. Second, the estimated poses are sometimes inaccurate. These challenges can
cause large variations between instances of the same class.
Third, the datasets are usually small, with only a few actors
performing few repetitions of each action. Hence training
complex classifiers risks over-fitting the data. We address
this task by mining a set of key-pose-motifs for each action class. A key-pose-motif contains a set of ordered poses,
which are required to be close but not necessarily adjacent
in the action sequences. The representation is robust to style
variations. The key-pose-motifs are represented in terms of
a dictionary using soft-quantization to deal with inaccuracies caused by quantization. We propose an efficient algorithm to mine key-pose-motifs taking into account of these
probabilities. We classify a sequence by matching it to the
motifs of each class and selecting the class that maximizes
the matching score. This simple classifier obtains state-ofthe-art performance on two benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Action recognition from RGB videos [10, 28, 26, 7, 22,
16] is an important task with many applications, such as
intelligent surveillance, sports video analysis and humancomputer interactions. Although this task has attracted a lot
of attention, the recognition performance is unsatisfactory
because of the considerable variations in the appearance and
the scales of the people performing the same action. In addition, 2D images will be very dependent on viewpoint and
the same action can vary as the perspective changes.

(

(a) a sequence of poses

(b) pose quantization

(

,

(

,

,

)
)

,

)

(c) mined key-pose-motifs

(d) matching motifs

Figure 1: Overview: (a) a sequence of training poses. (b)
the poses quantized by a simplicial model. (c) mined keypose-motifs. (d) a sequence is classified by matching it to
the motifs of each class.
The introduction of RGB-D cameras and the corresponding pose estimation algorithms [19] makes it possible to
obtain 3D human poses and hence study pose-based action
recognition. This leads to progress on the appearance and
viewpoint variations [11] [25] [27] [23] but there are other
challenges remaining unsolved. First, different actors often
perform the same action in differing styles. Second, the 3D
poses are sometimes inaccurate because they are usually estimated from noisy depth maps. The two challenges together cause large intra-class variations making two instances
of the same class far apart. It is not plausible to compare two instances directly. Third, most benchmarks only provide
only a few sequences for each action which makes training
complex classifiers sensitive to over-fitting.
Psychological studies, however, show that humans can
effortlessly recognize actions from pose sequences despite
all these challenges [9]. Indeed some actions can be classified from a single key-pose [31]. This suggests that we
can perform action classification using a set of key poses
rather than using the whole pose sequence. The key poses are close but not necessarily adjacent in the sequences
and hence allows short and variable gaps between the poses.
These gaps help deal with style variations. Also the representation is robust to outlier poses as they have little effect
on the representation as long as the key poses are accurate.
12639

