Multimodal Spontaneous Emotion Corpus for Human Behavior Analysis
Zheng Zhang1 , Jeffrey M. Girard2 , Yue Wu3 , Xing Zhang1 , Peng Liu1 , Umur Ciftci1 , Shaun Canavan1 ,
Michael Reale1 , Andrew Horowitz1 , Huiyuan Yang1 , Jeffrey F. Cohn2 , Qiang Ji3 , and Lijun Yin∗1
1

Binghamton University, 2 University of Pittsburgh, 3 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Abstract
Emotion is expressed in multiple modalities, yet most research has considered at most one or two. This stems in
part from the lack of large, diverse, well-annotated, multimodal databases with which to develop and test algorithms.
We present a well-annotated, multimodal, multidimensional
spontaneous emotion corpus of 140 participants. Emotion
inductions were highly varied. Data were acquired from a
variety of sensors of the face that included high-resolution
3D dynamic imaging, high-resolution 2D video, and thermal (infrared) sensing, and contact physiological sensors
that included electrical conductivity of the skin, respiration,
blood pressure, and heart rate. Facial expression was annotated for both the occurrence and intensity of facial action
units from 2D video by experts in the Facial Action Coding System (FACS). The corpus further includes derived features from 3D, 2D, and IR (infrared) sensors and baseline
results for facial expression and action unit detection. The
entire corpus will be made available to the research community.

1. Introduction
In the last 10 years, research on facial expression analysis has shifted its focus from posed behavior to non-posed
(i.e., spontaneous) behavior [34, 2, 14, 17, 23]. This shift
has increased the difficulty of such analyses, but also their
ecological validity and practical utility. In the next 10 years,
a similar shift will occur from single modality to multimodal analyses, with increasing research integrating 2D
and 3D videos, temperature dynamics, and physiological
responses.
Researchers are already beginning to use 3D sensors and
models to improve facial feature tracking and expression
recognition [29, 34, 21, 25, 20, 33, 32]. However, because
∗ Main Contact: lijun@cs.binghamton.edu; Others: jeffcohn@pitt.edu;
jiq@rpi.edu; realemj@sunyit.edu

of the difficulty in collecting and labeling spontaneous behavior, these studies mainly focused on posed expressions.
Infrared imaging technology has also been employed for
facial expression analysis [30, 15] due to its sensitivity to
skin temperature and relative insensitivity to lighting conditions and skin color. However, existing work mainly utilized the temperature information as a single modality. Because the temperature distribution may not align well with
facial appearance, it is challenging to extract temperaturebased features for expression recognition.
Research has also shown the correlation of the physiological state to the emotion state of individuals [18, 24]. A
number of databases have been developed successfully in
recent years [13, 23, 1]. The utility of the physiological signals needs to be further investigated.
Complex human behavior can only be fully-understood
by integrating physical features from multiple modalities (e.g., facial expressions and physiological responses).
Many studies have theoretically and empirically demonstrated the advantage of integrating multiple modalities in
human emotion perception relative to using a single modality [18, 24, 13, 23]. However, the emotion-related modalities are typically studied separately.
To our knowledge, there is no database of emotional
behavior that combines following multiple emotion related
modalities: 2D and 3D face visual dynamics, skin temperature dynamics, and physiological responses.
Although there are several facial expression databases
that include 3D data (e.g., BU-3DFE [33], BU-4DFE [32],
Bosphorus [21], ITC-3DRFE [25], ETH-3DAV [9], and 3D
AU-DB [5]), they are all based on posed behavior and typically include few subjects, little diversity, limited ground
truth labels, and limited metadata.
Recently, a 3D spontaneous facial expression database
(BP4D) [35] with extensive labeling, metadata, and diversity was released to the research community. The 2D
videos of this dataset were included in the second Facial Expression Recognition and Analysis Challenge (FERA) [28].
However, this dataset only includes 41 subjects, which lim13438

