STCT: Sequentially Training Convolutional Networks for Visual Tracking
Lijun Wang1,2 , Wanli Ouyang2 , Xiaogang Wang2 , and Huchuan Lu1
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China

Abstract
Due to the limited amount of training samples, finetuning pre-trained deep models online is prone to overfitting. In this paper, we propose a sequential training
method for convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to effectively transfer pre-trained deep features for online applications. We regard a CNN as an ensemble with each channel of the output feature map as an individual base learner.
Each base learner is trained using different loss criterions
to reduce correlation and avoid over-training. To achieve
the best ensemble online, all the base learners are sequentially sampled into the ensemble via important sampling. To
further improve the robustness of each base learner, we propose to train the convolutional layers with random binary
masks, which serves as a regularization to enforce each
base learner to focus on different input features.
The proposed online training method is applied to visual tracking problem by transferring deep features trained
on massive annotated visual data and is shown to significantly improve tracking performance. Extensive experiments are conducted on two challenging benchmark data
set and demonstrate that our tracking algorithm can outperform state-of-the-art methods with a considerable margin.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is a fundamental problem in computer
vision that has been receiving a rapidly growing attention. It has a variety of subfields ranging from single-target
to multi-target tracking. The focus here is single-target,
model-free online tracking [20, 12, 38], where a category
agnostic target is indicated by a bounding box in the first
frame, and the tracker aims at locating the target in the following each frame. Due to significant target appearance
changes caused by abrupt motion, deformation, occlusion
and illumination variation, visual tracking is still a very
challenging problem.
Prior approaches [11, 15, 40, 41] rely on hand-crafted
features to describe the target and have addressed the above
challenging factors to a certain extend. However, these

STCT
OTCT
Figure 1. Due to limited number of training samples, online training CNNs for tracking (denoted as OTCT) can easily lead to overfitting and cause tracking failure. We propose a sequential learning
method (denoted as STCT) for CNNs to address this issue.

hand-crafted features are designed for certain scenarios.
Thus, they can not generalize well and are incapable to capture the semantic information of the target, which can easily
lead to tracking failure in challenging conditions.
Recently, deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
trained on large scale image classification data sets (e.g. [5])
have demonstrated great success in many vision tasks [29,
9, 3, 25]. These semantic representations discovered by the
learning process are shown to be very effective at distinguishing objects of various categories. However, supervised
training of deep CNNs with millions of parameters entails
a large number of annotated training samples. To apply
deep CNNs for tasks with a limited amount of training samples, previous approaches [24, 30] adopt a transfer learning
method by first pre-training a deep CNN on a source task
with a large scale training data set and then fine-tuning the
learned feature on the target task. Due to the good generalization capability of CNN features across different data sets,
this transfer learning approach is effective and has shown
state-of-the-art performance.
However, for online visual tracking, the lack of training

1373

