Laplacian Patch-Based Image Synthesis
Joo Ho Lee
Inchang Choi
Min H. Kim∗
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{jhlee;inchangchoi;minhkim}@vclab.kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Patch-based image synthesis has been enriched with
global optimization on the image pyramid. Successively,
the gradient-based synthesis has improved structural coherence and details. However, the gradient operator is directional and inconsistent and requires computing multiple
operators. It also introduces a significantly heavy computational burden to solve the Poisson equation that often accompanies artifacts in non-integrable gradient fields.
In this paper, we propose a patch-based synthesis using a
Laplacian pyramid to improve searching correspondence
with enhanced awareness of edge structures. Contrary
to the gradient operators, the Laplacian pyramid has the
advantage of being isotropic in detecting changes to provide more consistent performance in decomposing the base
structure and the detailed localization. Furthermore, it does
not require heavy computation as it employs approximation
by the differences of Gaussians. We examine the potentials
of the Laplacian pyramid for enhanced edge-aware correspondence search. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the
Laplacian-based approach over the state-of-the-art patchbased image synthesis methods.

1. Introduction
In digital photography, we often confront a situation
where certain causes, such as blocks by uninvited objects,
occlusions, failures in transmission, and holes produced by
different perspectives in binocular stereo, corrupt a portion
of images. Accordingly we may wish to fix these corruptions with plausible contents. To address these situations, image inpainting [6], which refers to filling in a corrupted area, has received attention during the past decade.
Although image inpainting has been commonly used even
with novice users, there is no completely versatile inpainting algorithm that gives robust results under any conditions.
The image gradients are employed in classical inpainting methods [10] for detecting and copying image struc∗ Corresponding author

ture from the boundary to the interior such that the image
gradients, the first derivatives of image intensity, measure
directional changes of intensity around edges. The image
pyramid, which denotes an image representation based on
multiscale signals, has been widely used as a typical practice for enhancing structural coherence when completing
missing regions in patch-based synthesis [29]. Recently, the
image gradients in each level of the image pyramid are used
for enhancing edge structure in addition to coherent patchbased synthesis [11]. Even though the latest approach of
combining gradients and the image pyramid has improved
the structural coherence and details in inpainting, the gradient operator is directional and thus requires twofold greater
computation of multiple operators, and it introduces a significantly heavy computational burden to solve the Poisson
equation. Furthermore, it presents inconsistency often with
artifacts in non-integrable gradient fields.
The Laplacian operator, which is the divergence of gradients of image intensity, takes advantage of being isotropic
and invariant to rotation (Figure 1c). In addition, coordinates of the Laplacian correspond to those of the edges,
being well aligned to represent the image structure over
edges. The Laplacian pyramid allows us to decompose the
base and detail structure of an image into different spatial
frequency components that can preserve structure upon decomposition. This representation has been used in many
applications such as image blend/fusion, enhancement, and
denoising. However, to the best of our knowledge, the potentials of the Laplacian pyramid has not been intensively
exploited in previous coherent patch-based image synthesis. The proposed method is the first work that combines the
Laplacian with patch-based synthesis of global coherence.
In this paper, we examine the properties of the Laplacian
pyramid for image completion and describe our edge-aware
patch-based synthesis using a Laplacian pyramid.

2. Related Work
Proposed first by Bertalmio et al. [6], inpainting refers to
the task of filling in or completing holes, or missing or corrupted regions in images. Inpainting is classified into two
categories: diffusion-based and exemplar-based methods.

2727

