Understanding Real World Indoor Scenes With Synthetic Data
Ankur Handa, Viorica Pătrăucean, Vijay Badrinarayanan, Simon Stent and
Roberto Cipolla
Department of Engineering,
University of Cambridge
handa.ankur@gmail.com, {vp344,vb292,sais2,rc10001}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Scene understanding is a prerequisite to many high level
tasks for any automated intelligent machine operating in
real world environments. Recent attempts with supervised
learning have shown promise in this direction but also highlighted the need for enormous quantity of supervised data —
performance increases in proportion to the amount of data
used. However, this quickly becomes prohibitive when considering the manual labour needed to collect such data. In
this work, we focus our attention on depth based semantic
per-pixel labelling as a scene understanding problem and
show the potential of computer graphics to generate virtually unlimited labelled data from synthetic 3D scenes. By
carefully synthesizing training data with appropriate noise
models we show comparable performance to state-of-theart RGBD systems on NYUv2 dataset despite using only
depth data as input and set a benchmark on depth-based
segmentation on SUN RGB-D dataset.

1. Introduction
Many high level tasks in real world require some knowledge of objects present in the scene, their physical locations and the underlying physics involved as a means to
understanding the scene. Autonomously navigating robots
equipped with cameras can build upon the awareness and
understanding of their environment to perform a range of
simple to complex tasks in real world. In this work, we
choose to focus on per-pixel semantic labelling as an intermediate step towards scene understanding. Indeed, not only
can per-pixel labelling lead to object recognition, but it can
also facilitate estimating volume and actual physical extent
of the objects e.g. an indoor robot must understand how the
floor bends or curves so as to adjust its path while navigating, a robot operating in a kitchen may need to have an idea
of the volume of the objects to appropriately arrange them

in the cabinet — knowledge of the physical extent of the
supporting surface can provide a rough estimate of where
different objects can be placed. In 3D modelling, it is sometimes required to have precise knowledge of where different
objects can be fitted or inserted into others. It is exactly
in these high level tasks where the role of semantic segmentation is emphasized more than pure object detection.
Furthermore, it is more likely to benefit from the context
present in the scene to segment objects unlike any ‘blanket’
detection module that is generally run independently on a
sliding window on the image.
Motivated by its recent success, we use deep learning
as our computational framework for semantic segmentation.
Inspired by the human brain [5], deep learning models have
superseded many traditional approaches that relied on hand
engineered features — past few years have seen a rapid proliferation of deep learning based approaches in many domains in AI. However, a major limitation of modern day
deep learning models is the requirement of enormous supervised training data. Collecting big datasets can quickly
become labour intensive and may not be a viable option in
the end. In this work, we focus on the challenges of obtaining the desired training data for scene understanding.
Many existing datasets do not have the volume of data
needed to make significant advances in scene understanding that we aim in this work. For instance, indoor scene
datasets like, NYUv2 [25] contains only 795 training images for as many as 894 object classes. SUN RGB-D [27],
on the other hand contains 5,285 training images for 37
classes. These are the only two indoor depth datasets with
per-pixel labels and are limited in size considering the enormity of data needed to achieve good performance on unseen data. This limitation results from the difficulty of the
labelling process. Indeed, per-pixel segmentation is a tedious, expensive, and even error-prone process, when done
manually by human labellers. We believe scene understanding can greatly benefit from the computer graphics community that has long had the tradition of CAD model repos14077

