ASP Vision: Optically Computing the First Layer of Convolutional Neural
Networks using Angle Sensitive Pixels
Huaijin G. Chen∗
Rice University

Suren Jayasuriya∗
Cornell University

Sriram Sivaramakrishnan
Cornell University

Jiyue Yang
Cornell University

Ashok Veeraraghavan
Rice University

Abstract

Judy Stephen
Cornell University
Alyosha Molnar
Cornell University

Conventional Deep Learning Pipeline
Computation

Sensing

LN

Scene

Traditional
Camera

Output

CNN

ASP Vision: ASP Sensor + Deep Learning
ASP Camera

L1

L2

LN

L3

···

∗ Authors contributed equally to this paper

L3

···

State-of-the-art visual recognition algorithms utilize
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) which use hierarchical layers of feature computation to discriminate visual
stimuli. Early CNNs from LeCun et al. [26] showed promising results in digit recognition [27]. The advent of GPU
computing has allowed CNN training on large, public online data sets, and triggered an explosion of current research. CNNs have started to perform on par with or even
surpass humans on some image recognition challenges such
as ImageNet [23, 43]. CNNs have been universally applied to different vision tasks including object detection and
localization [50], pedestrian detection [49], face recogni-

L2

“Elephant”

Output

···

1. Introduction

L1

···

Deep learning using convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) is quickly becoming the state-of-the-art for challenging computer vision applications. However, deep learning’s power consumption and bandwidth requirements currently limit its application in embedded and mobile systems
with tight energy budgets. In this paper, we explore the energy savings of optically computing the first layer of CNNs.
To do so, we utilize bio-inspired Angle Sensitive Pixels
(ASPs), custom CMOS diffractive image sensors which act
similar to Gabor filter banks in the V1 layer of the human
visual cortex. ASPs replace both image sensing and the first
layer of a conventional CNN by directly performing optical
edge filtering, saving sensing energy, data bandwidth, and
CNN FLOPS to compute. Our experimental results (both on
synthetic data and a hardware prototype) for a variety of vision tasks such as digit recognition, object recognition, and
face identification demonstrate up to 90% reduction in image sensor power consumption and 90% reduction in data
bandwidth from sensor to CPU, while achieving similar performance compared to traditional deep learning pipelines.

Optically computed

Figure 1: A diagram of our proposed ASP Vision. ASP
Vision, our proposed system, is compared with a conventional deep learning pipeline. ASP Vision system saves
90% in energy and transmission bandwidth in the sensing
stage, compared to a traditional camera.
tion [44], and even synthesizing new objects [8]. However,
many applications in embedded vision such as vision for
mobile platforms, autonomous vehicles/robots, and wireless sensor networks have stringent constraints on power
and bandwidth, limiting the deployment of CNNs in these
contexts.

1.1. Motivation and Challenges
Porting deep learning vision systems to embedded and
battery-operated applications necessitates overcoming the
following challenges:
• Sensor power: Image sensors are notoriously powerhungry, sometimes accounting for more than 50% of the
power consumption in many embedded vision applications [30]. In addition, current image sensors are not optimized to significantly save power for such computer vision tasks [30]. Several researchers, most recently [29],
have argued that always-on, battery-operated, embedded
1903

