A Comparative Study for Single Image Blind Deblurring
Wei-Sheng Lai1
Jia-Bin Huang2
1 University of California, Merced

Zhe Hu1
Narendra Ahuja2
Ming-Hsuan Yang1
2 University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign

http://vllab.ucmerced.edu/˜wlai24/cvpr16_deblur_study

Abstract
Numerous single image blind deblurring algorithms
have been proposed to restore latent sharp images under
camera motion. However, these algorithms are mainly evaluated using either synthetic datasets or few selected real
blurred images. It is thus unclear how these algorithms
would perform on images acquired “in the wild” and how
we could gauge the progress in the field. In this paper, we
aim to bridge this gap. We present the first comprehensive
perceptual study and analysis of single image blind deblurring using real-world blurred images. First, we collect a
dataset of real blurred images and a dataset of synthetically blurred images. Using these datasets, we conduct a
large-scale user study to quantify the performance of several representative state-of-the-art blind deblurring algorithms. Second, we systematically analyze subject preferences, including the level of agreement, significance tests of
score differences, and rationales for preferring one method
over another. Third, we study the correlation between human subjective scores and several full-reference and noreference image quality metrics. Our evaluation and analysis indicate the performance gap between synthetically
blurred images and real blurred image and sheds light on
future research in single image blind deblurring.

1. Introduction
The recent years have witnessed significant progress in
single image blind deblurring (or motion deblurring). The
progress in this field can be attributed to the advancement
of efficient inference algorithms [2, 5, 17, 35, 44], various
natural image priors [15, 21, 29, 38, 45], and more general
motion blur models [8, 9, 11, 43]. To quantify and compare
the performance of competing algorithms, existing methods either use (1) synthetic datasets [17, 38] with uniform
blurred images generated by convolving a sharp image with
a known blur kernel, or (2) a non-uniform blurred benchmark [13] constructed by recording and playing back camera motion in a lab setting. However, existing datasets do
not consider several crucial factors, e.g., scene depth variation, sensor saturation and nonlinear camera response func-

Blurred input image

Cho & Lee [2]

Krishnan et al. [15]

Whyte et al. [43]

Sun et al. [38]

Xu et al. [45]

Zhong et al. [49]

Pan et al. [29]

Perrone et al. [31]

Figure 1. A blurred image from the real dataset proposed in this
work and a few deblurred results from state-of-the-art algorithms,
where there is no clear winner. In this work, we aim to evaluate
the performance of single image deblurring algorithms on the realworld blurred images by human perceptual studies.

tions in a camera pipeline. To understand the true progress
of deblurring algorithms, it is important to evaluate the performance “in the wild”. While several work has reported
impressive results on real blurred images, the lack of a
large benchmark dataset and perceptual comparison makes
it impossible to evaluate the relative strengths of these algorithms in the literature.
There are two main drawbacks in existing evaluation approaches. First, the synthetically generated blurred images
often fail to capture the complexity and the characteristics
of real motion blur degradation. For example, the camera
motion has 6 degrees of freedom (3 translations and 3 rotations) while a convolution model considers only 2D translations parallel to the image plane [17, 38]. Lens distortion,
sensor saturation, nonlinear transform functions, noise, and
compression in a camera pipeline are also not taken into account in these synthetically generated images. Furthermore,
the constant scene depth assumption in a convolution model
and the non-uniform blurred benchmark [13] may not hold
in many real scenes where the depth variation cannot be neglected. Evaluations on these datasets do not reflect the performance of single image blind deblurring algorithms on the
11701

