Gradient-Domain Image Reconstruction Framework
with Intensity-Range and Base-Structure Constraints
Takashi Shibata1,2 , Masayuki Tanaka1 , Masatoshi Okutomi1
1
Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2 NEC corporation
tshibata@ok.ctrl.titech.ac.jp, {mtanaka, mxo}@ctrl.titech.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper presents a novel unified gradient-domain
image reconstruction framework with intensity-range constraint and base-structure constraint. The existing method
for manipulating base structures and detailed textures are
classifiable into two major approaches: i) gradient-domain
and ii) layer-decomposition. To generate detail-preserving
and artifact-free output images, we combine the benefits of
the two approaches into the proposed framework by introducing the intensity-range constraint and the base-structure
constraint. To preserve details of the input image, the proposed method takes advantage of reconstructing the output image in the gradient domain, while the output intensity is guaranteed to lie within the specified intensity range,
e.g. 0-to-255, by the intensity-range constraint. In addition,
the reconstructed image lies close to the base structure by
the base-structure constraint, which is effective for restraining artifacts. Experimental results show that the proposed
framework is effective for various applications such as tone
mapping, seamless image cloning, detail enhancement, and
image restoration.

1. Introduction
Natural scenes include base structures and detailed textures of various kinds. Combinations of the base structures
and the detailed textures provide rich information. An image editing algorithm, or image filtering, by manipulating
the base structures and/or the detailed textures has a crucially important role in computer graphics and computer
vision. The applications of such image editing algorithms
include seamless image cloning [27], tone mapping for a
high-dynamic range image (HDR tone mapping) [12], and
detail enhancement [10]. Image editing algorithms for these
applications are classifiable as i) gradient-domain approach
or ii) layer-decomposition approach.
In the gradient-domain approach [5, 12, 27, 29], the gradients extracted from the input image are manipulated de-

pending on the gradient norm. Roughly speaking, large and
small gradients respectively associate to the base structure
and the detailed texture. In the HDR tone mapping application [12], for example, large gradients are compressed,
while preserving the small gradients. After these gradient
manipulations, the gradient-based HDR tone mapping applications integrate the gradients to generate the resultant
tone-mapped image. However, the intensity range of the
tone-mapped image remains unknown until the integration
is performed. Therefore, the intensity range of the tonemapped image often exceeds a fixed target range, 0-to-255
in general. Image range adjustment such as intensity rescaling or clipping is required as post-processing to enforce the
intensity range into 0-to-255. This post-processing generates artifacts such as oversaturation and oversmoothing.
In the layer-decomposition approach [10, 26, 39, 38], the
input image is decomposed into the base structure and the
detailed texture. Then, the base structure and the detailed
texture are manipulated separately. In a detail enhancement application [10], for example, the detailed texture is
enhanced and added to the base structure. The base structure should be extracted precisely and carefully to avoid artifacts such as ringing, halos, and gradient reversal. Various
sophisticated edge-preserving filters [10, 26, 39, 38] have
been proposed to extract the base structure precisely. However, the precise base structure extraction is still a challenging problem.
In this paper, we propose a unified gradient-domain
image reconstruction framework that involves gradientdomain and layer-decomposition approaches. The proposed
algorithm is an optimization approach based on the target gradient, which incorporates the intensity-range and the
base-structure constraints. The proposed algorithm needs
no post-processing of the intensity range adjustment because the fixed target intensity range is already taken into
account in the optimization with the range constraint. In
addition, the base structure constraint proposed in this paper are very effective for restraining artifacts such as ringing
and halos.

2745

