Feature Space Optimization for Semantic Video Segmentation
Abhijit Kundu∗
Georgia Tech

Vibhav Vineet∗
Intel Labs

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Figure 1. Semantic video segmentation on the Cityscapes dataset [6]. Input frame on the left, semantic segmentation computed by our
approach on the right.

Abstract
We present an approach to long-range spatio-temporal
regularization in semantic video segmentation. Temporal
regularization in video is challenging because both the camera and the scene may be in motion. Thus Euclidean distance in the space-time volume is not a good proxy for correspondence. We optimize the mapping of pixels to a Euclidean feature space so as to minimize distances between
corresponding points. Structured prediction is performed
by a dense CRF that operates on the optimized features. Experimental results demonstrate that the presented approach
increases the accuracy and temporal consistency of semantic video segmentation.

∗ Joint first authors

1. Introduction
Structured prediction has become a standard means of
achieving maximal accuracy in semantic segmentation. In
structured prediction, all pixels are labeled jointly and labeling coherence is explicitly enforced. This alleviates
the noise and inconsistency that can arise when pixels are
classified independently. In particular, the fully-connected
CRF [10, 11] – also known as the dense CRF – often yields
significant improvements in semantic segmentation accuracy. For example, after the recent breakthrough of Long
et al. [18], who developed a new model for semantic image
segmentation, an application of the dense CRF over the new
model yielded substantial accuracy gains [4, 15, 31].
The natural form of input for vision systems that operate
in the physical world is video. For this reason, we consider
semantic segmentation of video sequences, rather than individual images. In a typical video sequence, each frame
depicts a different view of the scene. Thus structured prediction can be used not only for spatial regularization within
13168

