Image Captioning with Semantic Attention
Quanzeng You1 , Hailin Jin2 , Zhaowen Wang2 , Chen Fang2 , and Jiebo Luo1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, Rochester NY 14627, USA
2
Adobe Research, 345 Park Ave, San Jose CA 95110, USA
{qyou,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu, {hljin,zhawang,cfang}@adobe.com

Abstract
Automatically generating a natural language description
of an image has attracted interests recently both because
of its importance in practical applications and because
it connects two major artificial intelligence fields: computer vision and natural language processing. Existing
approaches are either top-down, which start from a gist of
an image and convert it into words, or bottom-up, which
come up with words describing various aspects of an image
and then combine them. In this paper, we propose a new
algorithm that combines both approaches through a model
of semantic attention. Our algorithm learns to selectively
attend to semantic concept proposals and fuse them into
hidden states and outputs of recurrent neural networks.
The selection and fusion form a feedback connecting the
top-down and bottom-up computation. We evaluate our
algorithm on two public benchmarks: Microsoft COCO and
Flickr30K. Experimental results show that our algorithm
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches
consistently across different evaluation metrics.

1. Introduction
Automatically generating a natural language description
of an image, a problem known as image captioning, has
recently received a lot of attention in Computer Vision. The
problem is interesting not only because it has important
practical applications, such as helping visually impaired
people see, but also because it is regarded as a grand
challenge for image understanding which is a core problem
in Computer Vision. Generating a meaningful natural
language description of an image requires a level of image
understanding that goes well beyond image classification
and object detection. The problem is also interesting in that
it connects Computer Vision with Natural Language Processing which are two major fields in Artificial Intelligence.

wave
riding
man
surfboard
ocean
water
surfer
surfing
person
board

CNN
RNN

...

attention

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

surfboard
wave
surfing

Figure 1. Top: an overview of the proposed framework. Given
an image, we use a convolutional neural network to extract a topdown visual feature and at the same time detect visual concepts
(regions, objects, attributes, etc.). We employ a semantic attention
model to combine the visual feature with visual concepts in a recurrent neural network that generates the image caption. Bottom:
We show the changes of the attention weights for several candidate
concepts with respect to the recurrent neural network iterations.

There are two general paradigms in existing image captioning approaches: top-down and bottom-up. The topdown paradigm [4, 35, 26, 16, 8, 37, 25] starts from a “gist”
of an image and converts it into words, while the bottom-up
one [12, 19, 23, 9, 20, 11, 22] first comes up with words
describing various aspects of an image and then combines
them. Language models are employed in both paradigms
to form coherent sentences. The state-of-the-art is the topdown paradigm where there is an end-to-end formulation
from an image to a sentence based on recurrent neural
networks and all the parameters of the recurrent network
can be learned from training data. One of the limitations
of the top-down paradigm is that it is hard to attend to
fine details which may be important in terms of describing
the image. Bottom-up approaches do not suffer from this
problem as they are free to operate on any image resolution.
However, they suffer from other problems such as there
lacks an end-to-end formulation for the process going from
individual aspects to sentences. There leaves an interesting
14651

