First Person Action Recognition Using Deep Learned Descriptors
Suriya Singh 1
1

Chetan Arora 2

IIIT Hyderabad, India

2

C. V. Jawahar 1

IIIT Delhi, India

Abstract
We focus on the problem of wearer’s action recognition
in first person a.k.a. egocentric videos. This problem is
more challenging than third person activity recognition due
to unavailability of wearer’s pose and sharp movements in
the videos caused by the natural head motion of the wearer.
Carefully crafted features based on hands and objects cues
for the problem have been shown to be successful for limited targeted datasets. We propose convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) for end to end learning and classification
of wearer’s actions. The proposed network makes use of
egocentric cues by capturing hand pose, head motion and
saliency map. It is compact. It can also be trained from relatively small number of labeled egocentric videos that are
available. We show that the proposed network can generalize and give state of the art performance on various disparate egocentric action datasets.

1. Introduction
With availability of cameras from GoPro [2], Google
Glass [1], Microsoft SenseCam [3] etc., the wearable cameras are becoming a commodity allowing people to generate
more and more egocentric video content. By making first
person point of view available, egocentric cameras have become popular in applications like extreme sports, law enforcement, life logging and home automation.
The egocentric community has been trying to develop
or adapt solutions to a wide variety of computer vision
problems in the new emerging context. Work done in last
few years has ranged from problems like object recognition
[10, 35, 36], activity recognition [7, 9, 27, 29, 31, 37, 41, 42]
to more applied problems like summarization [4, 22, 26],
and predicting social interactions [8]. Interesting ideas
which exploit special properties of egocentric videos have
been proposed for problems like temporal segmentation
[16, 33], frame sampling [34, 49] and hyperlapse [18].
Newer areas specific to egocentric vision such as gaze detection [24] and camera wearer identification [11, 32] have
also been explored.

Figure 1: Hands and object motion pattern are important cues for
first person action recognition. The first two columns show ‘take’
action whereas last two show ‘stir’. Notice the wide difference in
appearance. Second and third row shows hand mask and saliency
map derived from dominant motion. In several cases hands are
occluded by the handled object and hence the partial hand mask is
obtained. We train a compact convolutional neural network using
such egocentric cues. We achieve state of the art accuracy for first
person action recognition. Our approach can be applied to datasets
that differ widely in appearance and actions, without requiring any
hand tuning. We further improve the performance by using pretrained networks for third person videos in a multi stream setting.

We focus on the recognition of wearer’s actions (or first
person actions) from egocentric videos in each frame. We
consider short term actions that typically last few seconds,
e.g., pour, take, open etc. We do not assume any prior temporal segmentation. First row in Figure 1 shows the frames
corresponding to some example actions.
Recognition of wearer’s actions is a natural first step
in many egocentric video analysis problems. The problem is more challenging than third person action recognition because of unavailability of the actor’s pose. Unlike
third person actions where the camera is either static or
smoothly moving, there are large shakes present in the egocentric videos due to head motion of the wearer. The sharp
change in the viewpoint makes any kind of tracking impossible which makes it difficult to apply third person action
recognition algorithms. Therefore, hands and handled objects become the most important cues for recognizing first
person actions. Figure 1 helps in visualizing the same.
Researchers have understood the importance of egocentric cues for the first person action recognition problem. In
last few years several features based on egocentric cues such
12620

