Ordinal Regression with Multiple Output CNN for Age Estimation
Zhenxing Niu1
Mo Zhou1
Le Wang2
Xinbo Gao1
Gang Hua3
1
Xidian University 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University 3 Microsoft Research Asia
{zhenxingniu,cdluminate}@gmail.com, lewang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, xinbogao@mail.xidian.edu.cn
ganghua@gmail.com

Abstract
To address the non-stationary property of aging patterns,
age estimation can be cast as an ordinal regression problem.
However, the processes of extracting features and learning
a regression model are often separated and optimized independently in previous work. In this paper, we propose an
End-to-End learning approach to address ordinal regression problems using deep Convolutional Neural Network,
which could simultaneously conduct feature learning and
regression modeling. In particular, an ordinal regression
problem is transformed into a series of binary classification sub-problems. And we propose a multiple output CNN
learning algorithm to collectively solve these classification
sub-problems, so that the correlation between these tasks
could be explored. In addition, we publish an Asian Face
Age Dataset (AFAD) containing more than 160K facial images with precise age ground-truths, which is the largest
public age dataset to date. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work to address ordinal regression problems by
using CNN, and achieves the state-of-the-art performance
on both the MORPH and AFAD datasets.

1. Introduction
Human age estimation from face images remains to be an
active research topic, which has many applications, such as
demographics analysis, commercial user management, visual surveillance [22, 23, 24, 30, 3], and even aging progression [28]. In previous methods, age estimation is often cast
as a multi-class classification [12][15] or a metric regression problem [11][15][14]. In a multi-class classification
problem, the class labels are assumed to be independent to
one another. However, the age labels have a strong ordinal
relationship since they form a well-ordered set, which is not
exploited in these multi-class classification methods.
On the other hand, metric regression approaches treat the
age labels as numerical values to utilize such ordinal information for age estimation. However, the human face matures in different ways depending on the person’s age [25].

For example, facial aging effects appear as changes in the
shape of the face during childhood and changes in skin texture during adulthood. This property makes the random process formed by the aging patterns non-stationary in general.
As manifested in [6], learning non-stationary kernels for a
regression problem is usually difficult since it will easily
cause over-fitting in the training process.
Due to the fact that facial aging process is a nonstationary process, one reliable information we can use
would be the relative order among the age labels in addition to their exact values. And hence the age estimation
is cast as a ordinal regression problem [4][6][32][20]. For
instance, Cao et al. [4] formulated age estimation as a ranking problem and proposed a novel method based on RankSVM [17].
Recently, to directly utilize the well-studied classification algorithms, the ordinal regression problem is transformed into a series of simpler binary classification subproblems [10][21]. For example, a reduction framework is
proposed in [21]. For each rank k ∈ {1, 2, · · · , K − 1} a
binary classifier is trained according to whether the rank of
a sample is larger than k. Then, the rank of a sample is predicted based on the classification results of the K −1 binary
classifiers on this sample. In [21], the well-tuned SVM classification algorithm is directly utilized to train those binary
classifiers. A benefit of this kind of methods is that new
generalization bounds for ordinal regression can be easily
derived from known bounds for binary classification.
Inspired by it, we also transform ordinal regression as
a series of binary classification sub-problems in this paper. In particular, the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
is used to solve those binary classification sub-problems.
Moreover, our CNN has multiple output layers where each
output layer corresponds to a binary classification task,
called Multiple Output CNN in this paper. Therefore, all
the binary classifiers can be jointly trained in such a CNN.
Since all the tasks share the same mid-level representations
in the CNN, the correlation among distinct tasks could be
explored, which is beneficial to improving the finial performance.

4920

