Temporal Action Localization with Pyramid of Score Distribution Features
Jun Yuan1 , Bingbing Ni2 , Xiaokang Yang2 , Ashraf A.Kassim1
1
National University of Singapore, 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
yuanjun@nus.edu.sg, nibingbing@sjtu.edu.cn, xkyang@sjtu.edu.cn, ashraf@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We investigate the feature design and classification architectures in temporal action localization. This application focuses on detecting and labeling actions in untrimmed
videos, which brings more challenge than classifying presegmented videos. The major difficulty for action localization is the uncertainty of action occurrence and utilization
of information from different scales. Two innovations are
proposed to address this issue. First, we propose a Pyramid of Score Distribution Feature (PSDF) to capture the
motion information at multiple resolutions centered at each
detection window. This novel feature mitigates the influence of unknown action position and duration, and shows
significant performance gain over previous detection approaches. Second, inter-frame consistency is further explored by incorporating PSDF into the state-of-the-art Recurrent Neural Networks, which gives additional performance gain in detecting actions in temporally untrimmed
videos. We tested our action localization framework on the
THUMOS’15 and MPII Cooking Activities Dataset, both of
which show a large performance improvement over previous attempts.

1. Introduction
Action recognition is an active research area with many
potential applications in multimedia, home care, logistic
support and security-based applications. With the technology advancement of network infrastructure, social media
and video-capturing devices, the explosion of video contents has greatly lifted the demand of automatic content
analysis. There are considerable amounts of work on analyzing human activities in videos; many pieces of work
focus on action classification, labeling human actions with
various datasets [30, 16, 34, 39, 28, 13]. It is not a easy
problem since human activities often vary in pose, interaction, clothing and background. During the last decade,
great progress has been made on both the dataset quality
and recognition algorithms.

Figure 1. Our framework for temporal action localization. We
encode visual features at multiple temproal resolutions, combine
with class SVM scores to form our Pyramid of Score Distribution
Features (PSDF). The features are further processed by Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNN) to produce action detection results.

Despite the great improvements in action classification,
there are still drawbacks in this field. Most human action classification algorithms are developed on datasets of
trimmed videos [26, 30, 16, 20], where each video file is
aligned with a single human action. The videos are often
trimmed by hand. This setting simplifies the real-life video
content analysis, however it is most of the time unrealistic,
since a real video often contains multiple action instances as
well as irrelevant backgrounds, i.e. the video is untrimmed.
A more practical setting is to label every video frame with
action classes; this can be considered as a detection task
which brings in new challenges due to the uncertainty in
action occurrence, where the action label, position and duration are all unknown.
This per-frame labeling process utilizes both the current
frame action information and inter-frame consistency. It can
be considered as an automatic trimming processes, including the detection of action start / stop time and classifying
the underlying action at the same time. This task is much
more demanding than outputting a label from a video file,
and requires huge amount of temporally labeled video data.
Due to the cost of annotation, the studies in the temporal ac-

3093

