Training Region-based Object Detectors with Online Hard Example Mining
Abhinav Shrivastava1
Abhinav Gupta1
Ross Girshick2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Facebook AI Research
{ashrivas,abhinavg}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
The ﬁeld of object detection has made signiﬁcant advances riding on the wave of region-based ConvNets, but
their training procedure still includes many heuristics and
hyperparameters that are costly to tune. We present a simple yet surprisingly effective online hard example mining
(OHEM) algorithm for training region-based ConvNet detectors. Our motivation is the same as it has always been –
detection datasets contain an overwhelming number of easy
examples and a small number of hard examples. Automatic
selection of these hard examples can make training more
effective and efﬁcient. OHEM is a simple and intuitive algorithm that eliminates several heuristics and hyperparameters in common use. But more importantly, it yields consistent and signiﬁcant boosts in detection performance on
benchmarks like PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012. Its effectiveness increases as datasets become larger and more difﬁcult,
as demonstrated by the results on the MS COCO dataset.
Moreover, combined with complementary advances in the
ﬁeld, OHEM leads to state-of-the-art results of 78.9% and
76.3% mAP on PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 respectively.

1. Introduction
Image classiﬁcation and object detection are two fundamental computer vision tasks. Object detectors are often
trained through a reduction that converts object detection
into an image classiﬁcation problem. This reduction introduces a new challenge that is not found in natural image classiﬁcation tasks: the training set is distinguished by
a large imbalance between the number of annotated objects and the number of background examples (image regions not belonging to any object class of interest). In the
case of sliding-window object detectors, such as the deformable parts model (DPM) [12], this imbalance may be
as extreme as 100,000 background examples to every one
object. The recent trend towards object-proposal-based detectors [15, 32] mitigates this issue to an extent, but the imbalance ratio may still be high (e.g., 70:1). This challenge
opens space for learning techniques that cope with imbal-

rbg@fb.com

ance and yield faster training, higher accuracy, or both.
Unsurprisingly, this is not a new challenge and a standard solution, originally called bootstrapping (and now often called hard negative mining), has existed for at least 20
years. Bootstrapping was introduced in the work of Sung
and Poggio [30] in the mid-1990’s (if not earlier) for training face detection models. Their key idea was to gradually grow, or bootstrap, the set of background examples by
selecting those examples for which the detector triggers a
false alarm. This strategy leads to an iterative training algorithm that alternates between updating the detection model
given the current set of examples, and then using the updated model to ﬁnd new false positives to add to the bootstrapped training set. The process typically commences
with a training set consisting of all object examples and a
small, random set of background examples.
Bootstrapping has seen widespread use in the intervening decades of object detection research. Dalal and Triggs
[7] used it when training SVMs for pedestrian detection.
Felzenszwalb et al. [12] later proved that a form of bootstrapping for SVMs converges to the global optimal solution deﬁned on the entire dataset. Their algorithm is often referred to as hard negative mining and is frequently
used when training SVMs for object detection [15, 16, 32].
Bootstrapping was also successfully applied to a variety of
other learning models, including shallow neural networks
[25] and boosted decision trees [9]. Even modern detection methods based on deep convolutional neural networks
(ConvNets) [19, 20], such as R-CNN [15] and SPPnet [16],
still employ SVMs trained with hard negative mining.
It may seem odd then that the current state-of-the-art object detectors, embodied by Fast R-CNN [14] and its descendants [24], do not use bootstrapping. The underlying
reason is a technical difﬁculty brought on by the shift towards purely online learning algorithms, particularly in the
context of deep ConvNets trained with stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) on millions of examples. Bootstrapping, and
its variants in the literature, rely on the aforementioned alternation template: (a) for some period of time a ﬁxed model
is used to ﬁnd new examples to add to the active training set;
(b) then, for some period of time the model is trained on the
1761

