Learning to Select Pre-trained Deep Representations with
Bayesian Evidence Framework
Yong-Deok Kim∗1 Taewoong Jang∗2 Bohyung Han3 Seungjin Choi3
1
Software R&D Center, Device Solutions, Samsung Electronics, Korea
2
Stradvision Inc., Korea
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Korea
yd.mlg.kim@samsung.com

taewoong.jang@stradvision.com {bhhan,seungjin}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a Bayesian evidence framework to facilitate
transfer learning from pre-trained deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Our framework is formulated on top
of a least squares SVM (LS-SVM) classifier, which is simple
and fast in both training and testing, and achieves competitive performance in practice. The regularization parameters in LS-SVM is estimated automatically without grid
search and cross-validation by maximizing evidence, which
is a useful measure to select the best performing CNN out
of multiple candidates for transfer learning; the evidence
is optimized efficiently by employing Aitken’s delta-squared
process, which accelerates convergence of fixed point update. The proposed Bayesian evidence framework also provides a good solution to identify the best ensemble of heterogeneous CNNs through a greedy algorithm. Our Bayesian
evidence framework for transfer learning is tested on 12 visual recognition datasets and illustrates the state-of-the-art
performance consistently in terms of prediction accuracy
and modeling efficiency.

1. Introduction
Image representations from deep CNN models trained
for specific image classification tasks turn out to be powerful even for general purposes [2, 6, 7, 21, 23] and useful for transfer learning or domain adaptation. Therefore, CNNs trained on specific problems or datasets are
often fine-tuned to facilitate training for new tasks or domains [2, 6, 13, 17, 19, 36], and an even simpler approach—
application of off-the-shelf classification algorithms such as
SVM to the representations from deep CNNs [7]—is getting
more attractive in many computer vision problems. However, fine-tuning of an entire deep network still requires a
lot of efforts and resources, and SVM-based methods also
∗ This work was done when Y. Kim and T. Jang were with POSTECH.

Figure 1. We address a problem to select the best CNN out of
multiple candidates as shown in this figure. Additionally, our algorithm is capable of identifying the best ensemble of multiple
CNNs to further improve performance.

involve time consuming grid search and cross validation to
identify good regularization parameters. In addition, when
multiple pre-trained deep CNN models are available, it is
unclear which pre-trained models are appropriate for target tasks and which classifiers would maximize accuracy
and efficiency. Unfortunately, most existing techniques for
transfer learning or domain adaptation are limited to empirical analysis or ad-hoc application specific approaches.
We propose a simple but effective algorithm for transfer
learning from pre-trained deep CNNs based on Bayesian
least squares SVM (LS-SVM), which is formulated with
Bayesian evidence framework [16, 29] and LS-SVM [26].
This approach automatically determines regularization parameters in a principled way, and shows comparable performance to the standard SVMs based on hinge loss or squared
hinge loss. More importantly, Bayesian LS-SVM provides
an effective solution to select the best CNN out of multiple

5318

