FANNG: Fast Approximate Nearest Neighbour Graphs
Ben Harwood and Tom Drummond
Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering,
Monash University, Victoria, Australia
{ben.harwood,tom.drummond}@monash.edu

Abstract
We present a new method for approximate nearest neighbour search on large datasets of high dimensional feature
vectors, such as SIFT or GIST descriptors. Our approach
constructs a directed graph that can be efficiently explored
for nearest neighbour queries. Each vertex in this graph
represents a feature vector from the dataset being searched.
The directed edges are computed by exploiting the fact that,
for these datasets, the intrinsic dimensionality of the local manifold-like structure formed by the elements of the
dataset is significantly lower than the embedding space.
We also provide an efficient search algorithm that uses this
graph to rapidly find the nearest neighbour to a query with
high probability.
We show how the method can be adapted to give a
strong guarantee of 100% recall where the query is within a
threshold distance of its nearest neighbour. We demonstrate
that our method is significantly more efficient than existing
state of the art methods. In particular, our GPU implementation can deliver 90% recall for queries on a data set of 1
million SIFT descriptors at a rate of over 1.2 million queries
per second on a Titan X. Finally we also demonstrate how
our method scales to datasets of 5M and 20M entries.

datasets is computationally demanding and becomes problematic when there is a requirement for real-time responses
or when a large number of these queries are required. A
naive solution to the feature correspondence problem is to
linearly search all features in the dataset and evaluate each
one as a possible correspondence for a query feature. Unfortunately this solution is only suitable for trivially small
datasets and due to the high dimensionality of feature vectors there is no known algorithm for consistently returning
correspondences in a sub-linear time. However for many
applications an approximate search [16] can offer a less
than perfect recall rate while having a considerably smaller
query cost than that of an exhaustive linear search. It is also
possible for the degree of this trade-off to be adjusted so it
provides an acceptable recall rate for a particular application. For the applications being considered in this paper we
will be using the Euclidean distance function to calculate
the similarity between feature vectors.
Our approach for finding the approximate nearest neighbours of a dataset involves building a graph where each
vertex represents a feature vector from the dataset being
searched. In this paper we describe our new graph based
method and demonstrate the following key contributions:
• We present algorithms for building graphs and for efficiently searching them during queries (Sections 3.1,
3.4).

1. Introduction
Large datasets of feature vectors are a common component of many computer vision tasks such as object and
scene recognition[25], pose estimation[27, 21], relocalisation and loop-closing [20], 3D reconstruction[4] and
machine learning[26]. Image features such as those described in SIFT[14], SURF[2] and GIST[22] compress local image regions to single points in a high dimensional
space that use between 64 and 512 extrinsic dimensions.
Calculating correspondences between feature vectors can
be achieved by applying a distance function (usually Euclidean) with the assumption that the correct correspondences are more closely located in feature space than incorrect ones. The challenge of finding correspondences in large

• We exploit the limited dimensionality of the local
manifold-like structure of a dataset without the need
to directly compute that manifold (Section 3.2).
• We present a method that is guaranteed to find the
absolute nearest neighbour for all queries within a
tunable distance threshold of all values in the initial
dataset (Section 3.3).
• We demonstrate that our method achieves much faster
average query times for a given recall rate compared to
current state-of-the-art algorithms (Section 4.2).
15713

