Structural-RNN: Deep Learning on Spatio-Temporal Graphs
Ashesh Jain1,2 , Amir R. Zamir2 , Silvio Savarese2 , and Ashutosh Saxena3
Cornell University1 , Stanford University2 , Brain Of Things Inc.3
ashesh@cs.cornell.edu, {zamir,ssilvio,asaxena}@cs.stanford.edu

Links: mWeb

1. Introduction
The world we live in is inherently structured. It is comprised of components that interact with each other in space
and time, leading to a spatio-temporal composition. Utilizing such structures in problem formulation allows domainexperts to inject their high-level knowledge in learning
frameworks. This has been the incentive for many efforts in computer vision and machine learning, such as
Logic Networks [46], Graphical Models [28], and Structured SVMs [26]. Structures that span over both space and
time (spatio-temporal) are of particular interest to computer
vision and robotics communities. Primarily, interactions between humans and environment in real world are inherently

Activity Affordance

Activity Affordance

Activity Affordance

RNN

Problem
(e.g. Activity)

Deep Recurrent Neural Network architectures, though
remarkably capable at modeling sequences, lack an intuitive high-level spatio-temporal structure. That is while
many problems in computer vision inherently have an underlying high-level structure and can benefit from it. Spatiotemporal graphs are a popular tool for imposing such highlevel intuitions in the formulation of real world problems.
In this paper, we propose an approach for combining the
power of high-level spatio-temporal graphs and sequence
learning success of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). We
develop a scalable method for casting an arbitrary spatiotemporal graph as a rich RNN mixture that is feedforward,
fully differentiable, and jointly trainable. The proposed
method is generic and principled as it can be used for transforming any spatio-temporal graph through employing a
certain set of well defined steps. The evaluations of the proposed approach on a diverse set of problems, ranging from
modeling human motion to object interactions, shows improvement over the state-of-the-art with a large margin. We
expect this method to empower new approaches to problem
formulation through high-level spatio-temporal graphs and
Recurrent Neural Networks.

Spatio-temporal
Corresponding
graph representation Structural-RNN

Abstract

t-1

t

t+1

Figure 1: From st-graph to S-RNN for an example problem. (Bottom) Shows an example activity (human microwaving food). Modeling
such problems requires both spatial and temporal reasoning. (Middle) Stgraph capturing spatial and temporal interactions between the human and
the objects. (Top) Schematic representation of our structural-RNN architecture automatically derived from st-graph. It captures the structure and
interactions of st-graph in a rich yet scalable manner.

spatio-temporal in nature. For example, during a cooking
activity, humans interact with multiple objects both in space
and through time. Similarly, parts of human body (arms,
legs, etc.) have individual functions but work with each
other in concert to generate physically sensible motions.
Hence, bringing high-level spatio-temporal structures and
rich sequence modeling capabilities together is of particular
importance for many applications.
The notable success of RNNs has proven their capability
on many end-to-end learning tasks [19, 14, 10, 66]. However, they lack a high-level and intuitive spatio-temporal
structure though they have been shown to be successful
at modeling long sequences [49, 43, 52]. Therefore, augmenting a high-level structure with learning capability of
RNNs leads to a powerful tool that has the best of both
worlds. Spatio-temporal graphs (st-graphs) are a popular [39, 37, 4, 11, 32, 65, 22] general tool for representing
such high-level spatio-temporal structures. The nodes of the
graph typically represent the problem components, and the
edges capture their spatio-temporal interactions. To achieve

5308

