One-Shot Learning of Scene Locations via Feature Trajectory Transfer
Roland Kwitt, Sebastian Hegenbart
University of Salzburg, Austria

Marc Niethammer
UNC Chapel Hill, NC, United States

roland.kwitt@gmail.com, sebastian.hegenbart@gmail.com

mn@cs.unc.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Learning new visual concepts from only a single image
is a remarkable ability of human perception. Yet, the predominant setting of recognition experiments in computer vision is to measure success of a learning process with respect
to hundreds or even thousands of training instances. While
datasets of such size were previously only available for
object-centric recognition [2], the emergence of the Places
database [31] has made a large corpus of scene-centric data
available for research. Coupled with advances in CNNbased representations and variants thereof, the performance
of scene recognition systems has improved remarkably in
the recent past [8, 31, 3], even on already well established
(and relatively small) benchmarks such as “15 Scenes”.
However, large scale databases are typically constructed

Cam 1
Cam 2
Cam 3
Cam N − 1

In this illustration, the transient attribute is “sunny”.

Cam N

The appearance of (outdoor) scenes changes considerably with the strength of certain transient attributes, such
as “rainy”, “dark” or “sunny”. Obviously, this also affects the representation of an image in feature space, e.g.,
as activations at a certain CNN layer, and consequently impacts scene recognition performance. In this work, we investigate the variability in these transient attributes as a
rich source of information for studying how image representations change as a function of attribute strength. In
particular, we leverage a recently introduced dataset with
fine-grain annotations to estimate feature trajectories for a
collection of transient attributes and then show how these
trajectories can be transferred to new image representations. This enables us to synthesize new data along the
transferred trajectories with respect to the dimensions of
the space spanned by the transient attributes. Applicability of this concept is demonstrated on the problem of oneshot recognition of scene locations. We show that data synthesized via feature trajectory transfer considerably boosts
recognition performance, (1) with respect to baselines and
(2) in combination with state-of-the-art approaches in oneshot learning.

Scenario A: limited attribute variability for training

Scenario B: full attribute variability for training

Image representation
SUN attributes (XS )
Places-CNN (Xfc7 )

Scenario A
65.1
79.5

Scenario B
93.0
98.3

∆
-27.9
-18.8

Figure 1: Introductory experiment on the Transient Attributes
Database of [11]. The task is to distinguish scenes from different
webcams. In Scenario A, images with annotated attribute strengths
(in the range of [0, 1]) less than 0.4 are excluded during training
and used for testing. Results are averaged over 40 attributes. Scenario B represents a standard five-fold cross-validation setup, using random splits of the data. The size of each training split is set
to approximately the size as in Scenario A. In summary, significant
drops in recognition accuracy occur when only limited variability
is present in the training data with respect to (transient) attributes.

by fetching images from the web and subsequently crowdsourcing the annotation task. Consequently, a considerable
user bias [25] is expected, e.g., with respect to captured
conditions. It is, e.g., highly unlikely that scenes of “city
skylines” or “beaches” are captured during rainy or cloudy
conditions. Hence, we expect that the observed variability
of transient states in readily available scene databases will
be limited. The question then is if this existing visual data
is rich enough to sufficiently inform the process of learning
to recognize scenes from single instances, i.e., the aforementioned task on which humans perform so exceptionally
well.
1 78

