SVBRDF-Invariant Shape and Reflectance Estimation from Light-Field Cameras
Ting-Chun Wang
UC Berkeley

Manmohan Chandraker
NEC Labs

Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

Ravi Ramamoorthi
UC San Diego

tcwang0509@berkeley.edu

manu@nec-labs.com

efros@eecs.berkeley.edu

ravir@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Light-field cameras have recently emerged as a powerful
tool for one-shot passive 3D shape capture. However, obtaining the shape of glossy objects like metals, plastics or
ceramics remains challenging, since standard Lambertian
cues like photo-consistency cannot be easily applied. In this
paper, we derive a spatially-varying (SV)BRDF-invariant
theory for recovering 3D shape and reflectance from lightfield cameras. Our key theoretical insight is a novel analysis of diffuse plus single-lobe SVBRDFs under a light-field
setup. We show that, although direct shape recovery is not
possible, an equation relating depths and normals can still
be derived. Using this equation, we then propose using
a polynomial (quadratic) shape prior to resolve the shape
ambiguity. Once shape is estimated, we also recover the reflectance. We present extensive synthetic data on the entire
MERL BRDF dataset, as well as a number of real examples to validate the theory, where we simultaneously recover
shape and BRDFs from a single image taken with a Lytro Illum camera.

1 Introduction
Light-fields implicitly capture the 3D geometry and reflectance properties of a scene, but until recently, they have
been primarily used in rendering [12, 17]. In recent years,
light-field cameras have become popular (e.g. Lytro [1] and
Raytrix [22]), and their use for shape recovery in a single
shot has been demonstrated. However, most current depth
estimation methods support only Lambertian scenes, making them unreliable for glossy surfaces.
In this paper, we present a depth and reflectance estimation algorithm that explicitly models spatially varying BRDFs (SVBRDFs) from light-field cameras (Fig. 1).
Since the problem is under-constrained, we assume a known
distant light source. We think of a light-field camera as
a multi-camera array (of virtual viewpoints), and follow
the shape estimation framework using camera motion proposed by Chandraker [5, 6, 7]. We then show that in the
case of light-fields, shape cannot be directly recovered using [5, 6, 7] (Sec. 3). However, in many instances where
the BRDF depends on only the half-angle, we derive an
SVBRDF-invariant equation relating depths and normals
(Sec. 4).

(a) Light-field input

(b) Our depth

(c) PLC [26]

(d) SDC [25]

(e) PSSM [13]

(f) Lytro Illum

Figure 1: Comparison of depth estimation results of different algorithms. We texture map the input image onto the
depth results, so we can clearly see where each method fails.
It can be seen that our method correctly handles the glossy
surface, while other methods generate visible artifacts, especially around the most specular parts.
After this equation is derived, we recover the shape by
applying a locally polynomial shape prior (Sec. 5.1). To
ease the optimization, we require the normal at one seed
pixel to be specified. Then, we solve for the BRDF derivatives and integrate them to recover the reflectance (Sec. 5.2).
Finally, we demonstrate extensive real-world examples of
shape and reflectance estimation using commercial lightfield cameras (Figs. 1, 7, and 8). Our main contributions
are:
1) A generalization of optical flow to the non-Lambertian
case in light-field cameras (Secs. 3 and 4).
2) A depth estimation algorithm for light-field cameras
that handles diffuse plus specular 1-lobe BRDFs (Sec. 5.1).
3) A reflectance estimation approach that recovers
BRDFs for up to 2-lobes once shape is given (Sec. 5.2).
4) An extensive synthetic evaluation on the entire MERL
BRDF dataset [18] (Sec. 6, Figs. 5 and 6).
5) A practical realization of our algorithm on images
taken with the Lytro Illum camera (Sec. 6).

2 Related Work
Depth from Light-Field Cameras: Many depth estimation methods for light-field cameras have been proposed.
However, most of them rely on the Lambertian assumption
and work poorly on glossy surfaces [9, 13, 15, 25, 29, 30,
15451

