Recurrently Target-Attending Tracking
Zhen Cui1 , Shengtao Xiao2 , Jiashi Feng2 , Shuicheng Yan3,2
1
Research Center for Learning Science, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
360 Artificial Intelligence Institute, Beijing, China
zhen.cui@seu.edu.cn;{xstgavin124,jshfeng}@gmail.com;eleyans@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Robust visual tracking is a challenging task in computer
vision. Due to the accumulation and propagation of estimation error, model drifting often occurs and degrades the
tracking performance. To mitigate this problem, in this paper we propose a novel tracking method called Recurrently Target-attending Tracking (RTT). RTT attempts to identify and exploit those reliable parts which are beneficial
for the overall tracking process. To bypass occlusion and
discover reliable components, multi-directional Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are employed in RTT to capture
long-range contextual cues by traversing a candidate spatial region from multiple directions. The produced confidence maps from the RNNs are employed to adaptively regularize the learning of discriminative correlation filters by
suppressing clutter background noises while making full use
of the information from reliable parts. To solve the weighted
correlation filters, we especially derive an efficient closedform solution with a sharp reduction in computation complexity. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed RTT is more competitive over those correlation filter
based methods.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is a fundamental research topic in
computer vision with a wide range of applications, including video surveillance, traffic monitoring, and augmented
reality [45], etc. Despite the great progress that has been
made over the past decades, it remains very challenging due
to the existing unpredictable appearance variations such as
partial occlusion, illumination change, geometric deformation, background clutter, fast motion, etc.
A typical pipeline of visual tracking starts with an initial
location (e.g., a rectangle bounding box) of the object in the
* This work was performed when Zhen Cui was a Postdoctoral Fellow
at National University of Singapore.

first video frame, and then the location of the specified target in the subsequent frames is predicted. Among the existing tracking works, recent part-based methods [1, 35, 7, 31]
have been studied actively due to their robustness to local
appearance variations, particularly partial occlusion. By
partitioning the candidate region of the tracking target into several parts, part-based methods attempt to extract some
useful cues from those identified reliable parts. For example, Kwon et al. [26] used the topology structure of local patches to find those reliable parts. Zhang et al. [46]
employed a locality-constrained low-rank and sparse prior
to establish correspondences between parts across frames.
More recently, Liu et al. [31] proposed to learn one response
function for each part, and integrated response maps of all
parts to generate the final tracking confidence. However,
those methods might suffer from some difficulties in capturing large-range spatial dependencies between parts, especially for those objects with a large homogenous region.
In addition to the above methods, many holistic tracking methods have also been developed. In particular, correlation filter (CF) based methods [4, 11, 13, 28, 33, 23]
arouse increasing interest due to their excellent efficiency
and robustness. CF based methods usually learn a group
of correlation filters, which produce correlation peaks for
the targets in the scene and meanwhile yield low responses to background regions. The correlation filters are trained
by scanning the candidate regions using a circular sliding
window. As they adopt the holistically convolutional representation, the whole candidate region is identically treated
without any identification during training. This might produce inaccurate filters which cause the learnt tracker to drift
away from its correct trajectory, especially when the candidate region embodies cluttered background.
To address the above problems, we propose a novel
tracking method called Recurrently Target-attending Tracking (RTT), which attempts to identify and exploit those reliable parts throughout the process of model learning. To discover reliable components, RTT employs multi-directional
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to spatially encode all
4321
1449

