Solving Small-piece Jigsaw Puzzles by Growing Consensus
Kilho Son1,∗
Daniel Moreno1
James Hays2
David B. Cooper1
Brown University1
Georgia Institute of Technology2
kilho.son@gmail.com∗

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel computational puzzle
solver for square-piece image jigsaw puzzles with no prior
information such as piece orientation, anchor pieces or resulting dimension of the puzzle. By “piece” we mean a
square dxd block of pixels, where we investigate pieces as
small as 7x7 pixels. To reconstruct such challenging puzzles, we aim to search for piece configurations which maximize the size of consensus (i.e. grid or loop) configurations which represent a geometric consensus or agreement
among pieces. Pieces are considered for addition to the existing assemblies if these pieces increase the size of the consensus configurations. In contrast to previous puzzle solvers
which goal for assemblies maximizing compatibility measures between all pairs of pieces and thus depend heavily
on the pairwise compatibility measure used, our new approach reduces the dependency on the pairwise compatibility measures which become increasingly uninformative
at small scales and instead exploits geometric agreement
among pieces. Our contribution also includes an improved
pairwise compatibility measure which exploits directional
derivative information along adjoining boundaries of the
pieces. For the challenging unknown orientation piece puzzles where the size of pieces is small, we reduce assembly
error by up to 75% compared with previous algorithms for
standard datasets.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in computer science and engineering
led to computational algorithms to solve digitized jigsaw
puzzles including images [4], broken ancient articles [22,
16], documents [26], photographs [13] and separated, fractured bones [14]. The computational puzzle solver has been
an important tool to assist the time-consuming assembly of
otherwise infeasible jigsaw puzzles. Many state of the art
algorithms perform beyond human ability and thus play essential roles in discovering unrevealed objects from many
fragments.
Introduced by Freeman et al. [8], the task of solving
square jigsaw puzzles has been a challenge to many re-

searchers. Many previous works [1, 4, 25, 18, 9, 7, 20,
23, 17] tackle non-overlapping square piece image jigsaw
puzzles and notable progress has been made. In addition,
researchers have demonstrated the utility of these methods
in applications such as seamless image editing via a bag
of patches [3], reconstructing a new image from a bag of
patches for image retrieval and recognition [12], and matching templates [5].
In this paper, we propose a solver for challenging square
piece image jigsaw puzzles where no prior information –
piece orientation, anchor pieces (ground truth configurations), and dimension of resulting puzzles (i.e number of
squares in the horizontal and vertical directions) are all unknown. Furthermore, we also attempt to assemble puzzles
with small pieces, 14 by 14, 10 by 10 and 7 by 7 pixels,
in contrast to the more common 28 by 28 pixel benchmark.
When the size of a piece becomes smaller, the information
in the pieces is reduced so that the predefined compatibility measure is no longer reliable enough to configure the
puzzles correctly. Thus, we must develop smarter and more
robust strategies to assemble small size pieces successfully.
For assembling these demanding puzzles, we choose
a framework that estimates pairwise matching and subsequently aligns these matched pieces by making use of all
the pairwise costs involved in the aligned sets. Since we are
using this framework, our puzzle solver is capable of simultaneously reconstructing multiple puzzles, whose pieces are
mixed together, with no prior information. Our solver also
handles missing fragments, which is a common situation in
archaeological applications [24]. The most challenging aspect of this puzzle reconstruction strategy is that the consecutive pairwise matching should not include false pairwise
matches. Even a single initial false pairwise match may
lead to a entire incorrect configuration.
To overcome these issues, we contribute two crucial
steps in the matching-based assembly algorithm: an assembly strategy and a pairwise compatibility measure. For
assembling pieces, we consider that the pairwise compatibility measure could be noisy when the pieces are small,
the pieces are from textureless regions, or the boundaries of
pieces are aligned with boundaries of man-made structures.
11193

