Fast Algorithms for Linear and Kernel SVM+
Wen Li1

Dengxin Dai1 Mingkui Tan2 Dong Xu3 Luc Van Gool1,4
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
2
School of Computer Science, University of Adelaide, Australia
3
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, University of Sydney, Australia
4
VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
The SVM+ approach has shown excellent performance
in visual recognition tasks for exploiting privileged information in the training data. In this paper, we propose two
efficient algorithms for solving the linear and kernel SVM+,
respectively. For linear SVM+, we absorb the bias term
into the weight vector, and formulate a new optimization
problem with simpler constraints in the dual form. Then,
we develop an efficient dual coordinate descent algorithm
to solve the new optimization problem. For kernel SVM+,
we further apply the ℓ2 -loss, which leads to a simpler optimization problem in the dual form with only half of dual
variables when compared with the dual form of the original
SVM+ method. More interestingly, we show that our new
dual problem can be efficiently solved by using the SMO
algorithm of the one-class SVM problem. Comprehensive
experiments on three datasets clearly demonstrate that our
proposed algorithms achieve significant speed-up than the
state-of-the-art solvers for linear and kernel SVM+.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision tasks contain privileged information that only exists in the training data, and not available
during the test stage. For example, the training images
of many datasets for image recognition are annotated with
privileged information such as attributes, object bounding
boxes, textual descriptions, depth information. Although
the raw test images in the real-world applications are not
associated with such information, it has been demonstrated
that such information is useful for learning classifiers with
better recognition performance [5, 11, 20, 29, 32, 33, 35].
This problem is known as the Learning Using Privileged Information (LUPI) problem [32]. Different from the
traditional learning paradigm, where the training data and
the test data have the same representation, LUPI leverages
training data containing additional information that is only
available during the training process, not in the testing pro-

cess. Such additional information in the training data is referred to as privileged information or hidden information.
Following the LUPI paradigm, Vapnik and Vashist [32]
proposed an SVM-like algorithm called SVM+, in which
they replace the slack variables in the standard SVM with
a slack function defined in the privileged feature space.
Through the slack function, the additional privileged information is used to model the loss function, which guides
the hyperplane learning in the main feature space. In contrast, the slack variables in the standard SVM are only constrained to non-negative values, which is often less effective
than the slack function in SVM+.
Although SVM+ can be formulated as a quadratic programming problem in the dual form similarly as the standard SVM, it is still non-trivial to efficiently solve it, because the introduction of the slack function leads to more
constraints, and makes the number of dual variables doubled. While an SMO-style algorithm was developed in [26],
the working set selection method is complicated, and the
algorithm is also slow in practice. Moreover, it is unclear
how to apply it to linear SVM+ without calculating the kernel matrix, which is becoming more crucial, due to rapidly
increasing data in real-world applications.
In this paper, we propose two efficient algorithms for
solving linear SVM+ and kernel SVM+, respectively. In
particular, inspired by linear SVM [16], we augment the
feature vector with an additional constant element, and absorb the bias term in the decision function into the weight
vector, which leads to a dual form with simpler constraints.
The new linear SVM+ formulation can be efficiently solved
by using the dual coordinate descent method, in a similar
way to linear SVM. For kernel SVM+, we further propose
to apply the ℓ2 -loss, which leads to a simpler optimization
problem in the dual form with only half of dual variables
when compared with the original SVM+. More interestingly, we show that the resultant dual form is in analogy
to one-class SVM, which can thus be efficiently solved using the efficient sequential minimal optimization (SMO) algorithm [28] with the existing state-of-the-art SVM solvers
12258

