A Paradigm for Building Generalized Models of Human Image Perception
through Data Fusion
Shaojing Fan1 , Tian-Tsong Ng2 , Bryan L. Koenig3 , Ming Jiang1 , and Qi Zhao∗1
1

National University of Singapore
Institute for Infocomm Research
3
Washington University in St. Louis
2

Abstract
In many sub-fields, researchers collect datasets of human
ground truth that are used to create a new algorithm. For example, in research on image perception, datasets have been
collected for topics such as what makes an image aesthetic
or memorable. Despite high costs for human data collection, datasets are infrequently reused beyond their own fields
of interest. Moreover, the algorithms built from them are
domain-specific (predict a small set of attributes) and usually unconnected to one another. In this paper, we present a
paradigm for building generalized and expandable models of
human image perception. First, we fuse multiple fragmented
and partially-overlapping datasets through data imputation.
We then create a theoretically-structured statistical model of
human image perception that is fit to the fused datasets. The
resulting model has many advantages. (1) It is generalized,
going beyond the content of the constituent datasets, and can
be easily expanded by fusing additional datasets. (2) It provides a new ontology usable as a network to expand human
data in a cost-effective way. (3) It can guide the design of a
generalized computational algorithm for multi-dimensional
visual perception. Indeed, experimental results show that a
model-based algorithm outperforms state-of-the-art methods
on predicting visual sentiment, visual realism and interestingness. Our paradigm can be used in various visual tasks
(e.g., video summarization).

1. Introduction
When it comes to understanding visual perception of
images, studying human judgment remains the leading technique [1]. Scientists have studied various high-level image
properties that impact human behavior [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
Such studies are done with psychophysical experiments in
labs or online surveys via crowdsourcing platforms such
∗ Corresponding author.

as Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT). Consequently, each
study creates an isolated set of data mostly used for a
specific research purpose, often containing strong built-in
bias [9]. Furthermore, collecting human data is costly and
time-consuming. The average pay to AMT workers is $2-3
per hour, and doing 40 ratings takes about 5 minutes, so
to have 10 workers rate each of 10K images for merely 40
attributes would cost around $21K [10].
We believe that the reuse of existing datasets can provide novel insights. Although various datasets were created
with different aims, many are manifestations of a shared
underlying human psychological process [11]. We focus on
perception of visual images, which we hypothesize to have
few dimensions [11, 12]. Indeed, many of the previously
studied visual perceptual attributes are interrelated (e.g., image naturalness is related to interestingness [13]). Based
on the above understandings, we propose to reuse and fuse
existing isolated datasets to statistically and computationally
model visual perception (see Fig. 1 for an overview). Our
contributions are as follows.
1. We report a method to create “big human data” from
smaller datasets. We show how to aggregate heterogeneous
and fragmented human datasets that partially overlap in content. The non-overlapping parts of dataset are effectively
missing data, whose values we infer using multiple imputation to get a “bigger” dataset. Notably, the fused dataset
outperforms the constituent datasets when predicting image
perceptions (e.g., visual sentiment, visual realism, and interestingness) across more diverse image semantics. Thus,
through data fusion we get extra performance for free. Our
method provides another path in the journey of achieving big
human data – the fused dataset includes all images and all
attributes from the partially overlapping constituent datasets.
2. We propose a paradigm for iteratively increasing the generality of a model of human image perception. Based on
structure-revealing data fusion and statistical modeling, we

5762

