Semantic Object Parsing with Local-Global Long Short-Term Memory
Xiaodan Liang1,3 ,
1

Sun Yat-sen University

Xiaohui Shen4 , Donglai Xiang3 , Jiashi Feng3
Liang Lin1 , Shuicheng Yan2,3
2
360 AI Institute 3 National University of Singapore 4 Adobe Research

Abstract

face
hair
up
head
r-arm
tail

Semantic object parsing is a fundamental task for understanding objects in detail in computer vision community,
where incorporating multi-level contextual information is
critical for achieving such fine-grained pixel-level recognition. Prior methods often leverage the contextual information through post-processing predicted confidence maps.
In this work, we propose a novel deep Local-Global Long
Short-Term Memory (LG-LSTM) architecture to seamlessly
incorporate short-distance and long-distance spatial dependencies into the feature learning over all pixel positions.
In each LG-LSTM layer, local guidance from neighboring
positions and global guidance from the whole image are
imposed on each position to better exploit complex local
and global contextual information. Individual LSTMs for
distinct spatial dimensions are also utilized to intrinsically
capture various spatial layouts of semantic parts in the images, yielding distinct hidden and memory cells of each position for each dimension. In our parsing approach, several LG-LSTM layers are stacked and appended to the intermediate convolutional layers to directly enhance visual
features, allowing network parameters to be learned in an
end-to-end way. The long chains of sequential computation
by stacked LG-LSTM layers also enable each pixel to sense
a much larger region for inference benefiting from the memorization of previous dependencies in all positions along
all dimensions. Comprehensive evaluations on three public datasets well demonstrate the significant superiority of
our LG-LSTM over other state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Semantic object parsing, which refers to segmenting an
image region of an object into several semantic parts, enables the computer to understand the contents of an image in
detail, as illustrated in Figure 1. It helps many higher-level
computer vision applications, such as image-to-caption
Corresponding author is Liang Lin (Email: linliang@ieee.org). This
work was done when the first author worked as an intern at NUS.

l-arm
body
leg

bag
pants
l-shoe
r-shoe

Figure 1. Examples for semantic object parsing by our LG-LSTM
architecture. Best viewed in color.

generation [5], clothes recognition and retrieval [36], and
human behavior analysis [34].
Recently, many research works [15][33][31][19][20][15]
have been devoted to exploring various Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) based models for semantic object parsing, due to their excellent performance in image classification [29], object segmentation [18][17] and object detection [16]. However, the classification of each pixel position by CNNs can only leverage very local information
from limited neighboring context, depicted by small convolutional filters. Intuitively, larger local context and global
perspective of the whole image are very critical cues to recognize each semantic part in the image. For instance, in
terms of local context, visually similar regions can be predicted as “left-leg” or “right-leg” depending on their specific locations and neighboring semantic parts (e.g. “leftshoes” or “right-shoes”), especially for regions with two
crossed legs. Similarly, the regions of “tail” and “leg” can
be distinguished by the spatial layouts relative to the region
of “body”. In terms of global perspective, distinguishing
“skirt” from “dress” or “pants” needs the guidance from
the prediction on other semantic regions such as “upperclothes” or “legs”. Previous works often resort to some
post-processing techniques to separately address these complex contextual dependencies, such as, super-pixel smoothing [15], mean field approximation [22] and conditional
random field [3][38][33]. They improve accuracy through
carefully designed processing on the predicted confidence
maps instead of explicitly increasing the discriminative capability of visual features and networks. These separate
steps often make feature learning inefficient and result in
suboptimal prediction for pixel-wise object parsing.
Instead of employing separate processing steps, this
work aims to explicitly increase the capabilities of features
13185

