Fashion Style in 128 Floats:
Joint Ranking and Classification using Weak Data for Feature Extraction
Edgar Simo-Serra and Hiroshi Ishikawa
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan
esimo@aoni.waseda.jp

hfs@waseda.jp

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for learning features from
weakly-supervised data by joint ranking and classification.
In order to exploit data with weak labels, we jointly train a
feature extraction network with a ranking loss and a classification network with a cross-entropy loss. We obtain highquality compact discriminative features with few parameters, learned on relatively small datasets without additional
annotations. This enables us to tackle tasks with specialized
images not very similar to the more generic ones in existing fully-supervised datasets. We show that the resulting
features in combination with a linear classifier surpass the
state-of-the-art on the Hipster Wars dataset despite using
features only 0.3% of the size. Our proposed features significantly outperform those obtained from networks trained
on ImageNet, despite being 32 times smaller (128 singleprecision floats), trained on noisy and weakly-labeled data,
and using only 1.5% of the number of parameters.1 .

1. Introduction
With the emergence of large-scale datasets and the appearance of deep networks with millions of parameters, researchers have started to replace hand-crafted global image
features such as GIST [21] with those obtained from intermediate representations of deep networks trained for classification on large datasets [44]. Although this has led to a
great improvement over the previous generation of features,
these networks are learned in a fully-supervised manner on
large amounts of data with very costly and time-consuming
annotation. Features learned on one dataset can be used on
another, but naturally not all datasets are equal [32], and
thus features taken from networks trained on ImageNet [7]
will not work as well on datasets with very different visual characteristics, such as the scene classification dataset
Places [49], and vice versa. While unsupervised feature
learning exists as an alternative to supervised learning, the
1 Models available at http://hi.cs.waseda.ac.jp/ esimo/research/stylenet/

Classiﬁer
Shared
parameters

Feature
CNN

Feature
CNN

Feature
CNN

I−

I

I＋

Dissimilar

Similar

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed feature learning approach. We train a feature extraction on weakly annotated
data by jointly training a feature extractor network with a
classification network. For training, an anchor image (center) is provided in conjunction with a similar image (right)
and a dissimilar image (left) according to a metric provided
on the weak noisy annotations. The classification loss lC
serves to learn useful feature maps while the ranking loss
lR on the triplet of Feature CNN encourages them to learn
a discriminative feature representation.
lack of guidance to what to learn given by explicit labels
makes it a much more complex task [19].
However, images obtained from the Internet usually have
associated metadata which, although often inaccurate, can
be used as weak labels. In this paper, we study how to exploit data with weak labels in order to obtain high-quality
compact discriminative features without additional annotations. With such features, we tackle tasks in which the images are more specific and not very similar to those of existing fully-supervised datasets such as ImageNet or Places.
In this work, we focus on the domain of fashion images,
which have only recently become the focus of research [40].
These images have several characteristics that make them
1298

