Face Alignment Across Large Poses: A 3D Solution
Xiangyu Zhu1
Zhen Lei1∗
Xiaoming Liu2
Hailin Shi1
Stan Z. Li1
1
Center for Biometrics and Security Research & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
{xiangyu.zhu,zlei,hailin.shi,szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Face alignment, which fits a face model to an image
and extracts the semantic meanings of facial pixels, has
been an important topic in CV community. However, most
algorithms are designed for faces in small to medium poses (below 45◦ ), lacking the ability to align faces in large
poses up to 90◦ . The challenges are three-fold: Firstly, the
commonly used landmark-based face model assumes that
all the landmarks are visible and is therefore not suitable
for profile views. Secondly, the face appearance varies
more dramatically across large poses, ranging from frontal
view to profile view. Thirdly, labelling landmarks in large
poses is extremely challenging since the invisible landmarks
have to be guessed. In this paper, we propose a solution to
the three problems in an new alignment framework, called
3D Dense Face Alignment (3DDFA), in which a dense 3D
face model is fitted to the image via convolutional neutral
network (CNN). We also propose a method to synthesize
large-scale training samples in profile views to solve the
third problem of data labelling. Experiments on the challenging AFLW database show that our approach achieves
significant improvements over state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Traditional face alignment aims to locate face fiducial
points like “eye corner”, “nose tip” and “chin center”, based
on which the face image can be normalized. It is an
essential preprocessing step for many face analysis tasks,
e.g., face recognition [41], expression recognition [5] and
inverse rendering [1]. The researches in face alignment can
be divided into two categories: the analysis-by-synthesis
based [12, 42, 15] and regression based [11, 17, 27, 45].
The former simulates the process of image generation and
achieves alignment by minimizing the difference between
model appearance and input image. The latter extracts
∗ Corresponding author.

liuxm@msu.edu

features around key points and regresses it to the ground
truth landmarks. With the development in the last decade,
face alignment across medium poses, where the yaw angle
is less than 45◦ and all the landmarks are visible, has been
well addressed [45, 51, 54]. However, face alignment across
large poses (±90◦ ) is still a challenging problem without
much attention and achievements. There are three main
challenges:

Figure 1. Fitting results of 3DDFA. For each pair of the four
results, on the left is the rendering of the fitted 3D shape with the
mean texture, which is made transparent to demonstrate the fitting
accuracy. On the right is the landmarks overlayed on the 3D face
model, in which the blue/red ones indicate visible/invisible landmarks. The visibility is directly computed from the fitted dense
model by [21]. More results are demonstrated in supplemental
material.

Modelling: Landmark shape model [13] implicitly assumes that each landmark can be robustly detected based on
its distinctive visual patterns. However, when faces deviate
from the frontal view, some landmarks become invisible
due to self-occlusion [53]. In medium poses, this problem
can be addressed by changing the semantic positions of
face contour landmarks to the silhouette, which is termed
landmark marching [55]. However, in large poses where
half of face is occluded, some landmarks are inevitably
invisible and have no image data. As a result, the landmark
shape model no longer works well.
Fitting: Face alignment across large poses is more challenging than medium poses due to the dramatic appearance

146

