Discriminative Hierarchical Rank Pooling for Activity Recognition
Basura Fernando, Peter Anderson, Marcus Hutter, Stephen Gould
The Australian National University
Canberra, Australia
firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

Abstract
We present hierarchical rank pooling, a video sequence
encoding method for activity recognition. It consists of a
network of rank pooling functions which captures the dynamics of rich convolutional neural network features within
a video sequence. By stacking non-linear feature functions
and rank pooling over one another, we obtain a high capacity dynamic encoding mechanism, which is used for action
recognition. We present a method for jointly learning the
video representation and activity classifier parameters. Our
method obtains state-of-the art results on three important
activity recognition benchmarks: 76.7% on Hollywood2,
66.9% on HMDB51 and, 91.4% on UCF101.

1. Introduction
Activity and action recognition in video is important for
many real-life applications including human-computer interaction, sports analytic, elderly-care, and healthcare. In
action recognition a key challenge is to extract and represent
high-level motion patterns, dynamics, and evolution of appearance of videos. Recently, some success has been gained
by exploiting temporal information [1, 4, 5, 13, 28, 36].
Some methods use linear ranking machines to capture first
order dynamics [4]. Other methods encode temporal information using RNN-LSTMs on video sequences [28, 36, 37].
To further advance activity recognition it is beneficial to exploit temporal information at multiple levels of granularity
in a hierarchical manner thereby capturing more complex
dynamics of the input sequences [3, 16, 26]. As frame based
features improve, e.g., from a convolutional neural network
(CNN), it is important to exploit information not only in
the spatial domain but also in the temporal domain. Several
recent methods have obtained significant improvements in
image categorisation and object detection using very deep
CNN architectures [25]. Motivated by these deep hierarchies [3, 16, 26, 25], we argue that learning a temporal encoding at a single level is not sufficient to interpret and understand video sequences, and that a temporal hierarchy is

Figure 1: Illustration of hierarchical rank pooling for encoding the temporal dynamics of a video sequence.

needed.
The recently introduced rank pooling method [4, 5] managed to obtain good activity recognition performance using
hand-crafted features. Given a sequence of video frames,
the rank pooling method returns a vector of parameters encoding the dynamics of that sequence. The vector of parameters is derived from the solution of a linear ranking
SVM optimization problem applied to the entire video sequence, i.e., at a single level. As richer features are used
to describe the input frames (e.g., CNN features) and more
complex video sequences are considered, a single level may
no longer be sufficient for good performance. Furthermore,
the capacity of linear ranking employed by Fernando et
al. [4, 5] is limited and the rank pooling representation may
not be discriminative for the task at hand.
To overcome these limitations, we propose to encode a
video sequence at multiple levels. First, we divide the original video into multiple overlapping video segments. At
the lowest level, we encode each video segment using rank
pooling. The resulting encoding captures the dynamics of
small video segments (see Figure 1). By recursively applying rank pooling on the obtained segment descriptors,
we capture higher-order, non-linear, and complex dynamics. The output of each encoding level is itself another
sequence of vectors which captures higher-order dynamics
11924

