Summary Transfer: Exemplar-based Subset Selection for Video Summarization
Ke Zhang∗ , Wei-Lun Chao∗
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089

Fei Sha
University of California
Los Angeles, CA 90095

Kristen Grauman
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78701

{zhang.ke,weilunc}@usc.edu

feisha@cs.ucla.edu

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Video summarization has unprecedented importance to
help us digest, browse, and search today’s ever-growing
video collections. We propose a novel subset selection technique that leverages supervision in the form of humancreated summaries to perform automatic keyframe-based
video summarization. The main idea is to nonparametrically transfer summary structures from annotated videos to
unseen test videos. We show how to extend our method to
exploit semantic side information about the video’s category/genre to guide the transfer process by those training
videos semantically consistent with the test input. We also
show how to generalize our method to subshot-based summarization, which not only reduces computational costs but
also provides more flexible ways of defining visual similarity across subshots spanning several frames. We conduct extensive evaluation on several benchmarks and demonstrate
promising results, outperforming existing methods in several settings.

1. Introduction
The amount of video data has been explosively increasing due to the proliferation of video recording devices
such as mobile phones, wearable and ego-centric cameras,
surveillance equipment, and others. According to YouTube
statistics, about 300 hours of video are uploaded every
minute [2]. To cope with this video data deluge, automatic
video summarization has emerged as a promising tool to assist in curating video contents for fast browsing, retrieval,
and understanding [14, 29, 45, 47], without losing important information.
Video can be summarized at several levels of abstraction: keyframes [10, 24, 27, 34, 48], segment or shotbased skims [23, 30, 35, 36], story-boards [6, 9], montages [16, 41] or video synopses [39]. In this paper,
we focus on developing learning algorithms for selecting
∗

Equal contributions

keyframes or subshots from a video sequence. Namely, the
input is a video and its subshots and the output is an (ordered) subset of the frames or subshots in the video.
Inherently, summarization is a structured prediction
problem where the decisions on whether to include or exclude certain frames or subshots into the subset are interdependent. This is in sharp contrast to typical classification
and recognition tasks where the output is a single label.
The structured nature of subset selection presents a major challenge. Current approaches rely heavily on several
heuristics to decide the desirability of each frame: representativeness [15, 17, 36], diversity or uniformity [28, 48],
interestingness and relevance [16, 24, 30, 32, 36]. However,
combining those frame-based properties to output an optimal subset remains an open and understudied problem. In
particular, researchers are hampered by the lack of knowledge on the “global” criteria human annotators presumably
optimize when manually creating a summary.
Recently, initial steps investigating supervised learning
for video summarization have been made. They demonstrate promising results [10, 12], often exceeding the conventional unsupervised clustering of frames. The main idea
is to use a training set of videos and human-created summaries as targets to adapt the parameters of a subset selection model to optimize the quality of the summarization.
If successful, a strong form of supervised learning would
extract high-level semantics and cues from human-created
summaries to guide summarization.
Supervised learning for structured prediction is a challenging problem in itself. Existing parametric techniques
typically require a complex model with sufficient annotated data to represent highly complicated decision regions
in a combinatorially large output space. In this paper, we
explore a nonparametric supervised learning approach to
summarization. Our method is motivated by the observation
that similar videos share similar summary structures. For
instance, suppose we have a collection of videos of wedding
ceremonies inside churches. It is quite likely good summaries for those videos would all contain frames portraying brides proceeding to the altar, standing of the grooms
11059

