Fast Temporal Activity Proposals for Efficient Detection of Human Actions in
Untrimmed Videos
Fabian Caba Heilbron1

Juan Carlos Niebles2,3

Bernard Ghanem1

fabian.caba@kaust.edu.sa

jniebles@cs.stanford.edu

bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

1

2

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 3 Universidad del Norte, Colombia
http://www.cabaf.net/temporalproposals

Abstract
In many large-scale video analysis scenarios, one is interested in localizing and recognizing human activities that
occur in short temporal intervals within long untrimmed
videos. Current approaches for activity detection still struggle to handle large-scale video collections and the task
remains relatively unexplored. This is in part due to the
computational complexity of current action recognition approaches and the lack of a method that proposes fewer intervals in the video, where activity processing can be focused.
In this paper, we introduce a proposal method that aims to
recover temporal segments containing actions in untrimmed
videos. Building on techniques for learning sparse dictionaries, we introduce a learning framework to represent and
retrieve activity proposals. We demonstrate the capabilities
of our method in not only producing high quality proposals
but also in its efficiency. Finally, we show the positive impact our method has on recognition performance when it is
used for action detection, while running at 10FPS.

1. Introduction
With the growth of online and personal media archives,
people are generating, storing and consuming very large
collections of videos. A need that arises from such large
sources of video is the ability to process them for contentbased indexing and search. In particular, many such applications would benefit from automatic recognition of events,
actions, and activities in continuous video streams. To
achieve this, computer vision algorithms are required to
temporally localize the activities of interest within long
video sequences. Such visual recognition setting corresponds to the well-known task of action/activity detection.
Current methods for action temporal localization rely on
applying action classifiers at every time location and at multiple temporal scales, in a temporal sliding window fashion.

False positive proposal

00:00

01:00

02:00
03:00
Timeline

True positive proposal

04:00

05:00

Figure 1. Visualization of temporal action proposals for a sample long
video of five minutes. Our method is not only able to retrieve the temporal
locations of actions with high recall but also it generates proposals quickly.

However, due to the computational complexity of such classifiers and the large number of possible temporal locations
and scales, the sliding window approach is computationally
infeasible for large-scale video analysis applications.
In order to avoid this exhaustive evaluation of video classifiers, a number of researchers have recently introduced the
idea of spatial or spatiotemporal proposals for the task of action recognition [31, 35, 20, 13, 10]. Within this paradigm,
a video is first processed to produce a set of candidate video
segments or proposals, which are likely to contain a human
action or activity as Figure 1 illustrates. These proposals
are then used as a reduced candidate set, on which more sophisticated action classifiers can be applied for recognition.
A good method for generating proposals should therefore
have the following properties: (a) it should recover the true
temporal locations of actions with high recall and relatively
good precision, and (b) it should produce proposals quickly.
These two requirements make proposal generation a
computationally challenging vision task. In addition, the
proposal algorithm should be versatile enough to find candidates for any action or activity class, and simultaneously
provide potential starting and ending times for each candidate activity. The large variation in motion, scenes, and
objects involved, styles of execution, camera viewpoints,
camera motion, background clutter and occlusions impose
additional burden to the proposal generation process.
Although the concept of action proposals in video has

1914

