Track and Transfer: Watching Videos to Simulate Strong
Human Supervision for Weakly-Supervised Object Detection
Krishna Kumar Singh, Fanyi Xiao, and Yong Jae Lee
University of California, Davis
Tracked objects in weakly-labeled videos tagged with “car”

Abstract
The status quo approach to training object detectors requires expensive bounding box annotations. Our framework
takes a markedly different direction: we transfer tracked object boxes from weakly-labeled videos to weakly-labeled images to automatically generate pseudo ground-truth boxes,
which replace manually annotated bounding boxes. We
first mine discriminative regions in the weakly-labeled image collection that frequently/rarely appear in the positive/negative images. We then match those regions to videos
and retrieve the corresponding tracked object boxes. Finally, we design a hough transform algorithm to vote for
the best box to serve as the pseudo GT for each image, and
use them to train an object detector. Together, these lead to
state-of-the-art weakly-supervised detection results on the
PASCAL 2007 and 2010 datasets.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental problem in computer
vision. While tremendous advances have been made in recent years, existing state-of-the-art methods [9, 30, 12, 11]
are trained in a strongly-supervised fashion, in which the
system learns an object category’s appearance properties
and precise localization information from images annotated
with bounding boxes. However, such carefully labeled exemplars are expensive to obtain in the large numbers that
are needed to fully represent a category’s variability, and
methods trained in this manner can suffer from unintentional biases or errors imparted by annotators that hinder
the system’s ability to generalize to new, unseen data [35].
To address these issues, researchers have proposed to
train object detectors with relatively inexpensive weak supervision, in which each training image is only weaklylabeled with an image-level tag (e.g., “car”, “no car”)
that states an object’s presence/absence but not its location [39, 10, 26, 32, 33, 3]. These methods typically mine
discriminative visual patterns in the training data that frequently occur in the images that contain the object and
rarely in the images that do not. However, due to scene
clutter, intra-class appearance variation, and occlusion, the
discriminative patterns often do not tightly ﬁt the object-of-

match

retrieve

match

retrieve

…
Weakly-labeled training images tagged with “car”

Figure 1. Main idea. (top) Automatically tracked objects (yellow
and blue boxes) in weakly-labeled videos without any human initialization. (bottom) Discriminative visual regions (green boxes)
mined in weakly-labeled training images. For each discriminative
region, we ﬁnd its best matching region across all videos, and retrieve its overlapping tracked object box (yellow dotted box) back
to the image. The retrieved boxes are used as pseudo ground-truth
to train an object detector. Our approach improves object localization by expanding the initial visual region beyond a small object
part (bottom-left) or removing the surrounding context (bottomright). In practice, we combine the retrieved boxes from multiple
visual regions in an image to produce its best box.

interest; they either correspond to a small part of the object
such as a car’s wheel instead of the entire car, or include the
surrounding context such as a car with portions of the surrounding road (Fig. 1 bottom, green boxes). Consequently,
the detector that is trained using these patterns performs
substantially worse than strongly-supervised algorithms.
Main idea. So, how can we create accurate object detectors that do not require expensive bounding box annotations? Our key idea is to use motion cues from videos as a
substitute for strong human supervision. Given a weaklylabeled image collection and videos retrieved using the
same weak-label (e.g., “car”), we ﬁrst automatically track
and localize candidate objects in the videos, and then transfer their relevant tracked object boxes to the images. We
transfer the object boxes by mining discriminative visual
regions in the image collection, and then matching them to
regions in the videos. See Fig. 1.
Since temporal contiguity and motion signals are lever-

3548

