Learning Deep Features for Discriminative Localization
Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Agata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, Antonio Torralba
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT
{bzhou,khosla,agata,oliva,torralba}@csail.mit.edu
Brushing teeth

Abstract
In this work, we revisit the global average pooling layer
proposed in [13], and shed light on how it explicitly enables
the convolutional neural network (CNN) to have remarkable localization ability despite being trained on imagelevel labels. While this technique was previously proposed
as a means for regularizing training, we find that it actually builds a generic localizable deep representation that
exposes the implicit attention of CNNs on an image. Despite
the apparent simplicity of global average pooling, we are
able to achieve 37.1% top-5 error for object localization on
ILSVRC 2014 without training on any bounding box annotation.We demonstrate in a variety of experiments that our
network is able to localize the discriminative image regions
despite just being trained for solving classification task1 .

1. Introduction
Recent work by Zhou et al [34] has shown that the convolutional units of various layers of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) actually behave as object detectors despite no supervision on the location of the object was provided. Despite having this remarkable ability to localize
objects in the convolutional layers, this ability is lost when
fully-connected layers are used for classification. Recently
some popular fully-convolutional neural networks such as
the Network in Network (NIN) [13] and GoogLeNet [25]
have been proposed to avoid the use of fully-connected layers to minimize the number of parameters while maintaining high performance.
In order to achieve this, [13] uses global average pooling which acts as a structural regularizer, preventing overfitting during training. In our experiments, we found that
the advantages of this global average pooling layer extend
beyond simply acting as a regularizer - In fact, with a little
tweaking, the network can retain its remarkable localization
ability until the final layer. This tweaking allows identifying
easily the discriminative image regions in a single forward1 Code and models are available at http://cnnlocalization.csail.mit.edu

Cutting trees

Figure 1. A simple modification of the global average pooling layer combined with our class activation mapping (CAM)
technique allows the classification-trained CNN to both classify
the image and localize class-specific image regions in a single
forward-pass e.g., the toothbrush for brushing teeth and the chainsaw for cutting trees.

pass for a wide variety of tasks, even those that the network
was not originally trained for. As shown in Figure 1(a), a
CNN trained on object categorization is successfully able to
localize the discriminative regions for action classification
as the objects that the humans are interacting with rather
than the humans themselves.
Despite the apparent simplicity of our approach, for the
weakly supervised object localization on ILSVRC benchmark [21], our best network achieves 37.1% top-5 test error, which is rather close to the 34.2% top-5 test error
achieved by fully supervised AlexNet [10]. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that the localizability of the deep features in
our approach can be easily transferred to other recognition
datasets for generic classification, localization, and concept
discovery.

1.1. Related Work
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have led to impressive performance on a variety of visual recognition
tasks [10, 35, 8]. Recent work has shown that despite being
trained on image-level labels, CNNs have the remarkable
ability to localize objects [1, 16, 2, 15, 18]. In this work, we
show that, using an appropriate architecture, we can generalize this ability beyond just localizing objects, to start identifying exactly which regions of an image are being used for
12921

