Visual Path Prediction in Complex Scenes with Crowded Moving Objects
YoungJoon Yoo1 , Kimin Yun1 , Sangdoo Yun1 , JongHee Hong1 , Hawook Jeong2 and Jin Young Choi1
1
Perception and Intelligence Lab., School of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University
2
Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd
1

{i0you200, ykmwww, yunsd101, hundaeding, jychoi}@snu.ac.kr 2 hawook.jeong@samsung.com

D

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel path prediction algorithm
for progressing one step further than the existing works focusing on single target path prediction. In this paper, we
consider moving dynamics of co-occurring objects for path
prediction in a scene that includes crowded moving objects.
To solve this problem, we ﬁrst suggest a two-layered probabilistic model to ﬁnd major movement patterns and their cooccurrence tendency. By utilizing the unsupervised learning results from the model, we present an algorithm to ﬁnd
the future location of any target object. Through extensive
qualitative/quantitative experiments, we show that our algorithm can ﬁnd a plausible future path in complex scenes
with a large number of moving objects.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding is an essential topic in the computer
vision area, but lots of challenges remain in scene understanding research. In particular, the prediction of the future
behavior of an object requires a highly intellectual inference regarding a scene structure and the objects’ dynamics
in a scene. The research on the visual prediction problem
is in an initial stage because the problem requires a high
level of inference on visual scenes, but the current scene
understanding algorithms do not have the capability to infer a complex scene like a human. The current research is
limited to speciﬁc problems such as occluded part prediction and future path prediction of an object in a scene, etc.,
as will be described in the related works in section 2. This
paper aims to progress in the research on the future path
prediction problem. Recently, a couple of works on the future path prediction problem have been presented [43, 21].
Kitani et al. [21] deﬁned their speciﬁc prediction problem
as ﬁnding the future trajectory of an object in an arbitrary
location given the semantic structure of the scene. Walker et
al. [43] proposed an algorithm to infer the shape and location changes of the representative patches considering the
semantic structures of the scene after detecting the essential patches. The existing prediction works do not consider
the reciprocal actions among moving objects in a scene.

E

Figure 1. Cross-street which includes diverse movement patterns.
To predict the future location of a target object at blue x point,
ﬁnding the co-occurring movement pattern is required. The blue
line shows the future trajectory of the object at blue x point and red
line denotes the co-occurring movement patterns of other objects
at the moment. If the turn right pattern (red) is dominant as in (a),
the object of our interest will goes right and it will goes straight or
left if straight pattern (red) occurs as in (b).

Even though their works pioneer the visual prediction ﬁeld,
the algorithms do not show satisfactory results in complex
scenes, like cross-streets, where many objects interact with
each other. In a cross-street, objects moves differently depending on the trafﬁc light, even when they start from the
same location in the cross-street.
Figure 1 is an example of this type of scene, which includes diverse movement patterns such as going straight and
turning left. To predict the future location of a target object
in this kind of scene, it is necessary to consider the movement patterns that occur at the prediction moment. For example, the object at the blue ‘x’ point will go to different
destinations with respect to the co-occurring movement patterns (red line). If other objects (red) move right, as in (a),
the object (blue) should go right in order to avoid collision.
The target object (blue), likewise, will go straight or turn left
when the co-occurring movement pattern (red) is straight as
in (b). This example indicates that if we do not consider the
dynamics of other co-occurring objects, we may get an inadequate predicted path, which may give rise to a collision.
In this paper, for one step of progress beyond the existing
works, we propose a novel path prediction algorithm, which
considers the moving dynamics of co-occurring objects. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt in the path
prediction research ﬁeld. We develop a new unsupervised
12668

