Theory and Practice of Structure-from-Motion using Affine Correspondences
Carolina Raposo and João P. Barreto
Institute of Systems and Robotics, University of Coimbra
Coimbra, Portugal
{carolinaraposo,jpbar}@isr.uc.pt

Abstract
Affine Correspondences (ACs) are more informative than
Point Correspondences (PCs) that are used as input in
mainstream algorithms for Structure-from-Motion (SfM).
Since ACs enable to estimate models from fewer correspondences, its use can dramatically reduce the number of combinations during the iterative step of sample-and-test that
exists in most SfM pipelines. However, using ACs instead of
PCs as input for SfM passes by fully understanding the relations between ACs and multi-view geometry, as well as by
establishing practical, effective AC-based algorithms. This
article is a step forward into this direction, by providing a
clear account about how ACs constrain the two-view geometry, and by proposing new algorithms for plane segmentation and visual odometry that compare favourably with
respect to methods relying in PCs.

1. Introduction
An Affine Correspondence (AC), denoted in this paper by (x, y, A), consists in a Point Correspondence (PC)
across views plus a 2 × 2 affine transformation A that maps
image points in the neighbourhood of x into image points
around y (see Fig 1). Since an affine map describes well
the warp undergone by a local image patch while the camera moves, the concept of AC is broadly used for tracking
and/or matching points across views [1, 14], or estimating
similarity models as in [17], where local transformations are
exploited for geometrical alignment. However, and despite
ACs being often readily available, mainstream methods for
relative pose estimation, such as [21, 8, 7], use as only input the PCs (x, y) completely disregarding the information
about local affine maps.
This fact has been noticed by previous authors that conducted seminal research in jointly using PCs and affine
maps for Structure-from-Motion (SfM). Perdoch et al. [16]
and Riggi et al. [19] proposed to use ACs for generating additional PCs and estimate the epipolar geometry. However,
these new matches are mere approximations that do not nec-

Figure 1: Images I1 and I2 are provided by two cameras
related by R, t that observe the same scene. They are used
for extracting point (z, w) and affine (x, y, A) correspondences. In this configuration, since the tangent plane to the
surface in points x and z is the same, both the point match
and the AC are compatible with homography H.

essarily correspond to correct PCs. Koser [11] studied the
relationships between ACs and homographies and advanced
a single point method to compute the relative pose between
a plane and a camera [10]. Recently, Bentolila and Francos proved that 1 AC puts 3 constraints on the fundamental
matrix [3]. Despite these seminal works, neither the theory
relating ACs with multi-view geometry is fully understood,
nor exist practical algorithms such that ACs can become an
effective alternative to PCs in SfM pipelines.
The most obvious benefit in using ACs is that models
can be estimated from fewer correspondences. Thus, and
since SfM pipelines invariably comprise an iterative step of
sample-and-test (e.g. RANSAC [6]), robustness and complexity can dramatically improve by reducing the number
of possible combinations, as it happened in the past with
the introduction of minimal solvers [15]. These advantages
can be specially useful for applications with high combinatorics as it often arises in problems of multi-model fitting or
single-model fitting with high percentages of outliers. Examples for the former are applications in plane detection
[18] or multibody SfM [20], and for the latter the case of
SfM in scenes dominated by deformable surfaces [13]. This
article starts by investigating how ACs constrain two-view
geometry deriving both new and known relations in a unified, systematic way. Also, it uses the new relations and in15470

