Coordinating Multiple Disparity Proposals for Stereo Computation
Ang Li, Dapeng Chen, Yuanliu Liu, Zejian Yuan
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
{bennie.522,chendapeng1988}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {liuyuanliu88,yzejian}@gmail.com

Abstract
While great progress has been made in stereo computation over the last decades, large textureless regions remain
challenging. Segment-based methods can tackle this problem properly, but their performances are sensitive to the
segmentation results. In this paper, we alleviate the sensitivity by generating multiple proposals on absolute and relative disparities from multi-segmentations. These proposals
supply rich descriptions of surface structures. Especially,
the relative disparity between distant pixels can encode the
large structure, which is critical to handle the large textureless regions. The proposals are coordinated by point-wise
competition and pairwise collaboration within a MRF model. During inference, a dynamic programming is performed
in different directions with various step sizes, so the longrange connections are better preserved. In the experiments,
we carefully analyzed the effectiveness of the major components. Results on the 2014 Middlebury and KITTI 2015
stereo benchmark show that our method is comparable to
state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Stereo computation is a fundamental task in computer vision with many applications like 3D reconstruction [7, 25],
autonomous driving [10], view synthesis [20], etc. Meanwhile it always suffers from matching ambiguities due to
noise, low or repetitive textures, and occlusions. To alleviate the matching ambiguities, many efforts focus on making
a prior on the disparity or surface. Cost filtering methods
[22, 36, 15] assume that a local support region should possess the same disparity. While most energy based methods
[33, 32, 11] impose smoothness prior that adjacent pixels
tend to have similar disparities or lie on the same surface.
Notably, segmentation of color image [38, 29, 16] has been
adopted to build the disparity prior. Segmentation provides
clues about depth discontinuities and potentially groups the
points belonging to an identical regular surface. Building
a regular 3D surface model over a superpixel can help preserve the depth discontinuity, and in particular can recover

the disparities of large textureless regions.
A major challenge of segment-based methods is how to
segment the images properly, such that both the regularity of
the surface fragments and the depth discontinuities are well
preserved. In the case of under-segmentation, a superpixel
cannot be explained by a single surface model. In the case
of over-segmentation, superpixels may get too small to estimate a reliable surface model. It remains an open problem
to select a suitable segmentation scale in general situations.
We consider to make use of multi-segmentation, so that we
can obtain a rich set of overlapping surface fragments. From
these fragments, we can compromise a suitable description
of the 3D scene, which avoids the risk of early-decision in
picking the segmentation method and parameters.
In this paper, we propose a strategy to generate multiple disparity proposals from different segmentations as priors to regularize the disparities. Disparity proposals include
absolute disparities as well as relative disparities between
pixel pairs. The absolute disparities are the initial disparities refined by surface models, thus are more reliable. The
relative disparities focus on the surface structure. Unlike the
traditional local smoothness priors, these pairwise relations are structure-dependent, and the long range relations can
encode the large structure directly.
To find out suitable descriptions from multiple proposals,
we develop a coordinating scheme consisting of point-wise
competition and pairwise collaboration. Point-wise competition picks the best absolute disparities exclusively, which
can effectively suppress the outliers. Pairwise collaboration
casts a vote on relative disparities, which can distinguish
the artificial boundaries. The coordinating scheme is realized by a MRF model with non-local connections. During
inference, we adapt the SGM algorithm by executing the
1D dynamic programming in various step sizes, so the long
range connections can be better preserved without losing
much computation efficiency.
The contributions of this paper are mainly three-fold:
• We use 3D surfaces to generate multiple disparity proposals, where the absolute disparity proposals are reliable point-wise estimations and relative disparity proposals reflect the 3D structures.
• We develop a coordinating scheme to mediate multiple
14022

