Semantic Filtering∗
Qingxiong Yang
School of Information Science and Technology
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Edge-preserving image operations aim at smoothing an
image without blurring the edges. Many excellent edgepreserving filtering techniques have been proposed recently to reduce the computational complexity or/and separate
different scale structures. They normally adopt a userselected scale measurement to control the detail/texture smoothing. However, natural photos contain objects of different sizes which cannot be described by a single scale measurement. On the other hand, edge/contour detection/analysis is closely related to edge-preserving filtering and has achieved significant progress recently. Nevertheless, most of the state-of-the-art filtering techniques
ignore the success in this area. Inspired by the fact that
learning-based edge detectors/classifiers significantly outperform traditional manually-designed detectors, this paper proposes a learning-based edge-preserving filtering
technique. It synergistically combines the efficiency of the
recursive filter and the effectiveness of the recent edge detector for scale-aware edge-preserving filtering. Unlike
previous filtering methods, the propose filter can efficiently extract subjectively-meaningful structures from natural
scenes containing multiple-scale objects.

1. Introduction
Edge-preserving filtering has found widespread use in
many computer vision and graphics tasks. It is an image smoothing technique that removes low-contrast details/textures while maintaining sharp edges/image structures.
A large category of edge-preserving filters are designed
with a specific filter kernel to measure the distance between
two pixels in a local region. The distance measurement is
then converted to the confidence of an edge between the two
pixels for edge-aware filtering. This category is very sensitive to noise/textures. Examples are anisotropic diffusion
[34], bilateral filter [42], guided image filter [23] and do∗ This work was partially supported by the Early Career Scheme
through the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (Project Number: CityU 21201914) and a grant from Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

main transform filter [20]. The main challenge in this category is accurately including scale measurement for filter
design to distinguish textures/noise from image structure.
Designing a robust edge-aware filter kernel is surprisingly
difficult. There is not an “optimal” solution as the detection of image edges can only be evaluated in a subjective
manner. Meanwhile, numerical experiments like the Berkeley Segmentation Dataset and Benchmark (BSDS500) [3]
demonstrate that human subjects have various perceptions
of edges in a same image.
On the other hand, significant progress has been
achieved in machine learning over the past few years. Unlike standard image processing techniques that use strictly static program instructions, it normally builds a model
based on example inputs and then uses it to generate predictions or decisions. The performance of a learning-based
edge-preserving image filter is thus likely to be closer to
human visual system when the example inputs are obtained
based on average agreement between sufficient human subjects. The svm-based filter presented in [51] is the first
learning-based bilateral filter. As Taylor series expansion
of the Gaussian function can be used to approximate the bilateral filters [38], [51] learns a function that maps feature
vector comprising of the exponentiation of the pixel intensity, the corresponding Gaussian filtered response, and their
products to the corresponding exact bilateral filtered values
from the training image.
This paper aims at developing image smoothing techniques that can preserve edges between different-size objects/structures. It is a much more challenging problem.
Unlike the bilateral filter, it cannot be approximated using
Taylor series expansion and there is not any ground-truth
filtered image for training. Nevertheless, there are sufficient hand-labelled segmentation data sets. For instance,
BSDS500 [3] contains 12,000 hand-labelled segmentations of 1,000 Corel dataset images from 30 human subjects.
Image segmentation and edge detection is closely related to
image smoothing technique. They normally pre-smooth the
image with a specific low-pass filter for noise reduction.
Because human visual system is capable to understand
semantically meaningful structures blended with or formed
14517

