Event-specific Image Importance
Yufei Wang1 Zhe Lin2 Xiaohui Shen2 Radomı́r Mĕch2
1
University of California, San Diego
{yuw176, gary}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
When creating a photo album of an event, people typically select a few important images to keep or share. There
is some consistency in the process of choosing the important images, and discarding the unimportant ones. Modeling this selection process will assist automatic photo selection and album summarization. In this paper, we show
that the selection of important images is consistent among
different viewers, and that this selection process is related
to the event type of the album. We introduce the concept of
event-specific image importance. We collected a new event
album dataset with human annotation of the relative image
importance with each event album. We also propose a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based method to predict
the image importance score of a given event album, using a
novel rank loss function and a progressive training scheme.
Results demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms various baseline methods.

1. Introduction
With the proliferation of cameras (in cell phones and
other portable cameras), taking photographs is practically
effortless, and happens frequently in everyday life. When
attending an event, for instance, a Thanksgiving holiday,
participants often take many photos recording every interesting moment during the event. This leads to an oversized
album at the end of the event. When we need to simplify
the album before saving to a device, or if we want to make
a photo collage or a photo book to share our important moment with others, we have to go through the tedious and
time-consuming work of selecting important images from a
large album. Therefore, it is desirable to perform this task
automatically.
Automatic photo selection or album summarization has
been studied by some researchers [29, 20, 23, 3, 30]. They
aim at personal event albums, and visual content information as well as diversity and coverage is often considered
jointly to obtain a summarization. However, these works
ignored the role of the event type in the selection process.

Gavin Miller2 Garrison W. Cottrell1
2
Adobe Research

{zlin, xshen, rmech, gmiller}@adobe.com

Intuitively, the event type of the album is an important criterion when we select important images. For example, if we
need to select important photos from a vacation to Hawaii,
the photo of the volcano on the Big Island is definitely important to keep, whereas if the album is a wedding ceremony, beautiful scenes are only background and are not
likely to be more important than the shot of the bride and
groom.
In this paper, we introduce the concept of event-specific
image importance. It is different from general image interestingness or aesthetics, in that it is contextual, and is
based on the album the image is in. We focus on the eventspecific importance score of a single image, and do not consider summarization problems where diversity and coverage
are also important: Image importance prediction is the most
challenging and crucial part of the event curation/album
summarization process; Moreover, the importance score
can be directly applied to to any album summarization algorithm. We collect an event-specific image importance
dataset from human annotators, and we show that the eventspecific importance is subjective yet predictable. Finally,
we provide a method for predicting event-specific image
importance using Convolutional Neural Network (CNN).
We propose a new loss function and training procedure, and
our CNN method greatly outperforms different baselines.

2. Related Work
Image properties. Importance of an image is a complex
image property, and is related to many other image properties. Many image properties can be viewed as cues when
selecting important images, such as memorability [13, 12],
specificity [14], popularity [16], aesthetics and interestingness [7, 10]. Those image properties are correlated to image
contents, such as high level features: object and scene categories [13, 12, 14, 16, 7], and low level features: texture,
edge distribution, etc. [10, 16]. In this work, rather than the
general image properties mentioned above, we study eventspecific image importance, which summarizes human preferences related to images within the context of an album,
where the album is of a known event type.
14810

