Force from Motion: Decoding Physical Sensation in a First Person Video
Hyun Soo Park
Jyh-Jing Hwang
University of Pennsylvania

Jianbo Shi

{hypar,jyh,jshi}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

Time: 11.81 sec
Speed: 31.80 m/s
Air drag: 465.54N

Gravity direction
Lift: 1628N

Cliff

Roll torque: 242N

A first-person video can generate powerful physical sensations of action in an observer. In this paper, we focus on
a problem of Force from Motion—decoding the sensation of
1) passive forces such as the gravity, 2) the physical scale of
the motion (speed) and space, and 3) active forces exerted
by the observer such as pedaling a bike or banking on a ski
turn.
The sensation of gravity can be observed in a natural
image. We learn this image cue for predicting a gravity direction in a 2D image and integrate the prediction across
images to estimate the 3D gravity direction using structure
from motion. The sense of physical scale is revealed to us
when the body is in a dynamically balanced state. We compute the unknown physical scale of 3D reconstructed camera motion by leveraging the torque equilibrium at a banked
turn that relates the centripetal force, gravity, and the body
leaning angle. The active force and torque governs 3D egomotion through the physics of rigid body dynamics. Using
an inverse dynamics optimization, we directly minimize 2D
reprojection error (in video) with respect to 3D world structure, active forces, and additional passive forces such as air
drag and friction force. We use structure from motion with
the physical scale and gravity direction as an initialization
of our bundle adjustment for force estimation. Our method
shows quantitatively equivalent reconstruction comparing
to IMU measurements in terms of gravity and scale recovery and outperforms method based on 2D optical flow for an
active action recognition task. We apply our method to first
person videos of mountain biking, urban bike racing, skiing, speedflying with parachute, and wingsuit flying where
inertial measurements are not accessible.

1. Introduction
A wingsuit BASE jumper, Jeb Corliss, dives from a cliff
in Alps with his body-mounted GoPro camera1 (Figure 1).
This camera records a beautiful scenery that he had seen
but also captures what he experienced and controlled via
the camera egomotion. This egomotion is a resultant of
1 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IM1vss7FXs8

Centripedal: 268N

11.81 sec

Thrust: -68N
Pitch torque: -15N

Yaw torque: -16N

3D camera trajectory
Travel distance: 650 m

Figure 1. This paper presents Force from Motion—decoding the
sensation of 1) passive forces such as the gravity, 2) the physical
scale of the motion (speed) and space, and 3) active forces exerted
by the observer. We model egomotion with rigid body dynamics integrated in a bundle adjustment that allows us to recover the
three sensations (left) via the physical scale and gravity aware reconstruction of the egomotion (right).

physical interactions between passive forces from environments (e.g., gravity and air pressure) and active forces exerted by him to control his egomotion, e.g., angular momentum change along the roll axis to shift the heading direction.
In this paper, we study a problem of Force from Motion—
reconstructing force and torque from an egocentric video to
revive the physical sensation.
Extracting such forces requires to explicitly measure his
muscle tension—the acceleration computed by a camera or
inertial measurement unit (IMU) is not directly applicable
to find active forces exerted by him because only net acceleration can be measured. Our key question is “can we
extract his input in a form of active force and torque without measuring muscle tension from an egocentric video?”
We show that it is possible to estimate an active force and
torque profile that generates the egomotion. This requires to
overcome three fundamental challenges: a) limited observations of body parts (body pose is often not visible from an
egocentric video); b) scale and orientation ambiguity inherent in structure from motion; c) scene and activity variability (different appearance, camera placement, and motion).
We address these challenges by modeling the observed
camera egomotion with rigid body dynamics that integrates
three key sensations: 1) gravity force; 2) physical scale of
the world; and 3) input force and torque.
The gravity force sensation is captured in the visual image itself. The gravity affects how physical environment is
formed, i.e. trees and buildings are usually vertical and horizon perpendicular to gravity direction. We learn such image
13834

