Oracle Based Active Set Algorithm for Scalable Elastic Net Subspace Clustering
Chong You† Chun-Guang Li∗ Daniel P. Robinson‡ René Vidal†
†
Center for Imaging Science, Johns Hopkins University
∗
SICE, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
‡
Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
State-of-the-art subspace clustering methods are based
on expressing each data point as a linear combination of
other data points while regularizing the matrix of coefficients with ℓ1 , ℓ2 or nuclear norms. ℓ1 regularization is
guaranteed to give a subspace-preserving affinity (i.e., there
are no connections between points from different subspaces)
under broad theoretical conditions, but the clusters may not
be connected. ℓ2 and nuclear norm regularization often improve connectivity, but give a subspace-preserving affinity
only for independent subspaces. Mixed ℓ1 , ℓ2 and nuclear
norm regularizations offer a balance between the subspacepreserving and connectedness properties, but this comes at
the cost of increased computational complexity. This paper
studies the geometry of the elastic net regularizer (a mixture of the ℓ1 and ℓ2 norms) and uses it to derive a provably
correct and scalable active set method for finding the optimal coefficients. Our geometric analysis also provides a
theoretical justification and a geometric interpretation for
the balance between the connectedness (due to ℓ2 regularization) and subspace-preserving (due to ℓ1 regularization)
properties for elastic net subspace clustering. Our experiments show that the proposed active set method not only
achieves state-of-the-art clustering performance, but also
efficiently handles large-scale datasets.

1. Introduction
In many computer vision applications, including image
representation and compression [19], motion segmentation
[6, 41, 34], temporal video segmentation [39], and face clustering [18], high-dimensional datasets can be well approximated by a union of low-dimensional subspaces. In this
case, the problem of clustering a high-dimensional dataset
into multiple classes or categories reduces to the problem of
assigning each data point to its own subspace and recovering the underlying low-dimensional structure of the data, a
problem known in the literature as subspace clustering [37].
Prior Work. Over the past decade, the subspace clustering

problem has received a lot of attention in the literature and
many methods have been developed. Among them, spectral
clustering based methods have become extremely popular
[4, 48, 9, 10, 26, 25, 13, 38, 28, 7, 17, 32, 23, 36] (see [37]
for details). These methods usually divide the problem into
two steps: a) learning an affinity matrix that characterizes
whether two points are likely to lie in the same subspace,
and b) applying spectral clustering to this affinity. Arguably,
the first step is the most important, as the success of spectral
clustering depends on having an appropriate affinity matrix.
State-of-the-art methods for constructing the affinity matrix are based on the self-expressiveness model [9]. Under
this model, each data point xj is expressedP
as a linear combination of all other data points, i.e., xj = i6=j xi cij +ej ,
where the coefficient cij is used to define an affinity between points i and j, and the vector ej captures deviations
from the self-expressive model. The coefficients are typically found by solving an optimization problem of the form
min r(cj ) + γ · h(ej ) s.t. xj = Xcj + ej , cjj = 0, (1)

cj ,ej

where X = [x1 , · · · , xN ] is the data matrix, cj =
[c1j , . . . , cN j ]⊤ is the vector of coefficients, r(·) is a properly chosen regularizer on the coefficients, h(·) is a properly
chosen regularizer on the noise or corruption, and γ > 0 is
a parameter that balances these two regularizers.
The main difference among state-of-the-art methods lies
in the choice of the regularizer r(·). The sparse subspace
clustering (SSC) method [9] searches for a sparse representation using r(·) = k · k1 . While under broad theoretical
conditions (see [10, 35, 47]) the representation produced by
SSC is guaranteed to be subspace preserving (i.e., cij 6= 0
only if xi and xj are in the same subspace), the affinity
matrix may lack connectedness [29] (i.e., data points from
the same subspace may not form a connected component of
the affinity graph due to the sparseness of the connections,
which may cause over-segmentation). Other recently proposed sparsity based methods, such as orthogonal matching
pursuit (OMP) [7, 46] and nearest subspace neighbor (NSN)
[32], also suffer from the same connectivity issue.
As an alternative, the least squares regression (LSR)

3928

