Combining Markov Random Fields and Convolutional Neural Networks for
Image Synthesis
Chuan Li
Mainz University
Germany

Michael Wand
Mainz University
Germany

chuli@uni-mainz.de

wandm@uni-mainz.de

Abstract
This paper studies a combination of generative Markov
random field (MRF) models and discriminatively trained
deep convolutional neural networks (dCNNs) for synthesizing 2D images. The generative MRF acts on higher-levels
of a dCNN feature pyramid, controling the image layout
at an abstract level. We apply the method to both photographic and non-photo-realistic (artwork) synthesis tasks.
The MRF regularizer prevents over-excitation artifacts and
reduces implausible feature mixtures common to previous
dCNN inversion approaches, permitting synthezing photographic content with increased visual plausibility. Unlike
standard MRF-based texture synthesis, the combined system can both match and adapt local features with considerable variability, yielding results far out of reach of classic
generative MRF methods.

1. Introduction
The problem of synthesizing content by example is a
classic problem in computer vision and graphics. It is of
fundamental importance to many applications, including
creative tools such as high-level interactive photo editing
[1, 2, 12], as well as scientific applications, such as generating stimuli in psycho-physical experiments [8].
In this paper, we specifically consider the problem of
data-driven image synthesis: Given an example image, we
want to fully automatically create a variant of the example image that looks similar but differs in structure. The
intended deviation is controlled by additional constraints
provided by the user, ranging from just changing image dimensions to detailed layout specifications. Concretely, we
implement this by splitting up the input into a “style” image and a “content” image [8, 12]. The first describes the
building blocks the image should be made of, the second
constrains their layout. Figure 1 shows an example of style
transferred images, where the input images are shown on

Figure 1: By combining deep convolutional neural network
with MRF prior, our method can transfer both photorealistic and non-photorealistic styles to new images. Images
credited to flickr users mricon (A) and Vidar Schiefloe (B).
the left. Our results are are shown on the right. Notice our
method produces plausible results for both art to photo and
photo to art transfers. In particular, see how meso-structures
in the style images, such as the mouth and eyes, are intentionally reused in the synthesized images.
The classic data-driven approach to generative image
modeling is based on Markov random fields (MRFs): We
assume that the most relevant statistical dependencies in an
image are present at a local level and learn a distribution
over the likelihood of local image patches by considering
all local k × k pixel patches in the example image(s). Usually, this is done using a simple nearest-neighbor scheme
[6], and inference is performed by approximate MRF inference [5, 14, 15] or greedy approximations [2, 6, 12, 26].
A critical limitation of MRFs texture synthesis is the
difficulty of learning the distribution of plausible image
patches from example data. Even the space of local
k × k image patches (typically: k ≈ 5...31) is already
way too high-dimensional to be covered with simple sampling and nearest-neighbor estimation. The results are mismatched local pieces, which are subsequently stitched [15]
or blended [14] together in order to minimize the perceptual impact of the lack of ability to generalize. The missing
ingredient is a strong scheme for interpolating and adapting
images from very sparse example sets of sample patches.
In terms of invariance and ability to generalize, discrim12479

