Efficient Point Process Inference for Large-scale Object Detection
Trung T. Pham, Seyed Hamid Rezatofighi, Ian Reid and Tat-Jun Chin
School of Computer Science
The University of Adelaide
{trung.pham,hamid.rezatofighi,ian.reid,tjchin}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
We tackle the problem of large-scale object detection
in images, where the number of objects can be arbitrarily
large, and can exhibit significant overlap/occlusion. A successful approach to modelling the large-scale nature of this
problem has been via point process density functions which
jointly encode object qualities and spatial interactions. But
the corresponding optimisation problem is typically difficult
or intractable, and many of the best current methods rely
on Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) simulation, which
converges slowly in a large solution space.
We propose an efficient point process inference for largescale object detection using discrete energy minimization.
In particular, we approximate the solution space by a finite
set of object proposals and cast the point process density
function to a corresponding energy function of binary variables whose values indicate which object proposals are accepted. We resort to the local submodular approximation
(LSA) based trust-region optimisation to find the optimal
solution. Furthermore we analyse the error of LSA approximation, and show how to adjust the point process energy
to dramatically speed up the convergence without harming
the optimality. We demonstrate the superior efficiency and
accuracy of our method using a variety of large-scale object detection applications such as crowd human detection,
birds, cells counting/localization.

1. Introduction
Object detection in images and video is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision. While there has
been remarkable progress in detecting small and moderate numbers of potentially complex deformable objects in
2D images [12, 11], in this work we focus on large-scale
object detection, considering images that may capture hundreds or even thousands of objects; Figure 1 shows typical
examples. Such scenarios are encountered in many useful
real-world applications ranging from estimating crowds in
video surveillance [14, 4, 25] to counting cells in micro-

scope images [20], bird populations (e.g., flamingos) [6]
and tree crowns [23] in remotely sensed images. Beside
being large-scale, these scenarios often include significant
overlap/occlusion of objects, which significantly complicates the process of localizing individual objects.
Traditional object detection methods usually take a twostage approach. First, a large number of object hypotheses are generated by running a scanning window detector
at different scales and locations. This procedure unavoidably returns many imprecise overlapping object hypotheses. To prune out redundant object detections, a greedy nonmaximum suppression (NMS) step is often applied, which
basically selects the maximum responses at each location.
However such a heuristic elimination suffers from several
limitations such as inability to detect nearby or overlapping
objects [17].
On the other hand, global methods [23, 8, 19, 28] jointly
optimize object detection and selection. Almost all of these
methods fall under the stochastic geometry framework [2],
which utilises point processes to model global object configurations. Point processes allow convenient modelling of
the spatial pattern of the object configuration, as well as the
interaction between objects, with the optimal object configuration inferred by optimizing the point process probability density. Typically the inference uses Reversible Jump
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (RJMCMC) simulation with
simulated annealing, whose convergence is slow, especially
for large-scale problems.
In this paper we propose a novel global method for largescale object detection, which utilizes both the elegant point
process formulation and efficient discrete energy minimization. As in [19, 28], we define an energy function of object
configurations pertaining to the point process, whose minimizer will give rise to an optimal set of objects. The energy simultaneously encodes object detection scores (e.g.
confidences) and spatial object interactions (e.g. overlapping). Unlike [19, 28] where the optimization is solved over
a continuous object state space using RJMCMC simulation,
we instead approximate the state space by a finite set of all
possible objects—for example proposing objects at all pixel
12837

