A Task-Oriented Approach for Cost-sensitive Recognition
Roozbeh Mottaghi1
Hannaneh Hajishirzi2
Ali Farhadi1,2
1
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
2
University of Washington

Abstract
With the recent progress in visual recognition, we have
already started to see a surge of vision related real-world
applications. These applications, unlike general scene understanding, are task oriented and require specific information from visual data. Considering the current growth in
new sensory devices, feature designs, feature learning methods, and algorithms, the search in the space of features and
models becomes combinatorial. In this paper, we propose
a novel cost-sensitive task-oriented recognition method that
is based on a combination of linguistic semantics and visual
cues. Our task-oriented framework is able to generalize to
unseen tasks for which there is no training data and outperforms state-of-the-art cost-based recognition baselines on
our new task-based dataset.

1. Introduction
In recent years we have witnessed a dramatic stride in the
performance of classification and detection methods. Visual recognition algorithms become more reliable and have
started getting considerable traction from real world applications. Most of these applications are centered around specific tasks (e.g., autonomous navigation, autonomous vacuum cleaning, automated lawn mowing, etc.) rather than
being as general as scene understanding. Considering the
state of visual recognition methods, we believe, it is the
right time to rethink task-oriented recognition.
Task-oriented recognition involves addressing a wide
range of problems. A very first issue that needs to be addressed is to find a set of cheap but effective features for the
given task. Suppose we want to design a system or a robot
to efficiently perform certain tasks such as “Put the cup on
the table” or “Walk towards the desk”. The first question
to answer is what features should we use? Should we use
surface normal estimates? How about RGB-D data? Do we
need high frequency texture information? What about object recognition? Are support surfaces useful? For a specific
task, among all possible information that one could extract
from visual data, only a small subset would be useful (the

Putting

put
sit

surface 3d shape
normals

Cup

find bed
find desk
find shelf

object
cubes

Table
unseen
find bottle
find cup

material

support
relationship

Figure 1. We create a syntactic parse of a given task to obtain
part-of-speech tags (noun, verb, etc). Then, we find a mapping
from each extracted noun (NN) and verb (VB) to the vocabulary
of known Shared Unit Tasks (SHUTs) for which we have training
data. If the noun or verb does not exist in our vocabulary (e.g.,
table in this example), we assign it to a cluster of SHUTs in our
vocabulary and use the feature selection strategy of that cluster for
the unseen part of the task. The bottom row shows examples of
features used in our framework.

majority of the information extracted might be irrelevant,
and some portion might be an overkill). For example, for
the task of “Walk on the floor”, surface normal and height
features might be relevant while texture of the carpet and
fine-grained object categories might not.
Often combination of features have shown to be effective, but picking the right combination is an exponential
search. One common approach is to consider all possible
information we could possibly extract and hope that our
model can benefit from the right subset of it. Such an approach has the following implicit assumptions that might
not hold in several application domains: (1) there exist
enough training data for such a high dimensional representation; (2) there exists a high capacity learning model that
can tolerate the inherent noise in the high dimensional representation; and (3) computational resources are free. A
natural solution to this problem is to learn to select a subset

2203

