Sketch Me That Shoe
Qian Yu1
Feng Liu1,2
Yi-Zhe Song1
Tao Xiang1
Timothy M. Hospedales1
Chen Change Loy3
1
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
Southeast University, Nanjing, China2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China3
{q.yu, feng.liu, yizhe.song, t.xiang, t.hospedales}@qmul.ac.uk

ccloy@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We investigate the problem of fine-grained sketch-based
image retrieval (SBIR), where free-hand human sketches are
used as queries to perform instance-level retrieval of images. This is an extremely challenging task because (i) visual comparisons not only need to be fine-grained but also
executed cross-domain, (ii) free-hand (finger) sketches are
highly abstract, making fine-grained matching harder, and
most importantly (iii) annotated cross-domain sketch-photo
datasets required for training are scarce, challenging many
state-of-the-art machine learning techniques.
In this paper, for the first time, we address all these
challenges, providing a step towards the capabilities that
would underpin a commercial sketch-based image retrieval
application. We introduce a new database of 1,432 sketchphoto pairs from two categories with 32,000 fine-grained
triplet ranking annotations. We then develop a deep tripletranking model for instance-level SBIR with a novel data
augmentation and staged pre-training strategy to alleviate the issue of insufficient fine-grained training data. Extensive experiments are carried out to contribute a variety of insights into the challenges of data sufficiency and
over-fitting avoidance when training deep networks for finegrained cross-domain ranking tasks.

1. Introduction
Notwithstanding the proliferation of touch-screen devices, mainstream image retrieval paradigms at present are
still limited to having text or exemplar image as input.
Only very recently has sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR)
started to return as a practical form of retrieval. Compared
with text, sketches are incredibly intuitive to humans and
have been used since pre-historic times to conceptualise and
depict visual objects [20, 15]. A unique characteristic of
sketches in the context of image retrieval is that they offer
inherently fine-grained visual descriptions – a sketch speaks
for a ‘hundred’ words.

free‐hand
sketch
fine‐grained
retrieval

Figure 1. Free-hand sketch is ideal for fine-grained instance-level
image retrieval.

However, existing SBIR works largely overlook such
fine-grained details, and mainly focus on retrieving images
of the same category [21, 22, 10, 2, 3, 27, 12, 19, 13, 28, 11],
thus not exploiting the real strength of SBIR. This oversight
pre-emptively limits the practical use of SBIR since text is
often a simpler form of input when only category-level retrieval is required, e.g., one would rather type in the word
“shoe” to retrieve one rather than sketching a shoe. The existing commercial image search engines have already done
a pretty good job on category-level image retrieval. In contrast, it is when aiming to retrieve a particular shoe that
sketching may be preferable than elucidating a long textual
description of it. Figure 1 illustrates an application scenario
of using free-hand sketch for fine-grained image search: a
person walking on a street notices that another person walking towards him/her wears a pair of shoes that he/she desperately wants to buy; instead of taking a picture of it, which
would be rude, he/she takes out a smartphone and draws a
sketch of it using fingers; all the information required to
have that pair of shoes is then just one click away.
In this paper, for the first time, the problem of
fine-grained instance-level SBIR using hand-free sketches
drawn by amateurs on a touch-screen device is studied. This
is an extremely challenging problem. Some of the challenges faced are shared with the category-level SBIR task:

799

