D3 : Deep Dual-Domain Based Fast Restoration of JPEG-Compressed Images
Zhangyang Wang†, Ding Liu†, Shiyu Chang†, Qing Ling‡, Yingzhen Yang†, and Thomas S. Huang†∗
†Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
‡Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230027, China

{zwang119, dingliu2, chang87, yyang58, t-huang1}@illinois.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we design a Deep Dual-Domain (D3 )
based fast restoration model to remove artifacts of JPEG
compressed images. It leverages the large learning capacity of deep networks, as well as the problem-specific expertise that was hardly incorporated in the past design of
deep architectures. For the latter, we take into consideration both the prior knowledge of the JPEG compression
scheme, and the successful practice of the sparsity-based
dual-domain approach. We further design the One-Step
Sparse Inference (1-SI) module, as an efficient and lightweighted feed-forward approximation of sparse coding. Extensive experiments verify the superiority of the proposed
D3 model over several state-of-the-art methods. Specifically, our best model is capable of outperforming the latest
deep model for around 1 dB in PSNR, and is 30 times faster.

1. Introduction
In visual communication and computing systems, the
most common cause of image degradation is arguably compression. Lossy compression, such as JPEG [25] and
HEVC-MSP [4], is widely adopted in image and video
codecs for saving both bandwidth and in-device storage.
It exploits inexact approximations for representing the encoded content compactly. Inevitably, it will introduce undesired complex artifacts, such as blockiness, ringing effects, and blurs. They are usually caused by the discontinuities arising from batch-wise processing, the loss of highfrequency components by coarse quantization, and so on.
These artifacts not only degrade perceptual visual quality,
but also adversely affect various low-level image processing routines that take compressed images as input [11].
As practical image compression methods are not information theoretically optimal [24], the resulting compression code streams still possess residual redundancies, which
∗ Zhangyang Wang and Thomas Huang’s research works are supported
in part by US Army Research Office under grant number W911NF-15-10317. Qing Ling’s research is supported by CAS grant XDA06011203.

qingling@mail.ustc.edu.cn

makes the restoration of the original signals possible. Different from general image restoration problems, compression artifact restoration has problem-specific properties that
can be utilized as powerful priors. For example, JPEG compression first divides an image into 8 × 8 pixel blocks,
followed by discrete cosine transformation (DCT) on every block. Quantization is applied on the DCT coefficients of every block, with pre-known quantization levels
[25]. Moreover, the compression noises are more difficult
to model than other common noise types. In contrast to the
tradition of assuming noise to be white and signal independent [2], the non-linearity of quantization operations makes
quantization noises non-stationary and signal-dependent.
Various approaches have been proposed to suppress
compression artifacts. Early works [6, 22] utilized filteringbased methods to remove simple artifacts. Data-driven
methods were then considered to avoid inaccurate empirical modeling of compression degradations. Sparsitybased image restoration approaches have been discussed in
[7, 8, 19, 23, 26] to produce sharpened images, but they are
often accompanied with artifacts along edges, and unnatural
smooth regions. In [24], Liu et.al. proposed a sparse coding
process carried out jointly in the DCT and pixel domains, to
simultaneously exploit residual redundancies of JPEG code
streams and sparsity properties of latent images. More recently, Dong et. al. [11] first introduced deep learning techniques [21] into this problem, by specifically adapting their
SR-CNN model in [12]. However, it does not incorporate
much problem-specific prior knowledge.
The time constraint is often stringent in image or video
codec post-processing scenarios. Low-complexity or even
real-time attenuation of compression artifacts is highly
desirable [28]. The inference process of traditional approaches, for example, sparse coding, usually involves iterative optimization algorithms, whose inherently sequential structure as well as the data-dependent complexity and
latency often constitute a major bottleneck in the computational efficiency [14]. Deep networks benefit from the
feed-forward structure and enjoy much faster inference.
However, to maintain their competitive performances, deep
12764

