Uncalibrated Photometric Stereo by Stepwise Optimization
Using Principal Components of Isotropic BRDFs
Keisuke Midorikawa
Toshihiko Yamasaki
Kiyoharu Aizawa
The University of Tokyo, Japan
{k.midor, yamasaki, aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The uncalibrated photometric stereo problem for nonLambertian surfaces is challenging because of the large
number of unknowns and its ill-posed nature stemming from
unknown reflectance functions. We propose a model that
represents various isotropic reflectance functions by using
the principal components of items in a dataset, and formulate the uncalibrated photometric stereo as a regression
problem. We then solve it by stepwise optimization utilizing
principal components in order of their eigenvalues. We have
also developed two techniques that lead to convergence and
highly accurate reconstruction, namely (1) a coarse-to-fine
approach with normal grouping, and (2) a randomized multipoint search. Our experimental results with synthetic data
showed that our method significantly outperformed previous methods. We also evaluated the algorithm in terms of
real image data, where it gave good reconstruction results.

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo is a technique for shape estimation
from the appearance of an object illuminated by various
light sources and captured by a fixed camera. The original photometric stereo technique [32], proposed by Woodham, is able to treat only Lambertian targets and assumes
that lighting positions are calibrated. Various types of extensions have been proposed such as the application to nonLambertian objects [3, 2, 28, 29, 11, 13, 10], overcoming
the necessity for lighting calibration [36, 5, 26, 22, 8, 15,
17, 16], adopting the environment of the perspective projection model [24, 20], and assuming near point lighting
sources [25, 31, 35].
In this paper, we tackle uncalibrated photometric stereo
for non-Lambertian reflection. Because the lighting directions and reflectance functions are involved as unknown parameters, this problem setting is quite challenging, with
few studies reported to date. In [26, 15], it is assumed

that the similarity of the intensity profiles is in proportion to one of the normal orientations, which enables this
problem to be solved up to a binary convex/concave ambiguity. Some methods [34, 17] enforce the symmetry
of isotropic bidirectional reflectance distribution functions
(BRDFs) about a half vector between a camera and lighting direction, which is observed in many materials. The
most recent method [16] utilizes a reference data and formulates the uncalibrated photometric stereo as the matching problem. While these existing methods work well in
some conditions, they strongly depend on various assumptions such as half-vector symmetry, good initial estimation,
and particular lighting distribution, and they fail when these
assumptions do not hold.
It is a common technique in calibrated photometric
stereo to represent specularity and retroreflection by parametric models such as the biquadratic model [28] and bivariate Bernstein polynomials [11]. Although they can be
effective with known lighting directions, they are difficult
to apply to uncalibrated cases because the solution space
expands enormously with the number of unknowns.
In this paper, we propose a new method solving uncalibrated non-Lambertian photometric stereo, that formulates
a regression problem using an image formation model based
on principal component analysis (PCA). This is the first
work that incorporates the image formation model into uncalibarated photometric stereo for general isotropic surfaces
to our best knowledge. This method estimates the surface
normals, lighting vectors, and reflectance properties simultaneously and accurately. We apply PCA to various BRDFs
in a database and represent any unknown BRDF as a linear combination of principal components as in [19], thereby
formulating the uncalibrated photometric stereo as a regression problem. We propose this strategy for two main reasons. First, we can approximate various kinds of materials well by using the unique model. Second, although
it also has unknowns of the same number of basis functions, this approach enables stepwise optimization. We can
roughly estimate surface normals, lightings, and basis coefficients by using only a few principal components and then

4350

