Inverting Visual Representations with Convolutional Networks
Alexey Dosovitskiy
Thomas Brox
University of Freiburg
Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
{dosovits,brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Feature representations, both hand-designed and
learned ones, are often hard to analyze and interpret, even
when they are extracted from visual data. We propose a
new approach to study image representations by inverting
them with an up-convolutional neural network. We apply
the method to shallow representations (HOG, SIFT, LBP),
as well as to deep networks. For shallow representations
our approach provides significantly better reconstructions
than existing methods, revealing that there is surprisingly
rich information contained in these features. Inverting a
deep network trained on ImageNet provides several insights
into the properties of the feature representation learned
by the network. Most strikingly, the colors and the rough
contours of an image can be reconstructed from activations
in higher network layers and even from the predicted class
probabilities.

1. Introduction
A feature representation useful for pattern recognition
tasks is expected to concentrate on properties of the input
image which are important for the task and ignore the irrelevant properties of the input image. For example, handdesigned descriptors such as HOG [3] or SIFT [17], explicitly discard the absolute brightness by only considering gradients, precise spatial information by binning the gradients
and precise values of the gradients by normalizing the histograms. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained in
a supervised manner [14, 13] are expected to discard information irrelevant for the task they are solving [28, 19, 22].
In this paper we propose a new approach to analyze
which information is preserved by a feature representation and which information is discarded. We train neural
networks to invert feature representations in the following
sense. Given a feature vector, the network is trained to
predict the expected pre-image, that is, the (weighted) average of all natural images which could have produced the

HOG

SIFT

AlexNet-CONV3

AlexNet-FC8

Figure 1: We train convolutional networks to reconstruct
images from different feature representations. Top row:
Input features. Bottom row: Reconstructed image. Reconstructions from HOG and SIFT are very realistic. Reconstructions from AlexNet preserve color and rough object
positions even when reconstructing from higher layers.

given feature vector. The content of this expected pre-image
shows image properties which can be confidently inferred
from the feature vector. The amount of blur corresponds to
the level of invariance of the feature representation. We obtain further insights into the structure of the feature space, as
we apply the networks to perturbed feature vectors, to interpolations between two feature vectors, or to random feature
vectors.
We apply our inversion method to AlexNet [13], a convolutional network trained for classification on ImageNet,
as well as to three widely used computer vision features:
histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) [3, 7], scale invariant feature transform (SIFT) [17], and local binary patterns (LBP) [21]. The SIFT representation comes as a nonuniform, sparse set of oriented keypoints with their corresponding descriptors at various scales. This is an additional
challenge for the inversion task. LBP features are not differentiable with respect to the input image. Thus, existing
methods based on gradients of representations [19] could
not be applied to them.
14829

