DCAN: Deep Contour-Aware Networks for Accurate Gland Segmentation
Hao Chen

Xiaojuan Qi
Lequan Yu
Pheng-Ann Heng
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{hchen, xjqi, lqyu, pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
The morphology of glands has been used routinely by
pathologists to assess the malignancy degree of adenocarcinomas. Accurate segmentation of glands from histology
images is a crucial step to obtain reliable morphological
statistics for quantitative diagnosis. In this paper, we proposed an efficient deep contour-aware network (DCAN) to
solve this challenging problem under a unified multi-task
learning framework. In the proposed network, multi-level
contextual features from the hierarchical architecture are
explored with auxiliary supervision for accurate gland segmentation. When incorporated with multi-task regularization during the training, the discriminative capability of intermediate features can be further improved. Moreover, our
network can not only output accurate probability maps of
glands, but also depict clear contours simultaneously for
separating clustered objects, which further boosts the gland
segmentation performance. This unified framework can be
efficient when applied to large-scale histopathological data
without resorting to additional steps to generate contours
based on low-level cues for post-separating. Our method
won the 2015 MICCAI Gland Segmentation Challenge out
of 13 competitive teams, surpassing all the other methods
by a significant margin.

1. Introduction
Normally, a typical gland is composed of a lumen area
forming the interior tubular structure and epithelial cell nuclei surrounding the cytoplasm, as illustrated in Figure 1
(top left). Malignant tumours arising from glandular epithelium, also known as adenocarcinomas, are the most prevalent form of cancer. In the routine of histopathological examination, the morphology of glands has been widely used
for assessing the malignancy degree of several adenocarcinomas, including breast [14], prostate [19], and colon [17].
Accurate segmentation of glands is one crucial pre-requisite
step to obtain reliable morphological statistics that indicate
the aggressiveness of tumors. Conventionally, this is per-

cytoplasm
lumen
nuclei

Figure 1: Examples of gland segmentation in benign (top
row) and malignant (bottom row) cases. From left to
right columns show the original images (stained with hematoxylin and eosin) and annotations by pathologists (individual objects are denoted by different colors), respectively.

formed by expert pathologists who evaluate the structure of
glands in the biopsy samples. However, manual annotation
suffers from issues such as limited reproducibility, considerable efforts, and time-consuming. With the advent of whole slide imaging, large-scale histopathological data need
to be analyzed. Therefore, automatic segmentation methods are highly demanded in clinical practice to improve the
efficiency as well as reliability and reduce the workload on
pathologists.
Nevertheless, this task is quite challenging for several
reasons. First, there is a huge variation of glandular morphology depending on the different histologic grades as
well as from one disease to another. Figure 1 (left column)
shows the large difference of glandular structures between
benign and malignant cases from colon tissues. Second,
the existence of touching glands in tissue samples makes
it quite hard for automated methods to separate objects individually. Third, in the malignant cases such as moderately and poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas, the glandular
structures are seriously degenerated, as shown in Figure 1
12487

