Metric Learning as Convex Combinations of Local Models
with Generalization Guarantees
Valentina Zantedeschi, Rémi Emonet, Marc Sebban
firstname.lastname@univ-st-etienne.fr

Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS, Institut d Optique Graduate School,
Laboratoire Hubert Curien UMR 5516, F-42023, SAINT-ETIENNE, France

Abstract
Over the past ten years, metric learning allowed the improvement of numerous machine learning approaches that
manipulate distances or similarities. In this field, local metric learning has been shown to be very efficient, especially
to take into account non linearities in the data and better capture the peculiarities of the application of interest.
However, it is well known that local metric learning (i) can
entail overfitting and (ii) face difficulties to compare two
instances that are assigned to two different local models.
In this paper, we address these two issues by introducing a
novel metric learning algorithm that linearly combines local models (C2LM). Starting from a partition of the space
in regions and a model (a score function) for each region,
C2LM defines a metric between points as a weighted combination of the models. A weight vector is learned for each
pair of regions, and a spatial regularization ensures that the
weight vectors evolve smoothly and that nearby models are
favored in the combination. The proposed approach has the
particularity of working in a regression setting, of working
implicitly at different scales, and of being generic enough so
that it is applicable to similarities and distances. We prove
theoretical guarantees of the approach using the framework
of algorithmic robustness. We carry out experiments with
datasets using both distances (perceptual color distances,
using Mahalanobis-like distances) and similarities (semantic word similarities, using bilinear forms), showing that
C2LM consistently improves regression accuracy even in
the case where the amount of training data is small.

1. Introduction
In many machine learning tasks, like classification, clustering or ranking, decisions are based on distance or similarity functions. In order to capture the peculiarities of
the data of the applications at hand, a lot of work has
gone during the past ten years into automatically optimiz-

Figure 1: Limitation of local metric learning: While two points
belonging to the same region (e.g. in R1 ) can be managed by
the corresponding locally-learned metric (depicted as an ellipse),
two points from different regions (e.g. in R2 and R4 ) cannot be
accurately compared using a single local metric.

ing those functions, topic referred to as metric learning
[9, 3, 4]. Most of the time, a unique global metric is learned
over the input space, typically taking the form of a (linear) geometric transformation. This is the case for most of
the Mahalanobis-like metric learning approaches, such as
LMNN [22] or ITML [5]. However, it turns out that for data
that present multi-modalities and/or non-linearities, local
metric learning has been shown to be very efficient because
of its flexibility to capture well geometric variations of the
input space. On the other hand, a major problem of local
metric learning is that it can entail overfitting. Some recent
solutions have been proposed based on feature space dimensionality reduction [8], manifold regularization [21] or generative models [15]. However, those approaches mainly focus on improving the results locally, i.e. while comparing
instances of the “same region” of the input space. Therefore, they are not suited to compare points far from each
other. This limitation is illustrated in Figure 1.
One of the main objectives of our paper is to address this
pitfall by learning convex combinations of local metrics that
are not only good locally, but also globally relevant. Our
algorithm, called Convex Combinations of Local Models
(C2LM), basically optimizes for any pair of regions a vector
of weights corresponding to the contribution of each local
model while computing the distance or similarity between

1478

