MSR-VTT: A Large Video Description Dataset for Bridging Video and Language
Jun Xu , Tao Mei , Ting Yao and Yong Rui
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{v-junfu, tmei, tiyao, yongrui}@microsoft.com

Abstract
While there has been increasing interest in the task of
describing video with natural language, current computer
vision algorithms are still severely limited in terms of the
variability and complexity of the videos and their associated language that they can recognize. This is in part due to
the simplicity of current benchmarks, which mostly focus on
speciﬁc ﬁne-grained domains with limited videos and simple descriptions. While researchers have provided several
benchmark datasets for image captioning, we are not aware
of any large-scale video description dataset with comprehensive categories yet diverse video content.
In this paper we present MSR-VTT (standing for “MSRVideo to Text”) which is a new large-scale video benchmark for video understanding, especially the emerging task
of translating video to text. This is achieved by collecting
257 popular queries from a commercial video search engine, with 118 videos for each query. In its current version, MSR-VTT provides 10K web video clips with 41.2
hours and 200K clip-sentence pairs in total, covering the
most comprehensive categories and diverse visual content,
and representing the largest dataset in terms of sentence
and vocabulary. Each clip is annotated with about 20 natural sentences by 1,327 AMT workers. We present a detailed analysis of MSR-VTT in comparison to a complete
set of existing datasets, together with a summarization of
different state-of-the-art video-to-text approaches. We also
provide an extensive evaluation of these approaches on this
dataset, showing that the hybrid Recurrent Neural Networkbased approach, which combines single-frame and motion
representations with soft-attention pooling strategy, yields
the best generalization capability on MSR-VTT.

1. Introduction
It has been a fundamental yet emerging challenge for
computer vision to automatically describe visual content
with natural language. Especially, thanks to the recent development of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), there
has been tremendous interest in the task of image caption-

ing, where each image is described with a single natural
sentence [7, 8, 11, 14, 22, 36]. Along with this trend,
researchers have provided several benchmark datasets to
boost research on image captioning (e.g., Microsoft COCO [21] and Flickr 30K [41]), where tens or hundreds of
thousands of images are annotated with natural sentences.
While there has been increasing interest in the task of
video to language, existing approaches only achieve severely limited success in terms of the variability and complexity
of video contents and their associated language that they
can recognize [2, 7, 15, 28, 35, 39, 34]. This is in part due
to the simplicity of current benchmarks, which mostly focus on speciﬁc ﬁne-grained domains with limited data scale
and simple descriptions (e.g., cooking [5], YouTube [16],
and movie [27, 32]). There are currently no large-scale
video description benchmarks that match the scale and variety of existing image datasets because videos are signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult and expensive to collect, annotate and
organize. Furthermore, compared with image captioning,
the automatic generation of video descriptions carries additional challenges, such as modeling the spatiotemporal information in video data and pooling strategies.
Motivated by the above observations, we present in this
paper the MSR-VTT dataset (standing for MSR-Video to
Text), which is a new large-scale video benchmark for video
understanding, especially the emerging task of translating
video to text. This is achieved by collecting 257 popular
queries from a commercial video search engine, with 118
videos for each query. In its current version, MSR-VTT
provides 10K web video clips with 41.2 hours and 200K
clip-sentence pairs in total, covering a comprehensive list
of 20 categories and a wide variety of video content. Each
clip was annotated with about 20 natural sentences.
From a practical standpoint, compared with existing
datasets for video to text, such as MSVD [3], YouCook [5],
M-VAD [32], TACoS [25, 28], and MPII-MD [27], our
MSR-VTT benchmark is characterized by the following
major unique properties. First, our dataset has the largest
number of clip-sentence pairs, where each video clip is annotated with multiple sentences. This can lead to a better training of RNNs and in consequence the generation of
15288

