Learning to Read Chest X-Rays:
Recurrent Neural Cascade Model for Automated Image Annotation
Hoo-Chang Shin1 , Kirk Roberts2 , Le Lu1 , Dina Demner-Fushman2 , Jianhua Yao1 , Ronald M Summers1
2

1

Lister Hill National Center for
Biomedical Communications,
National Library of Medicine

Imaging Biomarkers and ComputerAided Diagnosis Laboratory, Radiology
and Imaging Sciences, Clinical Center

National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 20892-1182, USA
{hoochang.shin; le.lu; kirk.roberts; rms}@nih.gov; ddemner@mail.nih.gov; JYao@cc.nih.gov

Abstract

Comparison:"None"
"

Indica-on:"Burmese"male"
has"complete"TB"treatment"

Despite the recent advances in automatically describing
image contents, their applications have been mostly limited
to image caption datasets containing natural images (e.g.,
Flickr 30k, MSCOCO). In this paper, we present a deep
learning model to efficiently detect a disease from an image
and annotate its contexts (e.g., location, severity and the affected organs). We employ a publicly available radiology
dataset of chest x-rays and their reports, and use its image
annotations to mine disease names to train convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). In doing so, we adopt various
regularization techniques to circumvent the large normalvs-diseased cases bias. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
are then trained to describe the contexts of a detected disease, based on the deep CNN features. Moreover, we introduce a novel approach to use the weights of the already
trained pair of CNN/RNN on the domain-specific image/text
dataset, to infer the joint image/text contexts for composite
image labeling. Significantly improved image annotation
results are demonstrated using the recurrent neural cascade
model by taking the joint image/text contexts into account.

1. Introduction
Comprehensive image understanding requires more than
single object classification. There have been many advances in automatic generation of image captions to describe image contents, which is closer to a more complete
image understanding than classifying an image to a single object class. Our work is inspired by many of the recent progresses in image caption generation [44, 54, 36,
14, 61, 15, 6, 62, 31], as well as some of the earlier pioneering work [39, 17, 16]. The former have substantially

/

Findings:"Both"lungs"are""
clear"and"expanded"with""
no"inﬁltrates."Basilar"focal"
atelectasis"is"present"in"the"
lingula."Heart"size"normal."
Calciﬁed"right"hilar"XXXX""
are"present"
"

Impression:"No"ac?ve"disease."
"
MeSH/
Major/
"

Pulmonary"Atelectasis"
"/"lingula"/"focal"
Calcinosis"
"/"lung"/"hilum"/"right"
CHEST"2V"FRONTAL/LATERAL"XXXX,"XXXX"XXXX"PM"

"

Figure 1. An example of OpenI [2] chest x-ray image, report, and
annotations.

improved performance, largely due to the introduction of
ImageNet database [13] and to advances in deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), effectively learning to recognize the images with a large pool of hierarchical representations. Most recent work also adapt recurrent neural
networks (RNNs), using the rich deep CNN features to generate image captions. However, the applications of the previous studies were limited to natural image caption datasets
such as Flickr8k [25], Flickr30k [65], or MSCOCO [42]
which can be generalized from ImageNet.
Likewise, there have been continuous efforts and progresses in the automatic recognition and localization of specific diseases and organs, mostly on datasets where target
objects are explicitly annotated [50, 26, 55, 46, 40, 49].
Yet, learning from medical image text reports and generating annotations that describe diseases and their contexts
12497

