DHSNet: Deep Hierarchical Saliency Network for Salient Object Detection
Nian Liu
Junwei Han*
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University
Xi’an, 710072, P. R. China
{liunian228, junweihan2010}@gmail.com

Abstract
Traditional 1 salient object detection models often use
hand-crafted features to formulate contrast and various
prior knowledge, and then combine them artificially. In this
work, we propose a novel end-to-end deep hierarchical
saliency network (DHSNet) based on convolutional neural
networks for detecting salient objects. DHSNet first makes
a coarse global prediction by automatically learning
various global structured saliency cues, including global
contrast, objectness, compactness, and their optimal
combination. Then a novel hierarchical recurrent
convolutional neural network (HRCNN) is adopted to
further hierarchically and progressively refine the details
of saliency maps step by step via integrating local context
information. The whole architecture works in a global to
local and coarse to fine manner. DHSNet is directly trained
using whole images and corresponding ground truth
saliency masks. When testing, saliency maps can be
generated by directly and efficiently feedforwarding testing
images through the network, without relying on any other
techniques. Evaluations on four benchmark datasets and
comparisons with other 11 state-of-the-art algorithms
demonstrate that DHSNet not only shows its significant
superiority in terms of performance, but also achieves a
real-time speed of 23 FPS on modern GPUs.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection aims at accurately and uniformly
detecting objects that grab human attention in images. In
recent years, researchers have developed many
computational models for salient object detection and
applied them to benefit many other applications, such as
image summarization [1], segmentation [2], retrieval [3],
and editing [4].
Traditional saliency detection methods rely on various
saliency cues. The most widely explored one is contrast,
which aims at evaluating the distinctiveness of each image
 Corresponding author.

678

Figure 1: Comparison of results by different kinds of methods.
For images in (a), we show the salient object detection results of a
global contrast based method in (b), a background prior based
method in (c), the results of the GV-CNN in (d), the final refined
results of DHSNet in (e), and the ground truth in (f).

region or image pixel with respect to local contexts or
global ones. Local contrast based methods [5, 6] typically
tend to highlight object boundaries while often miss object
interiors. On the contrary, global contrast based methods [7,
8] are capable of highlighting object interiors uniformly.
This kind of methods are better, but still unsatisfactory. On
one hand, they usually fail to preserve object details. On the
other hand, they are often difficult to detect salient objects
with large sizes and complex textures, especially when
image backgrounds are also cluttered or have similar
appearances with foreground objects (see column (b) in
Figure 1). Furthermore, conventional methods usually
model contrast via hand-crafted features (e.g., intensity,
color, and edge orientation [5]) and human designed
mechanisms (e.g., the "Difference of Gaussians" (DoG)
operator [5]) based on limited human knowledge on visual
attention. Thus they may not generalize well in different
scenarios.
Some recent works also utilize various prior knowledge
as informative saliency cues. Background prior [9-11]
hypothesizes that regions near image boundaries are
probably backgrounds. However, it often fails when salient
objects touch image boundaries or have similar appearance

