Learning Structured Inference Neural Networks with Label Relations
Hexiang Hu1,2 , Guang-Tong Zhou1 , Zhiwei Deng1 , Zicheng Liao2 , and Greg Mori1
1

2

School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University , Burnaby, BC, Canada
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University , Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
{hexiangh, gza11, zhiweid}@sfu.ca, zliao@zju.edu.cn, mori@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract
Images of scenes have various objects as well as abundant attributes, and diverse levels of visual categorization
are possible. A natural image could be assigned with finegrained labels that describe major components, coarsegrained labels that depict high level abstraction, or a set of
labels that reveal attributes. Such categorization at different concept layers can be modeled with label graphs encoding label information. In this paper, we exploit this rich information with a state-of-art deep learning framework, and
propose a generic structured model that leverages diverse
label relations to improve image classification performance.
Our approach employs a novel stacked label prediction neural network, capturing both inter-level and intra-level label
semantics. We evaluate our method on benchmark image
datasets, and empirical results illustrate the efficacy of our
model.

Classification Result

Outdoor?Indoor?

L4: outdoor man-made

Sports Fields?
Garden?Forest?

L3: sports fields

batter box?
football field?

L2: batter box

baseball? grass?
bat? people? wall?

L1: baseball,grass, bat,
field, people

Scene
T0: Coarse Scene
Category
T1: Scene
Attributes

T2: Fine-grained
Scene Category

T3: Object-level
Annotation

outdoor
man-made

indoor

leisure

arena
hockey

floor

construction

trech

field

bat

sports
field

outdoor
natural
house
cabins
farms

man-made
elements

pitcher
mound

batter
box

playground

barn

base
ball

grass

building

people

1. Introduction

Figure 1. This image example has visual concepts at various levels, from sports field at high level to baseball and person at lower
level. Our model leverages label relations and jointly predicts layered visual labels from an image using a structured inference neural network. In the graph, colored nodes correspond to the labels
associated with the image, and red edges encode label relations.

Standard image classification is a fundamental problem
in computer vision – assigning category labels to images. It
can serve as a building block for many different computer
vision tasks including object detection, visual segmentation, and scene parsing. Recent progress in deep learning [18, 29, 30, 31] significantly improved classification
performance on large scale image datasets [25, 37, 1, 20].
Approaches typically assume image labels to be semantically independent and adapt either a multi-class or binary
classifier to label images. In recent work [2, 5], deep learning methods that take advantage of label relations have been
proposed to improve image classification performance.
However, in realistic settings, these label relationships
could form a complicated graph structure. Take Figure 1
as an example. Various levels of interpretation could be
formed to represent such an image. This image of a baseball scene could be described as an outdoor image at coarse

level, or with a more concrete concept such as sports field,
or with even more fine-grained labels such as batter’s box
and objects such as grass, bat, person.
Models that incorporate semantic label relationships
could be utilized to generate better classification results.
The desiderata for these models include the ability to model
label-label relations such as positive or negative correlation,
respect multiple concept layers obtainable from sources
such as WordNet, and to handle partially observed label data
– given a subset of accurate labels for this image, infer the
remaining missing labels.
The contribution of this paper is in developing a structured inference neural network that permits modeling complex relations between labels, ranging from hierarchical to
within-layer dependencies. We do this by defining a net12960

