Prior-Less Compressible Structure from Motion
Chen Kong
Simon Lucey
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA, US
{chenk, slucey}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Many non-rigid 3D structures are not modelled well
through a low-rank subspace assumption. This is problematic when it comes to their reconstruction through Structure
from Motion (SfM). We argue in this paper that a more expressive and general assumption can be made around compressible 3D structures. The vision community, however,
has hitherto struggled to formulate effective strategies for
recovering such structures after projection without the aid
of additional priors (e.g. temporal ordering, rigid substructures, etc.). In this paper we present a “prior-less” approach to solve compressible SfM. Specifically, we demonstrate how the problem of SfM - assuming compressible 3D
structures - can be theoretically characterized as a block
sparse dictionary learning problem. We validate our approach experimentally by demonstrating reconstructions of
3D structures that are intractable using current state-of-theart low-rank SfM approaches.

1. Introduction
A 3D shape can often be well-approximated as a linear
combination of just a few elements from a set of basis or
dictionary. When this approximation is exact we say that
the 3D shape is sparse. In reality, few real-world 3D shapes
are truly sparse, rather they are “compressible” [7], meaning they can be well-approximated by a sparse 3D shape.
A scenario often entertained in Sf M literature [5, 8] is that
the same few K dictionary bases can be employed for approximating a set of 3D shape instances (see Figure 1(a)) these fixed set of basis vectors form the canonical low-rank
3D assumption. We shall refer herein to the finite set of 3D
shape instances as the 3D structure.
In compressible Sf M we make a similar assumption to
classical low-rank Sf M [5, 8] where we assume each 3D
shape instance can be described using only K dictionary
bases, but a different set of K basis vectors can be employed
for each shape instance (see Figure 1(b)). These set of 3D
shape instances do not form a single linear subspace, they

Figure 1: In this paper we explore the problem of “compressible”
structure from motion (Sf M). In this approach we assume a set
of 3D shapes, stemming from a non-rigid 3D structure, can be
well approximated by a few (i.e. K) examples of elements from
an unknown basis or dictionary. Classical low-rank Sf M makes a
similar assumption but assumes that the same K elements within
the dictionary will be used to approximate all 3D shape instances
- see (a). Our approach differs in this regard, where we allow for
the employment of different K elements within the dictionary for
each 3D instance - see (b). We describe a novel algorithm, based
on block sparse dictionary learning, for obtaining Sf M reconstructions that were previously deemed intractable using the low-rank
assumption employed by current state-of-the-art methods [8].


L
can instead be thought of as existing in a union of K
subspaces where L is the total number of basis vectors available. An obvious advantage of this compressible 3D structure assumption is the ability to model a much broader set
of 3D structures. A drawback to the assumption, however,
is discovering
which of the potentially very large number

L
of K
subspaces best describes the actual 3D shape instance - solely from its 2D projection. It is this dilemma
which is at the heart of our paper.
14123

