Sparse Coding for Third-order Super-symmetric Tensor Descriptors with
Application to Texture Recognition
Piotr Koniusz
National ICT Australia (NICTA),
Canberra Research Laboratory

Anoop Cherian
ARC Centre of Excellence for Robotic Vision,
Australian National University, Canberra

piotr.koniusz@nicta.com.au

anoop.cherian@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Super-symmetric tensors – a higher-order extension of
scatter matrices – are becoming increasingly popular in
machine learning and computer vision for modeling data
statistics, co-occurrences, or even as visual descriptors.
They were shown recently to outperform second-order approaches [18], however, the size of these tensors are exponential in the data dimensionality, which is a significant concern. In this paper, we study third-order supersymmetric tensor descriptors in the context of dictionary
learning and sparse coding. For this purpose, we propose
a novel non-linear third-order texture descriptor. Our goal
is to approximate these tensors as sparse conic combinations of atoms from a learned dictionary. Apart from the
significant benefits to tensor compression that this framework offers, our experiments demonstrate that the sparse
coefficients produced by this scheme lead to better aggregation of high-dimensional data and showcase superior performance on two common computer vision tasks compared
to the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Recent times have witnessed an increasing trend in several machine learning and computer vision applications to
use rich representations that capture the inherent structure
and statistics of the data. A few notable such representations are histograms, strings, covariances, trees, and graphs.
The goal of this paper is to study a new class of structured
data descriptors – third-order super-symmetric tensors – in
the context of sparse coding and dictionary learning. Tensors are often used to capture higher-order moments of data
distributions such as the covariance, skewness, or kurtosis
and have been used as data descriptors in several computer
vision applications. In region covariances [36], a covariance matrix – computed on multi-modal features from an
image region – is used as a descriptor for the region and
is useful for object tracking, retrieval, texture recognition,
and video analysis [36, 39, 30, 21, 10]. Given bag-of-words
histograms or local descriptor vectors from an image, a
second-order co-occurrence pooling of these vectors cap-

tures the occurrences of two features together in an image
and is recently shown to provide superior performance in
semantic segmentation and visual concept detection, compared to their first-order counterparts [5, 18]. A natural extension of the idea is to use higher-order pooling operators,
an extensive experimental analysis of which is provided
in [18]. Their paper shows that pooling using third-order
super-symmetric tensors can significantly improve upon the
second-order descriptors, e.g., by more than 7% MAP on
the challenging PASCAL VOC07 dataset.
However, given that the size of the tensors increases exponentially against the dimensionality of their first-order
counterpart, efficient representations are extremely important for applications that use these higher-order descriptors.
To this end, the goal of this paper is to study these descriptors in the classical dictionary learning and sparse coding setting [27]. Using the properties of super-symmetric
tensors, we formulate a novel optimization objective (Sections 6, 7) in which each third-order data tensor is approximated by a sparse non-negative linear combination of positive semi-definite matrices. Although our objective is nonconvex – typical to several dictionary learning algorithms
– we show that our objective is convex in each variable,
thus allowing a block-coordinate descent scheme for the
optimization. Experiments (Section 8) on the PASCAL
VOC07 dataset show that the compressed coefficient vectors produced by our sparse coding preserve the discriminative properties of the original tensors and provide robust tensor compression and aggregation. Inspired by the merits of
third-order pooling proposed in [18], we further introduce
a novel tensor descriptor for texture recognition via the linearization of explicitly defined RBF kernels, and show that
sparse coding of these novel tensors performs better than
the state-of-the-art descriptors used for texture recognition.
In summary, our contributions are: i) a novel third-order
texture descriptor1 , ii) novel third-order tensor dictionary
learning and sparse coding, and iii) theoretical guarantees
on the existence of the sparse decomposition.
1 Note that, third-order descriptors can be easily aggregated from CNN
features similar to [9]; however, the choice of input features is complementary to our main goal - theoretical foundations of third-order tensor coding.

5395

