Cross-stitch Networks for Multi-task Learning
Ishan Misra∗

Abhinav Shrivastava∗
Abhinav Gupta
Martial Hebert
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Multi-task learning in Convolutional Networks has displayed remarkable success in the ﬁeld of recognition. This
success can be largely attributed to learning shared representations from multiple supervisory tasks. However, existing multi-task approaches rely on enumerating multiple network architectures speciﬁc to the tasks at hand, that do not
generalize. In this paper, we propose a principled approach
to learn shared representations in ConvNets using multitask learning. Speciﬁcally, we propose a new sharing unit:
“cross-stitch” unit. These units combine the activations
from multiple networks and can be trained end-to-end. A
network with cross-stitch units can learn an optimal combination of shared and task-speciﬁc representations. Our proposed method generalizes across multiple tasks and shows
dramatically improved performance over baseline methods
for categories with few training examples.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, ConvNets have given huge performance boosts in recognition tasks ranging from classiﬁcation and detection to segmentation and even surface
normal estimation. One of the reasons for this success is
attributed to the inbuilt sharing mechanism, which allows
ConvNets to learn representations shared across different
categories. This insight naturally extends to sharing between tasks (see Figure 1) and leads to further performance
improvements, e.g., the gains in segmentation [26] and detection [19, 21]. A key takeaway from these works is that
multiple tasks, and thus multiple types of supervision, helps
achieve better performance with the same input. But unfortunately, the network architectures used by them for multitask learning notably differ. There are no insights or principles for how one should choose ConvNet architectures for
multi-task learning.

1.1. Multi-task sharing: an empirical study
How should one pick the right architecture for multi-task
learning? Does it depend on the ﬁnal tasks? Should we
∗ Both authors contributed equally

Attributes

Has saddle

Four legs

Detection

Surface Normals

Sem. Segmentation

Object location

Surface orientation

Pixel labels

Figure 1: Given an input image, one can leverage multiple related properties to improve performance by using a
multi-task learning framework. In this paper, we propose
cross-stitch units, a principled way to use such a multi-task
framework for ConvNets.

have a completely shared representation between tasks? Or
should we have a combination of shared and task-speciﬁc
representations? Is there a principled way of answering
these questions?
To investigate these questions, we ﬁrst perform extensive experimental analysis to understand the performance
trade-offs amongst different combinations of shared and
task-speciﬁc representations. Consider a simple experiment
where we train a ConvNet on two related tasks (e.g., semantic segmentation and surface normal estimation). Depending on the amount of sharing one wants to enforce, there
is a spectrum of possible network architectures. Figure 2(a)
shows different ways of creating such network architectures
based on AlexNet [32]. On one end of the spectrum is a
fully shared representation where all layers, from the ﬁrst
convolution (conv2) to the last fully-connected (fc7), are
shared and only the last layers (two fc8s) are task speciﬁc. An example of such sharing is [21] where separate
fc8 layers are used for classiﬁcation and bounding box regression. On the other end of the sharing spectrum, we can
train two networks separately for each task and there is no
cross-talk between them. In practice, different amount of
sharing tends to work best for different tasks.
13994

