Sublabel–Accurate Relaxation of Nonconvex Energies
Thomas Möllenhoff∗
TU München
moellenh@in.tum.de

Emanuel Laude∗
TU München
laudee@in.tum.de

Jan Lellmann
University of Lübeck
lellmann@mic.uni-luebeck.de

Michael Moeller
TU München
moellerm@in.tum.de
Daniel Cremers
TU München
cremers@tum.de

Abstract
We propose a novel spatially continuous framework for
convex relaxations based on functional lifting. Our method
can be interpreted as a sublabel–accurate solution to multilabel problems. We show that previously proposed functional lifting methods optimize an energy which is linear between two labels and hence require (often infinitely) many
labels for a faithful approximation. In contrast, the proposed formulation is based on a piecewise convex approximation and therefore needs far fewer labels – see Fig. 1. In
comparison to recent MRF-based approaches, our method
is formulated in a spatially continuous setting and shows
less grid bias. Moreover, in a local sense, our formulation
is the tightest possible convex relaxation. It is easy to implement and allows an efficient primal-dual optimization on
GPUs. We show the effectiveness of our approach on several computer vision problems.

1. Introduction
Energy minimization methods have become the central
paradigm for solving practical problems in computer vision.
The energy functional can often be written as the sum of
a data fidelity and a regularization term. One of the most
popular regularizers is the total variation (T V ) due to its
many favorable properties [4]. Hence, an important class of
optimization problems is given as
Z
min
ρ(x, u(x)) dx + λ T V (u),
(1)
u:Ω→Γ

Ω

∗ Those authors contributed equally.

Pock et al. [17], 48 labels, 1.49 GB, 52s.

Proposed, 8 labels, 0.49 GB, 30s.

Figure 1. We propose a convex relaxation for the variational model
(1), which opposed to existing functional lifting methods [17, 18]
allows continuous label spaces even after discretization. Our
method (here applied to stereo matching) avoids label space discretization artifacts, while saving on memory and runtime.

defined for functions u with finite total variation, arbitrary,
possibly nonconvex dataterms ρ : Ω × Γ → R, label
spaces Γ which are closed intervals in R, Ω ⊂ Rd , and
λ ∈ R+ . The multilabel interpretation of the dataterm is
that ρ(x, u(x)) represents the costs of assigning label u(x)
to point x. For (weakly) differentiable functions T V (u)
equals the integral over the norm of the derivative, and
therefore favors a spatially coherent label configuration.
The difficultly of minimizing the nonconvex energy (1) has
motivated researchers to develop convex reformulations.
Convex representations of (1) and more general related
energies have been studied in the context of the calibration
method for the Mumford-Shah functional [1]. Based on
these works, relaxations for the piecewise constant [15] and
piecewise smooth Mumford-Shah functional [16] have been
proposed. Inspired by Ishikawa’s graph-theoretic globally
13948

