Removing Clouds and Recovering Ground Observations in Satellite
Image Sequences via Temporally Contiguous Robust Matrix Completion
Jialei Wang
University of Chicago
jialei@uchicago.edu

Peder A. Olsen

Andrew R. Conn
Aurélie C. Lozano
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center

{pederao,arconn,aclozano}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of removing and replacing
clouds in satellite image sequences, which has a wide range
of applications in remote sensing. Our approach first detects and removes the cloud-contaminated part of the image sequences. It then recovers the missing scenes from
the clean parts using the proposed “TECROMAC” (TEmporally Contiguous RObust MAtrix Completion) objective.
The objective function balances temporal smoothness with a
low rank solution while staying close to the original observations. The matrix whose the rows are pixels and columns
are days corresponding to the image, has low-rank because
the pixels reflect land-types such as vegetation, roads and
lakes and there are relatively few variations as a result. We
provide efficient optimization algorithms for TECROMAC,
so we can exploit images containing millions of pixels. Empirical results on real satellite image sequences, as well as
simulated data, demonstrate that our approach is able to recover underlying images from heavily cloud-contaminated
observations.

1. Introduction
Optical satellite images are important tools for remote
sensing, and suitable analytics applied to satellite images
can often benefit applications such as land monitoring, mineral exploration, crop identification, etc. However, the usefulness of satellite images is largely limited by cloud contamination [18], thus a cloud removal and reconstruction
system is highly desirable.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for cloud removal in temporal satellite image sequences. Our method
improves upon exisiting cloud removal approaches [17, 20,
21, 23, 24, 28, 32] in the following ways: 1) the approach
does not require additional information such as a cloud
mask, or measurements from non-optical sensors; 2) our
model is robust even under heavy cloud contaminated situations, where several of the images could be entirely covered
by clouds; 3) efficient optimization algorithms makes our
approaches scalable to large high-resolution images.

We procede in two stages: a cloud detection stage and
a scene reconstruction stage. In the first, we detect clouds
based on pixel characteristics.1 After removing the cloudcontaminated pixels, we recover the background using a
novel “TECROMAC” (TEmporally Contiguous RObust
MAtrix Completion) model, which encourages low rank in
time-space, temporal smoothness and robustness with respect to errors in the cloud detector. Our model overcomes
the usual limitations of traditional low-rank matrix recovery
tools such as matrix completion and robust principal component analysis, which cannot handle images covered entirely by clouds. We provide efficient algorithms, which are
based upon an augmented Lagrangian method (ALM) with
inexact proximal gradients (IPG), or alternating minimization (ALT), to handle the challenging non-smooth optimization problems related to TECROMAC. Empirical results on
both simulated and real data sets demonstrate the efficiency
and efficacy of the proposed algorithms.

2. Related work
Cloud detection, removal and replacement is an essential
prerequisite for downstream applications of remote sensing. This paper belongs to the important line of research
of sparse representation, which has received considerable
attention in a variety of areas, including noise removal, inverse problems, and pattern recognition [13, 33, 38]. The
key idea of sparse representation is to approximate signals as a sparse decomposition in a dictionary that is learnt
from the data (see [25] for an extensive survey). For the
task of cloud removal and image reconstruction, [23] developed compressive sensing approaches to find sparse signal representations using images from two different time
points. Subsequently [20] extended dictionary learning to
perform multitemporal recovery from longer time series.
A group-sparse representation approach was recently proposed by [19] to leverage both temporal sparsity and non1 For example in 8-bit representations (0,0,0) is typically black while
(255,255,255) is white, so clouds can be assumed to have high pixel intensity.

12754

