Inextensible Non-Rigid Shape-from-Motion
by Second-Order Cone Programming
Ajad Chhatkulia , Daniel Pizarrob,a , Toby Collinsa and Adrien Bartolia
a

ISIT - CNRS/Université d’Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand, France
b
GEINTRA, Universidad de Alcalá, Alcalá de Henares, Spain

Abstract
We present a global and convex formulation for
template-less 3D reconstruction of a deforming object with
the perspective camera. We show for the first time how
to construct a Second-Order Cone Programming (SOCP)
problem for Non-Rigid Shape-from-Motion (NRSfM) using
the Maximum-Depth Heuristic (MDH). In this regard, we
deviate strongly from the general trend of using affine cameras and factorization-based methods to solve NRSfM. In
MDH, the points’ depths are maximized so that the distance
between neighbouring points in camera space are upper
bounded by the geodesic distance. In NRSfM both geodesic
and camera space distances are unknown. We show that,
nonetheless, given point correspondences and the camera’s
intrinsics the whole problem is convex and solvable with
SOCP. We show with extensive experiments that our method
accurately reconstructs quasi-isometric surfaces from partial views under articulated and strong deformations. It naturally handles missing correspondences, non-smooth objects and is very simple to implement compared to previous
methods, with only one free parameter (the neighbourhood
size).

1. Introduction
Non-Rigid Shape-from-Motion (NRSfM) is the problem
of finding the 3D shape of a deforming object given a set
of monocular images. This problem is naturally underconstrained because there can be many different deformations that produce the same images. By including deformation constraints one limits the set of solutions. Several
methods have been proposed in the last decade to tackle
NRSfM with a variety of deformation constraints. There
are two main categories of methods based on the deformation constraints: statistics-based [27, 14, 5, 10, 12] and
Corresponding author email: ajad.chhatkuli@gmail.com

physics-based [26, 30, 7, 29, 2] methods. In the former
group one assumes that the space of deformations is lowdimensional. These methods are accurate for deformations
such as body gestures, facial expressions and simple smooth
deformations. However they tend to perform poorly for objects with high-dimensional deformation spaces or atypical
deformations. They can also be difficult to use when there is
missing data due to e.g. occlusions. In the latter group one
finds deformation models based on isometry [7, 26, 30, 29],
elasticity [1] or particle-interaction models [2]. The isometric model is especially interesting and is an accurate model
for a great variety of real objects. In the related problem
of template-based reconstruction (also referred to as Shapefrom-Template [4]) it has been proven to make the problem
well-posed [23, 18, 4, 8]. However in NRSfM, approaches
based on isometry still lack in several aspects. For example
solutions tend to be complex and often require very good
initialization.
To address the shortcomings of state-of-the-art approaches we propose a method with the following properties: 1) a perspective camera model is used (unlike in
low-rank models and few others), 2) the isometry constraint
is used, 3) a global solution is guaranteed with a convex
problem and no initialization (unlike in the recent methods which use gradient-based energy minimization) 4) we
can handle non-smooth surfaces and do not require temporal continuity 5) we handle missing correspondences and 6)
the complete set of constraints are tied together in a single
problem.
We use the inextensibility constraint for approximating
isometry. Inextensibility is a relaxation of isometry where
one assumes that the Euclidean distances between points on
the surface do not exceed their geodesic distances. Inextensibility alone is insufficient because the reconstruction can
arbitrarily shrink to the camera’s center. In template-based
reconstruction inextensibility has been combined with the
so-called Maximum-Depth Heuristic (MDH), where one

1719

