Gradual DropIn of Layers to Train Very Deep Neural Networks
Leslie N. Smith
Naval Research Laboratory

Emily M. Hand∗
University of Maryland

Timothy Doster
Naval Research Laboratory

leslie.smith@nrl.navy.mil

emhand@cs.umd.edu

timothy.doster@nrl.navy.mil

Abstract
We introduce the concept of dynamically growing a neural network during training. In particular, an untrainable
deep network starts as a trainable shallow network and
newly added layers are slowly, organically added during
training, thereby increasing the network’s depth. This is
accomplished by a new layer, which we call DropIn. The
DropIn layer starts by passing the output from a previous
layer (effectively skipping over the newly added layers),
then increasingly including units from the new layers for
both feedforward and backpropagation. We show that deep
networks, which are untrainable with conventional methods, will converge with DropIn layers interspersed in the
architecture. In addition, we demonstrate that DropIn provides regularization during training in an analogous way
as dropout. Experiments are described with the MNIST
dataset and various expanded LeNet architectures, CIFAR10 dataset with its architecture expanded from 3 to 11 layers, and on the ImageNet dataset with the AlexNet architecture expanded to 13 layers and the VGG 16-layer architecture.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, state-of-the-art results for image
recognition [13, 19, 26], object detection [5], face recognition [27], speech recognition [7], machine translation [25],
image caption generation [28], driverless car technology
[11], and other applications [14] have required increasingly
deeper neural networks.
Network depth refers to the number of layers in the architecture. It is well known that adding layers to neural networks makes them more expressive [15]. Each year, the Imagenet Challenge [18] is held in which teams are expected,
given an image, to detect, localize, or recognize an object
in the image. Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have dominated the competition since Krizhevsky et al. won
in 2012 [13], and each year since, the winner of the compe∗ Research done while at the Naval Research Laboratory

tition used a deeper network than the previous year’s winner
[18, 19, 26].
However, training a very deep network is a difficult and
open research problem [4, 6, 22]. It is difficult to train very
deep networks because the error norm during backpropagation can grow or vanish exponentially. In addition, very
large training datasets are necessary when the network has
millions or billions of weights.
Here we suggest a dynamic architecture that grows during the training process and allows for the training of very
deep networks. We illustrate this with our DropIn layer,
where new layers are skipped at the start of the training, as
though they were not present. This allows the weights of
the included layers to start converging. Over a number of
iterations the DropIn layer increasingly includes activations
from the inserted layers, which gradually trains the weights
in theses added layers.
DropIn follows the philosophy embedded within curriculum learning [2]. With curriculum learning one starts with
an easier problem and incrementally increases the difficulty.
Here too, one starts training a shallow architecture and after convergence begins, DropIn incrementally modifies the
architecture to slowly include units from the new layers.
In addition, DropIn can be used in a mode analogous
to dropout [20] for the regularization of a deep neural network during training. Instead of setting random activations
to zero, as is done in dropout, DropIn sets these activations
to the activations from a previous layer. We demonstrate
that the “noise” from mixing the activations from previous
layers provides regularization during training. In addition,
both DropIn and dropout can be viewed as training a large
collection of networks with varied architectures and extensive weight sharing.
The contributions of this paper are:
1. A dynamic architecture that can grow during training.
2. The details of a DropIn layer for enabling the training of very deep networks and for regularization during training.
3. Examples of successfully training deep architectures
that cannot be trained with conventional methods on
MNIST, CIFAR-10, and ImageNet.

4763

