How hard can it be? Estimating the difficulty of visual search in an image
Radu Tudor Ionescu1 , Bogdan Alexe1,4 , Marius Leordeanu3 , Marius Popescu1 ,
Dim P. Papadopoulos2 , Vittorio Ferrari2
1

2
University of Bucharest,
University of Edinburgh,
3
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy,
4
Institute of Mathematical Statistics and Applied Mathematics of the Romanian Academy

Abstract
We address the problem of estimating image difficulty defined as the human response time for solving a visual search
task. We collect human annotations of image difficulty for
the PASCAL VOC 2012 data set through a crowd-sourcing
platform. We then analyze what human interpretable image
properties can have an impact on visual search difficulty,
and how accurate are those properties for predicting difficulty. Next, we build a regression model based on deep
features learned with state of the art convolutional neural
networks and show better results for predicting the groundtruth visual search difficulty scores produced by human annotators. Our model is able to correctly rank about 75% image pairs according to their difficulty score. We also show
that our difficulty predictor generalizes well to new classes
not seen during training. Finally, we demonstrate that our
predicted difficulty scores are useful for weakly supervised
object localization (8% improvement) and semi-supervised
object classification (1% improvement).

1. Introduction
Humans can naturally understand the content of images
quite easily. The visual human perception system works
by first recognizing the ’gist’ of the image almost instantaneously [32, 33], just from a single glance (200 ms) and,
then, in a second stage, by recognizing the individual objects in the image [33] as a result of visual search. Cognitive studies [3, 43, 48] show evidence that, for the task of
searching for a pattern in an image, the user response time
is proportional to the visual search difficulty, which could
vary from one image to another. Images are not equal in
their difficulty: some images are easy to search and objects
are found fast while others are harder, requiring intensive
visual processing by humans. The measure of visual search
difficulty could be related to several factors such as background clutter, complexity of the scene, number of objects,
whether they are partially occluded or not, and so on.

In this paper, we address the problem of estimating visual search difficulty. This topic is little explored in the
computer vision literature with no data sets assessing the
difficulty of an image being available. We approach our
study by collecting annotations on the PASCAL VOC 2012
data set [15] as human response times during a visual search
task and convert them into difficulty scores (Section 2).
While measuring visual search difficulty by human observations might be subject to some user variability, we believe that there are intrinsic image properties that constitute
the ingredients in the unknown underlying recipe of making
an image difficult (Figure 1). We use the PASCAL VOC
2012 images annotated with difficulty scores to investigate
in depth how different image properties correlate with the
ground-truth difficulty scores. We find that higher level features, such as the ones learned with convolutional neural
networks (CNN) [25] are the most effective, suggesting that
visual search difficulty is indeed a measure that relates to
higher level cognitive processing. Using such features, we
train models to automatically predict the human assessment
of visual search difficulty in an image (Section 3). We release the human difficulty scores we collected on PASCAL
VOC 2012, as well as our code to predict the difficulty of
any image at http://image-difficulty.herokuapp.com.
Measuring image difficulty could have many potential
applications that use the primary information that some
images are harder to analyze than others. In Section 4,
we demonstrate the usefulness of our difficulty measure
in two object recognition applications. For the task of
weakly supervised object localization, we show how to enhance standard methods based on multiple instance learning [5, 8, 10, 37, 39, 40, 41] with our measure and obtain an
8% improvement. Similarly, for the task of semi-supervised
object classification, we use our measure to improve the accuracy of a classifier based on CNN features [38] by 1%.
Related work. There are many computer vision works analyzing global image properties such as saliency [17, 19,
26, 30, 31], memorability [20, 21], photo quality [29] and
12157

