Semantic Instance Annotation of Street Scenes by 3D to 2D Label Transfer
Jun Xie1
Martin Kiefel2
1
University of Washington
{junx,mts}@uw.edu

Ming-Ting Sun1
Andreas Geiger2
2
MPI for Intelligent Systems Tübingen

{martin.kiefel,andreas.geiger}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract

1. Introduction
The revolutionary success of high-capacity deep learning architectures [23, 26, 52] may flag the beginning of a
paradigm shift in computer vision. Rather than developing methods for solving a certain task, future research could
be directed towards teaching a “universal program” (e.g., a
deep network) a mapping from input to output space. One
fundamental question arising in this context is how the required ground truth labels for training these models can be
generated at very large scales (i.e., > 100k images). While
for some tasks large annotated datasets are already available today (e.g., image classification [34]), other tasks such
as semantic segmentation of street scenes lack this information as human annotation is labor-intensive. We refer to this
phenomenon as the curse of dataset annotation (Fig. 1).
One option to circumvent this problem is to exploit auxiliary tasks for which large annotated datasets are available.
While generalization to the target domain can be achieved
to some extent, discriminative cues which solve the auxiliary problem will dominate the learned representation [51].

ImageNet
Classiﬁcation

Our Goal:

#Images

Semantic annotations are vital for training models for
object recognition, semantic segmentation or scene understanding. Unfortunately, pixelwise annotation of images at
very large scale is labor-intensive and only little labeled
data is available, particularly at instance level and for
street scenes. In this paper, we propose to tackle this problem by lifting the semantic instance labeling task from 2D
into 3D. Given reconstructions from stereo or laser data,
we annotate static 3D scene elements with rough bounding
primitives and develop a model which transfers this information into the image domain. We leverage our method to
obtain 2D labels for a novel suburban video dataset which
we have collected, resulting in 400k semantic and instance
image annotations. A comparison of our method to state-ofthe-art label transfer baselines reveals that 3D information
enables more efficient annotation while at the same time resulting in improved accuracy and time-coherent labels.

1,000k

- Semantic Segmentation
- Instance Segmentation
- Video
- Temporal Coherence
- 2D and 3D
- 400k Images
- 100k Laser Scans

500k

MS COCO

Partial Segmentation

ImageNet

2D Detection

PASCAL,KITTI

2D and 3D Detection

LabelMe

Segmentation

0k
0 Minutes

SUN RGB-D

CamVid/
CityScapes
Segmentation

Segmentation

30 Minutes

60 Minutes

Annotation Time

Figure 1: The Curse of Dataset Annotation.
A second option is the creation of synthetic datasets. Unfortunately, our community still lacks rich generative image
formation models which are able to produce realistic and
diverse imagery from the true underlying distribution of the
3D world we live in. In this paper, we therefore propose
an alternative approach which leverages additional 3D information to simplify the 2D annotation task.
Recently, applications such as autonomous cars and humanoid robots have attracted significant attention. For research in these applications, a street view video dataset
with dense semantic labels will be very useful. Motivated
by those needs, our work focuses on the challenging task
of semantic and instance video annotation of street scenes
for which pixelwise labeling requires up to 60 minutes per
image for a human annotator as acknowledged in [2]. Inspired by the easy usage of 3D modeling tools (Blender,
SketchUp) we propose to annotate scenes directly in 3D and
then transfer this knowledge back into the image domain.
The required 3D information can be obtained from various
sources including structure-from-motion (SfM), stereo or
laser scanners. This approach has several advantages over
labeling in 2D: First, objects often project into several images of the video sequence, thus lowering annotation efforts
considerably. Further, the obtained 2D instance annotations
13688

