Iterative Instance Segmentation
Ke Li
UC Berkeley

Bharath Hariharan
Facebook AI Research

Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley

ke.li@eecs.berkeley.edu

bharathh@fb.com

malik@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Existing methods for pixel-wise labelling tasks generally
disregard the underlying structure of labellings, often leading to predictions that are visually implausible. While incorporating structure into the model should improve prediction quality, doing so is challenging – manually specifying the form of structural constraints may be impractical
and inference often becomes intractable even if structural
constraints are given. We sidestep this problem by reducing
structured prediction to a sequence of unconstrained prediction problems and demonstrate that this approach is capable of automatically discovering priors on shape, contiguity of region predictions and smoothness of region contours from data without any a priori specification. On the
instance segmentation task, this method outperforms the
state-of-the-art, achieving a mean APr of 63.6% at 50%
overlap and 43.3% at 70% overlap.

Figure 1: A challenging image in which object instances are
segmented incorrectly. While pixels belonging to the category are identified correctly, they are not correctly separated
into instances.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, the objective of many tasks is to predict a pixel-wise labelling of the input image. While the
intrinsic structure of images constrains the space of sensible labellings, existing approaches typically eschew leveraging such cues and instead predict the label for each pixel
independently. Consequently, the resulting predictions may
not be visually plausible. To mitigate this, a common strategy is to perform post-processing on the predictions using superpixel projections [16] or conditional random fields
(CRFs) [19], which ensures the final predictions are consistent with local appearance cues like colour and texture but
fails to account for global object-level cues like shape.
Despite its obvious shortcomings, this strategy enjoys
popularity, partly because incorporating global cues requires introducing higher-order potentials in the graphical
model and often makes inference intractable. Because inference in general graphical models is NP-hard, extensive
work on structured prediction has focused on devising efficient inference algorithms in special cases where the higherorder potentials take on a particular form. Unfortunately,

this restricts the expressive power of the model. As a result, care must be taken to formulate the cues of interest as
higher-order potentials of the desired form, which may not
be possible. Moreover, low-energy configurations of the potentials often need to be specified manually a priori, which
may not be practical when the cues of interest are complex
and abstract concepts like shape.
In this paper, we devise a method that learns implicit
shape priors and use them to improve the quality of the predicted pixel-wise labelling. Instead of attempting to capture
shape using explicit constraints, we would like to model
shape implicitly and allow the concept of shape to emerge
from data automatically. To this end, we draw inspiration
from iterative approaches like auto-context [32], inference
machines [26] and iterative error feedback (IEF) [6]. Rather
than learning a model to predict the target in one step, we
decompose the prediction process into multiple steps and
allow the model to make mistakes in intermediate steps as
long as it is able to correct them in subsequent steps. By
13659

