Modality and Component Aware Feature Fusion for
RGB-D Scene Classification

1

Anran Wang1 , Jianfei Cai1 , Jiwen Lu2 , and Tat-Jen Cham1
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

Abstract
While convolutional neural networks (CNN) have been
excellent for object recognition, the greater spatial variability in scene images typically meant that the standard
full-image CNN features are suboptimal for scene classification. In this paper, we investigate a framework allowing
greater spatial flexibility, in which the Fisher vector (FV)
encoded distribution of local CNN features, obtained from
a multitude of region proposals per image, is considered instead. The CNN features are computed from an augmented pixel-wise representation comprising multiple modalities of RGB, HHA and surface normals, as extracted from
RGB-D data. More significantly, we make two postulates:
(1) component sparsity — that only a small variety of region proposals and their corresponding FV GMM components contribute to scene discriminability, and (2) modal
non-sparsity — within these discriminative components, all
modalities have important contribution. In our framework,
these are implemented through regularization terms applying group lasso to GMM components and exclusive group
lasso across modalities. By learning and combining regressors for both proposal-based FV features and global CNN features, we were able to achieve state-of-the-art scene
classification performance on the SUNRGBD Dataset and
NYU Depth Dataset V2.

1. Introduction
Scene classification is a challenging problem, especially
for indoor scenes, due to the large intra-class variation due
to vast differences in spatial layouts within each scene class.
After a substantial leap in object recognition [13] performance using convolutional neural networks (CNN) trained
on large-scale object-centric datasets such as ImageNet [4],
a scene-centric dataset known as Places [36] was introduced
for investigating the utility of CNN in scene classification
tasks. Although there was a reported performance improvement using a scene-centric CNN, it became obvious that

Proposal CNN features
Global CNN
feature

Fisher Vector

Modality and Component Aware Feature Fusion

Bedroom
Figure 1. Our framework: we first extract proposals from each
RGB-D image. Then for all the proposals and the full image, we
derive CNN features from different modalities: RGB, HHA and
surface normal (SN). For each image, the proposal based CNN features for each modality are encoded by Fisher Vector (FV), and the
resulted multi-modal FV features are regarded as the input to our
modality and component aware feature fusion. Finally we combine the regression results of the proposal based FV features and
the full-image based CNN features to get the final classification
result.

global CNN features extracted from full images were too
spatially rigid to be optimal for scene classification.
Several methods [5, 33, 38] have been proposed for classifying RGB scene images using local instead of global information. They share a similar pipeline: CNN features
were densely extracted at different locations and scales of

5995

