Single image object modeling based on BRDF and r-surfaces learning
Fabrizio Natola,
Valsamis Ntouskos,
Fiora Pirri,
Marta Sanzari
ALCOR Lab, DIAG, Sapienza University of Rome
{natola,ntouskos,pirri,sanzari}@diag.uniroma1.it

Abstract
A methodology for 3D surface modeling from a single
image is proposed. The principal novelty is concave and
specular surface modeling without any externally imposed
prior. The main idea of the method is to use BRDFs and
generated rendered surfaces, to transfer the normal field,
computed for the generated samples, to the unknown surface. The transferred information is adequate to blow and
sculpt the segmented image mask in to a bas-relief of the
object. The object surface is further refined basing on a
photo-consistency formulation that relates for error minimization the original image and the modeled object.

1. Introduction
There is an increasing need for 3D models of objects,
from single images, for several applications such as digital archives of heritage and monuments, anatomy models
for pathology detection, small artifacts models for populating rendered 3D scenes with objects or augmenting a MOCAP sequence with tools for manipulation and, finally, for
robotics. Likewise, there is a growing awareness that 3D
modeling, from a single image, helps to navigate the sea of
terabytes of images, for the object recognition challenge.
That surface modeling from a single view has to deal
with shading and the way materials shine and reflect the
light has become clear since the works of [31] and [20].
Though only recently a great deal of work has been done to
merge the rich information that light conveys about an object with its shape. Relevant examples are studies on specular reflection of materials and light incidence [23, 24], so as
to dismiss the Lambertian hypothesis, and on how illumination and reflectance combine to influence an object shape
perception [4] and its geometry [34].
Here, we address these problems introducing a novel
method, which is unbiased to the changes of the ambient
light, taking care of both concavities and sharp parts of an
object, this is the main contribution of this paper. Our approach is related to SIRFS [4], who introduced priors for
shape, albedo and illumination, respectively, so as to learn

Figure 1. An example of 3D surface of an object from ImageNet

the most likely shape. Though here we do not introduce any
prior, instead we formulate an hypothesis.
Our hypothesis is that a sufficiently large number of
patches, with varying surface curvature, rendered with different materials, with known reflectance properties, and
varying incidence and reflection angles, can be used to estimate these properties in unknown objects. Through this
generalization, the reflected, specular and diffuse light of a
new object, seen in a single image, can be recovered. We
show that this hypothesis is plausible and proves to give interesting results. Indeed, the normal field of the rendered
surfaces, applied as an external deformation force, basing
on finite element method [43], is used to sculpt the unknown
object surface. This gives very beautiful results, that are further refined to meet photo-consistency requirements.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section
we give some pointers to related works, despite we are not
able to cover the whole extraordinary literature on the topic.
In Section 3 we introduce the basic concepts supporting the
paper, namely the BRDF [31], the MERL database [25],
how rendered surfaces (r-surfaces) are generated, and few
hints for the reference database ImageNet [15] and for recovering the object contour [47]. In Section 4 we introduce
the unsupervised learning method to validate the hypothesis that the r-surfaces convey sufficient information about
unseen objects. The distribution of the data is inferred via
a nested Dirichlet process mixture model [16, 7]. Features
of the highest level in the hierarchy are obtained by sparse
stacked autoencoders [26, 33]. The outcome is a selection
of a BRDF and of the most plausible normals on each patch
covering the object image. These data, as described in Sec14414

