Comparative Deep Learning of Hybrid Representations
for Image Recommendations
Chenyi Lei, Dong Liu, Weiping Li, Zheng-Jun Zha, Houqiang Li
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in Geo-Spatial Information Processing and Application System,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
leichy@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {dongeliu,wpli,zhazj,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In many image-related tasks, learning expressive and
discriminative representations of images is essential, and
deep learning has been studied for automating the learning of such representations. Some user-centric tasks, such
as image recommendations, call for effective representations of not only images but also preferences and intents of
users over images. Such representations are termed hybrid
and addressed via a deep learning approach in this paper.
We design a dual-net deep network, in which the two subnetworks map input images and preferences of users into a
same latent semantic space, and then the distances between
images and users in the latent space are calculated to make
decisions. We further propose a comparative deep learning
(CDL) method to train the deep network, using a pair of images compared against one user to learn the pattern of their
relative distances. The CDL embraces much more training
data than naive deep learning, and thus achieves superior
performance than the latter, with no cost of increasing network complexity. Experimental results with real-world data
sets for image recommendations have shown the proposed
dual-net network and CDL greatly outperform other stateof-the-art image recommendation solutions.

1. Introduction
With the increasing abundance of images, finding out images that satisfy user needs from a huge collection is more
and more required, which emphasizes the importance of image search and image recommendations working as filters
for users. Such tasks are not trivial, however, due to the
gap in understanding the semantics of images as well as
the gap in understanding the intents or preferences of users
This work was supported by the National Program on Key Basic Research Projects (973 Program) under Grant 2015CB351800, by the Natural
Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants 61303149, 61331017,
61390512, and 61472392, and by the Fundamental Research Funds for the
Central Universities under Grants WK2100060011 and WK3490000001.

over images. Compared to their counterparts for structured
data, such as search of text and recommendations of book
or movie, image search and recommendations raise more
challenges since images lack an immediately effective representation.
How to represent images both expressively and discriminatively is of essential importance in many image-related
tasks including detection, registration, recognition, classification, and retrieval. This problem had been extensively
studied, and many kinds of hand-crafted features had been
designed and adopted in different tasks [4, 20, 28]. Most of
previous work focuses on low-level visual features of images, but for image search and recommendations, it is often
not clear how to represent the intents or preferences of users
within the framework of low-level features.
One feasible solution that has been studied is to utilize
the users’ information as constraints to refine the image representations, making them consistent with both semantic labels and user provided hints [19, 23, 33]. For example, Liu
et al. [19] proposes to learn an image distance metric by
combining the images’ visual similarity and their “social
similarity,” defined from users’ interests in images that are
mined from user data in online social networks. Nonetheless, visual content of images and users’ intents/preferences
on images are of two different modalities, simply combining them may not turn out efficient enough.
Recently, deep network models have attracted much attention of researchers in the image processing field. One
significant advantage of deep networks is the automated
learning of image representations, which are demonstrated
to be more effective than hand-crafted features, especially
in semantic level image understanding [13]. Moreover,
deep networks have achieved great success in processing
other forms of data such as speech and text [22]. Promisingly, multimodal data, such as images and users’ intents/preferences, may be efficiently handled by a single integrated deep network.
In this paper, we study a dual-net deep network model
for the purpose of making recommendations of images to

2545

