Fast Training of Triplet-based Deep Binary Embedding Networks
Bohan Zhuang, Guosheng Lin, Chunhua Shen∗, Ian Reid
The University of Adelaide; and Australian Centre for Robotic Vision

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to learn a mapping (or embedding)
from images to a compact binary space in which Hamming
distances correspond to a ranking measure for the image
retrieval task. We make use of a triplet loss because this has
been shown to be most effective for ranking problems. However, training in previous works can be prohibitively expensive due to the fact that optimization is directly performed
on the triplet space, where the number of possible triplets
for training is cubic in the number of training examples.
To address this issue, we propose to formulate high-order
binary codes learning as a multi-label classification problem by explicitly separating learning into two interleaved
stages. To solve the first stage, we design a large-scale
high-order binary codes inference algorithm to reduce the
high-order objective to a standard binary quadratic problem such that graph cuts can be used to efficiently infer
the binary codes which serve as the labels of each training
datum. In the second stage we propose to map the original image to compact binary codes via carefully designed
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and the hashing function fitting can be solved by training binary CNN
classifiers. An incremental/interleaved optimization strategy is proffered to ensure that these two steps are interactive with each other during training for better accuracy. We
conduct experiments on several benchmark datasets, which
demonstrate both improved training time (by as much as
two orders of magnitude) as well as producing state-of-theart hashing for various retrieval tasks.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of big data, large-scale nearest neighbor search with binary hash codes has attracted
much more attention. Hashing methods aim to map the
original features to compact binary codes that are able to
preserve the semantic structure of the original features in
the Hamming space. Compact binary codes are extremely
suitable for efficient data storage and fast search.
∗ Corresponding author, e-mail: chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au

4

65

65

64

67

6

66

Figure 1: The Hamming distances calculated using the proposed hashing
framework between pairs of faces. Each row represents a triplet of samples and the face pairs enclosed by a rectangle are from the same identity.
Here each face image is represented by a 128-dimensional binary codes
vector. We can see that a threshold of about 63 can correctly classify
same-identity and different-identity pairs of faces.

A few hashing methods in the literature incorporate the
triplet ranking loss to learn codes that preserve relative similarity relations [15, 16, 22, 38, 39]. In these works usually a triplet ranking loss is defined, followed by solving
an expensive optimization problem. For instance, Lai et
al. [15] and Zhao et al. [39] map original features into binary codes via deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
Both use a triplet ranking loss designed to preserve relative similarities, with the key difference being in the exact form of the loss function used. Similarly, FaceNet [25]
uses the triplet loss to learn a real-valued compact embedding of faces. All these methods suffer from huge training
complexity, because they directly train the CNNs using the
triplets, the number of which scales cubically with the number of images in the training set. For example, the training
of FaceNet [25] took a few months on Google’s computer
clusters. Other work like [32] simply subsamples a small
subset to reduce the computation complexity.
To address this issue, we employ a collaborative twostep approach, originally proposed in [18], to avoid directly learning hash functions based on the triplet ranking
loss. This two-step approach enables us to convert tripletbased hashing into an efficient combination of solving binary quadratic programs and learning conventional CNN

5955

