Some like it hot - visual guidance for preference prediction
Rasmus Rothe
CVL, ETH Zurich

Radu Timofte
CVL, ETH Zurich

Luc Van Gool
KU Leuven, ETH Zurich

rrothe@vision.ee.ethz.ch

radu.timofte@vision.ee.ethz.ch

vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract

?

For people first impressions of someone are of determining importance. They are hard to alter through further information. This begs the question if a computer can reach
the same judgement. Earlier research has already pointed
out that age, gender, and average attractiveness can be estimated with reasonable precision. We improve the stateof-the-art, but also predict - based on someone’s known
preferences - how much that particular person is attracted
to a novel face. Our computational pipeline comprises a
face detector, convolutional neural networks for the extraction of deep features, standard support vector regression
for gender, age and facial beauty, and - as the main novelties - visual regularized collaborative filtering to infer interperson preferences as well as a novel regression technique
for handling visual queries without rating history. We validate the method using a very large dataset from a dating
site as well as images from celebrities. Our experiments
yield convincing results, i.e. we predict 76% of the ratings
correctly solely based on an image, and reveal some sociologically relevant conclusions. We also validate our collaborative filtering solution on the standard MovieLens rating dataset, augmented with movie posters, to predict an
individuals movie rating. We demonstrate our algorithms
on howhot.io which went viral around the Internet with
more than 50 million pictures evaluated in the first month.

1. Introduction
‘First impressions count’ the saying goes. Indeed, psychology confirms that it only takes 0.1 seconds for us to get
a first impression of someone [47], with the face being the
dominant cue. Factors that are relevant for survival seem the
ones evolution makes us pick up the fastest. These include
age, gender, and attractiveness. We will call those quantifiable properties, such as age and gender, ‘demographics’.
An everyday demonstration is that people on dating sites often base their decisions mainly on profile images rather than
textual descriptions of interests or occupation. Our goal is
to let a computer predict someone’s preferences, from single facial photos (in the wild). In particular, we try to predict
how much a previously unseen face would be attractive for

Figure 1. Can we infer preferences from a single image?

a particular person who has already indicated preferences
for people in the system.
Our main benchmark is a large dataset of more than
13,000 user profiles from a dating site. We have access to
their age and gender, as well as more than 17 million ‘hot
or not’ ratings by some users about some other users (their
profile photo). The ratings are very sparse when compared
to their potential number. For people who have given ratings, we want to predict new ratings for other people in and
outside the dataset.
The visual information, here the profile image, presumably containing a face, is the main basis for any user-to-user
rating. Therefore, we employ a face detector and crop the
best detected face and its surrounding context (corresponding to body and posture) from which we extract deep features by means of a (fine-tuned) convolutional neural network. In order to make sure that these features are appropriate for the main task - automated attractiveness rating - we
first test our features on age, gender, and facial beauty estimation for which previous methods and standard datasets
exist. We obtain state-of-the-art results.
For predicting preferences for users with known ratings
for a subset of others in the dataset, collaborative filtering
is known to provide top results, i.e. for movie [22] or advertisement suggestions [36]. We adapt this framework to
take account of visual information, however. As our experiments will show, adding visual information improves the
prediction, especially in cases with few ratings per user. In
case of a new face, not part of the dataset and thus without a
history of preferences, we propose to regress the input im15553

