PPP: Joint Pointwise and Pairwise Image Label Prediction
Yilin Wang1 Suhang Wang1 Jiliang Tang2 Huan Liu1 Baoxin Li1
1
Department of Computer Science, Arizona State Univerity
2
Yahoo Research
{yilinwang,suhang.wang,huan.liu,baoxin.li}@asu.edu

jlt@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract
Pointwise label and pairwise label are both widely used
in computer vision tasks. For example, supervised image classification and annotation approaches use pointwise
label, while attribute-based image relative learning often
adopts pairwise labels. These two types of labels are often considered independently and most existing efforts utilize them separately. However, pointwise labels in image
classification and tag annotation are inherently related to
the pairwise labels. For example, an image labeled with
“coast” and annotated with “beach, sea, sand, sky” is more
likely to have a higher ranking score in terms of the attribute
“open”; while “men shoes” ranked highly on the attribute
“formal” are likely to be annotated with “leather, lace up”
than “buckle, fabric”. The existence of potential relations
between pointwise labels and pairwise labels motivates us
to fuse them together for jointly addressing related vision
tasks. In particular, we provide a principled way to capture the relations between class labels, tags and attributes;
and propose a novel framework PPP(Pointwise and Pairwise image label Prediction), which is based on overlapped
group structure extracted from the pointwise-pairwise-label
bipartite graph. With experiments on benchmark datasets,
we demonstrate that the proposed framework achieves superior performance on three vision tasks compared to the
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The increasing popularity of social media generates massive data at an unprecedented rate. The ever-growing number of images has brought new challenges for efficient and
effective image analysis tasks, such as image classification,
annotation and image ranking. Based on the types of labels, we can roughly divide the supervised vision tasks into
two categories – pointwise label based approaches and pairwise label based approaches. Pointwise approaches adopt
pointwise labels such as image categories or tags as training targets [10, 20, 6, 19, 8, 23, 24]. Class labels in classi-

Figure 1. An Illustrative Example of poinwise labels and pairwise
labels. Pointwise label “4 door” is better than the pairwise label to
describe presence of 4 door in a car, while “sporty” is better to use
pairwise label to describe the car style, as the right is more sporty
than the left. For example it is hard to label the middle (we ask
10 human viewer – 40% agree with the non sporty and 60% agree
with sporty, but 100% agree with middle one is more sporty than
the left one and less sporty than right one).

fication often capture high-level image content, while tags
in tag annotation are likely to describe a piece of information in the image, such as “high heel, buckle, leather” in a
shoe image. In [21], these two tasks are considered together
because the labels and tags may have some relations in an
image. Recently, due to the semantic gap between lowlevel image features and high-level image concepts, human
nameable visual attributes are proposed to solve the vision
tasks[7, 14, 1, 13]. However, for a large variety of attributes,
the pointwise binary setting is restrictive and unnatural. For
example, it is very difficult to assign or not assign “sporty”
to the middle car in Figure 1 because different people have
different opinions. Thus, pairwise approaches [17, 11, 12]
have been proposed, which aim to learn a ranking function
to predict the attribute strength for images. For example, in
Figure 1. most of the people would agree that the middle
car is more “sporty” than the left one and less “sporty” than
the right one
Pointwise and pairwise labels have their own advantages
as well as limitations in terms of labeling complexity and
representational capability. Labeling complexity: given 10
images, we only need 10 sets of class categories/tags. However, we need to label at least 45 image pairs to capture the
overall ordering information. (Although the ranking rela16005

