Person Re-Identification by Multi-Channel Parts-Based CNN with Improved
Triplet Loss Function
De Cheng, Yihong Gong, Sanping Zhou, Jinjun Wang, Nanning Zheng
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics
Xi’an Jiaotong University,Xi’an, Shaanxi, P.R. China

Abstract
Person re-identification across cameras remains a very
challenging problem, especially when there are no overlapping fields of view between cameras. In this paper,
we present a novel multi-channel parts-based convolutional neural network (CNN) model under the triplet framework
for person re-identification. Specifically, the proposed CNN
model consists of multiple channels to jointly learn both the
global full-body and local body-parts features of the input
persons. The CNN model is trained by an improved triplet
loss function that serves to pull the instances of the same
person closer, and at the same time push the instances belonging to different persons farther from each other in the
learned feature space. Extensive comparative evaluations demonstrate that our proposed method significantly outperforms many state-of-the-art approaches, including both
traditional and deep network-based ones, on the challenging i-LIDS, VIPeR, PRID2011 and CUHK01 datasets.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification is the problem of matching the
same individuals across multiple cameras, or across time
within a single camera. It is attracting rapidly increased
attentions in the computer vision and pattern recognition
research community due to its importance for many applications such as video surveillance, human-computer interaction, robotics, content-based video retrieval, etc. Despite years of efforts, person re-id remains challenging due
to the following reasons: 1) dramatic variations in visual
appearance and ambient environment caused by different viewpoints from different cameras; 2) significant changes
in human pose across time and space; 3) background clutter
and occlusions; and 4) different individuals that share similar appearances. Moreover, with little or no visible faces,
in many cases the use of biometric and soft-biometric approaches is not applicable. Figure 1 illustrates some examples of the matched pairs in four challenging person re-id

Figure 1. Matched examples in datasets i-LIDS, VIPeR, CUHK01
and PRID2011. Each row shows matched examples from the same
dataset. Images in a red bounding box contain the same person.

benchmark datasets i-LIDS [38],VIPeR[13],PRID2011[17]
and CUHK01[24]. Images in each red bounding box are
from the same person.
Given a query person’s image, in order to find the correct matches among a large set of candidate images captured by different cameras, two crucial problems must be
addressed. First, good image features are required to represent both the query and the gallery images. Second,
suitable distance metrics are indispensable to determine
whether a gallery image contains the same individual as
the query image. Many existing studies consider the two problems separately and have focused more on the first
one, that is, developing more discriminative and robust feature representations to describe a person’s visual appear4321
1335

