3D Semantic Parsing of Large-Scale Indoor Spaces
Iro Armeni1 Ozan Sener1,2 Amir R. Zamir1 Helen Jiang1
Ioannis Brilakis3 Martin Fischer1 Silvio Savarese1
1

2

Stanford University

Cornell University

3

University of Cambridge

http://buildingparser.stanford.edu/
(a) Raw Point Cloud

(c) Building
Element Detection

(b) Space Parsing and
Alignment in Canonical 3D Space

y

z

x

...

board
chair
beam

Enclosed Spaces

floor
wall
window

table
column
sofa

door
bookcase
ceiling

Figure 1: Semantic parsing of a large-scale point cloud. Left: the raw point cloud. Middle: the results of parsing the point cloud into
disjoint spaces (i.e. the floor plan). Right: the results of parsing a detected room (marked with the black circle) into semantic elements.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a method for semantic parsing
the 3D point cloud of an entire building using a hierarchical approach: first, the raw data is parsed into semantically
meaningful spaces (e.g. rooms, etc) that are aligned into a
canonical reference coordinate system. Second, the spaces
are parsed into their structural and building elements (e.g.
walls, columns, etc). Performing these with a strong notation of global 3D space is the backbone of our method. The
alignment in the first step injects strong 3D priors from the
canonical coordinate system into the second step for discovering elements. This allows diverse challenging scenarios as man-made indoor spaces often show recurrent geometric patterns while the appearance features can change
drastically. We also argue that identification of structural
elements in indoor spaces is essentially a detection problem, rather than segmentation which is commonly used. We
evaluated our method on a new dataset of several buildings
with a covered area of over 6, 000m2 and over 215 million
points, demonstrating robust results readily useful for practical applications.

1. Introduction
During the past few years, 3D imaging technology experienced a major progress with the production of inexpensive depth sensors (e.g. Kinect [2]). This caused a leap in
the development of many successful semantic segmentation
methods that use both RGB and depth [26, 31, 7]. However, the 3D sensing field has recently undergone a followup shift with the availability of mature technology for scanning large-scale spaces, e.g. an entire building. Such systems can reliably form the 3D point cloud of thousands of
square meters with the number of points often exceeding
hundreds of millions (see Fig. 1 left). This demands semantic parsing methods capable of coping with this scale, and
ideally, exploiting the unique characteristics of such data.
Large-scale scans of buildings pose new challenges/opportunities in semantic parsing that are different
from, or not faced in, small-scale RGB-D segmentation:
Richer Geometric Information: Large-scale point clouds
make the entire building available at once. This allows
utilizing recurrent geometric regularities common in manmade structures. Such possibilities are beyond what a

1534

