A Probabilistic Framework for Color-Based Point Set Registration
Martin Danelljan, Giulia Meneghetti, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, Michael Felsberg
Computer Vision Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University, Sweden
{martin.danelljan, giulia.meneghetti, fahad.khan, michael.felsberg}@liu.se

Abstract
In recent years, sensors capable of measuring both color
and depth information have become increasingly popular.
Despite the abundance of colored point set data, stateof-the-art probabilistic registration techniques ignore the
available color information. In this paper, we propose a
probabilistic point set registration framework that exploits
available color information associated with the points. Our
method is based on a model of the joint distribution of
3D-point observations and their color information. The
proposed model captures discriminative color information,
while being computationally efficient. We derive an EM algorithm for jointly estimating the model parameters and the
relative transformations.
Comprehensive experiments are performed on the Stanford Lounge dataset, captured by an RGB-D camera, and
two point sets captured by a Lidar sensor. Our results
demonstrate a significant gain in robustness and accuracy
when incorporating color information. On the Stanford
Lounge dataset, our approach achieves a relative reduction
of the failure rate by 78% compared to the baseline. Furthermore, our proposed model outperforms standard strategies for combining color and 3D-point information, leading
to state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
3D-point set registration is a classical computer vision
problem with important applications. Generally, the points
originate from measurements of sensors, such as time-offlight cameras and laser range scanners. The problem is to
register observed point sets from the same scene by finding
their relative geometric transformations. One class of approaches [2, 16], based on the Iterative Closest Point (ICP)
[1], iteratively assumes pairwise correspondences and then
finds the transformation by distance minimization. Alternatively, probabilistic methods [5, 7, 9, 14] model the distribution of points using e.g. Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs).
Recently, probabilistic approaches demonstrated promising results for point set registration [5, 7]. The im-

(a) First set.

(b) Second set.

(c) Baseline registration [5].

(d) Our color-based registration.

Figure 1. Registration of the two colored point sets (a) and (b),
of an indoor scene captured by a Lidar. The baseline GMM-based
method (c) fails to register the two point sets due to the large initial
rotation error of 90 degrees. Our method accurately registers the
two sets (d), by exploiting the available color information.

proved performance in probabilistic methods is achieved
by modeling the distribution of points as a density function. The probabilistic approaches can be further categorized into correlation-based and Expectation Maximization
(EM) based methods. The correlation-based approaches
[9, 17] estimate the transformation parameters by maximizing a similarity measure between the density models of the
two point sets. Instead, the EM-based methods simultaneously estimate the density model and the transformation parameters [5, 7, 14]. In this paper, we explore probabilistic
models for EM-based colored point set registration.
State-of-the-art probabilistic techniques [5, 7, 14] rely on
the distribution of points in 3D-space, while ignoring additional information, such as color, for point set registration.
On the other hand, the increased availability of cheap RGBD cameras has triggered the use of colored 3D-point sets
in many computer vision applications, including 3D object
recognition [4], scene reconstruction [3] and robotics [6].
Besides RGB-D cameras, many laser range scanners also
capture RGB or intensity information. Additionally, col-

1818

