MovieQA: Understanding Stories in Movies through Question-Answering
Makarand Tapaswi1 ,
Yukun Zhu3 ,
Rainer Stiefelhagen1
2
3
Antonio Torralba ,
Raquel Urtasun ,
Sanja Fidler3
1
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 3 University of Toronto
{tapaswi,rainer.stiefelhagen}@kit.edu, torralba@csail.mit.edu, {yukun,urtasun,fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

Source of Information

http://movieqa.cs.toronto.edu

Plot

… Trinity contacts
him confirming that
Morpheus can …

…

Video

…

About to disconnect when an
anonymous message slices onto
the screen.

Subtitle
Scripts
DVS

SCREEN
Do you want to know what the
Matrix is, Neo?

0:15

0:00

Quiz

… The Matrix is revealed to
be a shared simulation of the
world as it was in 1999 …

… Neo meets
Morpheus, …

... secretly betrayed
Morpheus to Agent
Smith in exchange for
a comfortable …

…

01:04:08 --> 01:04:09
... you know what I realize?

00:40:47 --> 00:40:48
that we call the Matrix.

01:04:17 --> 01:04:18
Ignorance is bliss.

0:45

1:15

1:00

… He ends the
call and flies into
the sky.

…

…

00:40:42 --> 00:40:47
It exists now only as part of a
neural-interactive simulation

0:30

… Morpheus and Trinity exit
the Matrix, but Smith ambushes
and kills Neo before he can …

Neo is seen exiting the
phone booth and observing
the surrounding people.
He looks up and flies to the
skies.

1:30

1:45

2:00

Time

What is the Matrix?

Who kills Neo in the Matrix?

Why does Cypher betray Morpheus?

How does the movie end?

A: A shared simulation of the world

A: Smith kills Neo

A: In exchange for a comfortable life

A: With Neo flying into the sky

A: A group of robots
A: A human body
A: A set of numbers stored as a table

A: Trinity kills Neo
A: Morpheus kills Neo after he realizes
that Neo is not the one

A: In exchange for money
A: Because he is threatened by Agent Smith

A: With the Machines chasing after Neo
A: We see Mr. Smith torture Morpheus

Figure 1: Our MovieQA dataset contains 14,944 questions about 408 movies. It contains multiple sources of information: plots, subtitles,
video clips, scripts, and DVS transcriptions. In this figure we show example QAs from The Matrix and localize them in the timeline.

Abstract
We introduce the MovieQA dataset which aims to evaluate automatic story comprehension from both video and
text. The dataset consists of 14,944 questions about 408
movies with high semantic diversity. The questions range
from simpler “Who” did “What” to “Whom”, to “Why”
and “How” certain events occurred. Each question comes
with a set of five possible answers; a correct one and four
deceiving answers provided by human annotators. Our
dataset is unique in that it contains multiple sources of
information – video clips, plots, subtitles, scripts, and
DVS [32]. We analyze our data through various statistics
and methods. We further extend existing QA techniques
to show that question-answering with such open-ended semantics is hard. We make this data set public along with an
evaluation benchmark to encourage inspiring work in this
challenging domain.

1. Introduction
Fast progress in Deep Learning as well as a large amount
of available labeled data has significantly pushed forward

the performance in many visual tasks such as image tagging, object detection and segmentation, action recognition,
and image/video captioning. We are steps closer to applications such as assistive solutions for the visually impaired,
or cognitive robotics, which require a holistic understanding of the visual world by reasoning about all these tasks
in a common framework. However, a truly intelligent machine would ideally also infer high-level semantics underlying human actions such as motivation, intent and emotion,
in order to react and, possibly, communicate appropriately.
These topics have only begun to be explored in the literature [27, 49].
A great way of showing one’s understanding about the
scene is to be able to answer any question about it [23].
This idea gave rise to several question-answering datasets
which provide a set of questions for each image along with
multi-choice answers. These datasets are either based on
RGB-D images [23] or a large collection of static photos
such as Microsoft COCO [1, 47]. The types of questions
typically asked are “What” is there and “Where” is it, what
attributes an object has, what is its relation to other objects
in the scene, and “How many” objects of certain type are
present. While these questions verify the holistic nature of
14631

