HyperNet: Towards Accurate Region Proposal Generation
and Joint Object Detection
∗

Tao Kong1 Anbang Yao2 Yurong Chen2 Fuchun Sun1
1
State Key Lab. of Intelligent Technology and Systems
1
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University 2 Intel Labs China
{kt14@mails, sunfc@mail}.tsinghua.edu.cn

{anbang.yao, yurong.chen}@intel.com

person 0.978

Abstract

person 0.966
person 0.941
motorbike 0.825

Almost all of the current top-performing object detection
networks employ region proposals to guide the search for
object instances. State-of-the-art region proposal methods
usually need several thousand proposals to get high recall, thus hurting the detection efficiency. Although the latest
Region Proposal Network method gets promising detection
accuracy with several hundred proposals, it still struggles
in small-size object detection and precise localization (e.g.,
large IoU thresholds), mainly due to the coarseness of its
feature maps. In this paper, we present a deep hierarchical
network, namely HyperNet, for handling region proposal
generation and object detection jointly. Our HyperNet is
primarily based on an elaborately designed Hyper Feature
which aggregates hierarchical feature maps first and then
compresses them into a uniform space. The Hyper Features well incorporate deep but highly semantic, intermediate but really complementary, and shallow but naturally
high-resolution features of the image, thus enabling us to
construct HyperNet by sharing them both in generating proposals and detecting objects via an end-to-end joint training
strategy. For the deep VGG16 model, our method achieves
completely leading recall and state-of-the-art object detection accuracy on PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 using only
100 proposals per image. It runs with a speed of 5 fps (including all steps) on a GPU, thus having the potential for
real-time processing.

1. Introduction
Generic object detection methods are moving from dense
sliding window approaches to sparse region proposal framework. High-quality and category-independent object pro∗ This work was done when Tao Kong was an intern at Intel Labs China
supervised by Anbang Yao who is responsible for correspondence.

region proposals

Image

Hyper Feature
extraction

detection results

Object
proposal

Detection

Figure 1. HyperNet object detection overview. Topleft: top 10
object proposals generated by the network. Topright: detection
results with precision value. Down: object proposal generation
and detection pipeline.

posals reduce the number of windows each classifier needs
to consider, thus promoting the development of object detection. Most recent state-of-the-art object detection methods adopt such pipeline [28][14][16][12][35]. A pioneering work is regions with convolutional neural network (RCNN)[14]. It first extracts ∼2k region proposals by Selective Search [33] method and then classifies them with a pretrained convolutional neural network (CNN). By employing
an even deeper CNN model (VGG16 [32]), it gives 30% relative improvement over the best previous result on PASCAL
VOC 2012 [9].
There are two major keys to the success of the R-CNN:
(a) It replaces the hand-engineered features like HOG [6] or
SIFT [25] with high level object representations obtained
from CNN models. CNN features are arguably more discriminative representations. (b) It uses a few thousands of category-independent region proposals to reduce the
searching space for an image. One may note that R-CNN
relies on region proposals generated by Selective Search. Selective Search takes about 2 seconds to compute proposals
for a typical 500×300 image. Meanwhile, feature computation in R-CNN is time-consuming, as it repeatedly applies

845

