Determining occlusions from space and time image reconstructions
Juan-Manuel Pérez-Rúa1,2 , Tomas Crivelli1 , Patrick Bouthemy2 , and Patrick Pérez1
1

Technicolor, Cesson Sévigné, France

2

Inria, Centre Rennes - Bretagne Atlantique, France

Abstract
The problem of localizing occlusions between consecutive frames of a video is important but rarely tackled on its
own. In most works, it is tightly interleaved with the computation of accurate optical flows, which leads to a delicate chicken-and-egg problem. With this in mind, we propose a novel approach to occlusion detection where visibility or not of a point in next frame is formulated in terms
of visual reconstruction. The key issue is now to determine how well a pixel in the first image can be “reconstructed” from co-located colors in the next image. We first
exploit this reasoning at the pixel level with a new detection criterion. Contrary to the ubiquitous displaced-framedifference and forward-backward flow vector matching, the
proposed alternative does not critically depend on a precomputed, dense displacement field, while being shown to
be more effective. We then leverage this local modeling
within an energy-minimization framework that delivers occlusion maps. An easy-to-obtain collection of parametric
motion models is exploited within the energy to provide the
required level of motion information. Our approach outperforms state-of-the-art detection methods on the challenging
MPI Sintel dataset.

1. Introduction
Detecting occluded areas at each instant of a video sequence is of utmost interest for many computer vision applications. In fact, even though occlusion detection is mostly
associated with the problem of computing inter-image correspondences (optical flow for monocular vision, or disparity map in stereo vision), it is very informative on its own.
Among other applications, occlusion-based reasoning has
been applied to contour and object tracking [21, 44], segmentation of multiple objects [39], action recognition [37],
pose estimation [36], and depth ordering [26].
In spite of the usual association between motion field
estimation and occlusion detection, it is worth noting that
physical motion within the scene by itself does not deter-

mine if an element is hidden at a given instant. An additional factor is needed in the equation, that is, the observer
point of view, or in other words, the observed 2D visual
representation of the real 3D world, i.e., the image. This
is a well-known fact and limitation of the optical flow as
a representation of physical motion [35]. When working
with a succession of discrete-in-time and discrete-in-space
2D images, one can define that a point of a given image is
occluded in the next (or other) image of the sequence, if it
is not visible by the observer in the latter.
Many state-of-the-art approaches tackle occlusion detection based on the following question: Does an image point
have a correspondent in the other image that can be confidently identified as physically identical? In practice, this
is indeed evidenced, either implicitly or explicitly, by a
wide range of formulations that consider the problem of occlusion detection as inseparable of displacement estimation
[2, 13, 18, 32, 41]. This simple question leads however to
obstacles in formulating the problem. First, true dense correspondences between images are not easily obtained, especially on occluded pixels where the optical flow (or disparity, likewise) is not well defined. Even in non-occluded
areas, rapid changes in appearance and scale make the definition and the estimation of unique correspondences difficult.
We strive for an alternative, more direct, approach to occlusion detection. We adopt an image reconstruction viewpoint that frees us, to a large extent, from the need of jointly
estimating an accurate, dense motion field. Instead, we only
make use of “plausible” motions simply extracted from the
image pair.
The main idea is to assess whether or not pixel appearance can be equally well explained by its spatial neighborhood in the same frame and by suitable co-located pixels in
the other frame. If not, this point is likely to be occluded
in the next image. In this way, occlusion detection can be
sought as independent of the knowledge of an accurate, univocal motion field between the two images. It suffices to exploit loosely the spatiotemporal coherency in order to select
a suitable spatiotemporal neighborhood.
11382

