Discriminative Invariant Kernel Features: A Bells-and-Whistles-Free Approach
to Unsupervised Face Recognition and Pose Estimation
Dipan K. Pal
Carnegie Mellon University

Felix Juefei-Xu
Carnegie Mellon University

Marios Savvides
Carnegie Mellon University

dipanp@andrew.cmu.edu

felixu@cmu.edu

msavvid@ri.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose an explicitly discriminative and ‘simple’ approach to generate invariance to nuisance transformations
modeled as unitary. In practice, the approach works well to
handle non-unitary transformations as well. Our theoretical results extend the reach of a recent theory of invariance
to discriminative and kernelized features based on unitary
kernels. As a special case, a single common framework
can be used to generate subject-specific pose-invariant features for face recognition and vice-versa for pose estimation. We show that our main proposed method (DIKF)
can perform well under very challenging large-scale semisynthetic face matching and pose estimation protocols with
unaligned faces using no landmarking whatsoever. We additionally benchmark on CMU MPIE and outperform previous work in almost all cases on off-angle face matching
while we are on par with the previous state-of-the-art on the
LFW unsupervised and image-restricted protocols, without
any low-level image descriptors other than raw-pixels.

1. Introduction
Over the years there have been many different approaches to the problem of general face recognition and
pose estimation. However, there is a lot yet to be achieved
before one can consider the unconstrained version of these
problems fully solved. Though there are many algorithms
in literature that perform extremely well on unconstrained
datasets such as the LFW [21, 35, 8, 40, 6, 26, 38], given
the complexity of these algorithms, it remains unclear as to
what underlying objective each of them aims to achieve in
the context of unconstrained face matching. To address this
need, we refrain from incorporating ‘complex’ algorithms
and optimization problems in our approach and solely base
the core mechanism on fundamental principles of generating invariance.
Although success on the LFW framework has been very
encouraging, a paradigm shift is underway towards the role

Figure 1: The common single framework for pose-invariant face recognition and subject-invariant pose estimation. Measuring moments (pooling)
across a transformation (i.e. subject or pose in this figure) invokes invariance towards that transformation.

of such large unconstrained databases. It has been suggested, that the problem of face recognition be divided into
subtasks of achieving invariance towards transformations of
a face [23]. Further, strong recent progress on the supervised protocols of the LFW dataset nearing human accuracy have perhaps overshadowed the need to understand the
fundamental problems in vision tasks such as recognition.
In light of these arguments, there is a need for methods
that are based on fundamental principles, not in order to
beat the current state-of-the-art, but instead to further our
understanding of the problem itself. Although, there has
been significant work in literature generating implicit invariance to specific individual or a small subset of these
transformations at once, an approach which generates explicitly invariant features to any unitary modeled transformation while being explicitly discriminative has not been
studied. Further, there is a need for a study investigating
generation of invariant features to multiple common transformations of faces in a controlled setting. Studies on largescale controlled datasets have the advantage of being more
informative regarding the algorithmic shortcomings.
15590

