VLAD3 : Encoding Dynamics of Deep Features for Action Recognition
Yingwei Li†
Weixin Li†
†
University of California, San Diego

Vijay Mahadevan§
Nuno Vasconcelos†
§
Yahoo Research

{yil325, wel107, nuno}@ucsd.edu

vmahadev@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract
Previous approaches to action recognition with deep features tend to process video frames only within a small temporal region, and do not model long-range dynamic information explicitly. However, such information is important
for the accurate recognition of actions, especially for the
discrimination of complex activities that share sub-actions,
and when dealing with untrimmed videos. Here, we propose
a representation, VLAD for Deep Dynamics (VLAD3 ), that
accounts for different levels of video dynamics. It captures
short-term dynamics with deep convolutional neural network features, relying on linear dynamic systems (LDS) to
model medium-range dynamics. To account for long-range
inhomogeneous dynamics, a VLAD descriptor is derived for
the LDS and pooled over the whole video, to arrive at the
final VLAD3 representation. An extensive evaluation was
performed on Olympic Sports, UCF101 and THUMOS15,
where the use of the VLAD3 representation leads to stateof-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Object and action recognition are two important problems in computer vision. Over the last decade, the dominant representation for both problems was the bag-of-words
model, combining histograms of descriptors such as HoG or
HoF and pooling over space-time volumes [24, 32]. More
recently, substantial gains in object recognition have been
reported with the use of deep convolution neural networks
(CNNs) [13, 27, 30]. This has motivated several attempts to
apply CNNs to the action recognition problem [11, 26, 31].
However, for action, the gains over state-of-the-art bag-ofwords approaches [32] have not been as impressive. This
can be at least partially explained by the structure of the
video signal.
While most images tend to exhibit localized spatial structure, the temporal structure of video is constrained by the
laws of Newtonian mechanics, which determine the motion
of objects in natural scenes. Since this motion tends to be
smooth, the video dynamics are homogeneous over a substantial number of frames. We refer to this as the medium-

range structure of video, which tends to be homogeneous.
On the other hand, over the long-range, natural scene dynamics can be very inhomogeneous since videos frequently
depict a number of actions. An example is given in Figure 1,
where the action of interest (“javelin throw”) is embedded in
video that also contains actions that precede (athlete warmups) and follow (crowd shot, shot of the score board, etc.) it.
This video is only marginally informative about the action
of interest (depicts actions shared by all track events). Overall, the statistics of the video can be represented at various
levels of granularity, giving rise to the hierarchy of Figure 1.
In the short-term, a video can be characterized as a sequence of frames with characteristic motion patterns. For
example, the optical flow of the “pole-fly” scene is very
distinct from that of the “score board” scene. We refer to
this as short-term video dynamics. At the next level, the
video can be grouped into shots of dynamics that are discriminative for the target action. Since these dynamics tend
to span a substantial number of frames (at least seconds,
sometimes minutes) they are denoted as medium-range dynamics. Note that, as shown in Figure 1, a single action,
such as the “javelin throw,” can span several shots, including the sub-actions “run,” “throw,” “pole flight,” and “pole
landing.” Hence, the dynamics of a single action can frequently be decomposed into a sequence of states, which
typically have themselves homogeneous mid-range dynamics. Finally, the target action is embedded into marginally
or totally unrelated video. Hence, the long-range dynamics
of video tend to be highly inhomogeneous. While chunks
of these dynamics correspond to the action of interest, their
location can vary from one video to the next.
Since the temporal structure of video statistics follows
the hierarchy of Figure 1, it is sensible to consider a similar hierarchy for video models. The lowest level in this hierarchy includes models whose temporal support accounts
for a few video frames. This includes approaches based on
hand-crafted descriptors and a number of recent CNN models, which use a few frames as inputs and a purely feedforward structure [11, 26, 31]. This is denoted as the shortterm level of the model hierarchy. The next class of models
includes recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and their vari11951

