Learning to Match Aerial Images with Deep Attentive Architectures
Hani Altwaijry1,2 , Eduard Trulls3 , James Hays4 , Pascal Fua3 , Serge Belongie1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University 2 Cornell Tech
3
Computer Vision Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
4
School of Interactive Computing, College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
Input Pair

Abstract
Image matching is a fundamental problem in Computer
Vision. In the context of feature-based matching, SIFT and
its variants have long excelled in a wide array of applications. However, for ultra-wide baselines, as in the case of
aerial images captured under large camera rotations, the
appearance variation goes beyond the reach of SIFT and
RANSAC. In this paper we propose a data-driven, deep
learning-based approach that sidesteps local correspondence by framing the problem as a classification task. Furthermore, we demonstrate that local correspondences can
still be useful. To do so we incorporate an attention mechanism to produce a set of probable matches, which allows
us to further increase performance. We train our models on
a dataset of urban aerial imagery consisting of ‘same’ and
‘different’ pairs, collected for this purpose, and characterize the problem via a human study with annotations from
Amazon Mechanical Turk. We demonstrate that our models outperform the state-of-the-art on ultra-wide baseline
matching and approach human accuracy.

1. Introduction
Finding the relationship between two images depicting
a 3D scene is one of the fundamental problems of Computer Vision. This relationship can be examined at different
granularities. At a coarse level, we can ask whether two images show the same scene. At the other extreme, we would
like to know the dense pixel-to-pixel correspondence, or
lack thereof, between the two images. These granularities
are directly related to broader topics in Computer Vision;
in particular, one can look at the coarse-grained problem
as a recognition/classification task, whereas the pixel-wise
problem can be viewed as one of segmentation. Traditional
geometry-based approaches live in a middle ground, relying on a multi-stage process that typically involves keypoint matching and outlier rejection, where image-level correspondence is derived from local correspondence.

SIFT

CNN Match

Figure 1. Matching ultra-wide baseline aerial images. Left: The
pair of images in question. Middle: Local correspondence matching approaches fail to handle this baseline and rotation. Right: The
CNN matches the pair and proposes possible region matches.

In this paper we focus on pairs of oblique aerial images acquired by distant cameras from very different angles, as shown in Fig. 1. These images are challenging for
geometry-based approaches for a number of reasons—chief
among them are dramatic appearance distortions due to
viewpoint changes and ambiguities due to repetitive structures. This renders methods based on local correspondence
insufficient for ultra-wide baseline matching.
In contrast, we follow a data-driven approach. Specifically, we treat the problem from a recognition standpoint,
without appealing specifically to hand-crafted, featurebased approaches or their underlying geometry. Our aim is
to learn a discriminative representation from a large amount
of instances of same and different pairs, which separates the
genuine matches from the impostors.
We propose two architectures based on Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN). The first architecture is only concerned with learning to discriminate image pairs as same or
different. The second one extends it by incorporating a Spatial Transformer module [16] to propose possible matching
13539

