Improved Hamming Distance Search using Variable Length Hashing
Eng-Jon Ong and Miroslaw Bober
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing
University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
e.ong,m.bober@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of ultra-large-scale
search in Hamming spaces. There has been considerable
research on generating compact binary codes in vision, for
example for visual search tasks. However the issue of efficient searching through huge sets of binary codes remains
largely unsolved. To this end, we propose a novel, unsupervised approach to thresholded search in Hamming space,
supporting long codes (e.g. 512-bits) with a wide-range of
Hamming distance radii. Our method is capable of working efficiently with billions of codes delivering between one
to three orders of magnitude acceleration, as compared to
prior art. This is achieved by relaxing the equal-size constraint in the Multi-Index Hashing approach, leading to
multiple hash-tables with variable length hash-keys. Based
on the theoretical analysis of the retrieval probabilities of
multiple hash-tables we propose a novel search algorithm
for obtaining a suitable set of hash-key lengths. The resulting retrieval mechanism is shown empirically to improve
the efficiency over the state-of-the-art, across a range of
datasets, bit-depths and retrieval thresholds.

1. Introduction
At present, there is a need for efficient searching in image datasets that are increasingly larger in size, ranging
from millions (e.g.Flickr 1M[5], ImageNet[1]) to a billion
images (e.g. ANN1B [7]). Tackling this problem requires
two important mechanisms: 1) efficient image representation and 2) the ability to quickly search inside the representation space.
This paper addresses the second part of efficient searching. For our purposes, we tackle the task of fast large-scale
retrieval of compact binary vectors, posed as a thresholded
Hamming distance search. To achieve this, we propose a
novel unsupervised approach for performing thresholded
search in Hamming space. Our approach is able to cope
efficiently with binary code dimensionalities that are large
(e.g. 512-bits) and a wide range of Hamming distance radii.

1.1. Background Review
There exists a large body of work on generating binary
codes for the purpose of large scale image retrieval, in particular the method of hashing [11, 10, 14]. They aim to extract hashing functions that binarise high dimensional feature vectors into compact binary codes.
Nonetheless, the problem of efficiently searching
through a large dataset of binary vectors remains. A linear scan is usually used at this stage, which can be accelerated by the build-in CPU hardware instructions. However,
for large datasets (hundreds of millions, billions), the linear
search time for a single query is still in the order of minutes. One solution is the hierarchical decomposition of the
search space using multiple trees [8]. Hashing using binary
codes has also been used for fast approximate nearest neighbour search in image retrieval [13], where, the binary code
is the hashtable key. Retrieval of related examples to a query
example are the colliding hashtable entries. However, this
approach is only applicable when the dimensionality of the
binary code is small (i.e. less than 32), otherwise, the memory footprint of the hashtable itself becomes prohibitively
large. Our work differs from this in that we can still cope
with large dimensionalities.
Another approach is to divide the binary code into
smaller segments and build multiple hashtables, leading to
the Multi-Index Hashing (MIH) approach [3] and its use
for large scale search by Norouzi et al.[9]. Here, a binary
code is divided into equally sized substrings and separate
hashtables are built from them. The configuration of substring lengths and their number is selected such that a superset of relevant examples (i.e. within some r-neighbourhood
in Hamming space) are returned. Examples that are above
distance r are then removed using linear scan. The resulting search speeds were significantly faster than linear scan.
However, this speedup is possible only for small Hamming
thresholds r. When r increases, the time spent on removing
inaccurate retrievals increases very quickly and eventually,
becomes very similar to exhaustive linear scans. This is due
to the constraint of equal length strings.
Our work removes this constraint and we show how this
12000

