LocNet: Improving Localization Accuracy for Object Detection
Spyros Gidaris
Universite Paris Est, Ecole des Ponts ParisTech

Nikos Komodakis
Universite Paris Est, Ecole des Ponts ParisTech

gidariss@imagine.enpc.fr

nikos.komodakis@enpc.fr

Abstract
We propose a novel object localization methodology with
the purpose of boosting the localization accuracy of stateof-the-art object detection systems. Our model, given a
search region, aims at returning the bounding box of an object of interest inside this region. To accomplish its goal,
it relies on assigning conditional probabilities to each row
and column of this region, where these probabilities provide
useful information regarding the location of the boundaries
of the object inside the search region and allow the accurate inference of the object bounding box under a simple
probabilistic framework.
For implementing our localization model, we make use of
a convolutional neural network architecture that is properly
adapted for this task, called LocNet. We show experimentally that LocNet achieves a very significant improvement on
the mAP for high IoU thresholds on PASCAL VOC2007 test
set and that it can be very easily coupled with recent stateof-the-art object detection systems, helping them to boost
their performance. Finally, we demonstrate that our detection approach can achieve high detection accuracy even
when it is given as input a set of sliding windows, thus proving that it is independent of box proposal methods.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a computer vision problem that has
attracted an immense amount of attention over the last
years. The localization accuracy by which a detection system is able to predict the bounding boxes of the objects of
interest is typically judged based on the Intersection over
Union (IoU) between the predicted and the ground truth
bounding box. Although in challenges such as PASCAL
VOC an IoU detection threshold of 0.5 is used for deciding
whether an object has been successfully detected, in real
life applications a higher localization accuracy (e.g. IoU
⩾ 0.7) is normally required (e.g., consider the task of a
This work was supported by the ANR SEMAPOLIS project. Code
and trained models are available on:
https://github.com/gidariss/LocNet

Figure 1: Illustration of the basic work-flow of our localization
module. Left column: our model given a candidate box B (yellow
box) it ”looks” on a search region R (red box), which is obtained
by enlarging box B by a constant factor, in order to localize the
bounding box of an object of interest. Right column: To localize
a bounding box the model assigns one or more probabilities on
each row and independently on each column of region R. Those
probabilities can be either the probability of an element (row or
column) to be one of the four object borders (see top-right image),
or the probability for being on the inside of an objects bounding
box (see bottom-right image). In either case the predicted bounding box is drawn with blue color.

robotic arm that must grasp an object). Such a need is
also reflected in the very recently introduced COCO detection challenge [23], which uses as evaluation metric the traditional average precision (AP) measurement but averaged
over multiple IoU thresholds between 0.5 (loosely localized
object) and 1.0 (perfectly localized object) so as to reward
detectors that exhibit good localization accuracy.
Therefore, proposing detectors that exhibit highly accurate (and not loose) localization of the ground truth objects
should be one of the major future challenges in object detection. The aim of this work is to take a further step towards
addressing this challenge. In practical terms, our goal is to
boost the bounding box detection AP performance across a
wide range of IoU thresholds (i.e., not just for IoU thresh-

789

