Video Paragraph Captioning Using Hierarchical Recurrent Neural Networks
Haonan Yu1∗ Jiang Wang3 Zhiheng Huang2∗ Yi Yang3 Wei Xu3
1
2
Purdue University
Facebook
haonanu@gmail.com
3

zhiheng@fb.com

Baidu Research - Institute of Deep Learning

{wangjiang03,yangyi05,wei.xu}@baidu.com

Abstract
We present an approach that exploits hierarchical Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to tackle the video captioning
problem, i.e., generating one or multiple sentences to describe a realistic video. Our hierarchical framework contains a sentence generator and a paragraph generator. The
sentence generator produces one simple short sentence that
describes a specific short video interval. It exploits both
temporal- and spatial-attention mechanisms to selectively
focus on visual elements during generation. The paragraph
generator captures the inter-sentence dependency by taking
as input the sentential embedding produced by the sentence
generator, combining it with the paragraph history, and
outputting the new initial state for the sentence generator.
We evaluate our approach on two large-scale benchmark
datasets: YouTubeClips and TACoS-MultiLevel. The experiments demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art methods with BLEU@4
scores 0.499 and 0.305 respectively.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the problem of video captioning, i.e. generating one or multiple sentences to describe
the content of a video. The given video could be as general as those uploaded to YouTube, or it could be as specific
as cooking videos with fine-grained activities. This ability
to generate linguistic descriptions for unconstrained video
is important because not only it is a critical step towards
machine intelligence, but also it has many applications in
daily scenarios such as video retrieval, automatic video subtitling, blind navigation, etc. Figure 1 shows some example
sentences generated by our approach.
The video captioning problem has been studied for over
one decade ever since the first rule-based system on describing human activities with natural language [23]. In a very
limited setting, Kojima et al. designed some simple heuris∗ This work was done while the authors were at Baidu.

tics for identifying video objects and a set of rules for producing verbs and prepositions. A sentence is then generated
by filling predefined templates with the recognized parts
of speech. Following their work, several succeeding approaches [26, 20, 21, 15, 3] applied similar rule-based systems to datasets with larger numbers of objects and events,
in different tasks and scenarios. With ad hoc rules, they
manually establish the correspondence between linguistic
terms and visual elements, and analyze the relations among
the visual elements to generate sentences. Among them, the
most complex rule-based system [3] supports a vocabulary
of 118 lexical entries (including 48 verbs and 24 nouns).
To eliminate the tedious effort of rule engineering when
the problem scales, some recent methods train statistical
models for lexical entries, either in a fully [10, 14, 24, 42] or
weakly [37, 36, 57, 55] supervised fashion. The statistical
models of different parts of speech usually have different
mathematical representations and training strategies (e.g.,
[14, 24]). With most of the manual effort gone, the training process exposes these methods to even larger datasets
(e.g., YouTubeClips [6] and TACoS-MultiLevel [36]) which
contain thousands of lexical entries and dozens of hours of
videos. As a result, the video captioning task becomes much
more challenging, and the generation performance of these
methods is usually low on these large-scale datasets.
Since then, inspiring results have been achieved by a recent line of work [11, 48, 47, 32, 54, 56] which benefits
from the rapid development of deep neural networks, especially Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). Applying RNN
to translating visual sequence to natural language is largely
inspired by the recent advances in Neural Machine Translation (NMT) [1, 43] in the natural language processing community. The idea is to treat the image sequence of a video as
the “source text” and the corresponding caption as the target
text. Given a sequence of deep convolutional features (e.g.,
VggNet [40] and C3D [45]) extracted from video frames, a
compact representation of the video is obtained by: average
pooling [48, 32], weighted average pooling with an attention model [56], or taking the last output from an RNN en-

4584

