Dynamic Image Networks for Action Recognition
Hakan Bilen†∗ Basura Fernando‡∗ Efstratios Gavves§ Andrea Vedaldi† Stephen Gould‡
†
University of Oxford ‡The Australian National University §QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam

Abstract
We introduce the concept of dynamic image, a novel
compact representation of videos useful for video analysis especially when convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
are used. The dynamic image is based on the rank pooling concept and is obtained through the parameters of a
ranking machine that encodes the temporal evolution of the
frames of the video. Dynamic images are obtained by directly applying rank pooling on the raw image pixels of a
video producing a single RGB image per video. This idea
is simple but powerful as it enables the use of existing CNN
models directly on video data with fine-tuning. We present
an efficient and effective approximate rank pooling operator, speeding it up orders of magnitude compared to rank
pooling. Our new approximate rank pooling CNN layer allows us to generalize dynamic images to dynamic feature
maps and we demonstrate the power of our new representations on standard benchmarks in action recognition achieving state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Videos comprise a large majority of the visual data in
existence, surpassing by a wide margin still images. Therefore understanding the content of videos accurately and
on a large scale is of paramount importance. The advent
of modern learnable representations such as deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has improved dramatically
the performance in many image understanding tasks. Since
videos are composed of a sequence of still images, some of
these improvements have been shown to transfer to videos
directly. However, it remains unclear how videos could be
optimally represented. For example, one can look at a video
as a sequence of still images, perhaps enjoying some form
of temporal smoothness, or as a subspace of images or image features, or as the output of a neural network encoder.
Which one among these and other possibilities results in the
best representation of videos is not well understood.
∗ Equal contribution
1 From left to right and top to bottom: “blowing hair dry”, “band marching”, “balancing on beam”, “golf swing”, “fencing”, “playing the cello”,

Figure 1: Dynamic images summarizing the actions and
motions that happen in images in standard 2d image format. Can you guess what actions are visualized just from
their dynamic image motion signature? 1
In this paper, we explore a new powerful and yet simple
representation of videos in the context of deep learning. As
a representative goal we consider the standard problem of
recognizing human actions in short video sequences. Recent works such as [5, 6, 7, 9, 23] pointed out that long
term dynamics and temporal patterns are a very important
cues for the recognition of actions. However, representing
complex long term dynamics is difficult, particularly if one
seeks compact representations that can be processed efficiently. Several efficient representations of long term dynamics have been obtained by temporal pooling of image
features in a video. Temporal pooling has been done using
temporal templates [1] or using ranking functions for video
frames [6] or subvideos [9] or by more traditional pooling
operators [23].
In this paper we propose a new long-term pooling operator which is simple, efficient, compact, and very powerful in
a neural network context. Since a CNN provides a whole hierarchy of image representations, one for each intermediate
layer, the first question is where temporal pooling should
take place. For example, one could use a method such as
“horse racing”, “doing push-ups”, “drumming”.

13034

