FireCaffe: near-linear acceleration of deep neural network training
on compute clusters
Forrest N. Iandola, Matthew W. Moskewicz, Khalid Ashraf, Kurt Keutzer
DeepScale∗ and UC Berkeley
{forresti, moskewcz, kashraf, keutzer}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Long training times for high-accuracy deep neural networks (DNNs) impede research into new DNN architectures
and slow the development of high-accuracy DNNs. In this
paper we present FireCaffe, which successfully scales deep
neural network training across a cluster of GPUs. We also
present a number of best practices to aid in comparing
advancements in methods for scaling and accelerating the
training of deep neural networks. The speed and scalability of distributed algorithms is almost always limited by the
overhead of communicating between servers; DNN training
is not an exception to this rule. Therefore, the key consideration here is to reduce communication overhead wherever possible, while not degrading the accuracy of the DNN
models that we train. Our approach has three key pillars.
First, we select network hardware that achieves high bandwidth between GPU servers – Infiniband or Cray interconnects are ideal for this. Second, we consider a number
of communication algorithms, and we find that reduction
trees are more efficient and scalable than the traditional
parameter server approach. Third, we optionally increase
the batch size to reduce the total quantity of communication during DNN training, and we identify hyperparameters
that allow us to reproduce the small-batch accuracy while
training with large batch sizes. When training GoogLeNet
and Network-in-Network on ImageNet, we achieve a 47x
and 39x speedup, respectively, when training on a cluster
of 128 GPUs.

1. Introduction and Motivation
Since the publication of AlexNet [17], a variety of
new deep neural network (DNN) architectures such as
GoogleNet [26], Network-in-Network [20], and VGG [24]
have been developed at a rapid pace. This is natural,
because with the training and testing dataset fixed (e.g.
ImageNet-1k [9]), it is the DNN architecture that is primarily responsible for improvements in accuracy. In other
∗ http://deepscale.ai

words, the race for improvements in accuracy in image classification and other contemporary problems of computer
science, has become a race in the development of new DNN
architectures. So, what is the bottleneck in the development
of new architectures?
In the development of new DNN architectures, as in any
human research endeavor, creativity is a key element. However, the impact of architectural variations in DNNs – such
as number of layers, filter dimensions, and so forth – can
be hard to predict, and experimentation is required to assess
their impact. A high-accuracy deep neural network (DNN)
model such as GoogLeNet [26] can take weeks to train on a
modern GPU. This is true even when leveraging deep neural network primitives like cuDNN [5], maxDNN [18], or
fbfft [28] – all of which operate near the theoretical peak
computation per second achievable on GPUs. Thus, training time is a key challenge at the root of the development of
new DNN architectures.
This sentiment was voiced by Jeffrey Dean of Google
in his recent keynote address [7]. The four key points that
Dean makes are: (1) DNN researchers and users want results of experiments quickly. (2) There is a “patience threshold”: No one wants to wait more than a few days or a week
for a result. (3) This significantly affects scale of problems
that can be tackled. (4) We sometimes optimize for experiment turnaround time, rather than absolute minimal system
resources for performing the experiment.
As a particular example of where long training times are
limiting the pace of DNN research and productization, consider the following. ImageNet-1k has 1.2 million training
images, distributed across 1000 different category labels.
From first-hand conversations with engineers and executives, we know that several internet companies have internal
databases containing billions of images with hundreds of
thousands of different category labels. Due to long training
times, these companies are facing serious delays in bringing
DNN-based solutions to market. Accelerated DNN training
solutions would solve a major pain point for these companies.
So far, we have argued how accelerating DNN training
12592

