Solving Temporal Puzzles
Caglayan Dicle, Burak Yilmaz, Octavia Camps, Mario Sznaier∗
Dept of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University
{cdicle,camps,msznaier}@coe.neu.edu, yilmazbur@gmail.com

Figure 1: Time puzzles: Given a scrambled temporal sequence, we want to order it back in chronological order.

Abstract
Many physical phenomena, within short time windows,
can be explained by low order differential relations. In a
discrete world, these relations can be described using low
order difference equations or equivalently low order auto
regressive (AR) models. In this paper, based on this intuition, we propose an algorithm for solving time-sort temporal puzzles, defined as scrambled time series that need to
be sorted out. We frame this problem using a mixed-integer
semi definite programming formulation and show how to
turn it into a mixed-integer linear programming problem,
which can be solved with off-the-shelf solvers, by using the
recently introduced atomic norm framework. Our experiments show the effectiveness and generality of our approach
in different scenarios.

1. Introduction
Temporal sequences are encountered frequently in computer vision problems such as tracking, activity recognition, dynamic textures, and video segmentation. Substantial
performance improvements over conventional appearancebased methods have been reported when dynamic information is also incorporated [1, 4, 11, 13, 28, 33]. However,
such information can only be utilized if the temporal ordering of the relevant data (e.g. video frames) is known.
Thus, as the number of images uploaded to the world
wide web continue to increase exponentially, it is only natural to try to sort (in time) pictures capturing an event (i.e.

a concert, a soccer game, etc.) but taken by different individuals, so that processing algorithms could benefit from
the (hidden) dynamic information. The problem of ordering a collection of pictures, i.e. the photo sequencing problem, was initially introduced by Basha et al. in [3]. Here,
we consider a generalization of this problem, which we call
temporal puzzles, where (any) temporal sequence taken out
of order has to be ordered back, as illustrated in Figure 1.
In this paper, we present a framework for solving temporal puzzles, with examples from the field of computer vision. The proposed approach is based on the premise that
spatio-temporal dynamic information can be encapsulated
using dynamic models, where the simplest model should
always be preferred. This approach is supported by the fact
that favoring simpler models among a set of possible hypotheses has proved to be successful in a range of applications [12, 20, 22, 31, 34]. It should be noted that for
complex signals, the dynamic models might require static
non-linear maps preceding and/or following a simple linear
dynamic model(s) [32], or orchestrating a switch pattern between a small number of simple models [23], or designing
special inputs [2], or a combination of these. However, in
the sequel we will assume that as we zoom in time and look
into a small time window, the dynamics can be modeled
using a simple linear auto regressive model1 . Finally, it is
important to also note that, for this application, knowing
the exact model is not important, but what it matters is the
assumption that the data can be explained by such a model.
The contributions of the paper are as follows:
• A general framework for solving temporal puzzles.
• An atomic norm based algorithm to solve temporal

∗ This work was supported in part by NSF grants IIS–1318145 and

ECCS–1404163; AFOSR grant FA9550-15-1-0392; and the Alert DHS
Center of Excellence under Award Number 2013-ST-061-ED0001.

1 This is a valid assumption since auto regressive models are known to
be universal approximators [5, 30].

15896

