LOMo: Latent Ordinal Model for Facial Analysis in Videos
Karan Sikka1,∗
1

UCSD, USA

2

Gaurav Sharma2,3,†

MPI for Informatics, Germany

Abstract
We study the problem of facial analysis in videos.
We propose a novel weakly supervised learning
method that models the video event (expression, pain
etc.) as a sequence of automatically mined, discriminative sub-events (e.g. onset and offset phase for smile,
brow lower and cheek raise for pain). The proposed
model is inspired by the recent works on Multiple Instance Learning and latent SVM/HCRF – it extends
such frameworks to model the ordinal or temporal aspect in the videos, approximately. We obtain consistent
improvements over relevant competitive baselines on
four challenging and publicly available video based
facial analysis datasets for prediction of expression,
clinical pain and intent in dyadic conversations. In
combination with complimentary features, we report
state-of-the-art results on these datasets.

1. Introduction
Facial analysis is an important area of computer vision. The representative problems include face (identity) recognition [52], identity based face pair matching [10], age estimation [1], kinship verification [23],
emotion prediction [6], [11], among others. Facial
analysis finds important and relevant real world appli∗

Machine Perception Lab, University of California San Diego.
Currently with CSE, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur.
Majority of this work was done at MPI for Informatics.
‡
Marian Bartlett was a co-founder of Emotient, a company that
may have indirectly benefitted from this work. The terms of this
arrangement have been reviewed and approved by the University
of California, San Diego, in accordance with its conflict-of-interest
policies. Support for this research was provided by NIH grant R01
NR013500. Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Institutes of
Health.
†

Marian Bartlett1,∗,‡

Event 1

3

IIT Kanpur, India

Event 3

Event 2

= c1
= c2

= c6

The model scores subevents (color coded) in a
particular order

+

Different ordering of
sub-events carry
different costs

The final score is the sum of (i) the average sub-event
scores, and (ii) the cost of the sequence in which they appear

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed approach.
cations such as human computer interaction, personal
robotics, and patient care in hospitals [37, 25, 42, 5].
While we work with videos of faces, i.e. we assume
that face detection has been done reliably, we note that
the problem is pretty challenging due to variations in
human faces, articulations, lighting conditions, poses,
video artifacts such as blur etc. Moreover, we work in
a weakly supervised setting, where only video level
annotations are available and there are no annotations
for individual video frames.
In weakly supervised setting, Multiple Instance
Learning (MIL) [2] methods are one of the popular
approaches and have been applied to the task of facial video analysis [37, 33, 45] with video level, and
not frame level, annotations. However, the main drawbacks of most of such approaches are that (i) they use
the maximum scoring vector to make the prediction
[2], and (ii) the temporal/ordinal information is always
lost completely. While, in the recent work by Li and
Vasconcelos [17], MIL framework has been extended
to consider multiple top scoring vectors, the temporal
order is still not incorporated. In the present paper we
propose a novel method that (i) works with weakly su15580

