Robust Multi-body Feature Tracker: A Segmentation-free Approach
Pan Ji1 , Hongdong Li1 , Mathieu Salzmann2 , and Yiran Zhong1
1
ANU, Canberra; 2 EPFL, Switzerland
{pan.ji, hongdong.li, yiran.zhong}@anu.edu.au, mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Abstract
Feature tracking is a fundamental problem in computer
vision, with applications in many computer vision tasks,
such as visual SLAM and action recognition. This paper
introduces a novel multi-body feature tracker that exploits
a multi-body rigidity assumption to improve tracking robustness under a general perspective camera model. A
conventional approach to addressing this problem would
consist of alternating between solving two subtasks: motion segmentation and feature tracking under rigidity constraints for each segment. This approach, however, requires
knowing the number of motions, as well as assigning points
to motion groups, which is typically sensitive to the motion
estimates. By contrast, here, we introduce a segmentationfree solution to multi-body feature tracking that bypasses
the motion assignment step and reduces to solving a series
of subproblems with closed-form solutions. Our experiments demonstrate the benefits of our approach in terms of
tracking accuracy and robustness to noise.

1. Introduction
Feature tracking is a prerequisite for many computer
vision tasks, such as visual SLAM and action recognition.
Among all the feature tracking methods, the Kanade-LucasTomasi (KLT) tracker [17, 22, 20], although developed
30 years ago, still remains one of the most widely used
techniques. One of the reasons for this popularity is its
computational efficiency; the KLT tracker is local, in the
sense that it treats each local region independently of the
others, which makes it highly parallelizable. This locality, however, comes at a cost in tracking robustness: the
tracking of each feature cannot benefit from intrinsic scene
constraints, and thus often suffers from drift.
Real-world scenes, however, are often strongly constrained. For example, in autonomous driving, most of
the moving objects (cars, vehicles, pedestrian) are rigid,
or quasi-rigid if seen from afar. Several methods have
therefore been proposed to exploit this scene rigidity to
improve feature tracking [23, 3, 19]. Unfortunately, these

methods all assume an affine camera model and are thus
ill-suited to handle strong perspective effects. More importantly, they work either as a post-processing step on an
entire sequence [23], which is sensitive to initial tracking
results and does not apply to online feature tracking, or
within a temporal sliding window [3, 19], which is sensitive
to initialization in the first few frames.
By contrast, in this paper, we introduce a novel feature
tracker that takes advantage of multi-body scene rigidity
to improve tracking robustness under a general perspective
camera model. A conventional approach to addressing this
problem would consist of alternating between two subtasks:
motion segmentation and feature tracking under rigidity
constraints for each segment. This, however, suffers from
the following drawbacks: First, it requires knowing the
number of observed motions; and, second, it relies on assigning points to individual motions, which is very sensitive
to the initial motion estimates.
Here, we introduce a segmentation-free multi-body feature tracker that overcomes these drawbacks. Specifically,
our approach bypasses the motion assignment step by making use of subspace constraints derived directly from the
epipolar constraints of multiple motions. As a result, our
algorithm does not require prior knowledge of the number
of motions. Furthermore, this allows us to formulate tracking as an optimization problem whose subproblems all have
closed-form solutions.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on both
feature point tracking and frame-by-frame motion segmentation on real world sequences. Our experiments show
that, by incorporating multi-motion constraints, our tracker
yields better accuracies and is more robust to noise than
the standard KLT tracker and the state-of-the-art tracking
algorithm of [19].

2. Related Work
The KLT tracker [22, 20] was derived from the LucasKanade algorithm for image alignment [17]. Feature tracking was achieved by optimizing the sum of squared differences between a template patch and an image patch
with the Gauss-Newton method. It was later extended to
13843

