Symmetry reCAPTCHA
Christopher Funk
Yanxi Liu
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA. 16802, USA
{funk, yanxi}@cse.psu.edu

Abstract
This paper is a reaction to the poor performance of symmetry detection algorithms on real-world images, benchmarked since CVPR 2011. Our systematic study reveals significant difference between human labeled (reflection and
rotation) symmetries on photos and the output of computer
vision algorithms on the same photo set. We exploit this
human-machine symmetry perception gap by proposing a
novel symmetry-based Turing test. By leveraging a comprehensive user interface, we collected more than 78,000
symmetry labels from 400 Amazon Mechanical Turk raters
on 1,200 photos from the Microsoft COCO dataset. Using
a set of ground-truth symmetries automatically generated
from noisy human labels, the effectiveness of our work is
evidenced by a separate test where over 96% success rate is
achieved. We demonstrate statistically significant outcomes
for using symmetry perception as a powerful, alternative,
image-based reCAPTCHA.

1. Introduction
With increasing malicious online attacks against companies, individuals and governments alike, CAPTCHA
(Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell
Computers and Humans Apart) [1, 41] becomes a necessary tool in many web applications to prevent automatic login, blog post, email, and DoS (denial-of-service) attacks.
CAPTCHAs are constructed by taking advantage of the behavioral discrepancies between humans and machines. For
example, since humans are in general superior at recognizing distorted text than computers, text-based CAPTCHAs
such as [42] have been widely used. reCAPTCHAs, where
one word is used for testing and the other for dataset expansion, can also be implemented and deployed easily. Meanwhile, successful breakings of existing CAPTCHAs (e.g.
[2, 27, 29, 37]) have been extensively reported as well, including a recent self-broken reCAPTCHA by Google [17].
We are witnessing a healthy interleaving of more advanced CAPTCHAs that provide better software security

Rotation
Symmetry

Reflection
Symmetry

Rotation &
Reflection

None

Figure 1. Human labeled symmetries on real photos. Red: rotation
center. Green: reflection axis.

and breakings of CAPTCHAs which advance machine intelligence. In recent years, automatic text recognition is
closing the gap to human performance [17], thus more
image-based CAPTCHAs have emerged as an alternative [3, 4, 7, 8, 13, 14, 18, 28, 30, 31, 32, 41]. Most current
image-based CAPTCHAs focus on recognition of common
objects, such as cats, dogs, human faces or relating objects
(with the help of words) semantically. The primary challenges for computers come from image distortions and object semantics. Little work has explored and taken advantage of human ability in visual abstraction, for example, the
perception of symmetry from photos (e.g. Figure 1).
Strong evidence of inherent symmetry detection capability in humans has been shown at both behavioral and neural levels [5, 6, 19, 21, 35, 40], while the outcome from
the 2011/13 CVPR symmetry detection competitions [23]
is less encouraging. This performance gap between humans and machines presents an opportunity for a symmetryperception-based CAPTCHA. To the best of our knowledge, no systematic elicitations of human understanding of
reflection and rotation symmetries on a large set of realworld photos has been reported, nor has the gap of symmetry perception between humans and computers been welldefined or quantified. This leads to our specific contributions in this work. We provide:
• via crowdsourcing, a systematic collection and evaluation of human symmetry labels from 401 online raters
on 1,200 photos;
• a well-defined set of symmetry metrics and algorithms
to determine human perceived Ground Truth symme-

5165

