Learning Online Smooth Predictors for Realtime Camera Planning
using Recurrent Decision Trees

˚

Jianhui Chen ˚
Hoang M. Le :
Peter Carr ;
Yisong Yue :
:
University of British Columbia
California Institute of Technology

{jhchen14, little}@cs.ubc.ca

{hmle, yyue}@caltech.edu

James J. Little ˚
Disney Research

;

carr@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
We study the problem of online prediction for realtime
camera planning, where the goal is to predict smooth trajectories that correctly track and frame objects of interest (e.g.,
players in a basketball game). The conventional approach
for training predictors does not directly consider temporal
consistency, and often produces undesirable jitter. Although
post-hoc smoothing (e.g., via a Kalman filter) can mitigate
this issue to some degree, it is not ideal due to overly stringent modeling assumptions (e.g., Gaussian noise). We propose a recurrent decision tree framework that can directly
incorporate temporal consistency into a data-driven predictor, as well as a learning algorithm that can efficiently
learn such temporally smooth models. Our approach does
not require any post-processing, making online smooth predictions much easier to generate when the noise model is
unknown. We apply our approach to sports broadcasting:
given noisy player detections, we learn where the camera
should look based on human demonstrations. Our experiments exhibit significant improvements over conventional
baselines and showcase the practicality of our approach.

1. Introduction
We investigate the problem of determining where a camera should look when broadcasting a team sporting event,
such as basketball or soccer (see Fig. 1). Realtime camera
planning shares many similarities with online object tracking: in both cases, the algorithm must constantly revise an
estimated target position as new evidence is acquired. Noise
and other ambiguities can cause non-ideal jittery trajectories, which in camera planning lead to unaesthetic results
(see Fig. 2). In contrast to object tracking, smoothness is of
paramount importance in camera control: fluid movements
that maintain adequate framing are preferable to erratic motions that constantly pursue perfect composition.
Non-parametric or model-free estimation methods, such
as random forests [10], are very popular because they can
learn (almost) arbitrary predictors directly from training

Figure 1. Camera Planning. The goal is to predict the pan angle
for a broadcast camera based on noisy player detections. Consider two planning algorithms (the blue and red curves) which
both make the same mistake at time A but recover to a good framing by C (the ideal camera trajectory is shown in black). The blue
solution quickly corrects by time B using a jerky motion, whereas
the red curve conducts a gradual correction. Although the red
curve has a larger discrepancy with the ideal motion curve, its
velocity characteristics are most similar to the ideal motion path.

data. When applied to smooth trajectory prediction, the estimator is often learned within a time-independent paradigm,
with temporal regularization integrated afterwards as a postprocessing stage (e.g., via a Kalman filter) [28, 30]. One
major limitation of this two-stage approach for camera planning is that the smoothing is done in a context-independent
way, which can lead to uninformed tradeoffs between accuracy and smoothness (see Fig. 1).
In this paper, we propose a recurrent decision tree framework that can make predictions conditioned on its own previous predictions, which allows it to learn temporal patterns
within the data (in addition to any direct feature-based relationships). However, this recursive formulation (similar
to reinforcement learning [31]) makes the learning problem
much more challenging compared to the time-independent
approach. We develop a learning algorithm based on the
“search and learn” (SEARN) approach [12] to efficiently
converge to a stable recurrent model.
We applied our approach to autonomous camera control
in sports, where the goal is to generate smooth camera motion that imitates a human expert. We provide both quantitative and qualitative evidence showing our approach significantly outperforms several strong baselines.
14688

