Learning Aligned Cross-Modal Representations from Weakly Aligned Data
Lluı́s Castrejón∗
University of Toronto

Yusuf Aytar∗
MIT CSAIL

Carl Vondrick
MIT CSAIL

castrejon@cs.toronto.edu

yusuf@csail.mit.edu

vondrick@mit.edu

Hamed Pirsiavash
University of Maryland - Baltimore County

Antonio Torralba
MIT CSAIL

hpirsiav@umbc.edu

torralba@csail.mit.edu

1. Introduction

Abstract
People can recognize scenes across many different
modalities beyond natural images. In this paper, we investigate how to learn cross-modal scene representations
that transfer across modalities. To study this problem, we
introduce a new cross-modal scene dataset. While convolutional neural networks can categorize cross-modal scenes
well, they also learn an intermediate representation not
aligned across modalities, which is undesirable for crossmodal transfer applications. We present methods to regularize cross-modal convolutional neural networks so that
they have a shared representation that is agnostic of the
modality. Our experiments suggest that our scene representation can help transfer representations across modalities for retrieval. Moreover, our visualizations suggest that
units emerge in the shared representation that tend to activate on consistent concepts independently of the modality.
∗ denotes equal contribution

Clip art

Sketches

Spatial text

Descriptions
There is a bed with a striped bedspread. Beside
this is a nightstand with a drawer. There is also a
tall dresser and a chair with a blue cushion. On
the dresser is a jewelry box and a clock.

Bedroom

Real

Can you recognize the scenes in Figure 1, even though
they are depicted in different modalities? Most people have
the capability to perceive a concept in one modality, but represent it independently of the modality. This cross-modal
ability enables people to perform some important abstraction tasks, such as learning in different modalities (cartoons,
stories) and applying them in the real-world.
Unfortunately, representations in computer vision do not
yet have this cross-modal capability. Standard approaches
typically learn a separate representation for each modality,
which works well when operating within the same modality.
However, the representations learned are not aligned across
modalities, which makes cross-modal transfer difficult.
Two modalities are strongly aligned if, for two images
from each modality, we have correspondence at the level
of objects. In contrast, weak alignment is if we only have
global label that is shared across both images. For instance,
if we have a picture of a bedroom and a line drawing of a

Kindergarten classroom

I am inside a room surrounded by my favorite
things. This room is filled with pillows and a
comfortable bed. There are stuffed animals
everywhere. I have posters on the walls. My
jewelry box is on the dresser.
There are brightly colored wooden tables with
little chairs. There is a rug in one corner with
ABC blocks on it. There is a bookcase with
picture books, a larger teacher's desk and a
chalkboard.
The young students gather in the room at their
tables to color. They learn numbers and letters
and play games. At nap time they all pull out
mats and go to sleep.

Figure 1: Can you recognize scenes across different modalities? Above, we show a few examples of our new cross-modal
scene dataset. In this paper, we investigate how to learn cross-modal scene representations.

2940

