Siamese Instance Search for Tracking
Ran Tao, Efstratios Gavves, Arnold W.M. Smeulders
QUVA Lab, Science Park 904, 1098 XH Amsterdam
{r.tao,egavves,a.w.m.smeulders}@uva.nl

Abstract
In this paper we present a tracker, which is radically
different from state-of-the-art trackers: we apply no model
updating, no occlusion detection, no combination of trackers, no geometric matching, and still deliver state-of-theart tracking performance, as demonstrated on the popular
online tracking benchmark (OTB) and six very challenging YouTube videos. The presented tracker simply matches
the initial patch of the target in the first frame with candidates in a new frame and returns the most similar patch
by a learned matching function. The strength of the matching function comes from being extensively trained generically, i.e., without any data of the target, using a Siamese
deep neural network, which we design for tracking. Once
learned, the matching function is used as is, without any
adapting, to track previously unseen targets. It turns out
that the learned matching function is so powerful that a simple tracker built upon it, coined Siamese INstance search
Tracker, SINT, which only uses the original observation of
the target from the first frame, suffices to reach state-of-theart performance. Further, we show the proposed tracker
even allows for target re-identification after the target was
absent for a complete video shot.

1. Introduction
At the core of many tracking algorithms is the function
by which the image of the target is matched to the incoming frames. The matching function for tracking ideally provides good matching even if the target in the video is occluded, changes its scale, rotates in and out-of-plane or, undergoes uneven illumination, camera motion and other disturbing factors [41, 52]. One way to proceed is to model
each of these distortions explicitly in the matching by introducing affine transformations [29], probabilistic matching [6], eigen images [38], illumination invariants [32], occlusion detection [33]. While one explicit matching mechanism may be well-fitted to solve one distortion, it is likely
to disturb another.
In this work, rather than explicitly modeling the match-

Figure 1: The tracker simply finds the patch that matches
best to the original patch of the target in the first frame,
using a learned matching function. The matching function
is learned once on a rich video dataset. Once it has been
learned, it is applied as is, without any adapting, to new
videos of previously unseen target objects. We do not apply
offline target learning and the target is not included in the
training video dataset.

ing for particular distortions, we propose to learn the matching mechanism. More specifically, we suggest that we learn
from external videos that contain various disturbing factors
the invariances without, however, explicitly modeling these
invariances. If the set of external videos is sufficiently large,
the goal is to learn a generically applicable matching function a priori. We take extra care that there is absolutely
no overlap between the videos we use for training and any
of the tracking videos for evaluation. Namely, we do not
aim to do any offline learning of the tracking targets, since
in that case we would essentially learn an object detector.
Instead, in the learning we focus on the generic set of object appearance variations in videos. In this way, we optimize the matching function between an arbitrary target and
patches from subsequent frames. Once the matching function has been learnt on the external data we do not adapt it
anymore and, we apply it as is to new tracking videos of
previously unseen target objects.
We focus on learning the matching function suited for

1420

