Efficient Indexing of Billion-Scale datasets of deep descriptors
Artem Babenko
Yandex
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology

Victor Lempitsky
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
(Skoltech)

artem.babenko@phystech.edu

lempitsky@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Existing billion-scale nearest neighbor search systems
have mostly been compared on a single dataset of a billion of SIFT vectors, where systems based on the Inverted
Multi-Index (IMI) have been performing very well, achieving state-of-the-art recall in several milliseconds. SIFT-like
descriptors, however, are quickly being replaced with descriptors based on deep neural networks (DNN) that provide better performance for many computer vision tasks.
In this paper, we introduce a new dataset of one billion
descriptors based on DNNs and reveal the relative inefficiency of IMI-based indexing for such descriptors compared
to SIFT data. We then introduce two new indexing structures, the Non-Orthogonal Inverted Multi-Index (NO-IMI)
and the Generalized Non-Orthogonal Inverted Multi-Index
(GNO-IMI). We show that due to additional flexibility, the
new structures are able to adapt to DNN descriptor distribution in a better way. In particular, extensive experiments
on the new dataset demonstrate that these data structures
provide considerably better trade-off between the speed of
retrieval and recall, given similar amount of memory, as
compared to the standard Inverted Multi-Index.

1. Introduction
Modern image retrieval systems[19] have to search
through billion-scale databases in several milliseconds to
respond to user queries. This imposes strict demands on
scalability and efficiency of the underlying nearest-neighbor
search algorithms. As exhaustive search is mostly infeasible
at this scale, approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) methods
that restrict the part of a dataset that is being considered in
response to a query have to be used.
State-of-the-art ANN algorithms of this kind [13, 2, 9,
14, 5] avoid exhaustive search by organizing dataset points
using an indexing structure. For a given query the indexing structure allows to retrieve a short-list of candidate
points that are likely to be close to this query. The candidate points are then reranked according to their distances

using such methods as Asymmetric Distance Computation
(ADC) [12]. In general, the reranking runtime is approximately linear in the size of the short-list. Consequently, the
ability to obtain compact short-lists with high enough recall
leads to fast reranking and overall time efficiency.
One of the first billion-scale retrieval systems for billionscale datasets have been presented by Jegou et al. [13].
Their system called IVFADC divides data space into separate cells, corresponding to Voronoi regions obtained via
k-means clustering. Given a query, IVFADC returns the
short list with the points from the cells that are the closest to it. The Inverted Multi-Index (IMI)[2] generalizes
IVFADC by decomposing the dataspace into several subspaces and splitting each subspace into cells independently.
The system [14], based on the IMI indexing structure and
the Product Quantization (PQ) compression provides stateof-the-art performance on the SIFT1B dataset of one billion
SIFT descriptors [13], which invariably serves as the testbed
for such systems.
Recently, the focus in computer vision has shifted from
SIFT descriptors to descriptors produced by deep neural
networks (DNN). Several works [17, 7, 11, 18, 4] have
shown that DNN-based descriptors significantly improve
the state-of-the-art on common retrieval benchmarks. Furthermore, [7] have shown that deep descriptors can be compressed by PCA with almost no loss in performance.
Despite such shift to deep descriptors, to the best of our
knowledge, billion-scale ANN with deep descriptors has
not been investigated. One potential problem with relying
on the SIFT1B dataset is its particular suitability for IMIbased systems. This is because, the SIFT construction procedure uses different halves of a SIFT vector to describe
disjoint regions of an image patch. Thus, the correlations
between the two halves are likely to be small and the decomposition in the IMI is justified. Deep descriptors do not
possess such structure and therefore the good performance
of IMI might not be achieved.
This paper seeks to develop a good indexing structure
for deep descriptors. We begin with experiments illustrating that for this type of data the Inverted Multi-Index indeed
12055

