Unsupervised Learning of Edges
Yin Li1,2 , Manohar Paluri1 , James M. Rehg2 , and Piotr Dollár1
1
2

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
Data-driven approaches for edge detection have proven
effective and achieve top results on modern benchmarks.
However, all current data-driven edge detectors require
manual supervision for training in the form of hand-labeled
region segments or object boundaries. Specifically, human
annotators mark semantically meaningful edges which are
subsequently used for training. Is this form of strong, highlevel supervision actually necessary to learn to accurately
detect edges? In this work we present a simple yet effective
approach for training edge detectors without human supervision. To this end we utilize motion, and more specifically,
the only input to our method is noisy semi-dense matches
between frames. We begin with only a rudimentary knowledge of edges (in the form of image gradients), and alternate between improving motion estimation and edge detection in turn. Using a large corpus of video data, we show
that edge detectors trained using our unsupervised scheme
approach the performance of the same methods trained with
full supervision (within 3-5%). Finally, we show that when
using a deep network for the edge detector, our approach
provides a novel pre-training scheme for object detection.

(a) unsupervised semi-dense correspondence

(b) motion discontinuities à image edges

(c) image edges à motion discontinuities

Figure 1. Our goal is to train an edge detector given only semidense matches between frames (a). While motion discontinuities
imply the presence of image edges (b), the converse is not necessarily true as distinct image regions may undergo similar motion
(c). In this work we exploit the sparsity of edges to overcome the
latter difficulty. We show that the signal obtained from matches
computed over a large corpus of video data is sufficient to train
top-performing edge detectors.

1. Introduction
The human visual system can easily identify perceptually salient edges in an image. Endowing machine vision
systems with similar capabilities is of interest as edges
are useful for diverse tasks such as optical flow [31],
object detection [40, 13], and object proposals [39, 46, 3].
However, edge detection has proven challenging. Early
approaches [14, 8, 15] relied on low-level cues such as
brightness and color gradients. Reasoning about texture [25] markedly improved results, nevertheless, accuracy
still substantially lagged human performance.
The introduction of the BSDS dataset [2], composed of
human annotated region boundaries, laid the foundations
for a fundamental shift in edge detection. Rather than rely
on complex hand-designed features, Dollár et al. [10] proposed a data-driven, supervised approach for learning to

detect edges. Modern edge detectors have built on this idea
and substantially pushed the state-of-the-art forward using
more sophisticated learning paradigms [30, 23, 11, 44].
However, existing data-driven methods require strong
supervision for training. Specifically, in datasets such as
BSDS [2], human annotators use their knowledge of scene
structure and object presence to mark semantically meaningful edges.1 Moreover, recent edge detectors use ImageNet pre-training [5, 44]. In this paper, we explore whether
this is necessary: Is object-level supervision indispensable
for edge detection? Moreover, can edge detectors be trained
entirely without human supervision?
1 Human annotation of edge structure in local patches (without context)
is quite noisy and is matched by machine vision approaches. Humans excel
when given context and the ability to reason about object presence [47].

11619

