Loss Functions for Top-k Error: Analysis and Insights
Maksim Lapin,1 Matthias Hein2 and Bernt Schiele1
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany

Abstract
In order to push the performance on realistic computer
vision tasks, the number of classes in modern benchmark
datasets has significantly increased in recent years. This increase in the number of classes comes along with increased
ambiguity between the class labels, raising the question if
top-1 error is the right performance measure. In this paper, we provide an extensive comparison and evaluation of
established multiclass methods comparing their top-k performance both from a practical as well as from a theoretical perspective. Moreover, we introduce novel top-k loss
functions as modifications of the softmax and the multiclass
SVM losses and provide efficient optimization schemes for
them. In the experiments, we compare on various datasets
all of the proposed and established methods for top-k error
optimization. An interesting insight of this paper is that the
softmax loss yields competitive top-k performance for all
k simultaneously. For a specific top-k error, our new topk losses lead typically to further improvements while being
faster to train than the softmax.

1. Introduction
The number of classes is rapidly growing in modern
computer vision benchmarks [37, 52]. Typically, this also
leads to ambiguity in the labels as classes start to overlap.
Even for humans, the error rates in top-1 performance are
often quite high (≈ 30% on SUN 397 [50]). While previous
research focuses on minimizing the top-1 error, we address
top-k error optimization in this paper. We are interested in
two cases: a) achieving small top-k error for all reasonably
small k; and b) minimization of a specific top-k error.
While it is argued in [2] that the one-versus-all (OVA)
SVM scheme performs on par in top-1 and top-5 accuracy
with the other SVM variations based on ranking losses,
we have recently shown in [23] that minimization of the
top-k hinge loss leads to improvements in top-k performance compared to OVA SVM, multiclass SVM, and other
ranking-based formulations. In this paper, we study topk error optimization from a wider perspective. On the

one hand, we compare OVA schemes and direct multiclass losses in extensive experiments, and on the other,
we present theoretical discussion regarding their calibration for the top-k error. Based on these insights, we suggest 4 new families of loss functions for the top-k error.
Two are smoothed versions of the top-k hinge losses [23],
and the other two are top-k versions of the softmax loss.
We discuss their advantages and disadvantages, and for the
convex losses provide an efficient implementation based on
stochastic dual coordinate ascent (SDCA) [38].
We evaluate a battery of loss functions on 11 datasets
of different tasks ranging from text classification to large
scale vision benchmarks, including fine-grained and scene
classification. We systematically optimize and report results
separately for each top-k accuracy. One interesting message
that we would like to highlight is that the softmax loss is
able to optimize all top-k error measures simultaneously.
This is in contrast to multiclass SVM and is also reflected
in our experiments. Finally, we show that our new top-k
variants of smooth multiclass SVM and the softmax loss
can further improve top-k performance for a specific k.
Related work. Top-k optimization has recently received
revived attention with the advent of large scale problems
[18, 23, 24, 25]. The top-k error in multiclass classification, which promotes good ranking of class labels for each
example, is closely related to the precision@k metric in information retrieval, which counts the fraction of positive instances among the top-k ranked examples. In essence, both
approaches enforce a desirable ranking of items [23].
The classic approaches optimize pairwise ranking with
SVMstruct [20, 43], RankNet [10], and LaRank [6]. An
alternative direction was proposed by Usunier et al. [44],
who described a general family of convex loss functions for
ranking and classification. One of the loss functions that
we consider (top-k SVMβ [23]) also falls into that family. Weston et al. [49] then introduced Wsabie, which optimizes an approximation of a ranking-based loss from [44].
A Bayesian approach was suggested by [41].
Recent works focus on the top of the ranked list [1, 8,
29, 36], scalability to large datasets [18, 23, 24], explore
transductive learning [25] and prediction of tuples [35].
11468

