Scene recognition with CNNs: objects, scales and dataset bias
Luis Herranz, Shuqiang Jiang, Xiangyang Li
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)
Institute of Computer Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
{luis.herranz,shuqiang.jiang,xiangyang.li}@vipl.ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Since scenes are composed in part of objects, accurate
recognition of scenes requires knowledge about both scenes
and objects. In this paper we address two related problems:
1) scale induced dataset bias in multi-scale convolutional
neural network (CNN) architectures, and 2) how to combine effectively scene-centric and object-centric knowledge
(i.e. Places and ImageNet) in CNNs. An earlier attempt,
Hybrid-CNN[23], showed that incorporating ImageNet did
not help much. Here we propose an alternative method taking the scale into account, resulting in significant recognition gains. By analyzing the response of ImageNet-CNNs
and Places-CNNs at different scales we find that both operate in different scale ranges, so using the same network
for all the scales induces dataset bias resulting in limited
performance. Thus, adapting the feature extractor to each
particular scale (i.e. scale-specific CNNs) is crucial to improve recognition, since the objects in the scenes have their
specific range of scales. Experimental results show that
the recognition accuracy highly depends on the scale, and
that simple yet carefully chosen multi-scale combinations
of ImageNet-CNNs and Places-CNNs, can push the stateof-the-art recognition accuracy in SUN397 up to 66.26%
(and even 70.17% with deeper architectures, comparable to
human performance).

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art in visual recognition is based on the
successful combination of deep representations and massive datasets. Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
trained on ImageNet (i.e. ImageNet-CNNs) achieve impressive performance in object recognition, while CNNs trained
on Places (Places-CNNs) do in scene recognition[23, 2].
However, CNNs also have limitations, such as the lack of
invariance to significant scaling. This problem is particularly important in scene recognition, due to a wider range
of scales and a larger amount of objects per image.
As an alternative to Places-CNN holistic representation,

some recent works[4, 1, 21, 16] have shown that CNN features extracted locally in patches can be also aggregated into
effective scene representations. Often, these approaches
combine multiple scales, that are pooled using VLAD[4]
or Fisher vector (FV)[21] encoding. Dixit et al[1] suggested applying the pooling directly on the semantic representation, arguing that semantic representations are more
invariant. Recently, Wu et al[16] proposed an architecture
in which dense sampling of patches is replaced by region
proposals and discrimintive patch mining. In general, these
works use ImageNet-CNN to extract the local activations
instead of Places-CNN, since local patches are closer to objects than to scenes. However, a largely overlooked aspect
in this multi-scale scenario is the role of the scale and its
relation with the feature extractor (i.e. CNN). One limitation of current multi-scale approaches is the naive use of
CNNs by simply considering CNNs as general purpose feature extractors[10, 2]. Using the same fixed CNN model
for all the scales inevitably leads to dataset bias[13], since
the properties of the data vary at different scales, while the
feature extractor remains fixed.
Since objects are main components of scenes, knowledge about objects may be helpful in scene recognition.
Although, Places-CNN itself develops suitable object models at intermediate layers[22], the information in ImageNet
might be valuable. However, in a previous attempt, a network trained with the combined dataset ImageNet+Places
(Hybrid-CNN[23]) show that including ImageNet, far from
helpful was harmful. We will see how this problem is also
connected to scale-related dataset bias.
In this paper we will study these two problems (i.e.
dataset bias in patch-based CNNs under different scaling
conditions, and how to effectively combine Places and ImageNet) and will see that they are related. Torralba and
Efros[13] studied the dataset bias as a cross-dataset generalization problem, in which the same classes may have
slightly different feature distributions in different datasets.
In our particular case, this bias in the feature distribution
is induced by scaling the image. If the scaling operation
is considerable, the characteristics of the data may change
1571

