Deep Interactive Object Selection
Ning Xu1 , Brian Price 2 , Scott Cohen 2 , Jimei Yang 2 , and Thomas Huang 1
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Adobe Research

ningxu2@illinois.edu, {bprice,scohen,jimyang}@adobe.com, t-huang1@illinois.edu

Abstract
Interactive object selection is a very important research
problem and has many applications. Previous algorithms
require substantial user interactions to estimate the foreground and background distributions. In this paper, we
present a novel deep-learning-based algorithm which has
much better understanding of objectness and can reduce
user interactions to just a few clicks. Our algorithm transforms user-provided positive and negative clicks into two
Euclidean distance maps which are then concatenated with
the RGB channels of images to compose (image, user interactions) pairs. We generate many of such pairs by combining several random sampling strategies to model users’
click patterns and use them to finetune deep Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs). Finally the output probability
maps of our FCN-8s model is integrated with graph cut optimization to refine the boundary segments. Our model is
trained on the PASCAL segmentation dataset and evaluated
on other datasets with different object classes. Experimental results on both seen and unseen objects demonstrate that
our algorithm has a good generalization ability and is superior to all existing interactive object selection approaches.

1. Introduction
Interactive object selection (also known as interactive
segmentation) has become a very popular research area over
the past years. It enables users to select objects of interest by
interactively providing inputs such as strokes and bounding
boxes. The selected results are useful for many applications
such as localized editing and image/video composition.
There are many algorithms proposed to solve this problem. One of the most famous algorithms is proposed by
Boykov and Jolly [2] where they formulate interactive segmentation as the graph cut optimization and solve it via

max-flow/min-cut energy minimization. Rother et al. [21]
extend graph cut by using a more powerful, iterative version
of optimization. Bai and Sapiro [1] present a new algorithm
that computes weighted geodesic distances to the userprovided scribbles. Grady [8] uses the graph theory to estimate the probabilities of random walks from unlabeled pixels to labeled pixels. In order to get accurate segmentation,
all these algorithms require substantial user interactions to
have a good estimation of the foreground/background distributions. In contrast, our approach simplifies user interactions to a few clicks, with one or two clicks usually giving
reasonably good results. The advantage of our approach
over the others is the capability to understand objectness
and semantics by leveraging deep learning techniques. To
our best knowledge, this is the first work that solves interactive segmentation in the framework of deep learning.
Our approach is inspired by recent successes of deep
fully convolutional neural networks (FCNs) on the semantic
segmentation problem [17, 29, 3, 16, 12]. Long et al. [17]
adapt popular deep classification networks into FCNs for
semantic segmentation and improve the architecture with
multi-resolution layer combinations. Built upon this, Chen
et al. [3] combine the outputs of FCNs with Conditional
Random Field (CRF) while Zheng et al. [29] formulate
mean-field approximate inference as Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and plug it on top of FCNs to get finer results.
A seemingly plausible transformation of those approaches to interactive segmentation is that we first perform
semantic segmentation on the whole image and then select
the connected components which contain user-provided selections. However, there exists at least three problems with
this approach. First, it is not always clear how to response
to use inputs. For example, if the user places a foreground
click and background click inside the same class label, this
approach cannot response to that. Second, current semantic segmentation methods do not support instance-level segmentation while that is often the user’s desire. Last but not
the least, current semantic segmentation approaches do not
1373

