Learning with Side Information through Modality Hallucination
Judy Hoffman
Saurabh Gupta
Trevor Darrell
EECS Department, UC Berkeley
{jhoffman, sgupta, trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract

FOVDQG
ORFORVV
5*%

We present a modality hallucination architecture for
training an RGB object detection model which incorporates depth side information at training time. Our convolutional hallucination network learns a new and complementary RGB image representation which is taught to
mimic convolutional mid-level features from a depth network. At test time images are processed jointly through
the RGB and hallucination networks to produce improved
detection performance. Thus, our method transfers information commonly extracted from depth training data to a
network which can extract that information from the RGB
counterpart. We present results on the standard NYUDv2
dataset and report improvement on the RGB detection task.

FOVDQG
ORFORVV
5*%+

5*%1HWZRUN

FOVDQG
ORFORVV
+

5*%,PDJH
+DOOXFLQDWLRQ1HWZRUN

+DOOXFLQDWLRQ/RVV
UHJUHVVPLGOHYHO
KDOOXFLQDWLRQWRPLG
OHYHOGHSWK

FOVDQG
ORFORVV
5*%'

FOVDQG
ORFORVV
GHSWK

'HSWK1HWZRUN

'HSWK,PDJH

1. Introduction
RGB and depth images offer different and often complementary information. In fact, recent work has shown
that the two image modalities can be used simultaneously
to produce better recognition models than either modality
alone [15, 36, 35]. While RGB image capturing devices are
pervasive, depth capturing devices are much less prevalent.
This means that many recognition models will need to perform well on RGB images alone as input. We present an
algorithm which uses available paired RGB-d training data
to learn to hallucinate mid-level convolutional features from
an RGB image. We demonstrate that through our approach
we produce a novel convolutional network model which operates over only the single RGB modality input, but outperforms the standard network which only trains on RGB
images. Thus, our method transfers information commonly
extracted from depth training data to a network which can
extract that information from the RGB counterpart.
Convolutional networks (ConvNets) have produced
tremendous success on visual recognition tasks, from classification [21, 28, 31], to detection [11, 25], to semantic
segmentation [24, 39]. The standard approach for training
these networks is to initialize the network parameters us-

Figure 1: Training our modality hallucination architecture.
We learn a multimodal Fast R-CNN [10] convolutional network for object detection. Our hallucination branch is
trained to take an RGB input image and mimic the depth
mid-level activations. The whole architecture is jointly
trained with the bounding box labels and the standard softmax cross-entropy loss.

ing a large labeled image corpra (ex: ImageNet [6]) and
then fine-tune using the smaller target labeled data sources.
While this strategy has been proven to be very effective, it
offers only one technique for learning representations for
recognition and due to the large parameter space of the network, runs the risk of overfitting to the nuances of the small
RGB dataset.
We propose an additional representation learning algorithm which incorporates side information in the form of
an additional image modality at training time to produce a
more informed test time single modality model. We accomplish this by directly learning a modality hallucination network which optimizes over the standard class and bounding
box localization losses while being guided by an additional
hallucination loss which regresses the hallucination features
1826

