DeepStereo: Learning to Predict New Views from the World’s Imagery
John Flynn
Zoox∗

Ivan Neulander
Google Inc.

James Philbin
Zoox∗

Noah Snavely
Google Inc.

john.flynn@zoox.com

ineula@google.com

james@zoox.com

snavely@google.com

Abstract
Deep networks have recently enjoyed enormous success
when applied to recognition and classification problems in
computer vision [22, 33], but their use in graphics problems
has been limited ([23, 7] are notable recent exceptions). In
this work, we present a novel deep architecture that performs new view synthesis directly from pixels, trained from
a large number of posed image sets. In contrast to traditional approaches, which consist of multiple complex stages
of processing, each of which requires careful tuning and can
fail in unexpected ways, our system is trained end-to-end.
The pixels from neighboring views of a scene are presented
to the network, which then directly produces the pixels of
the unseen view. The benefits of our approach include generality (we only require posed image sets and can easily
apply our method to different domains), and high quality
results on traditionally difficult scenes. We believe this is
due to the end-to-end nature of our system, which is able to
plausibly generate pixels according to color, depth, and texture priors learnt automatically from the training data. We
show view interpolation results on imagery from the KITTI
dataset [12], from data from [1] as well as on Google
Street View images. To our knowledge, our work is the first
to apply deep learning to the problem of new view synthesis
from sets of real-world, natural imagery.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D shape from multiple posed images is a
fundamental task in computer vision and graphics, both as
an aid to image understanding and as a way to generate 3D
representations of scenes that can be rendered and edited. In
this work, we aim to solve the related problem of new view
synthesis, a form of image-based rendering (IBR) where
the goal is to synthesize a new view of a scene by warping and combining images from nearby posed images. This
can be used for applications such as cinematography, virtual reality, teleconferencing [4], image stabilization [21],
∗ Contributed while at Google.

Figure 1: The top image was synthesized from several input
panoramas. A portion of four of the inputs is shown on the
bottom row.

or 3-dimensionalizing monocular film footage.
New view synthesis is an extremely challenging, underconstrained problem. An exact solution would require full
3D knowledge of all visible geometry in the unseen view
which is in general not available due to occluders. Additionally, visible surfaces may have ambiguous geometry due to
a lack of texture. Therefore, good approaches to IBR typically require the use of strong priors to fill in pixels where
the geometry is uncertain, or when the target color is unknown due to occlusions.
The majority of existing techniques for this problem involve traditional multi-view stereo and/or image warping
methods and often explicitly model the stereo, color, and
occlusion components of each target pixel [39, 1]. A key
problem with these approaches is that they are prone to generating unrealistic and jarring rendering artifacts in the new
view. Commonly seen artifacts include tearing around occluders, elimination of fine structures, and aliasing. Handling complex, self-occluding (but commonly seen) objects
such as trees is particularly challenging for traditional ap15515

