Discriminatively Embedded K-Means for Multi-view Clustering
Jinglin Xu1 , Junwei Han1 , Feiping Nie2
1
School of Automation, 2 School of Computer Science and Center for OPTIMAL,
Northwestern Polytechnical University
Xi’an, 710072, P. R. China
xujignlinlove, junweihan2010, feipingnie@gmail.com

Abstract
In real world applications, more and more data, for example, image/video data, are high dimensional and represented by multiple views which describe different perspectives of the data. Efficiently clustering such data is a challenge. To address this problem, this paper proposes a novel
multi-view clustering method called Discriminatively Embedded K-Means (DEKM), which embeds the synchronous
learning of multiple discriminative subspaces into multiview K-Means clustering to construct a unified framework,
and adaptively control the intercoordinations between these
subspaces simultaneously. In this framework, we firstly
design a weighted multi-view Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), and then develop an unsupervised optimization
scheme to alternatively learn the common clustering indicator, multiple discriminative subspaces and weights for
heterogeneous features with convergence. Comprehensive
evaluations on three benchmark datasets and comparisons with several state-of-the-art multi-view clustering algorithms demonstrate the superiority of the proposed work.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental technique in machine learning, pattern recognition and computer vision fields, clustering is to
assign data of similar patterns into the same cluster and reflect the intrinsic structure of the data. In past decades, a
variety of classical clustering algorithms such as K-Means
Clustering [15] and Spectral Clustering [24, 25] have been
invented.
In recent years, due to the rapid development of information technology, we are often confronted with data represented by heterogeneous features. These features are generated by using various feature construction ways. One good
example is image/video data. A large number of different
visual descriptors, such as SIFT [20], HOG [7], LBP [22],
GIST [23], CMT [30] and CENT [29], have been proposed
to characterize the rich content of image/video data from

different perspectives. Each type of features may capture
the specific information about the visual data. To cluster
these data, one challenge is how to integrate the strengths
of various heterogeneous features by exploring the rich information among them, which certainly can lead to more
accurate and robust clustering performance than by using
each individual type of features.
Nowadays, the data is often represented by very high dimensional features, which renders another challenge for the
clustering. A number of earlier efforts have been devoted
to addressing these two challenges. Focusing on one challenge that data is very high dimensional, many dimensionality reduction-based clustering methods [12, 10, 26, 16]
have been developed, which mostly concern simultaneous
subspace selection by LDA and clustering. These methods
generally are more appropriate for single-view data clustering. Although they may be extended to multi-view data
clustering task by simply concatenating different views as
input or integrating each view of clustering results to the final results, these extended methods still cannot achieve the
satisfactory performance due to the lack of intercoordination and complementation between different views during
clustering.
Focusing on another challenge that data is represented by
multi-view, a school of unsupervised multi-view clustering
methods have been presented. Although these methods can
achieve interactions among heterogeneous features, there
still exist some problems regarding heavy computational
complexity or curse of dimensionality. Most of these methods can be roughly classified into two categories: MultiView K-Means Clustering (MVKM) and Multi-View Spectral Clustering (MVSC). Many MVSC approaches essentially extend the Spectral Clustering from single view to
multiple views and are mainly based on similarity graphs or matrices. Although this kind of multi-view clustering
algorithms [8, 32, 21, 18, 19, 4, 14, 27, 5] can achieve encouraging performance, they still have two main drawbacks. On the one hand, the construction of the similarity graph
for high dimensional data is a heavy work because many

5356

