Heterogeneous Light Fields
Maximilian Diebold, Bernd Jähne
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
Speyerer Str 6, 69115 Heidelberg, Germany

Alexander Gatto
Sony Deutschland GmbH
Hedelfinger Strae 61, 70327 Stuttgart, Germany

maximilian.diebold@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
In contrast to traditional binocular or multi-view stereo
approaches, the adequately sampled space of observations
in light-field imaging allows, to obtain dense and high quality depth maps. It also extends capabilities beyond those of
traditional methods. Previously, constant intensity has been
assumed for estimating disparity of orientation in most approaches to analyze epipolar plane images (EPIs). Here,
we introduce a modified structure tensor approach which
improves depth estimation. This extension also includes a
model of non-constant intensity on EPI manifolds. We derive an approach to estimate high quality depth maps in
luminance-gradient light fields, as well as in color-filtered
light fields. Color-filtered light fields pose particular challenges due to the fact that structures can change significantly in appearance with wavelength and can completely
vanish at some wavelength. We demonstrate solutions to
this challenge and obtain a dense sRGB image reconstruction in addition to dense depth maps.

1. Introduction
The basis of light-field [8] imaging is the plenoptic function as introduced in [1]. It represents a multi-dimensional
function describing all the information available of light
reflected from a scene. This comprises the direction and
spectral radiance of the light. To capture light fields, the
plenoptic function is simplified in its dimensionality to a
four dimensional subspace, at times termed the lumigraph.
This light field representation was first introduced in computer graphics by both Gortler et al. [9] and Levoy et
al. [16]. The lumigraph describes the ray path as parameterized by two parallel planes. Along the ray path, the
radiance remains constant. That means that all rays leaving a surface point and intersecting the two parallel planes
have equal intensity in the resulting light field. Due to
that constraint, most methods to compute disparities such
as [24, 13, 3, 5, 4] relate only to light fields with this property. Even for binocular or multi-view stereo approaches, as

proposed in [17, 12, 6, 20] correspondence between points
is modeled on their having the same intensity value. Thus,
current cameras such as Raytrix [19] and Lytro [7] focus on
reconstruction from input images having similar color information. A violation, in case of images captured with different color filters or illuminations, needs sophisticated preprocessing algorithms to adapt the data for the depth estimation, as in the work of Yong et al. [10]. In that approach,
the input image data is mapped to a log-chromaticity color
space to obtain an illumination-independent color space to
find corresponding points in the input data. Thus the direct computation of depth maps on heterogeneous input data
is made in neither multi-view stereo nor current light field
imaging. Hyper-spectral images may be generated using a
single camera with revolving color filters before the objective, as described in Tominaga [22]. Unfortunately with this
setup, it is not possible to make depth estimates on the underlying scene. In this paper we present heterogeneous light
fields which have changing properties between the captured
images – such as with the presence of illumination gradients or application of colored filters. We demonstrate that a
modified structure tensor is able to process heterogeneous
light fields. We analyze the limits of both illumination
gradients and randomly illuminated light fields. Furthermore, we show that even for color filtered light fields the
structure tensor approach computes locally highly reliable
depth information which can be merged to a dense depth
map. With this dense depth map it is possible to compute a
hyper-spectral image with respect to a reference view out of
the used color filtered light field. To visualize the obtained
hyper-spectral image we introduce a method to approximate
the sRGB color space from the hyper-spectral information
and display the final RGB reconstruction.

2. Light field disparity estimation
A light field may be defined as a lumigraph [9] having
two parallel planes Π and Ω. While the Ω -plane addresses
the image coordinates (x, y) ∈ Ω of each taken image, the
Π- plane defines the location of the focal points (s, t) ∈ Π
of each camera. A 3D light field as used to capture hetero-

1745

