SketchNet: Sketch Classification with Web Images
Hua Zhang1 , Si Liu1 , Changqing Zhang2 , Wenqi Ren2 , Rui Wang1∗, Xiaochun Cao1
1
State Key Laboratory of Information Security (SKLOIS), Institute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University
{zhanghua, liusi, wangrui, caoxiaochun@iie.ac.cn, zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn,
rwq.renwenqi@gmail.com }

Abstract
In this study, we present a weakly supervised approach
that discovers the discriminative structures of sketch images, given pairs of sketch images and web images. In
contrast to traditional approaches that use global appearance features or relay on keypoint features, our aim is to
automatically learn the shared latent structures that exist
between sketch images and real images, even when there
are significant appearance differences across its relevant
real images. To accomplish this, we propose a deep convolutional neural network, named SketchNet. We firstly develop a triplet composed of sketch, positive and negative
real image as the input of our neural network. To discover
the coherent visual structures between the sketch and its
positive pairs, we introduce the softmax as the loss function. Then a ranking mechanism is introduced to make the
positive pairs obtain a higher score comparing over negative ones to achieve robust representation. Finally, we formalize above-mentioned constrains into the unified objective function, and create an ensemble feature representation to describe the sketch images. Experiments on the TUBerlin sketch benchmark demonstrate the effectiveness of
our model and show that deep feature representation brings
substantial improvements over other state-of-the-art methods on sketch classification.

1. Introduction
Sketch can be seen as the abstract representation of
expressing some types of ideas. Moreover, sketch image can convey information that is hard to describe using
text without requiring a tremendous amount of effort (e.g.
Sketch2photo [7]). With the popularity of touch devices,
sketch has been attracted more and more researches’ attentions in the computer vision and graphic field. There exist
∗ corresponding author

(a) A group of cat images
collected from website

(b) Some samples of sketch images
drawn by human

Figure 1. Motivation of our proposed method. Humans draw
sketch images with their prior knowledges, which would generate
a large variations for the same category (b). Sketch classification
can be seen as the reverse processing of drawing sketch. We introduce the real images (a) as the references, which can bridge the
representation gap between sketch images in the same category.

various interesting applications including sketch based image retrieval [14, 34], human-computer interaction [10], and
other relevant works [31, 3, 15, 21, 22, 24, 28].
While most existing methods use global appearance [13]
or interesting points [1] based feature representations to
model sketches, recent work demonstrate that the effective
way of using localized part based representation with embedding structure information [14, 2, 29]. Based on the
extracted low-level hand-crafted local features [1, 2, 13],
one way is following the process of image matching [30] to
find the most-similar image. The other way is based on the
paradigm of bag of features [17], and then train the classifiers [4] of categories using histogram representations.
One of the biggest limitations of traditional methods is
the sketch image itself as shown in Fig.1 (b): 1) Without the
texture and color informations, distinct categories appear to
be similar e.g. tire and donut. 2) Different drawing styles
can cause the variation of sketches, which would further enlarge the intra-similarities. 3) The existing localized sketch
descriptors [9, 25, 1] are sensitive to the view perspectives
and some appearance cues (the stripes of tigers) of drawn

1105

