A nonlinear regression technique for manifold valued data with applications to
Medical Image Analysis ∗
Monami Banerjee1 , Rudrasis Chakraborty1 , Edward Ofori2 , Michael S. Okun3 , David E. Vaillancourt2
and Baba C. Vemuri1
1

2

1

Department of CISE, University of Florida, FL 32611, USA
Department of Applied Physiology and Kinesiology, University of Florida, FL 32611, USA
3
Department of Neurology, University of Florida, FL 32611, USA

{monami, rudrasis, vemuri}@cise.ufl.edu

2

{eofori, vcourt}@ufl.edu

Abstract
Regression is an essential tool in Statistical analysis of
data with many applications in Computer Vision, Machine
Learning, Medical Imaging and various disciplines of Science and Engineering. Linear and nonlinear regression
in a vector space setting has been well studied in literature. However, generalizations to manifold-valued data
are only recently gaining popularity. With the exception
of a few, most existing methods of regression for manifold
valued data are limited to geodesic regression which is a
generalization of the linear regression in vector-spaces. In
this paper, we present a novel nonlinear kernel-based regression method that is applicable to manifold valued data.
Our method is applicable to cases when the independent
and dependent variables in the regression model are both
manifold-valued or one is manifold-valued and the other
is vector or scalar valued. Further, unlike most methods,
our method does not require any imposed ordering on the
manifold-valued data. The performance of our model is
tested on a large number of real data sets acquired from
Alzhiemers and movement disorder (Parkinsons and Essential Tremor) patients. We present an extensive set of results
along with statistical validation and comparisons.

1. Introduction
An essential task in any regression-based analysis involves finding the relation between two sets of variables,
i.e., the independent and the dependent variables. So, given
a training data set {xi , yi } of independent and dependent
∗ This research was funded in part by the NSF grant IIS-1525431 and
NIH grant NS066340 to BCV.

3

okun@neurology.ufl.edu

variables our goal is to regress between these two sets of
variables, i.e., find a function f : x → y s.t. yi = f (xi ). If
both of these variables are vector valued and if there is a linear relationship between them, i.e., yi = axi + b for some
a, b, any linear least square estimator can be used to find
this relationship. However, in most real applications, this
relationship is rather nonlinear and thus, one resorts to the
use of either nonlinear least-squares or tools such as support
vector regression [1].
Often, one or the other or both the variables lie on a Riemannian manifold which lacks global vector space structure. This lack of vector space structure means that any
linear combination of points on the manifold does not lie
on that manifold. For example, in general, a linear combination of points on a hypersphere do not lie on that hypersphere. Moreover, in a vector space the linear relation between {xi , yi } can be expressed as a straight line,
yi = axi + b, but on a general Riemannian manifold with
non-zero sectional curvature, straight lines correspond to
geodesic curves. Hence, even for the linear relation, one
can not use the linear least squares method on a general
Riemannian manifold. Instead, a sophisticated technique is
needed even to find a linear relationship for manifold valued data. This poses a restriction on the direct use of well
known vector-space based linear/non-linear least-squares
type techniques on the manifold. Hence, finding a relationship between manifold valued variables poses a formidable
challenge. One may be tempted to use an embedding of the
manifold valued variables in the Euclidean space (using the
Whitney Embedding [2]) and apply the linear/non-linear regression scheme in the Euclidean settings. But, note that often embedding results in a poor estimation of the underlying
relationship. Moreover, the data dimension after the embedding becomes larger. For example, using the strong Whitney
14424

