Detection and Accurate Localization of Circular Fiducials under Highly
Challenging Conditions
Lilian Calvet1 , Pierre Gurdjos2 , Carsten Griwodz1 , and Simone Gasparini2
Simula Research Laboratory, Oslo, Norway ☞ {lcalvet, griff}@simula.no
University of Toulouse, France ☞ {pgurdjos, simone.gasparini}@enseeiht.fr
1

2

Abstract
Using fiducial markers ensures reliable detection and
identification of planar features in images. Fiducials are
used in a wide range of applications, especially when a reliable visual reference is needed, e.g., to track the camera
in cluttered or textureless environments. A marker designed
for such applications must be robust to partial occlusions,
varying distances and angles of view, and fast camera motions. In this paper, we present a robust, highly accurate
fiducial system, whose markers consist of concentric rings,
along with its theoretical foundations. Relying on projective
properties, it allows to robustly localize the imaged marker
and to accurately detect the position of the image of the
(common) circle center. We demonstrate that our system
can detect and accurately localize these circular fiducials
under very challenging conditions and the experimental results reveal that it outperforms other recent fiducial systems.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a,c) Synthetic images of circular fiducials under very
challenging shooting conditions i.e., perturbed, in particular, by a
(unidirectional) motion blur of magnitude 15px. (b,d) Using the
proposed fiducial system, markers are correctly detected and identified with an accuracy of 0.54px and 0.36px resp. in (a) and (c) for
the estimated imaged center of the outer ellipse whose semi-major
axis (in green) is equal to 31.9px and 34.5px resp.

1. Introduction
The term fiducial marker, or simply fiducial, refers to a
set of (coplanar) points encoded in a planar pattern allowing a reliable detection and identification across views. A
fiducial marker system is a (set of) fiducial marker(s) coupled with dedicated computer vision algorithms solving the
detection and identification problems. This is used in a variety of applications, both in computer vision and robotics,
ranging from camera calibration to augmented reality or visual SLAM. The choice of fiducials is of crucial importance
within this framework as markers must provide reliable visual references in the scene that can be used to estimate,
e.g., the camera position or its motion. Such framework
requires that the fiducial marker system be robustly and accurately detectable even under very challenging conditions,
such as, e.g., when the markers are partially or largely occluded, or seen under highly skewed angles or from long

distances, when the illumination is very poor or irregular,
or when the camera undergoes very fast motions generating
blur.
In this paper, we present a robust, highly accurate and
theoretically-founded fiducial system, which is highly tolerant to all of the mentioned challenges, as shown in Figure
1. Its markers are based on concentric black rings on a white
background, extending the one-ring markers introduced by
Gatrell et al. in [10]. The geometric properties of the concentric circles delivered by their edges are exploited to accurately detect the image of the circle common center, thus
providing a highly reliable feature point that can be used
for tracking and motion estimation. The thickness of the
rings can be used to encode the information of the marker,
typically a unique ID, thus providing a simple and reliable

562

