Automating Carotid Intima-Media Thickness Video Interpretation with
Convolutional Neural Networks
Jae Y. Shin∗† , Nima Tajbakhsh∗† , R. Todd Hurst‡ , Christopher B. Kendall‡ , and Jianming Liang†
†
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Arizona State University
13212 East Shea Boulevard, Scottsdale, AZ 85259, USA
{Sejong,Nima.Tajbakhsh, Jianming.Liang}@asu.edu
‡

Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic Arizona
13400 E. Shea Blvd., Scottsdale, AZ 85259, USA
{Hurst.R, Kendall.Christopher}@mayo.edu

Abstract
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of
mortality yet largely preventable, but the key to prevention
is to identify at-risk individuals before adverse events. For
predicting individual CVD risk, carotid intima-media thickness (CIMT), a noninvasive ultrasound method, has proven
to be valuable, offering several advantages over CT coronary artery calcium score. However, each CIMT examination includes several ultrasound videos, and interpreting
each of these CIMT videos involves three operations: (1)
select three end-diastolic ultrasound frames (EUF) in the
video, (2) localize a region of interest (ROI) in each selected
frame, and (3) trace the lumen-intima interface and the
media-adventitia interface in each ROI to measure CIMT.
These operations are tedious, laborious, and time consuming, a serious limitation that hinders the widespread utilization of CIMT in clinical practice. To overcome this limitation, this paper presents a new system to automate CIMT
video interpretation. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that the suggested system performs reliably. The
reliable performance is attributable to our unified framework based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) coupled with our informative image representation and effective post-processing of the CNN outputs, which are uniquely
designed for each of the above three operations.

1. Introduction
Given the clinical significance of carotid intima-media
thickness (CIMT) as an early and reliable indicator of cardiovascular risk, several methods have been developed for
* Jae Y. Shin and Nima Tajbakhsh have contributed equally.

Figure 1: Longitudinal view of the carotid artery in an ultrasound B-scan image. CIMT is defined as the distance between the lumen-intima interface and the media-adventitia
interface, measured approximately 1 cm distal from the
carotid bulb on the far wall of the common carotid artery at
the end of the diastole; therefore, interpreting a CIMT video
involves three operations: (1) select three end-diastolic ultrasound frames (EUFs) in each video (the cardiac cycle indicator, a black line, shows to where in the cardiac cycle the
current frame corresponds); (2) localize a region of interest (ROI) approximately 1 cm distal from the carotid bulb
in the selected EUF; (3) measure the CIMT within the localized ROI. This paper aims to automate these three operations simultaneously through a unified framework based on
convolutional neural networks.

CIMT image interpretation. The CIMT is defined as the
distance between the lumen-intima and media-adventitia
interfaces at the far wall of the carotid artery (Figure 1).

2526

