Learning to Assign Orientations to Feature Points
Kwang Moo Yi1,∗
Yannick Verdie 1,∗
Pascal Fua1
Vincent Lepetit2
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
2
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology
{kwang.yi, yannick.verdie, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch, lepetit@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We show how to train a Convolutional Neural Network
to assign a canonical orientation to feature points given an
image patch centered on the feature point. Our method improves feature point matching upon the state-of-the art and
can be used in conjunction with any existing rotation sensitive descriptors. To avoid the tedious and almost impossible task of finding a target orientation to learn, we propose
to use Siamese networks which implicitly find the optimal
orientations during training. We also propose a new type
of activation function for Neural Networks that generalizes
the popular ReLU, maxout, and PReLU activation functions. This novel activation performs better for our task.
We validate the effectiveness of our method extensively with
four existing datasets, including two non-planar datasets,
as well as our own dataset. We show that we outperform
the state-of-the-art without the need of retraining for each
dataset.

1. Introduction
Feature points are an essential and ubiquitous tool in
computer vision, and extensive research has been conducted
on both detectors [3, 6, 22, 25, 27, 32, 48] and descriptors [2, 6, 22, 25, 32, 38, 43, 47], including using statistical approaches [33, 46]. However, the assignment of a
canonical orientation, which is an important common step,
has received almost no individual attention, probably since
the dominant orientation of SIFT [25] is considered to give
good results.
However, this is not necessarily true. In complex scenes,
feature points lie on non-planar surfaces and their appearance can be drastically altered by viewpoint and illumination changes. This can easily produce errors in orientation
estimates as shown in Fig. 1. In addition, rotation invariant descriptors [7, 14, 42] are not a definitive solution ei∗ First two authors contributed equally.
1 Figures are best viewed in color.

Reference

SIFT

Our method

Reference

SIFT

Our method

Figure 1. Multi-View Stereo (MVS) [44, 45] reconstruction with
the orientation assignment of SIFT [25] and our orientation assignment. Top: two of the original images from [1] used for MVS.
Middle: enlarged feature point regions in groups of three; left reference region from the left image, center region rotated back with
SIFT orientations, right region rotated back with our learned orientations. Estimation errors are denoted by a green arc. Bottom left:
MVS results with SIFT orientations, and Bottom right: MVS results with our orientations. As shown, due to viewpoints changes
on non-planar surfaces, SIFT orientations are not stable. On the
contrary, orientations provided by our method are stable, which
leads to better reconstructions. 46272 vertices were obtained using
SIFT orientations, and 84087 vertices with our orientations. Edge
Foci feature points [48] were used in conjunction with Daisy [38]
descriptors for both methods. 1

ther as these descriptors discard rotation sensitive information which can be useful when ideal orientations are given.
Thus, as we will show in our experiments, higher match1107

