Sample and Filter: Nonparametric Scene Parsing via Efficient Filtering
Mohammad Najafi1,2 Sarah Taghavi Namin1,2 Mathieu Salzmann1,3 Lars Petersson1,2
1
2
3
Australian National University (ANU)
NICTA∗
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
{sarah.namin, mohammad.najafi, lars.petersson}@nicta.com.au

mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Abstract
Scene parsing has attracted a lot of attention in computer vision. While parametric models have proven effective for this task, they cannot easily incorporate new training data. By contrast, nonparametric approaches, which
bypass any learning phase and directly transfer the labels
from the training data to the query images, can readily exploit new labeled samples as they become available. Unfortunately, because of the computational cost of their label
transfer procedures, state-of-the-art nonparametric methods typically filter out most training images to only keep a
few relevant ones to label the query. As such, these methods throw away many images that still contain valuable
information and generally obtain an unbalanced set of labeled samples. In this paper, we introduce a nonparametric approach to scene parsing that follows a sample-andfilter strategy. More specifically, we propose to sample labeled superpixels according to an image similarity score,
which allows us to obtain a balanced set of samples. We
then formulate label transfer as an efficient filtering procedure, which lets us exploit more labeled samples than existing techniques. Our experiments evidence the benefits of
our approach over state-of-the-art nonparametric methods
on two benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Scene parsing, also known as semantic segmentation,
tackles the problem of assigning one class label to every
pixel in an image (Fig. 1). The traditional approach to addressing this problem consists of having a separate training
phase that learns a parametric model, which will then be
applied to the test data [24, 14, 12, 10, 15, 13, 16, 27, 32,
9, 6, 23, 19, 25]. While effective, this approach doesn’t account for the dynamic nature of our world, where images
are constantly being acquired. Indeed, as new training data
becomes available, these techniques need to re-train their
model. Unfortunately, this process is generally very timeconsuming; for example, training a state-of-the-art Convo∗

NICTA is funded by the Australian Government through the Department of Communications and the Australian
Research Council through the ICT Centre of Excellence Program.

Figure 1: Nonparametric Scene Parsing. Top left: Query
image; Top right: Ground-truth; Bottom left: Superparsing [28]; Bottom right: Our method.
lutional Neural Network (CNN) can take several days.
Nonparametric methods have recently emerged as a solution to this drawback [17, 5, 11, 28, 21, 20, 26, 29]. Rather
than training a model, these techniques aim at directly transferring the semantics of labeled images to the test data. As
such, they can readily incorporate new labeled images as
they become available.
Most nonparametric methods [17, 5, 28, 21, 20, 26, 29]
follow a two-stage procedure: They first retrieve a set of
images similar to the query image, and then transfer the labels of these retrieved images to the query. The retrieval
step plays two important roles. First, it discards the labeled
images that are irrelevant to the query. Second, by reducing
the amount of data to take into account, it effectively speeds
up the transfer step. While the benefits of the former point
are unquestionable, the latter one is somewhat more dubious and mostly motivated by the relative lack of speed of
the transfer step. Indeed, to remain fast, existing techniques
typically throw away images which might still contain valuable information. This particularly causes problems when
the classes are unbalanced, since the less-frequent classes
might easily not even appear in the retrieved images.
1607

