Deep Hand: How to Train a CNN on 1 Million Hand Images
When Your Data Is Continuous and Weakly Labelled
Oscar Koller, Hermann Ney
Human Language Technology & Pattern Recog.
RWTH Aachen University, Germany

Richard Bowden
Centre for Vision Speech & Signal Processing
University of Surrey, UK

{koller,ney}@cs.rwth-aachen.de

r.bowden@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
This work presents a new approach to learning a framebased classifier on weakly labelled sequence data by embedding a CNN within an iterative EM algorithm. This
allows the CNN to be trained on a vast number of example images when only loose sequence level information is
available for the source videos. Although we demonstrate
this in the context of hand shape recognition, the approach
has wider application to any video recognition task where
frame level labelling is not available. The iterative EM algorithm leverages the discriminative ability of the CNN to
iteratively refine the frame level annotation and subsequent
training of the CNN. By embedding the classifier within an
EM framework the CNN can easily be trained on 1 million
hand images. We demonstrate that the final classifier generalises over both individuals and data sets. The algorithm
is evaluated on over 3000 manually labelled hand shape
images of 60 different classes which will be released to the
community. Furthermore, we demonstrate its use in continuous sign language recognition on two publicly available
large sign language data sets, where it outperforms the current state-of-the-art by a large margin. To our knowledge no
previous work has explored expectation maximization without Gaussian mixture models to exploit weak sequence labels for sign language recognition.

usually do not provide sufficiently fine-grained hand shape
classes suitable for sign language recognition. Recent advances in sign language research have given rise to many
publicly available sign language lexicons that allow searching of the videos by the index of hand shapes. These resources constitute noisy but valuable data sources. In this
work, we exploit the modelling capabilities of a pre-trained
22 layer deep convolutional neural network and integrate
it into a force-aligning algorithm that converts noisy video
level annotations into a strong frame level classifier. As
such, this manuscript provides the following contributions:
• formulation of an EM-based algorithm integrating
CNNs with Hidden-Markov-Models (HMMs) for
weak supervision and overcoming the temporal alignment problem in continuous video processing tasks using the strong discriminative capabilities of CNN architectures
• robust fine grained single frame hand shape recognition based on a CNN-model, trained on over 1 million
hand shapes and shown to generalise across data sets
without retraining
• making an articulated sign language hand shape data
set publicly available comprising 3361 manual labelled
frames in 45 classes 1
• and integration of pose-independent hand shape subunits into a continuous sign language recognition
pipeline

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been
demonstrated to provide superior performance in many
tasks. But to achieve this they require large amounts of labelled training data which in many areas is a limiting factor.
Pose-independent hand shape recognition, crucial to gesture and sign language recognition, suffers from large visual intra-class ambiguity and therefore places further burden on the acquisition of training data. Typically, only small
and quite specific labelled data sets exist ([16, 26]) which

This paper is organised as follows: after introducing the
related literature in Section 2 we give a precise problem formulation and the solution in Section 3. Section 4 introduces
the employed data sources. Subsequently, we evaluate the
approach in Section 5 in two parts: firstly classifying single
frames and secondly in a continuous sign language recognition pipeline. The paper closes with a conclusion in Section 6
1 Available at: http://www.hltpr.rwth-aachen.de/˜koller/1miohands

13793

