Multispectral Images Denoising by Intrinsic Tensor Sparsity Regularization
Qi Xie1 , Qian Zhao1 , Deyu Meng1,∗, Zongben Xu1 , Shuhang Gu2 , Wangmeng Zuo3 , Lei Zhang2
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University; 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University; 3 Harbin Institute of Technology
xq.liwu@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

timmy.zhaoqian@gmail.com

shuhanggu@gmail.com

wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
A multispectral image (MSI) consists of multiple images of a real scene captured by sensors over various discrete bands. As compared with traditional image collecting systems which integrate the product of the intensity at
only a few typical band intervals, MSI facilitates a fine delivery of more faithful knowledge under real scenes. Such
full knowledge representation capability of MSI has been
substantiated to greatly enhance the performance of various
computer vision tasks, such as superresolution [13], inpainting [7], and tracking [22].
In real cases, however, due to the acquisition errors conducted by sensor, an MSI generally contains certain extent
of noises, which inclines to negatively influence the subse∗ Corresponding author.

cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Block
Matching

FBP Group

Unfolding
Stacking

…

…

Perform our model
3D FBPs

2D FBPs

…
…

Multispectral images (MSI) can help deliver more faithful representation for real scenes than the traditional image system, and enhance the performance of many computer vision tasks. In real cases, however, an MSI is always corrupted by various noises. In this paper, we propose a new tensor-based denoising approach by fully considering two intrinsic characteristics underlying an MSI,
i.e., the global correlation along spectrum (GCS) and nonlocal self-similarity across space (NSS). In specific, we construct a new tensor sparsity measure, called intrinsic tensor sparsity (ITS) measure, which encodes both sparsity insights delivered by the most typical Tucker and CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) low-rank decomposition for a general tensor. Then we build a new MSI denoising model by
applying the proposed ITS measure on tensors formed by
non-local similar patches within the MSI. The intrinsic GCS and NSS knowledge can then be efficiently explored under
the regularization of this tensor sparsity measure to finely
rectify the recovery of a MSI from its corruption. A series
of experiments on simulated and real MSI denoising problems show that our method outperforms all state-of-the-arts
under comprehensive quantitative performance measures.

{dymeng zbxu}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Aggregaion

Folding

FBP Group

Figure 1. Flowchart of the proposed MSI denoising algorithm.

quent MSI processing tasks. Therefore, MSI denoising has
become a critical and inevitable issue for MSI analysis.
The most significant issue of recovering a clean MSI
from its corruption is to rationally extract prior structure
knowledge under a to-be-reconstructed MSI, and fully utilize such prior information to rectify the configuration of
the recovered MSI in a sound manner. The most commonly utilized prior structures for MSI recovery include its
global correlation along spectrum (GCS) and nonlocal selfsimilarity across space (NSS). Specifically, the GCS prior
indicates that an MSI contains a large amount of spectral
redundancy and the images obtained across the spectrum of
an MSI are generally highly correlated. And the NSS prior
refers to the fact that for a given local fullband patch (FBP)
of an MSI (which is stacked by patches at the same location of MSI over all bands), there are many FBPs similar
to it. It has been extensively shown that such two kinds of
prior knowledge are very helpful for various MSI recovery
problems [13, 7, 35, 23].
Albeit demonstrated to be effective to certain MSI denoising cases, most of the current methods to this task only consider one such prior knowledge in their model, like
BM3D [8] only considering the NSS and PARAFAC [16])
only considering the GCS. Their potential capacity thus still
has room to be further enhanced. The TDL [23] method was
recently proposed by taking both priors into account and
achieved the state-of-the-art MSI denoising performance.
The method, however, coarsely encodes the NSS prior under relatively small amount of FBP clusters while does not

1692

