Inferring Forces and Learning Human Utilities From Videos
Yixin Zhu1∗ Chenfanfu Jiang2∗ Yibiao Zhao1
Demetri Terzopoulos2 Song-Chun Zhu1
1

UCLA Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning and Autonomy
2
UCLA Computer Graphics & Vision Laboratory

Abstract
We propose a notion of affordance that takes into account physical quantities generated when the human body
interacts with real-world objects, and introduce a learning
framework that incorporates the concept of human utilities,
which in our opinion provides a deeper and finer-grained
account not only of object affordance but also of people’s
interaction with objects. Rather than defining affordance
in terms of the geometric compatibility between body poses
and 3D objects, we devise algorithms that employ physicsbased simulation to infer the relevant forces/pressures acting on body parts. By observing the choices people make in
videos (particularly in selecting a chair in which to sit) our
system learns the comfort intervals of the forces exerted on
body parts (while sitting). We account for people’s preferences in terms of human utilities, which transcend comfort
intervals to account also for meaningful tasks within scenes
and spatiotemporal constraints in motion planning, such as
for the purposes of robot task planning.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been growing interest in studying object affordance in computer vision and graphics.
As many object classes, especially man-made objects and
scene layouts, are designed primarily to serve human purposes, the latest studies on object affordance include reasoning about geometry and function, thereby achieving better generalizations to unseen instances than conventional
appearance-based machine learning approaches. In particular, Grabner et al. [19] designed an “affordance detector” for
chairs by fitting typical human sitting poses to 3D objects.
In this paper, we propose to go beyond visible geometric compatibility to infer, through physics-based simulation,
the forces/pressures on various body parts (hip, back, head,
neck, arm, leg, etc.) as people interact with objects. By
∗ Y. Zhu and C. Jiang contributed equally to this work.

Email: yixin.zhu@ucla.edu, cffjiang@cs.ucla.edu, ybz@mit.edu,
dt@cs.ucla.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Figure 1. Examples of sitting activities in (a) an office and (b)
a meeting room. In addition to geometry and appearance, people also consider other important factors including comfortability,
reaching cost, and social goals when choosing a chair. The histograms indicate human preferences for different candidate chairs.

observing people’s choices in videos—for example, in selecting a specific chair in which to sit among the many
chairs available in a scene (Fig. 1)—we can learn the comfort intervals of the pressures on body parts as well as human preferences in distributing these pressures among body
parts. Thus, our system is able to “feel”, in numerical terms,
discomfort when the forces/pressures on body parts exceed
comfort intervals. We argue that this is an important step
in representing human utilities—the pleasure and satisfaction defined in economics and ethics (e.g., by the philosopher Jeremy Benthem) that drives human activities at all
levels. In our work, human utilities explain why people
choose one chair over others in a scene and how they adjust their poses to sit more comfortably, providing a deeper
and finer-grained account not only of object affordance but
also of people’s behaviors observed in videos.
In addition to comfort intervals for body pressures, our
notion of human utilities also takes into consideration: (i)
the tasks observed in a scene—for example, students conversing with a professor in an office (Fig. 1(a)) or participating in a teleconference in a lab (Fig. 1(b))—where people
must attend to other objects and humans, and (ii) the space
constraints in a planned motion—e.g., the cost to reach a
chair at a distance. In a full-blown application, we demonstrate that human utilities can be used to analyze human activities, such as in the context of robot task planning.
13823

