Temporally coherent 4D reconstruction of complex dynamic scenes
Armin Mustafa

Hansung Kim
Jean-Yves Guillemaut
CVSSP, University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom

Adrian Hilton

a.mustafa@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper presents an approach for reconstruction of
4D temporally coherent models of complex dynamic scenes.
No prior knowledge is required of scene structure or camera
calibration allowing reconstruction from multiple moving
cameras. Sparse-to-dense temporal correspondence is integrated with joint multi-view segmentation and reconstruction to obtain a complete 4D representation of static and
dynamic objects. Temporal coherence is exploited to overcome visual ambiguities resulting in improved reconstruction of complex scenes. Robust joint segmentation and reconstruction of dynamic objects is achieved by introducing
a geodesic star convexity constraint. Comparative evaluation is performed on a variety of unstructured indoor and
outdoor dynamic scenes with hand-held cameras and multiple people. This demonstrates reconstruction of complete
temporally coherent 4D scene models with improved nonrigid object segmentation and shape reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Existing reconstruction frameworks for general dynamic
scenes commonly operate on a frame-by-frame basis [14,
32] or are limited to simple scenes [15]. Previous work
on indoor and outdoor dynamic scene reconstruction has
shown that joint segmentation and reconstruction across
multiple views gives improved reconstruction [17]. In this
work we build on this concept exploiting temporal coherence of the scene to overcome visual ambiguities inherent in
single frame reconstruction and multiple view segmentation
methods for general scenes. This is illustrated in Figure 1
where the resulting 4D scene reconstruction has temporally
coherent labels and surface correspondence for each object.
We present a sparse-to-dense approach to estimate dense
temporal correspondence and surface reconstruction for
non-rigid objects. Initially sparse 3D feature points are robustly tracked from wide-baseline image correspondence
using spatio-temporal information to obtain sparse temporal correspondence and reconstruction. Sparse 3D feature
correspondences are used to constrain optical flow estimation to obtain an initial dense temporally consistent model
of dynamic regions. The initial model is then refined using

Figure 1. Temporally consistent scene reconstruction for Odzemok
dataset colour-coded to show the obtained scene segmentation.

a novel optimisation framework using a geodesic star convexity constraint for simultaneous multi-view segmentation
and reconstruction of non-rigid shape. The proposed approach overcomes limitations of existing methods allowing
an unsupervised temporally coherent 4D reconstruction of
complete models for general scenes. The scene is automatically decomposed into a set of spatio-temporally coherent
objects as shown in Figure 1. The contributions are as follows:
• Temporally coherent reconstruction of complex dynamic scenes.
• A framework for space-time sparse-to-dense segmentation and reconstruction.
• Optimisation of dense reconstruction and segmentation using geodesic star convexity.
• Robust and computationally efficient reconstruction of
dynamic scenes by exploiting temporal coherence.

2. Related work
2.1. Temporal multi-view reconstruction
Extensive research has been performed in multi-view reconstruction of dynamic scenes. Most existing approaches
process each time frame independently due to the difficulty
of simultaneously estimating temporal correspondence for
non-rigid objects. Independent per-frame reconstruction
can result in errors due to the inherent visual ambiguity
14660

