A Probabilistic Collaborative Representation based Approach
for Pattern Classification
Sijia Cai1 , Lei Zhang1∗, Wangmeng Zuo2 , Xiangchu Feng3
Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
3
Dept. of Applied Mathematics, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
1

{csscai, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, cswmzuo@gmail.com, xcfeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Conventional representation based classifiers, ranging
from the classical nearest neighbor classifier and nearest
subspace classifier to the recently developed sparse representation based classifier (SRC) and collaborative representation based classifier (CRC), are essentially distance
based classifiers. Though SRC and CRC have shown
interesting classification results, their intrinsic classification mechanism remains unclear. In this paper we propose a probabilistic collaborative representation framework, where the probability that a test sample belongs to
the collaborative subspace of all classes can be well defined and computed. Consequently, we present a probabilistic collaborative representation based classifier (ProCRC),
which jointly maximizes the likelihood that a test sample
belongs to each of the multiple classes. The final classification is performed by checking which class has the maximum
likelihood. The proposed ProCRC has a clear probabilistic
interpretation, and it shows superior performance to many
popular classifiers, including SRC, CRC and SVM. Coupled
with the CNN features, it also leads to state-of-the-art classification results on a variety of challenging visual datasets.

1. Introduction
Pattern classification is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision and machine learning. Given a
set of training samples X = [X1 , X2 , . . . , XK ], where
Xk , k = 1, 2, . . . , K, is the sample matrix of class k, pattern classification aims to predict the class label of a query
sample y. Many pattern classification schemes have been
proposed in the past decades. Generally speaking, there
are two categories of pattern classification methods [32, 4]:
∗ This work is supported by Hong Kong RGC GRF grant (PolyU
152124/15E).

parametric methods and non-parametric methods. The parametric pattern classification methods (e.g., SVM) focus on
how to learn the parameters of a hypothesis classification
model from the training data. The learned parametric model
is then used to predict the class labels of unknown data. In
contrast, the non-parametric pattern classification methods
(e.g., nearest neighbor) do not learn a parametric model for
classification but use the training samples directly to predict
the class labels of unknown data. Though non-parametric
methods bear some weaknesses in computational efficiency,
recent works have revealed their advantages (e.g., avoid
over-fitting) over the parametric based methods [4, 53].
A popular type of non-parametric classifiers which are
widely used in various visual recognition tasks are the distance based classifiers, e.g., the nearest subspace classifier
(NSC) [10]. The principle of such classifier is to assign
a test sample to the class which has the shortest distance
to it. However, the distance based non-parametric classifiers rely heavily on the pre-determined distance or similarity metrics. Though some commonly used metrics, such as
Euclidean distance, manifold distance and principal angle
based correlation [47, 18], are intuitive to describe the variations among samples, they have limitations in accurately
reflecting the intrinsic similarity among objects [28]. In order to better characterize the similarity, a promising choice
is to introduce the uncertainties of the outputs of a classifier
for decision making, as what has been done in probabilistic
SVMs [35, 26, 14]. Probabilistic SVM estimates the posterior probabilities of class labels by the calibration techniques, such as Platt’s scaling [35, 26] which transforms
the classifier’s scores into the calibrated probabilities over
classes by fitting a sigmoid posterior model.
An alternative approach to probabilistic SVM is the
probabilistic subspace methods, e.g., probabilistic principal
component analysis (PPCA) [43, 25] and probabilistic linear discriminant analysis (PLDA) [36], which reformulate
the subspace methods as a latent variable model and op-

2950

