Video2GIF: Automatic Generation of Animated GIFs from Video
Michael Gygli∗
CVL, ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland

Yale Song
Yahoo Research
New York, USA

Liangliang Cao
Yahoo Research
New York, USA

gygli@vision.ee.ethz.ch

yalesong@yahoo-inc.com

liangliang@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract
We introduce the novel problem of automatically generating animated GIFs from video. GIFs are short looping
video with no sound, and a perfect combination between image and video that really capture our attention. GIFs tell a
story, express emotion, turn events into humorous moments,
and are the new wave of photojournalism. We pose the
question: Can we automate the entirely manual and elaborate process of GIF creation by leveraging the plethora of
user generated GIF content? We propose a Robust Deep
RankNet that, given a video, generates a ranked list of its
segments according to their suitability as GIF. We train our
model to learn what visual content is often selected for GIFs
by using over 100K user generated GIFs and their corresponding video sources. We effectively deal with the noisy
web data by proposing a novel adaptive Huber loss in the
ranking formulation. We show that our approach is robust
to outliers and picks up several patterns that are frequently
present in popular animated GIFs. On our new large-scale
benchmark dataset, we show the advantage of our approach
over several state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Animated GIF is an image format that continuously displays multiple frames in a loop, with no sound. Although
first introduced in the late 80’s, its popularity has increased
dramatically in recent years on social networks, such as
Tumblr and reddit, generating numerous famous Internet
memes and creative Cinemagraphs [1]. In response, various websites have been created to provide easy-to-use tools
to generate GIF from video, e.g., GIFSoup, Imgflip, and
Ezgif. However, while becoming more prevalent, the creation of GIF remains an entirely manual process, requiring
the user to specify the timestamps of the beginning and the
end of a video clip, from which a single animated GIF is
generated. This way of manually specifying the exact time
range makes existing solutions cumbersome to use and re∗ This work was done while the author was an intern at Yahoo! Inc.

Figure 1. Our goal is to rank video segments according to their
suitability as animated GIF. We collect a large-scale dataset of animated GIFs and the corresponding video sources. This allows us
to train our Robust Deep RankNet using over 500K pairs of GIF
and non-GIF segment pairs, learning subtle differences between
video segments using our novel adaptive rank Huber loss.

quires extensive human effort.
In this paper, we introduce the novel problem of automatically generating animated GIFs from video, dubbed
Video2GIF. From the computer vision perspective, this is
an interesting research problem because GIFs have some
unique properties compared to conventional images and
videos: A GIF is short, entirely visual with no sound, expresses various forms of emotions, and sometimes contains
unique spatio-temporal visual patterns that make it appear
to loop forever. The task has some connections to existing computer vision problems – such as visual interestingness [16, 11], creativity [31], video highlights [35, 40] and
summarization [13, 33] – but differs from them due to the
unique properties described above. Apart from research interest, the task is supported by real-world demand and has
many practical application scenarios including photojournalism, advertising, video sharing and preview, as well as
video promotion on social media.
To handle this task, we propose a novel RankNet that,
given a video, produces a ranked list of segments accord11001

