Reconstructing Shapes and Appearances of Thin Film Objects
using RGB Images
Yoshie Kobayashi1 ,Tetsuro Morimoto2 , Imari Sato3 ,
Yasuhiro Mukaigawa4 , Takao Tomono2 , Katsushi Ikeuchi1
1
The University of Tokyo, 2 Toppan Printing Co. Ltd.,
3
National Institute of Informatics, 4 Nara Institute of Science and Technology
yoshie,ki@cvl.iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp, tetsuro.morimoto, takao.tomono@toppan.co.jp,
imarik@nii.co.jp, mukaigawa@is.naist.jp

Abstract

difficult, thin film modeling is applied in many areas such as
industrial inspection, biological analysis, and archaeological research.

Reconstruction of shapes and appearances of thin film
objects can be applied to many fields such as industrial inspection, biological analysis, and archaeologic research.
However, it comes with many challenging issues because
the appearances of thin film can change dramatically depending on view and light directions. The appearance is
deeply dependent on not only the shapes but also the optical parameters of thin film. In this paper, we propose a
novel method to estimate shapes and film thickness. First,
we narrow down candidates of zenith angle by degree of polarization and determine it by the intensity of thin film which
increases monotonically along the zenith angle. Second, we
determine azimuth angle from occluding boundaries. Finally, we estimate the film thickness by comparing a look-up
table of color along the thickness and zenith angle with captured images. We experimentally evaluated the accuracy of
estimated shapes and appearances and found that our proposed method is effective.

In computer graphics, several methods have shown that
a physical model of interference can represent appearances
well. However, this type of a model requires optical parameters (refractive index and film thickness) to determine
appearances. In optics fields, there are several methods
to estimate optical parameters, such as the refractive index and film thickness of a planar object. Interference
spectroscopy[13] and ellipsometry are representative methods. Kitagawa[11, 10] proposed an image-based method,
that utilizes RGB values along the film thickness, but this
method requires a known refractive index. Some applications such as archaeological applications require the thickness of a curved surface to be measured, meaning that they
cannot be applied to non-planar surfaces. Kobayashi et
al.[12] proposed a method for thin film objects that have a
complicated shape. The problem with this method, though,
is that it needs spectral images for the analysis, and thus the
data dimensionality becomes high due to the high volume
of memory and computational complexity required.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we proposes a novel method to estimate
the shapes and film thickness of an object with thin film
layers by using only RGB images. The shape of an object is
estimated on the basis of polarization and intensity change
along the zenith angle. From the observed color and obtained object shape, the method compares color change of
a simulated result with the observed image, and then determines film thickness from the closest color.

Reconstructing the shapes and appearances of real objects is an important issue in the computer vision and computer graphics fields. Several of the current reconstruction methods issue reflectance properties which describes
the reflection between reflected and incoming light. However, objects in the real world have quite a few different reflectance properties such as diffusion, specularity, isotropy,
anisotropy, scattering, refraction, and interference. Among
these, interference has been less explored due to difficult
elements such as dramatically varying color along the lighting and viewing directions. Such interference effects are
observed on the thin layer over object surfaces such as laminated film, soap bubbles, and oil film. Although it can be

The three main contributions of this work are as follows.
First, while conventional methods use spectral sensors, we
use only a commercial available digital camera, resulting in
less data to be processed. Second, our method can obtain
both the shape and film thickness of a target object. Third,
we have developed a novel measurement apparatus that can
1
3774

