Local Background Enclosure for RGB-D Salient Object Detection
David Feng, Nick Barnes, Shaodi You
NICTA; RSE, Australian National University

Chris McCarthy
Swinburne University of Technology

{david.feng, nick.barnes, shaodi.you}@nicta.com.au

cdmccarthy@swin.edu.au

Abstract
Recent work in salient object detection has considered
the incorporation of depth cues from RGB-D images. In
most cases, depth contrast is used as the main feature. However, areas of high contrast in background regions cause
false positives for such methods, as the background frequently contains regions that are highly variable in depth.
Here, we propose a novel RGB-D saliency feature. Local
Background Enclosure (LBE) captures the spread of angular directions which are background with respect to the candidate region and the object that it is part of. We show that
our feature improves over state-of-the-art RGB-D saliency
approaches as well as RGB methods on the RGBD1000 and
NJUDS2000 datasets.

(b) Depth

(a) RGB

(c) Ground Truth

(d) Our Method

(e) GP [23]

(f) ACSD [15]

(g) LMH [22]

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Saliency output on a depth image where foreground
depth contrast is relatively low. Our method measures background
enclosure of the object to overcome this problem.

Visual attention refers to the ability of the human visual
system to rapidly identify scene components that stand out,
or are salient, with respect to their surroundings. Early work
on computing saliency aimed to model and predict human
gaze on images [12]. Recently the field has expanded to include the detection of entire salient regions or objects [1,3].
These techniques have many computer vision applications,
including compression [10], visual tracking [19], and image
retargeting [18].
The saliency of a region is usually obtained by measuring
contrast at a local [12] and/or global scale [7]. The majority of previous approaches compute contrast with respect to
appearance-based features such as colour, texture, and intensity edges [6, 13]. However, recent advances in 3D data
acquisition techniques have motivated the adoption of structural features, improving discrimination between different
objects with similar appearance.
RGB-D saliency methods typically incorporate depth directly, or use depth in a contrast measurement framework
[11,15,22–24], where contrast is computed as the difference
between the means or distributions of foreground and background depth. Use of depth contrast in conjunction with
colour contrast, various priors, and refinement schemes pro-

duces state-of-the-art results [23]. However, depth contrast
is prone to false positives from background regions with
large depth difference. Figure 1 shows an example in which
the foreground has relatively low contrast, making it challenging to detect using existing depth features. Contrast in
background regions is unavoidable, and in general contrast
in depth scenes can be dependent on random factors such as
object placement and viewpoint. Although Ju et al. [15] has
started to investigate depth contrast for whole object structures, false positives still appear due to nearby regions with
large depth difference as shown in Figure 1f.
Aiming to address this issue, we propose the Local Background Enclosure (LBE) feature, which directly measures
salient structure from depth. We note that salient objects
tend to be characterised by being locally in front of surrounding regions, and the distance between an object and
the background is not as important as the fact that the background surrounds the object for a large proportion of its
boundary. The existence of background in a large spread of
angular directions around the object implies pop-out structure and thus high saliency. Conversely, background regions
are less likely to exhibit pop-out structure. Thus we pro-

2343

