Regularity-Driven Building Facade Matching between Aerial and Street Views
Mark Wolff
Robert T. Collins
Yanxi Liu
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA. 16802, USA
wolff@psu.edu, {rcollins, yanxi}@cse.psu.edu

Abstract
We present an approach for detecting and matching
building facades between aerial view and street-view images. We exploit the regularity of urban scene facades
as captured by their lattice structures and deduced from
median-tiles’ shape context, color, texture and spatial similarities. Our experimental results demonstrate effective
matching of oblique and partially-occluded facades between aerial and ground views. Quantitative comparisons
for automated urban scene facade matching from three
cities show superior performance of our method over baseline SIFT, Root-SIFT and the more sophisticated ScaleSelective Self-Similarity and Binary Coherent Edge descriptors. We also illustrate regularity-based applications of
occlusion removal from street views and higher-resolution
texture-replacement in aerial views.

1. Introduction
With the increasing availability of Google maps and
other online mapping tools, geolocating consumer images
has become a popular yet challenging task. As a step in
this direction, we are interested in matching aerial view facades, such as those automatically detected by the method
in [19], with a set of street-view facades to identify the same
buildings. This is a challenging problem due to large differences in viewpoint and lighting (Figure 1), temporal disparities between aerial and street-level image collection, and
perspective deformations at the street-view level due to the
camera’s close proximity to each building. Occlusions also
complicate the problem – lower levels of a building may
be blocked by other buildings in aerial views, and streetview images can be occluded by trees, street-lights, cars,
and pedestrians, as well as by other buildings.
Urban facade feature-level matching is inherently ambiguous due to pattern regularities. Even though many existing works in computer vision and computer graphics have
exploited such regularities computationally (see Section 2),

Figure 1. Aerial-view (top-left) and street-view (top-right) images
from the same facade of an NYC building (image data provided
by Google). Our facade matching pipeline finds corresponding facades in spite of drastic variations in viewpoint and lighting. Our
method is regularity-driven, using features induced from the automatically detected lattices. Bottom row shows additional matched
street-views of this facade. Note that a facade can be matched correctly even when the detected street-view lattice does not overlap
with the aerial view lattice.

matching between aerial and street views of the same facade poses technical challenges beyond generic image patch
matching and even beyond ground-level-only wide-baseline
facade matching. Furthermore, very little work (e.g. [4, 30])
has explored a regularity-driven approach for urban scene
segmentation and matching at the facade level.
We propose to use a lattice and its associated median tiles
(motifs) as the basis for matching widely differing aerial

1591

