A Consensus-Based Framework for Distributed Bundle Adjustment
Anders Eriksson1 , John Bastian2 , Tat-Jun Chin2 and Mats Isaksson3
1
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology
2
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide
3
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Colorado State University,

Abstract
In this paper we study large-scale optimization problems
in multi-view geometry, in particular the Bundle Adjustment
problem. In its conventional formulation, the complexity
of existing solvers scale poorly with problem size, hence
this component of the Structure-from-Motion pipeline can
quickly become a bottle-neck. Here we present a novel formulation for solving bundle adjustment in a truly distributed
manner using consensus based optimization methods. Our
algorithm is presented with a concise derivation based on
proximal splitting, along with a theoretical proof of convergence and brief discussions on complexity and implementation. Experiments on a number of real image datasets convincingly demonstrates the potential of the proposed method
by outperforming the conventional bundle adjustment formulation by orders of magnitude.

1. Introduction
With the number of images and video available over the
internet reaching several billions of terabytes and growing, the need for novel tools capable of handling such vast
amount of data becomes apparent. In this paper we present
a framework for solving a wide range of large-scale optimization problems in multi-view geometry in a distributed
manner.
Our work focuses on Structure-from-Motion and in particular the Bundle Adjustment problem [23, 9], which is
the process of iteratively refining the camera parameters
as well as the 3D points of a scene reconstruction through
non-linear optimization. Bundle adjustment constitutes a
core component in most state-of-the-art multi-view geometry systems, and is typically invoked as a final refinement
stage to approximate initial scene estimates as well as a
means for removing drift in incremental reconstructions.
The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm has proven to be the
most successful method for solving this formulation, as it is
simple to implement, robust to initialization, and its framework makes it very amenable to taking advantage of the

forms of sparsity that typically arise in multi-view geometry
problems. Each step of this algorithm produces an estimate
of the parameters that improves upon the previous and the
resulting series of iterates can be shown to converge to a
local minimum of the objective function at hand.
Despite its long history within the field of computer vision, bundle adjustment still receives a significant amount
of research attention. In its conventional formulation, the
complexity of bundle adjustment scales quite poorly with
the size of the problem considered; as we transition from
small and moderate reconstructions to truly large scale
settings, bundle adjustment quickly becomes a computational bottle-neck. Hence, recent efforts in this topic have
primarily been focussed towards improving the computational efficiency of bundle adjustment, in particular when
applied to very large-scale reconstruction problems, see
[16, 14, 24, 6, 15, 3], with a number of publicly available
software packages as a result [16, 24, 1]. These previous approaches typically boost performance of bundle adjustment
by raising the efficiency of specific computational steps
taken within the algorithm itself. For example, a number
of methods have been introduced in attempts at improving
the efficiency of solving the linear systems that rise within
the bundle adjustment algorithm. In [6] the authors advocated the use of conjugate gradients along with a novel preconditioning to replace the Cholesky factorization typically
employed. In the paper [2] a method was proposed using
a combination of sparse methods, preconditioned conjugate
gradient and approximation methods with some very impressive results.
Other research directions include the work of [18]. Here
the authors attempt to split the problem into a number of
smaller subproblems, solve these individually and in parallel and then subsequently merge them into one large final reconstruction. However, because this method relies on
decoupling the full scene into sub-maps that are as independent as possible, the degree of parallelism that can be
achieved is limited to particular classes of scenes.
The paper [24] proposed a very efficient method for solving large scale 3D scene reconstruction problems by capi11754

