Large-Scale Location Recognition and the Geometric Burstiness Problem
Torsten Sattler1 , Michal Havlena2 , Konrad Schindler3 , Marc Pollefeys1
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
2
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
3
Institute of Geodesy and Photogrammetry, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
{sattlert,pomarc}@inf.ethz.ch, havlena@vision.ee.ethz.ch, schindler@geod.baug.ethz.ch

Abstract
Visual location recognition is the task of determining the
place depicted in a query image from a given database of
geo-tagged images. Location recognition is often cast as an
image retrieval problem and recent research has almost exclusively focused on improving the chance that a relevant
database image is ranked high enough after retrieval. The
implicit assumption is that the number of inliers found by
spatial verification can be used to distinguish between a
related and an unrelated database photo with high precision. In this paper, we show that this assumption does not
hold for large datasets due to the appearance of geometric bursts, i.e., sets of visual elements appearing in similar
geometric configurations in unrelated database photos. We
propose algorithms for detecting and handling geometric
bursts. Although conceptually simple, using the proposed
weighting schemes dramatically improves the recall that
can be achieved when high precision is required compared
to the standard re-ranking based on the inlier count. Our
approach is easy to implement and can easily be integrated
into existing location recognition systems.

1. Introduction
Given a database of geo-tagged images, the task of a visual location recognition system is to determine the place
depicted in a query photo [2, 5, 30, 34, 35]. Knowing which
database images show the same place as the query, the position (potentially also the orientation) from which the query
photo was taken can either be approximated [7, 13, 37] or
computed precisely [26,40] from the known positions of the
matching database images. Location recognition techniques
play an important role for several applications such as loopclosure in robotics [9], landmark recognition [4, 7], visual
navigation [26], and image-based localization [6, 14, 29].
Typically, two tasks must be accomplished to solve
the visual location recognition problem: (i) find a set of
database images visually similar to the query and (ii) de-

termine which, if any, of the retrieved images depict the
same place as the query. The first step is another canonical
problem of computer vision, namely image retrieval [31].
Consequently, most work on location recognition focuses
on optimizing the retrieval step, with the aim to maximize
the portion of queries where at least one relevant database
photo is contained in the N most similar retrieved images,
the so-called recall@N . Image retrieval largely ignores the
spatial relations between features in the query image. Thus,
the recall@N can be improved further through spatial verification: the (approximate) geometric transformation between the query and the top-ranked images after retrieval is
estimated [24,32,33] and the database images are re-ranked
based on the number of inliers to the transformation.
Improving the retrieval step is clearly a key factor for
solving the location recognition problem. Yet, only improving the recall@N is not sufficient for quite a few applications which require high precision. For example, to support
loop-closure in SLAM systems one must recognize previously visited locations with high precision, since the loop
closure (a.k.a. pose graph optimization) itself tolerates only
a small number of mistakes [18]. Similarly, tools which automatically annotate photos with the place where they were
taken [11] become useless if the user must search and correct too many mistakes. Thus, a second key capability of
a location recognition system is to decide with high precision (i.e., low false-positive rate) which of the retrieved
images actually depict the same place – ideally the bulk of
the queries should satisfy recall@1.
As explained, the standard way to refine the raw list of
retrieved images is geometric verification with a suitable
transformation. But the re-ranking is surprisingly primitive:
typically, images are simply re-ordered by the number of
inliers to the transformation, respectively discarded if that
number falls below some threshold. Interestingly, the results reported in previous work actually suggest that this is
not a suitable strategy if high precision is required. E.g., [2]
reports a recall@1 of ≈70% on the large-scale Pittsburgh
dataset [35], but a recall@50 of ≈90%. In other words, for

1582

