Handwriting Recognition in Low-resource Scripts using Adversarial Learning
Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Abhirup Das2 Ankan Kumar Bhunia3 Perla Sai Raj Kishore2 Partha Pratim Roy4
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Institute of Engineering & Management, India
3
Jadavpur University, India 4 Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, India
1

ayanbhunia007@gmail.com

Abstract
Handwritten Word Recognition and Spotting is a challenging field dealing with handwritten text possessing irregular and complex shapes. The design of deep neural network models makes it necessary to extend training
datasets in order to introduce variations and increase the
number of samples; word-retrieval is therefore very difficult
in low-resource scripts. Much of the existing literature comprises preprocessing strategies which are seldom sufficient
to cover all possible variations. We propose an Adversarial Feature Deformation Module (AFDM) that learns ways
to elastically warp extracted features in a scalable manner. The AFDM is inserted between intermediate layers and
trained alternatively with the original framework, boosting its capability to better learn highly informative features rather than trivial ones. We test our meta-framework,
which is built on top of popular word-spotting and wordrecognition frameworks and enhanced by AFDM, not only
on extensive Latin word datasets but also on sparser Indic
scripts. We record results for varying sizes of training data,
and observe that our enhanced network generalizes much
better in the low-data regime; the overall word-error rates
and mAP scores are observed to improve as well.

1. Introduction
Handwriting recognition has been a very popular area of
research over the last two decades, owing to handwritten
documents being a personal choice of communication for
humans, other than speech. The technology is applicable
in postal automation, bank cheque processing, digitization
of handwritten documents, and also as a reading aid for visually handicapped. Handwritten character recognition and
word spotting and recognition systems have evolved significantly over the years. Since Nipkow’s scanner [27] and
LeNet [21], modern deep-learning based approaches today
[18, 29, 41] seek to be able to robustly recognize handwritten text by learning local invariant patterns across diverse
handwriting styles that are consistent in individual charac-

ters and scripts. These deep learning algorithms require
vast amounts of data to train models that are robust to realworld handwritten data. While large datasets of both wordlevel and separated handwritten characters are available for
scripts like Latin, a large number of scripts with larger vocabularies have limited data, posing challenges in research
in the areas of word-spotting and recognition in languages
using these scripts.
Deep learning algorithms, which have emerged in recent
times, enable networks to effectively extract informative
features from inputs and automatically generate transcriptions [31] of images of handwritten text or spot [40] query
words, with high accuracy. In the case of scripts where
abundant training data is not available, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) often fall short, overfitting on the training
set and thus generalizing poorly during evaluation. Popular
methods such as data augmentation allow models to use the
existing data more effectively, while batch-normalization
[15] and dropout [39] prevent overfitting. Augmentation
strategies such as random translations, flips, rotations and
addition of Gaussian noise to input samples are often used
to extend the original dataset [20] and prove to be benefitial for not only limited but also large datasets like Imagenet [7]. The existing literature [6, 19, 29, 51] augment
the training data prior to feature extraction before classifying over as many as 3755 character classes [51]. Such transformations, however, fail to incorporate the wide variations
in writing style and the complex shapes assumed by characters in words, by virtue of the free-flowing nature of handwritten text. Due to the huge space of possible variances
in handwritten images, training by generating deformed examples through such generic means is not sufficient as the
network easily adapts to these policies. Models need to become robust to uncommon deformations in inputs by learning to effectively utilize the more informative invariances,
and it is not optimal to utilize just “hard” examples to do so
[34, 43]. Instead, we propose an adversarial-learning based
framework for handwritten word retrieval tasks for low resource scripts in order to train deep networks from a limited
number of samples.

4767

