Guided Stereo Matching
Matteo Poggi∗, Davide Pallotti∗ , Fabio Tosi, Stefano Mattoccia
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy
{m.poggi, fabio.tosi5, stefano.mattoccia }@unibo.it

93.21%

(a)

4.36%

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Guided stereo matching. (a) Challenging, reference image from KITTI 2015 [20] and disparity maps estimated by (b) iResNet
[14] trained on synthetic data [19], or (c) guided by sparse depth measurements (5% density). Error rate (> 3) superimposed on each map.

Abstract
Stereo is a prominent technique to infer dense depth
maps from images, and deep learning further pushed forward the state-of-the-art, making end-to-end architectures
unrivaled when enough data is available for training. However, deep networks suffer from significant drops in accuracy when dealing with new environments. Therefore, in
this paper, we introduce Guided Stereo Matching, a novel
paradigm leveraging a small amount of sparse, yet reliable
depth measurements retrieved from an external source enabling to ameliorate this weakness. The additional sparse
cues required by our method can be obtained with any strategy (e.g., a LiDAR) and used to enhance features linked
to corresponding disparity hypotheses. Our formulation is
general and fully differentiable, thus enabling to exploit the
additional sparse inputs in pre-trained deep stereo networks
as well as for training a new instance from scratch. Extensive experiments on three standard datasets and two stateof-the-art deep architectures show that even with a small set
of sparse input cues, i) the proposed paradigm enables significant improvements to pre-trained networks. Moreover,
ii) training from scratch notably increases accuracy and robustness to domain shifts. Finally, iii) it is suited and effective even with traditional stereo algorithms such as SGM.

1. Introduction
Obtaining dense and accurate depth estimation is pivotal to effectively address higher level tasks in computer
∗ Joint first authorship.

vision such as autonomous driving, 3D reconstruction, and
robotics. It can be carried out either employing active sensors, such as LiDAR, or from images acquired by standard
cameras. The former class of devices suffers from some
limitations, depending on the technology deployed to infer depth. For instance, sensors based on structured light
have limited working range and are ineffective in outdoor
environments, while LiDARs, although very popular and
accurate, provide only sparse depth measurements and may
have shortcomings when dealing with reflective surfaces.
On the other hand, passive sensors based on standard cameras potentially allow obtaining dense depth estimation in
any environment and application scenario. Stereo [28] relies on two (or more) rectified images to compute the disparity by matching corresponding pixels along the horizontal epipolar line, thus enabling to infer depth via triangulation. The most recent trend in stereo consists in training end-to-end Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) on
a large amount of (synthetic) stereo pairs [19] to directly
infer a dense disparity map. However, deep stereo architectures suffer when shifting domain, for example moving
from synthetic data used for the initial training [19] to the
real target imagery. Therefore, deep networks are fine-tuned
in the target environment to ameliorate domain shift issues.
Nonetheless, standard benchmarks used to assess the accuracy of stereo [7, 20, 27, 29] give some interesting insights
concerning such paradigm. While it is unrivaled when a
massive amount of data is available for fine-tuning, as is the
case of KITTI datasets [7, 20], approaches mixing learning
and traditional pipelines [35] are still competitive with deep
networks when not enough data is available, as particularly
evident with Middlebury v3 [27] and ETH3D [29] datasets.

1979

