Multi-Label Image Recognition with Graph Convolutional Networks∗
Zhao-Min Chen1,2
Xiu-Shen Wei2
Peng Wang3
Yanwen Guo1
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Megvii Research Nanjing, Megvii Technology, China
3
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia
{chenzhaomin123, weixs.gm}@gmail.com, peng.wang@adelaide.edu.au, ywguo@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
The task of multi-label image recognition is to predict
a set of object labels that present in an image. As objects
normally co-occur in an image, it is desirable to model the
label dependencies to improve the recognition performance.
To capture and explore such important dependencies, we
propose a multi-label classification model based on Graph
Convolutional Network (GCN). The model builds a directed
graph over the object labels, where each node (label) is
represented by word embeddings of a label, and GCN is
learned to map this label graph into a set of inter-dependent
object classifiers. These classifiers are applied to the image
descriptors extracted by another sub-net, enabling the whole
network to be end-to-end trainable. Furthermore, we propose a novel re-weighted scheme to create an effective label
correlation matrix to guide information propagation among
the nodes in GCN. Experiments on two multi-label image
recognition datasets show that our approach obviously outperforms other existing state-of-the-art methods. In addition,
visualization analyses reveal that the classifiers learned by
our model maintain meaningful semantic topology.

1. Introduction
Multi-label image recognition is a fundamental and practical task in Computer Vision, where the aim is to predict
a set of objects present in an image. It can be applied to
many fields such as medical diagnosis recognition [7], human attribute recognition [19] and retail checkout recognition [8, 30]. Comparing to multi-class image classification [21], the multi-label task is more challenging due to the
∗ Z.-M. Chen’s contribution was made when he was an intern in Megvii
Research Nanjing. X.-S. Wei and Y. Guo are the corresponding authors.
Yanwen Guo is also with the Science and Technology on Information
Systems Engineering Laboratory, China, and the 28th Research Institute of
China Electronics Technology Group Corporation, Nanjing 210007, China.
This research was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (No.
2017YFA0700800), the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grants 61772257 and 61672279.

Person, Sports Ball,
Tennis Racket

Person, Tie

Person, Ski

Tie

Sports Ball

Person
Tennis
Racket

Ski

Figure 1. We build a directed graph over the object labels to model
label dependencies in multi-label image recognition. In this figure,
“LabelA → LabelB ”, means when LabelA appears, LabelB is
likely to appear, but the reverse may not be true.

combinatorial nature of the output space. As the objects normally co-occur in the physical world, a key for multi-label
image recognition is to model the label dependencies, as
shown in Fig. 1.
A Naı̈ve way to address the multi-label recognition problem is to treat the objects in isolation and convert the multilabel problem into a set of binary classification problems
to predict whether each object of interest presents or not.
Benefited from the great success of single-label image classification achieved by deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) [10, 26, 27, 12], the performance of the binary solutions has been greatly improved. However, these methods
are essentially limited by ignoring the complex topology
structure between objects. This stimulates research for approaches to capture and explore the label correlations in various ways. Some approaches, based on probabilistic graph
model [18, 17] or Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [28],
are proposed to explicitly model label dependencies. While
the former formulates the multi-label classification problem
as a structural inference problem which may suffer from a
scalability issue due to high computational complexity, the

5177

