Adversarial Defense Through Network Profiling Based Path Extraction
Yuxian Qiu§ Jingwen Leng§∗ Cong Guo§
Quan Chen§ Chao Li§ Minyi Guo§∗ Yuhao Zhu†
§
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
†
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester
{qiuyuxian,leng-jw,guocong}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{chen-quan,lichao,guo-my}@cs.sjtu.edu.cn, yzhu@rochester.edu

Abstract
Recently, researchers have started decomposing deep neural network models according to their semantics or functions.
Recent work has shown the effectiveness of decomposed functional blocks for defending adversarial attacks, which add
small input perturbation to the input image to fool the DNN
models. This work proposes a profiling-based method to
decompose the DNN models to different functional blocks,
which lead to the effective path as a new approach to exploring DNNs’ internal organization. Specifically, the per-image
effective path can be aggregated to the class-level effective
path, through which we observe that adversarial images activate effective path different from normal images. We propose
an effective path similarity-based method to detect adversarial images with an interpretable model, which achieve better
accuracy and broader applicability than the state-of-the-art
technique.

1. Introduction
Deep learning (DL) has revolutionized the key application domains such computer vision [16], natural-language
processing [35], and automatic speech recognition [1]. DL
models have outperformed traditional machine learning approaches and even outperformed human beings. Although
most of the current research efforts have been in improving
the efficiency and accuracy of DL models, interpretability
has recently become an increasingly important topic. This is
because many DL-enabled or DL-based systems are missioncritical systems, such as ADAS [9] and online banking systems [11]. However, to date, there is no theoretical understanding of how DL models work, which is a significant
roadblock in pushing DL into mission-critical systems.
Owing to the lack of interpretability, DL models usually
∗ Jingwen Leng and Minyi Guo are co-corresponding authors of this

paper.

do not have a clear decision boundary and are vulnerable to
the input perturbation. Researches have recently been proposed [29, 24, 18, 6], which can all successfully find a small
perturbation on the input image to fool the DNN based classifier. There is also prior work that demonstrates the physical
attack feasibility by putting a printed image in front of a stop
sign to mislead a real DNN based traffic sign detector [10].
Last but not least, a DNN model often fails for inputs that
are dramatically different from the training samples. For
example, the classification model used in Tesla’s autopilot
system that incorrectly classified a white truck to cloud [12]
and caused the crash accident.
To address the vulnerability challenge in DL models, this
work proposes the effective path as a new approach to explore
the internal organization of neural networks. The effective
path for an image is a critical set of synapses and neurons
that together lead to the final predicted class. The concept
is similar to the execution path of a control-flow based program [3]. We propose an activation based back-propagation
algorithm to extract the image’s effective path, which preserves the critical information in the neural network and
allows us to analyze the inner structures of DNNs.
The derived per-image effective path has direct aggregation capability. For example, we get per-class effective path
by aggregating the effective path from all training images in
the same class. We can then decompose the entire DNN into
multiple components, each pertaining to an inference class.
We perform similarity analysis and find the phenomenon
called path specialization that different classes activate distinctive portions of the neural network in the inference task.
On the basis of the observation, we analyze the path similarity between normal and adversarial images, we uncover
that when an adversarial image successfully alters the prediction result by small perturbation, the network activates a
significantly distinctive set of effective path compared to the
training samples, which lays the foundation for defending
the DNN using the effective path.
We propose to use the simple linear combination of an im-

4777

