“

”

Unified Visual-Semantic Embeddings:
Bridging Vision and Language with Structured Meaning Representations
“

∗†

”

∗†

†

Hao Wu1,3,4,6, , , Jiayuan Mao5,6, , , Yufeng Zhang2,6, , Yuning Jiang6 , Lei Li6 , Weiwei Sun1,3,4 , Wei-Ying Ma6
1

School of Computer Science, 2 School of Economics, Fudan University
Systems and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, Fudan University
4
Shanghai Insitute of Intelligent Electroics & Systems
5
ITCS, Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, 6 Bytedance AI Lab
3

A

A

D

{wuhao5688,
zhangyf, wwsun}@fudan.edu.cn, mjy14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
D
{jiangyuning, lileilab, maweiying}@bytedance.com

Sentence A white clock on the wall is above a wooden table.

Abstract

Relational phrase white clock above wooden table

We propose the Unified Visual-Semantic Embeddings
(Unified VSE) for learning a joint space of visual representation and textual semantics. The model unifies the embeddings
of concepts at different levels: objects, attributes, relations,
and full scenes. We view the sentential semantics as a combination of different semantic components such as objects and
relations; their embeddings are aligned with different image
regions. A contrastive learning approach is proposed for the
effective learning of this fine-grained alignment from only
image-caption pairs. We also present a simple yet effective
approach that enforces the coverage of caption embeddings
on the semantic components that appear in the sentence. We
demonstrate that the Unified VSE outperforms baselines on
cross-modal retrieval tasks; the enforcement of the semantic coverage improves the model’s robustness in defending
text-domain adversarial attacks. Moreover, our model empowers the use of visual cues to accurately resolve word
dependencies in novel sentences.

1. Introduction
We study the problem of establishing accurate and generalizable alignments between visual concepts and textual semantics efficiently, based upon rich but few, paired but noisy,
or even biased visual-textual inputs (e.g., image-caption
pairs). Consider the image-caption pair A shown in Fig. 1:
“A white clock on the wall is above a wooden table”. The alignments are formed at multiple levels: This short sentence can
be decomposed into a rich set of semantic components [3]:
∗ indicates equal contribution.
† Work was done when HW, JM and YZ were intern researchers at the
Bytedance AI Lab.

Object white clock

white clock on wall

wooden table

wall
basin is on a wooden
A white basin
wall
table in front of the wall
table

Pair A

.

Pair B

Figure 1. Two examplar image-caption pairs. Humans are able to
establish accurate and generalizable alignments between vision and
language, at different levels: objects, relations and full sentences.
Pair A and B form a pair of contrastive example for the concepts
clock and basin.

objects (clock, table and wall) and relations (clock
above table, and clock on wall). These components are
linked with different parts of the scene.
This motives our work to introduce Unified VisualSemantic Embeddings (Unified VSE for short) Shown in
Fig. 2, Unified VSE bridges visual and textual representation
in a joint embedding space that unifies the embeddings for
objects (noun phrases vs. visual objects), attributes (prenominal phrases vs. visual attributes), relations (verbs or prepositional phrases vs. visual relations) and scenes (sentence vs.
image).
There are two major challenges in establishing such a
factorized alignment. First, the link between the textual
description of an object and the corresponding image region
is ambiguous: A visual scene consists of multiple objects,
and thus it is unclear to the learner which object should be
aligned with the description. Second, it could be problematic
to directly learn a neural network that combines various
semantic components in a caption and form an encoding for
the full sentence, with the training objective to maximize the
16609

