Robust Facial Landmark Detection via Occlusion-adaptive Deep Networks
Meilu Zhu, Daming Shi∗, Mingjie Zheng, Muhammad Sadiq
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
{zhumeilu2016,zhengmingjie}@email.szu.edu.cn; dshi@szu.edu.cn; sadiq paec@yahoo.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present a simple and effective framework called Occlusion-adaptive Deep Networks (ODN)
with the purpose of solving the occlusion problem for facial
landmark detection. In this model, the occlusion probability
of each position in high-level features are inferred by a distillation module that can be learnt automatically in the process of estimating the relationship between facial appearance and facial shape. The occlusion probability serves as
the adaptive weight on high-level features to reduce the impact of occlusion and obtain clean feature representation.
Nevertheless, the clean feature representation cannot represent the holistic face due to the missing semantic features.
To obtain exhaustive and complete feature representation,
it is vital that we leverage a low-rank learning module to
recover lost features. Considering that facial geometric
characteristics are conducive to the low-rank module to recover lost features, we propose a geometry-aware module
to excavate geometric relationships between different facial
components. Depending on the synergistic effect of three
modules, the proposed network achieves better performance
in comparison to state-of-the-art methods on challenging
benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
For many facial analysis tasks, e.g., face recognition [7],
face frontalisation [19], and face 3D modeling [26], facial
landmark detection is one of pivotal steps, which aims to
locate some predefined key-points on facial components.
Unfortunately, this significant task still suffers from many
challenges in reality, e.g., occlusion, extreme pose, illumination and so on. The occlusion problem is a main obstacle to locate the facial landmarks accurately. Many existing methods [55, 40, 38, 61, 53, 25, 15] perform well for
near frontal and untainted face images, while their performances degrade severely if faces undergo severe occlusions.
A crucial core of solving the occlusion problem is how to
∗ Corresponding author.

model occlusion. Nevertheless, modeling occlusion explicitly from facial appearance is very difficult because occlusion is irregular, random, and complex.
Recently, some related work has been proposed to
solve this challenge. Robust Cascaded Pose Regression
(RCPR) [5] divides face into different blocks and explicitly predicts the occlusion likelihood of the corresponding
landmarks using a fixed occlusion prior knowledge. However, the training of the RCPR model depends on annotated occlusion state of all the landmarks in the training
set. It is very time-consuming to annotate occlusion state
of each landmark for large-scale datasets, e.g., 300W [39],
AFLW [34], etc. Wu et al. [50] leveraged a supervised regression method that gradually updates the landmark visibility by utilizing the appearance, current shape information, and the occlusion consistency. To locate facial landmarks under occlusions, Xing et al. [52] introduced an occlusion dictionary into the face appearance dictionary to recover face shape from partially occluded face appearance
and model various partial face occlusions. Moreover, Liu et
al. [32] utilized the shape-indexed appearance to estimate
the occlusion level of each landmark, which acts as adaptive weight on the shape-indexed features to decrease the
noise on the shape-indexed features.
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNN)
have been achieved significant performance improvements
for facial landmark detection [59, 33, 12, 13, 14, 49]. It is
due to the fact that feature extraction process and regression process are trained simultaneously using end-to-end
way in CNN that can directly infer the underlying relationship between facial appearance and facial shape. However,
occlusion sensitivity is a challenging problem for CNN as
well [56]. The occlusion probably mislead CNN on feature
representation learning. The localization accuracy would
drop significantly if faces are partially occluded.
In this work, we present occlusion-adaptive deep networks (ODN) to overcome the occlusion problem for robust
facial landmark detection, which consists of three modules:
geometry-aware module, distillation module, and low-rank
learning module. First, to model occlusion, the distillation
module is used to infer the occlusion probability map based

3486

