Multiview 2D/3D Rigid Registration via
a Point-Of-Interest Network for Tracking and Triangulation
Haofu Liao1 *, Wei-An Lin2 *, Jiarui Zhang3 , Jingdan Zhang4 , Jiebo Luo1 , S. Kevin Zhou5,6
2
3
University of Rochester
University of Maryland, College Park
Rutgers University
4
5
6
Z2W Corporation
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen
1

Abstract
We propose to tackle the multiview 2D/3D rigid registration problem via a Point-Of-Interest Network for Tracking and Triangulation (POINT2 ). POINT2 learns to establish 2D point-to-point correspondences between the preand intra-intervention images by tracking a set of pointof-interests (POIs). The 3D pose of the pre-intervention
volume is then estimated through a triangulation layer. In
POINT2 , the unified framework of the POI tracker and the
triangulation layer enables learning informative 2D features and estimating 3D pose jointly. In contrast to existing
approaches, POINT2 only requires a single forward-pass to
achieve a reliable 2D/3D registration. As the POI tracker
is shift-invariant, POINT2 is more robust to the initial pose
of the 3D pre-intervention image. Extensive experiments
on a large-scale clinical cone-beam computed tomography
dataset show that the proposed POINT2 method outperforms the existing learning-based method in terms of accuracy, robustness and running time. Furthermore, when used
as an initial pose estimator, our method also improves the
robustness and speed of the state-of-the-art optimizationbased approaches by ten folds.

1. Introduction
In 2D/3D rigid registration for intervention, the goal is
to find a rigid pose of a pre-intervention 3D data, e.g.,
computed tomography (CT), such that it aligns with a 2D
intra-intervention image of a patient, e.g., fluoroscopy. In
practice, CT is usually a preferred 3D pre-intervention data
as digitally reconstructed radiographs (DRRs) can be produced from CT using ray casting [21]. The generation of
DRRs simulates how an X-ray is captured, which makes
them visually similar to the X-rays. Therefore, they are
leveraged to facilitate the 2D/3D registration as we can observe the misalignment between the CT and patient by directly comparing the intra-intervention X-ray and the gen* indicates equal contributions.

(a) before registration

(b) after registration

Figure 1: Overlay of the DRRs and X-rays before and after
the 2D/3D registration. For visualization purpose, only the
bone region of the DRRs are projected and recolored with
red to distinguish from the X-rays.
erated DRR (See Figure 1 and Section 3.1 for details).
One of the most commonly used 2D/3D registration
strategies [12] is through an optimization-based approach,
where a similarity metric is first designed to measure the
closeness between the DRRs and the 2D data, and then
the 3D pose is iteratively searched and optimized for the
best similarity score. However, the iterative pose searching scheme usually suffers from two problems. First, the
generation of DRRs incurs high computation, and the iterative pose searching requires a significant number of DRRs
for the similarity measure, making it computationally slow.
Second, iterative pose searching relies on a good initialization. When the initial position is not close enough to the
correct one, the method may converge to local extrema, and
the registration fails. Although many studies have been proposed to address these two problems [4, 16, 15, 8, 5, 7, 19],
trade-offs still have to be made between sampling good
starting points and less costly registration.
In recent years, the development of deep neural networks
(DNNs) has enabled a learning-based strategy for medical
image registration [13, 22, 11, 14] that aims to estimate the
pose of the 3D data without searching and sampling the
pose space at a large scale. Despite the efficiency, there are
still two limitations of the existing learning-based methods.
First, the learning-based methods usually require generat-

12638

