Finding Task-Relevant Features for Few-Shot Learning by Category Traversal
Hongyang Li1,2∗ David Eigen2

Samuel Dodge2

Matthew Zeiler2

Xiaogang Wang1,3

1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Clarifai Inc. 3 SenseTime Research
{yangli,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
{deigen,samuel,zeiler}@clarifai.com

Abstract

(a)

Few-shot learning is an important area of research. Conceptually, humans are readily able to understand new concepts given just a few examples, while in more pragmatic
terms, limited-example training situations are common in
practice. Recent effective approaches to few-shot learning employ a metric-learning framework to learn a feature
similarity comparison between a query (test) example, and
the few support (training) examples. However, these approaches treat each support class independently from one
another, never looking at the entire task as a whole. Because of this, they are constrained to use a single set of features for all possible test-time tasks, which hinders the ability to distinguish the most relevant dimensions for the task
at hand. In this work, we introduce a Category Traversal
Module that can be inserted as a plug-and-play module into
most metric-learning based few-shot learners. This component traverses across the entire support set at once, identifying task-relevant features based on both intra-class commonality and inter-class uniqueness in the feature space.
Incorporating our module improves performance considerably (5%-10% relative) over baseline systems on both miniImageNet and tieredImageNet benchmarks, with overall
performance competitive with recent state-of-the-art systems.

ISOLATED

averaging/
embedding/
…

TRAVERSED

(b)
Category
Traversal

mask

Figure 1. (a) A high-level illustration of the metric-based algorithms for few-shot learning. Both support and query are first fed
into a feature extractor fθ ; in previous methods, the query is compared with support based on the feature similarity individually,
without associating the most relevant information across classes.
(b) The proposed Category Traversal Module (CTM) looks at all
categories in the support set to find task-relevant features.

shot learning, therefore, is to make best use of the limited
data available in the support set in order to find the “right”
generalizations as suggested by the task.
A recent effective approach to this problem is to train
a neural network to produce feature embeddings used to
compare the query to each of the support samples. This
is similar to metric learning using Siamese Networks [4, 6],
trained explicitly for the few-shot classification problem by
iteratively sampling a query and support set from a larger labeled training set, and optimizing to maximize a similarity
score between the query and same-labeled examples. Optimizing for similarity between query and support has been
very effective [35, 38, 31, 14, 21, 2, 13]. Fig. 1 (a) illustrates such a mechanism at a high level.
However, while these approaches are able to learn rich
features, the features are generated for each class in the sup-

1. Introduction
The goal of few-shot learning [38, 35, 30, 36, 33, 7, 25,
26] is to classify unseen data instances (query examples)
into a set of new categories, given just a small number of
labeled instances in each class (support examples). Typically, there are between 1 and 10 labeled examples per class
in the support set; this stands in contrast to the standard
classification problem [19, 16, 20], in which there are often thousands per class. Also classes for training and test
set are the same in traditional problem whereas in few-shot
learning the two sets are exclusive. A key challenge in few∗ This paper is the product of work during an internship at Clarifai Inc.

1

