Assessing Personally Perceived Image Quality via Image Features and
Collaborative Filtering
Jari Korhonen
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
jari.t.korhonen@ieee.org

Abstract
During the past few years, different methods for
optimizing the camera settings and post-processing
techniques to improve the subjective quality of consumer
photos have been studied extensively. However, most of the
research in the prior art has focused on finding the optimal
method for an average user. Since there is large deviation
in personal opinions and aesthetic standards, the next
challenge is to find the settings and post-processing
techniques that fit to the individual users’ personal taste. In
this study, we aim to predict the personally perceived image
quality by combining classical image feature analysis and
collaboration filtering approach known from the
recommendation systems. The experimental results for the
proposed method show promising results. As a practical
application, our work can be used for personalizing the
camera settings or post-processing parameters for different
users and images.

1. Introduction
As a result of the rapid development of mobile
technology and integration of low-cost cameras in
smartphones and tablets, the amount of visual content
produced and shared in the internet by regular consumers is
constantly growing. Due to the technical limitations of the
compact mobile cameras, image quality enhancement via
post-processing is typically more essential for mobile
photos than in traditional photography. Since many users
may lack the skills and interest for retouching their photos
manually, automatic post-processing of consumer photos is
an interesting and demanded application.
Several different algorithms for image enhancement are
known from the prior art, ranging from denoising,
sharpening and contrast enhancement to aesthetic and
artistic filtering [1-8]. Since the ground truth for a visually
pleasant image is based on users’ subjective opinions and
the sense of aesthetics, the post-processing studies are often
accompanied by a subjective quality assessment study [4, 6,
8]. It is also possible to use automated (i.e. algorithm-based)
image quality metrics for evaluating the quality of

8169

post-processed images. Unfortunately, the general purpose
image quality metrics tend to perform poorly on
post-processed images, and this is why several artifact
specific objective image quality metrics designed for
assessing particularly post-processed images have also been
proposed in the literature [6-14].
Conventionally, the ground truth for the subjective
quality obtained from a user study represents the average
opinion by several test users. However, when aesthetic
image enhancement is concerned, different users may have
substantially different opinions about the quality of
different images. In many applications, it could be desirable
to select the post-processing method based on the personal
opinion, rather than the average opinion. For example, if the
images are intended for the personal use only, or if the user
wants to apply the personally preferred post-processing
method to the images shared in the social media,
personalized camera settings or post-processing would be
desired. Personal post-processing could be also useful in
applications where several versions of the same image are
available in the cloud, and the version that is displayed in
the application is selected individually for each user,
according to their personal taste.
In this paper, we study the problem of predicting the
personal image quality preferences by combining the
conventional approach for image quality assessment, based
on a bag of features extracted from the image, with the
collaborative filtering approach [15, 16], where the user’s
ratings are known for some images and this information,
together with the image features, is exploited to predict the
user’s ratings for other images. The application could gather
information about user preferences in different ways; for
example, asking the user occasionally to select the preferred
alternative among two differently processed images or two
photos taken with different camera settings, or keeping a
track of the user’s preferred methods for manual retouching.
In the experimental part of our study, we use annotated
image quality databases with subjective ratings available,
and the implementation details for collecting the subjective
opinions in practical applications is beyond the scope of this
paper.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we discuss the background and the relevant related work

