A Bayesian Perspective on the Deep Image Prior
Zezhou Cheng

Matheus Gadelha Subhransu Maji Daniel Sheldon
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

{zezhoucheng, mgadelha, smaji, sheldon}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
The deep image prior [26] was recently introduced as a
prior for natural images. It represents images as the output
of a convolutional network with random inputs. For “inference”, gradient descent is performed to adjust network
parameters to make the output match observations. This
approach yields good performance on a range of image reconstruction tasks. We show that the deep image prior is
asymptotically equivalent to a stationary Gaussian process
prior in the limit as the number of channels in each layer of
the network goes to infinity, and derive the corresponding
kernel. This informs a Bayesian approach to inference. We
show that by conducting posterior inference using stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics we avoid the need for early
stopping, which is a drawback of the current approach, and
improve results for denoising and impainting tasks. We illustrate these intuitions on a number of 1D and 2D signal
reconstruction tasks.

1. Introduction
It is well known that deep convolutional networks trained
on large datasets provide a rich hierarchical representation of images. Surprisingly, several works have shown
that convolutional networks with random parameters can
also encode non-trivial image properties. For example,
second-order statistics of filter responses of random convolutional networks are effective for style transfer and synthesis tasks [27]. On small datasets, features extracted from
random convolutional networks can work just as well as
trained networks [24]. Along these lines, the “deep image prior” proposed by Ulyanov et al. [26] showed that the
output of a suitably designed convolutional network on random inputs tends to be smooth and induces a natural image
prior, so that the search over natural images can be replaced
by gradient descent to find network parameters and inputs
to minimize a reconstruction error of the network output.
Code and supplementary materials are available at https://
people.cs.umass.edu/˜zezhoucheng/gp-dip

Remarkably, no prior training is needed and the method operates by initializing the parameters randomly.
Our work provides a novel Bayesian view of the deep
image prior. We prove that a convolutional network with
random parameters operating on a stationary input, e.g.,
white noise, approaches a two-dimensional Gaussian process (GP) with a stationary kernel in the limit as the number of channels in each layer goes to infinity (Theorem 1).
While prior work [19, 31, 18, 3, 20] has investigated the
GP behavior of infinitely wide networks and convolutional
networks, our work is the first to analyze the spatial covariance structure induced by a convolutional network on stationary inputs. We analytically derive the kernel as a function of the network architecture and input distribution by
characterizing the effects of convolutions, non-linearities,
up-sampling, down-sampling, and skip connections on the
spatial covariance. These insights could inform choices of
network architecture for designing 1D or 2D priors.
We then use a Bayesian perspective to address drawbacks of current estimation techniques for the deep image
prior. Estimating parameters in a deep network from a single image poses a huge risk of overfitting. In prior work
the authors relied on early stopping to avoid this. Bayesian
inference provides a principled way to avoid overfitting by
adding suitable priors over the parameters and then using
posterior distributions to quantify uncertainty. However,
posterior inference with deep networks is challenging. One
option is to compute the posterior of the limiting GP. For
small networks with enough channels, we show this closely
matches the deep image prior, but is computationally expensive. Instead, we conduct posterior sampling based on
stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) [28], which
is both theoretically well founded and computationally efficient, since it is based on standard gradient descent. We
show that posterior sampling using SGLD avoids the need
for early stopping and performs better than vanilla gradient
descent on image denoising and inpainting tasks (see Figure 1). It also allows us to systematically compute variances
of estimates as a measure of uncertainty. We illustrate these
ideas on a number of 1D and 2D reconstruction tasks.

5443

