Elastic Boundary Projection for 3D Medical Image Segmentation
Tianwei Ni1 , Lingxi Xie2,3( ) , Huangjie Zheng4 , Elliot K. Fishman5 , Alan L. Yuille2
1
Peking University 2 Johns Hopkins University 3 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Inc.
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 Johns Hopkins Medical Institute
{twni2016, 198808xc, alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com

Abstract
We focus on an important yet challenging problem: using a 2D deep network to deal with 3D segmentation for
medical image analysis. Existing approaches either applied
multi-view planar (2D) networks or directly used volumetric (3D) networks for this purpose, but both of them are not
ideal: 2D networks cannot capture 3D contexts effectively,
and 3D networks are both memory-consuming and less
stable arguably due to the lack of pre-trained models.
In this paper, we bridge the gap between 2D and 3D
using a novel approach named Elastic Boundary Projection
(EBP). The key observation is that, although the object is a
3D volume, what we really need in segmentation is to find
its boundary which is a 2D surface. Therefore, we place a
number of pivot points in the 3D space, and for each pivot,
we determine its distance to the object boundary along a
dense set of directions. This creates an elastic shell around
each pivot which is initialized as a perfect sphere. We train
a 2D deep network to determine whether each ending point
falls within the object, and gradually adjust the shell so that
it gradually converges to the actual shape of the boundary
and thus achieves the goal of segmentation. EBP allows
boundary-based segmentation without cutting a 3D volume
into slices or patches, which stands out from conventional
2D and 3D approaches. EBP achieves promising accuracy
in abdominal organ segmentation. Our code will be released on https://github.com/twni2016/EBP.

1. Introduction
Medical image analysis (MedIA), in particular 3D organ
segmentation, is an important prerequisite of computerassisted diagnosis (CAD), which implies a broad range of
applications. Recent years, with the blooming development
of deep learning, convolutional neural networks have been
widely applied to this area [23, 22], which largely boosts
the performance of conventional segmentation approaches
based on handcrafted features [17, 18], and even surpasses
human-level accuracy in many organs and soft tissues.

zhj865265@sjtu.edu.cn

efishman@jhmi.edu

2D-Net 3D-Net AH-Net EBP
[23, 31] [22, 33]
[20]
(ours)
X
X
Pure 2D network?
X
Pure 3D network?
X
X
X
Working on 3D data?
X
3D data not cropped?
X
3D data not rescaled?
X
X
X
Can be pre-trained?
R
R
R
B
Segmentation method
Table 1. A comparison between EBP and previous approaches
in network dimensionality, data dimensionality, the ways of preprocessing data, network weights, and segmentation methodology.
Due to space limit, we do not cite all related work here – see
Section 2 for details. R and B in the last row stand for regionbased and boundary-based approaches, respectively.

Existing deep neural networks for medical image segmentation can be categorized into two types, differing from
each other in the dimensionality of the processed object.
The first type cuts the 3D volume into 2D slices, and trains
a 2D network to deal with each slice either individually [31]
or sequentially [6]. The second one instead trains a 3D
network to deal with volumetric data directly [22, 20]. Although the latter was believed to have potentially a stronger
ability to consider 3D contextual information, it suffers
from two weaknesses: (1) the lack of pre-trained models
makes the training process unstable and the parameters
tuned in one organ less transferrable to others, and (2) the
large memory consumption makes it difficult to receive the
entire volume as input, yet fusing patch-wise prediction into
the final volume remains non-trivial yet tricky.
In this paper, we present a novel approach to bridge the
gap between 2D networks and 3D segmentation. Our idea
comes from the observation that an organ is often singleconnected and locally smooth, so, instead of performing
voxel-wise prediction, segmentation can be done by finding
its boundary which is actually a 2D surface. Our approach is
named Elastic Boundary Projection (EBP), which uses the
spherical coordinate system to project the irregular boundary into a rectangle, on which 2D networks can be applied.
EBP starts with a pivot point within or without the target

2109

