Video Magnification in the Wild
Using Fractional Anisotropy in Temporal Distribution
Shoichiro Takeda1 Yasunori Akagi2 Kazuki Okami1 Megumi Isogai1 Hideaki Kimata1
1
2
NTT Media Intelligence Laboratories
NTT Service Evolution Laboratories
1-1 Hikarinooka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, 239-0847 Japan
{shoichiro.takeda.us, yasunori.akagi.cu, kazuki.okami.ac, megumi.isogai.ks, hideaki.kimata.yu}@hco.ntt.co.jp

(a)

(b)

y
time

(c)

(d)

(a) Original

(b) Acceleration

(c) Jerk

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Top left: slam dunk video visualizing backboard deformations with ball trajectory by yellow arrow. Bottom left (a)-(d) show
spatio-temporal slices along the single red line at top left. Right (a)-(d) show backgrounds in the green square at top left. (b) Acceleration
method [24] produces messy artifacts due to quick ball motion. (c) Jerk method [17] magnifies meaningful subtle backboard deformations
but misdetects non-meaningful subtle distortions of background window caused by photographic noise (purple circle). (d) On the contrary,
our proposed method magnifies only meaningful subtle backboard deformations. See supplementary material for video results.

Abstract
Video magnification methods can magnify and reveal
subtle changes invisible to the naked eye. However, in such
subtle changes, meaningful ones caused by physical and
natural phenomena are mixed with non-meaningful ones
caused by photographic noise. Therefore, current methods
often produce noisy and misleading magnification outputs
due to the non-meaningful subtle changes. For detecting
only meaningful subtle changes, several methods have been
proposed but require human manipulations, additional resources, or input video scene limitations. In this paper, we
present a novel method using fractional anisotropy (FA) to
detect only meaningful subtle changes without the aforementioned requirements. FA has been used in neuroscience
to evaluate anisotropic diffusion of water molecules in the
body. On the basis of our observation that temporal distribution of meaningful subtle changes more clearly indicates
anisotropic diffusion than that of non-meaningful ones, we
used FA to design a fractional anisotropic filter that passes
only meaningful subtle changes. Using the filter enables our
method to obtain better and more impressive magnification
results than those obtained with state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Physical and natural phenomena often cause meaningful
and attractive changes in a small world. For example, muscles and skin are slightly deformed by impacts spreading
through our bodies, materials deform elastically to absorb
external force and thus prevent breakage and ensure safety,
and strumming ukulele strings produce complicated string
vibrations and result in generating wonderful sounds. However, these meaningful and attractive subtle changes are too
small to see with the naked eye.
To visualize such subtle motion or color changes, video
magnification methods have been proposed [22, 20, 21].
These methods are typically based on Eulerian approach
which can measure subtle motion or color changes pixel
by pixel. With recently developed spatio-temporal filtering
[24, 17], current video magnification methods produce good
results for magnifying and revealing only subtle changes
under the presence of large motions of objects. However,
in such subtle changes, meaningful ones caused by physical and natural phenomena are mixed with non-meaningful
ones caused by noise introduced during the photographic
process (i.e. low light levels, high sensor gain, short expo-

1614

