Deep Plug-and-Play Super-Resolution for Arbitrary Blur Kernels
1

Kai Zhang1,2 , Wangmeng Zuo1,3,∗, Lei Zhang2,4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
cskaizhang@gmail.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
https://github.com/cszn/DPSR

Abstract
While deep neural networks (DNN) based single image
super-resolution (SISR) methods are rapidly gaining popularity, they are mainly designed for the widely-used bicubic
degradation, and there still remains the fundamental challenge for them to super-resolve low-resolution (LR) image
with arbitrary blur kernels. In the meanwhile, plug-andplay image restoration has been recognized with high flexibility due to its modular structure for easy plug-in of denoiser priors. In this paper, we propose a principled formulation and framework by extending bicubic degradation
based deep SISR with the help of plug-and-play framework
to handle LR images with arbitrary blur kernels. Specifically, we design a new SISR degradation model so as to take
advantage of existing blind deblurring methods for blur kernel estimation. To optimize the new degradation induced
energy function, we then derive a plug-and-play algorithm via variable splitting technique, which allows us to plug
any super-resolver prior rather than the denoiser prior as a
modular part. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations on
synthetic and real LR images demonstrate that the proposed
deep plug-and-play super-resolution framework is flexible
and effective to deal with blurry LR images.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR), with the goal of
estimating the clean high-resolution (HR) counterpart x of
a given low-resolution (LR) image y, is a classical problem
with highly academic and practical values [3]. Basically, the
relationship between LR and HR images is characterized by
the degradation model which defines how the LR image is
degraded from an HR image. Empirical and theoretical studies have proven that an accurate degradation model is
crucial for the success of SISR [20, 60]. Thus, it is important to first review the degradation model for SISR.
∗ Corresponding author.

In fact, most existing SISR methods are designed under
the assumption of certain degradation model. There are two
widely-used degradation models. The first one, which is
acknowledged as a general degradation model for SISR, is
given by
y = (x ⊗ k) ↓s + n,
(1)
where x ⊗ k represents the convolution between blur kernel
k and HR image x, ↓s is a subsequent downsampling operation with scale factor s, and n is additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN) with noise level σ. Such degradation model has been extensively studied on developing model-based
optimization methods [13, 19]. However, these methods
mostly assume a priori known blur kernel which in practice is difficult to estimate. Although several works such
as [41, 53] focus on estimating blur kernel, their source
codes are unfortunately not publicly available.
The second and perhaps the most widely-used one which
we refer to as bicubic degradation is formalized as
y = x ↓s .

(2)

Here, unless otherwise specified, ↓s instead represents the
bicubic downsampler (Matlab default function imresize)
with scale factor s. Due to its simplicity, bicubic degradation model has become the benchmark setting to evaluate SISR methods [29, 36]. In particular, it greatly facilities the development of powerful deep neural networks
(DNN) for SISR [2]. However, such a simple degradation
inevitably gives rise to poor results in many practical scenarios [20, 65]. Nevertheless, little work has been done on
extending to more realistic degradation models.
Given the above considerations, it is very necessary to
address the following two issues: 1) designing an alternative degradation model, and 2) extending existing DNNbased methods for bicubic degradation to the new degradation model so as to exploit the power of DNN. To this end,
we first propose a simple yet effective degradation model
which assumes the LR image is a bicubicly downsampled,
blurred and noisy version of an HR image. Compared to the

1671

