Scene Parsing via Integrated Classification Model and Variance-Based
Regularization
Hengcan Shi, Hongliang Li ∗, Qingbo Wu, Zichen Song
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Chengdu, China
shihc@std.uestc.edu.cn, hlli@uestc.edu.cn, qbwu@uestc.edu.cn, szc.uestc@gmail.com

Abstract
Scene Parsing is a challenging task in computer vision,
which can be formulated as a pixel-wise classification problem. Existing deep-learning-based methods usually use one
general classifier to recognize all object categories. However, the general classifier easily makes some mistakes in
dealing with some confusing categories that share similar
appearances or semantics. In this paper, we propose an
integrated classification model and a variance-based regularization to achieve more accurate classifications. On
the one hand, the integrated classification model contains
multiple classifiers, not only the general classifier but also a refinement classifier to distinguish the confusing categories. On the other hand, the variance-based regularization differentiates the scores of all categories as large
as possible to reduce misclassifications. Specifically, the
integrated classification model includes three steps. The
first is to extract the features of each pixel. Based on the
features, the second step is to classify each pixel across
all categories to generate a preliminary classification result. In the third step, we leverage a refinement classifier
to refine the classification result, focusing on differentiating
the high-preliminary-score categories. An integrated loss
with the variance-based regularization is used to train the
model. Extensive experiments on three common scene parsing datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method. †

Input

Output

…

(a) general-classifier-based model

…

ground floor

Input

×

Output

…

(b) integrated classification model

…

ground floor

√

Ground Truth

building

car

light

ground

floor

background

(c) object categories and ground truth

Figure 1. A comparison of general-classifier-based model and
our proposed integrated classification model. (a) The generalclassifier-based model. (b) The proposed integrated classification
model. (c) The ground truth and object categories. The generalclassifier-based model misclassifies the ground object as the floor
object, whereas this misclassification is avoided by the integrated
classification model. Moreover, the general-classifier-based model often predicts close scores for similar categories, while these
scores are more different in the proposed method, benefiting from
the variance-based regularization.

1. Introduction
Scene parsing expects to segment an entire image into multiple objects, which acts as a crucial component for
many higher-level computer vision tasks, such as scene understanding [8, 20], object extraction [15, 26] and languagebased vision analysis [11, 35]. The scene parsing task is
∗ Corresponding author.
† Code: https://github.com/shihengcan/ICM-matcaffe

usually formulated as a pixel-wise classification problem.
State-of-the-art scene parsing methods [1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 18,
23–25, 31, 36–38, 42, 44–46] mostly leverage deep neural
network (DNN) to tackle this pixel-wise classification problem. These DNN-based methods encode the features of every pixel in an image and then classify these pixels by a
general classifier, which focuses on classifying each pixel
across all object categories by one step. However, as inves-

5307

