Tactical Rewind: Self-Correction via Backtracking
in Vision-and-Language Navigation
Liyiming Ke1∗
Xiujun Li1,2
Yonatan Bisk1
Ari Holtzman1
Zhe Gan2
2
2
1,3
Jingjing Liu
Jianfeng Gao
Yejin Choi
Siddhartha Srinivasa1
1
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
2
3
Microsoft Research AI
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
{kayke, xiujun, ybisk, ahai, yejin, siddh}@cs.washington.edu
{xiul, zhgan, jingjl, jfgao}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present the Frontier Aware Search with backTracking (FAST) Navigator, a general framework for action decoding, that achieves state-of-the-art results on the Roomto-Room (R2R) Vision-and-Language navigation challenge
of Anderson et. al. (2018). Given a natural language instruction and photo-realistic image views of a previously
unseen environment, the agent was tasked with navigating
from source to target location as quickly as possible. While
all current approaches make local action decisions or score
entire trajectories using beam search, ours balances local
and global signals when exploring an unobserved environment. Importantly, this lets us act greedily but use global
signals to backtrack when necessary. Applying FAST framework to existing state-of-the-art models achieved a 17% relative gain, an absolute 6% gain on Success rate weighted
by Path Length (SPL).1

1. Introduction
When reading an instruction (e.g. “Exit the bathroom,
take the second door on your right, pass the sofa and stop
at the top of the stairs .”), a person builds a mental map of
how to arrive at a specific location. This map can include
landmarks, such as the second door, and markers such as
reaching the top of the stairs. Training an embodied agent
to accomplish such a task with access to only ego-centric
vision and individually supervised actions requires building
rich multi-modal representations from limited data [2].
Most current approaches to Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) formulate the task to use the seq2seq (or
encoder-decoder) framework [21], where language and vision are encoded as input and an optimal action sequence is
∗ Work done partially as an intern at MSR
1 The code is available at https://github.com/Kelym/FAST.

(a) SoTA Beam Search

(b) FAST NAVIGATOR

Figure 1. Top-down view of the trajectory graphs for beam search
and FAST. Blue Star is the start and Red Stop is the target.

decoded as output. Several subsequent architectures also
use this framing; however, they augment it with important advances in attention mechanisms, global scoring, and
beam search [2, 13, 10].
Inherent to the seq2seq formulation is the problem of
exposure bias [19]: a model that has been trained to predict one-step into the future given the ground-truth sequence cannot perform accurately given its self-generated
sequence. Previous work with seq2seq models attempted to
address this using student forcing and beam search.
Student forcing exposes a model to its own generated sequence during training, teaching the agent how to recover.
However, once the agent has deviated from the correct path,
the original instruction no longer applies. The Supplementary Materials (§A.1) show that student forcing cannot solve
the exposure bias problem, causing the confused agent to
fall into loops.

6741

