Unsupervised Primitive Discovery for Improved 3D Generative Modeling

∗

Salman H. Khan∗‡
Yulan Guo†⋄
Munawar Hayat∗⋆
Nick Barnes‡
†
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE; National University of Defense Technology, China;
‡
Australian National University, AU; ⋄ Sun Yat-sen University, China; ⋆ University of Canberra, AU
salman.khan@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
3D shape generation is a challenging problem due to the
high-dimensional output space and complex part configurations of real-world objects. As a result, existing algorithms
experience difficulties in accurate generative modeling of
3D shapes. Here, we propose a novel factorized generative
model for 3D shape generation that sequentially transitions
from coarse to fine scale shape generation. To this end, we introduce an unsupervised primitive discovery algorithm based
on a higher-order conditional random field model. Using
the primitive parts for shapes as attributes, a parameterized
3D representation is modeled in the first stage. This representation is further refined in the next stage by adding fine
scale details to shape. Our results demonstrate improved
representation ability of the generative model and better
quality samples of newly generated 3D shapes. Further, our
primitive generation approach can accurately parse common
objects into a simplified representation.

1. Introduction
‘The objects seen could be constructed out of parts
with which we are familiar.’
L.G. Roberts

Computer vision in its early days saw the emergence
of parts-based representations for object representation and
scene understanding [23]. As early as 1963, Roberts [27]
presented an approach to represent objects using a set of 3D
polyhedral shapes. Subsequently, Guzman [10] introduced
a collection of parts that appear in generic line drawings
and demonstrated how they can be used to recognize 2D
curved shapes. The generalized cylinders based representation to describe curved objects of Binford [3] was a significant breakthrough. It was developed further, including
a pioneering contribution by Biederman, who introduced a
set of basic primitives (termed as ‘geons’ meaning geometrical ions) and linked it with the object recognition in human
cognitive system [2].
Very recently, early research towards automatic discovery

Figure 1: Compared to traditional 3D generative modeling approaches (top) that directly generate 3D shape, our
approach (bottom) transitions incrementally from a simple
primitive based representation towards a complete 3D shape.
Such a hierarchical approach provides better control and interpretability for generative networks. Furthermore, a major
novelty of this work is an unsupervised primitive discovery
approach that underpins the proposed generative pipeline.

of shape primitives using deep networks have been reported
in the literature. Tulsiani et al. [39] proposed a CNN model
to predict the size and transformation parameters of primitives that were assembled together to represent generic 3D
shapes. Their main draw-back is the inability to jointly represent different object categories using a single model. This
requires a class-specific CNN training procedure, that is both
time-consuming and difficult to scale to a large number of
categories. Zou et al. [47] proposed a generative model
based on RNNs to recover a 3D shape defined by primitives
from an input depth image. Their model, however, requires
primitive-level shape labellings for training, requires an accurate depth map as input and works only for a set of three
related classes (i.e., chair, table and night stand).
In this work, we propose to incorporate a generic primitive based representation in the 3D generative modeling
process to enhance the scalability of learned models. Our
first major contribution is the automatic primitive discovery
19739

