Leveraging Crowdsourced GPS Data for Road Extraction from Aerial Imagery
Tao Sun,

Zonglin Di, Pengyu Che, Chun Liu,
Tongji University, Shanghai, China

Yin Wang

{suntao, dizonglin, chepengyu, liuchun, yinw}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning is revolutionizing the mapping industry. Under lightweight human curation, computer has
generated almost half of the roads in Thailand on OpenStreetMap (OSM) using high resolution aerial imagery.
Bing maps are displaying 125 million computer generated
building polygons in the U.S. While tremendously more efficient than manual mapping, one cannot map out everything from the air. Especially for roads, a small prediction
gap by image occlusion renders the entire road useless for
routing. Misconnections can be more dangerous. Therefore
computer based mapping often requires local verifications,
which is still labor intensive. In this paper, we propose
to leverage crowd sourced GPS data to improve and support road extraction from aerial imagery. Through novel
data augmentation, GPS rendering, and 1D transpose convolution techniques, we show almost 5% improvements over
previous competition winning models, and much better robustness when predicting new areas without any new training data or domain adaptation.

(a) Occlusions by trees, buildings, and shadows are challenging without GPS

(b) Roads susceptible to over connection in post-processing without GPS

1. Introduction
Segmentation of aerial imagery has been an active research area for more than two decades [4, 17]. It is also
one of the earliest applications of deep convolutional neural
nets (CNN) [19]. Today, using deep convolutional neural
nets over high resolution satellite imagery, Facebook has
added 370 thousand km of computer generated roads to
OpenStreetMap (OSM) [3] Thailand, accounting for 46 %
of the total roads in the country, which is on display for all
Facebook users [1, 22]. Microsoft used similar techniques
to add 125 million building polygons to Bing maps U.S.,
five times more than those on OSM [29].
Despite real-world applications, mapping by aerial imagery has its limitations. The top challenge is overfitting.
The deep neural net models often deteriorate miserably with
new terrain, new building styles, new image styles, or new
resolutions. Other than the model limitation, occlusions by
vegetation, buildings, and shadows can be excessive. Many

Figure 1: Crowdsourced GPS data helps road extraction
when aerial imagery alone is insufficient or challenging.
Here each red dot represents a taxi GPS sample.
features are indistinguishable from the air, e.g., dirt roads
and bare fields, cement pavements and building tops, alleys
in slum areas. Bad weather, low satellite angle, and low
light angle further complicate the issue. Even if the feature
is perfectly clear, mapping often needs local knowledge.
Trails and roads may have same appearances. Houses and
storage sheds may have similar sizes and roofs. To make
things worse, mapping has low tolerance for errors. Especially for roads, incorrect routes cause longer travel time,
lead people to restricted areas, and even cause fatal accidents [34]. Because of these reasons, OSM prefers local
mappers for each area, and even requires local verification
for large-scale edits [1].
With a smart phone or any other GPS device, one
17509

