Transferrable Prototypical Networks for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Yingwei Pan † , Ting Yao † , Yehao Li ‡ , Yu Wang † , Chong-Wah Ngo § , and Tao Mei †
†
‡
§

JD AI Research, Beijing, China

Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China

City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong

{panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc, yehaoli.sysu, feather1014}@gmail.com, cscwngo@cityu.edu.hk, tmei@live.com

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a new idea for unsupervised
domain adaptation via a remold of Prototypical Networks,
which learn an embedding space and perform classification via a remold of the distances to the prototype of each
class. Specifically, we present Transferrable Prototypical
Networks (TPN) for adaptation such that the prototypes for
each class in source and target domains are close in the
embedding space and the score distributions predicted by
prototypes separately on source and target data are similar. Technically, TPN initially matches each target example to the nearest prototype in the source domain and assigns an example a “pseudo” label. The prototype of each
class could then be computed on source-only, target-only
and source-target data, respectively. The optimization of
TPN is end-to-end trained by jointly minimizing the distance across the prototypes on three types of data and KLdivergence of score distributions output by each pair of the
prototypes. Extensive experiments are conducted on the
transfers across MNIST, USPS and SVHN datasets, and superior results are reported when comparing to state-of-theart approaches. More remarkably, we obtain an accuracy
of 80.4% of single model on VisDA 2017 dataset.

1. Introduction
The recent advances in deep neural networks have convincingly demonstrated high capability in learning vision
models on large datasets. For instance, an ensemble of
residual nets [7] achieves 3.57% top-5 error on the ImageNet test set, which is even lower than 5.1% of the reported
human-level performance. The achievements rely heavily
on the requirement to have large quantities of annotated data for deep model learning. However, performing intensive
manual labeling on a new dataset is expensive and timeconsuming. A valid question is why not recycling off-theshelf learnt knowledge/models in source domain for new
domain(s). The difficulty originates from the domain gap

[33] that may adversely affect the performance especially
when the source and target data distributions are very different. An appealing way to address this challenge would
be unsupervised domain adaptation, which aims to utilize
labeled examples or learnt models in the source domain and
the large number of unlabeled examples in the target domain
to generalize a target model.
A common practice in unsupervised domain adaptation
is to align data distributions between source and target domains or build invariance across domains by minimizing domain shift through measures such as correlation distances
[27, 34] or maximum mean discrepancy [31]. In this paper, we explore general-purpose and task-specific domain
adaptations under the framework of Prototypical Networks
[26]. The design of prototypical networks assumes the existence of an embedding space in which the projections of
samples in each class cluster around a single prototype (or
centroid). The classification is then performed by computing the distances to prototype representations of each class
in the embedding space. In this way, the general-purpose
adaptation is to represent each class distribution by a prototype and match the prototypes of each class in the embedding space learnt on the data from different domains.
The inspiration of task-specific adaptation is from the rationale that the target data should be classified correctly by the
task-specific model when the source and target distributions are well aligned. In the context of prototypical networks,
task-specific adaptation is equivalent to adapting the score
distributions produced by prototypes in different domains.
By consolidating the idea of general-purpose adaptation and task-specific adaptation into unsupervised domain
adaptation, we present a novel Transferrable Prototypical
Networks (TPN) architecture. Ideally, TPN is to learn a
non-linear mapping (a neural network) of the input examples into an embedding space, in which the representations are invariant across domains. Specifically, TPN takes a
batch of labeled source and unlabeled target examples, compares each target example to each of the prototypes computed on source data, and assigns the label of the nearest

2239

