A Generative Appearance Model for End-to-end Video Object Segmentation
Joakim Johnander1,3
1

Martin Danelljan1,2
Emil Brissman1,4
Michael Felsberg1

CVL, Linköping University, Sweden

2

CVL, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

3

Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,5

Zenuity, Sweden

4

Saab, Sweden

5

IIAI, UAE

Abstract
One of the fundamental challenges in video object segmentation is to find an effective representation of the target and background appearance. The best performing approaches resort to extensive fine-tuning of a convolutional
neural network for this purpose. Besides being prohibitively
expensive, this strategy cannot be truly trained end-to-end
since the online fine-tuning procedure is not integrated into
the offline training of the network.
To address these issues, we propose a network architecture that learns a powerful representation of the target and
background appearance in a single forward pass. The introduced appearance module learns a probabilistic generative model of target and background feature distributions.
Given a new image, it predicts the posterior class probabilities, providing a highly discriminative cue, which is processed in later network modules. Both the learning and
prediction stages of our appearance module are fully differentiable, enabling true end-to-end training of the entire
segmentation pipeline. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach on three
video object segmentation benchmarks. We close the gap to
approaches based on online fine-tuning on DAVIS17, while
operating at 15 FPS on a single GPU. Furthermore, our
method outperforms all previously published approaches on
the large-scale YouTube-VOS dataset.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) is the task of tracking
and segmenting one or multiple target objects in a video
sequence. In this work, we consider the semi-supervised
setting, where the ground-truth segmentation is only given
in the first frame. The task is generic, i.e., the targets are
arbitrary and no further assumptions regarding the object
classes are made. The VOS problem is challenging from
several aspects. The target may undergo significant appearance changes and may be subject to fast motion or occlusion. Moreover, the scene may contain distractor objects

Image

RGMP [31]

A-GAME (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison between our proposed approach and the recently proposed RGMP [31]. In RGMP, the input features are
concatenated with the initial mask and feature map. In contrast,
we explicitly capture the target and background appearance, including distractor objects, by generative modelling. While RGMP
severely struggles, the proposed approach successfully identifies
and accurately segments all annotated targets. As in RGMP, we do
not invoke computationally intensive fine-tuning in the first frame,
but instead aim to learn the appearance model in a single forward
pass. The figure is best viewed in colour.

that are visually or semantically similar to the target.
To tackle the aforementioned challenges, the standard
strategy is to invoke extensive iterative optimization in the
first frame [1, 2, 21, 30], given the initial image-mask pair.
However, this strategy comes at an immense computational
cost, rendering real-time operation infeasible. Furthermore,
these methods do not train the segmentation pipeline endto-end, since the online fine-tuning step is excluded from
the offline learning stage. In response to the these issues, we
explore the problem of finding a feedforward network architecture for VOS that completely avoids online optimization.
Recent works have posed video object segmentation as a
feedforward mask-refinement process [23,31,34], where the
previous mask prediction is adapted to fit the target in the
current frame using a convolutional neural network. How-

8953

