Learning from Synthetic Data for Crowd Counting in the Wild
Qi Wang,
Junyu Gao,
Wei Lin,
Yuan Yuan
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, P. R. China
{crabwq, gjy3035, elonlin24, y.yuan1.ieee}@gmail.com

Abstract
Recently, counting the number of people for crowd
scenes is a hot topic because of its widespread applications
(e.g. video surveillance, public security). It is a difficult task
in the wild: changeable environment, large-range number
of people cause the current methods can not work well. In
addition, due to the scarce data, many methods suffer from
over-fitting to a different extent. To remedy the above two
problems, firstly, we develop a data collector and labeler,
which can generate the synthetic crowd scenes and simultaneously annotate them without any manpower. Based on it,
we build a large-scale, diverse synthetic dataset. Secondly, we propose two schemes that exploit the synthetic data
to boost the performance of crowd counting in the wild: 1)
pretrain a crowd counter on the synthetic data, then finetune
it using the real data, which significantly prompts the model’s performance on real data; 2) propose a crowd counting method via domain adaptation, which can free humans
from heavy data annotations. Extensive experiments show
that the first method achieves the state-of-the-art performance on four real datasets, and the second outperforms
our baselines. The dataset and source code are available at
https://gjy3035.github.io/GCC-CL/.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting is a branch of crowd analysis [17, 29,
18, 37], which is essential to video surveillance, public
areas planning, traffic flow monitoring and so on. This
task aims to predict density maps and estimate the number of people for crowd scenes. At present, many CNNand GAN-based methods [43, 31, 32, 33, 7] attain a phenomenal performance on the existing datasets. The above
methods focus on how to learn effective and discriminative
features (such as local patterns, global contexts, multi-scale
features and so on) to improve models’ performance.
At the same time, The aforementioned mainstream deep
learning methods need a large amount of accurately labeled and diversified data. Unfortunately, current datasets

Supervised
Crowd Counting

Pretrained
Crowd
Counter

Finetune

Crowd
Counter

Image & Label

Image
& Label

Image

Image

Synthetic Data
Crowd Counting
via Domain Adaptation

Real-world Data

SE Cycle
GAN

Translated
Image
Synthetic
& Label
Images

Crowd
Counter

Figure 1. Two ways of using the proposed GCC dataset: supervised learning and domain adaptation.

[8, 9, 41, 43, 38, 14, 15] can not perfectly satisfy the needs, which also results in two intractable problems for crowd
counting in the wild. Firstly, it causes that the existing methods cannot be performed to tackle some unseen extreme
cases in the wild (such as changeable weather, variant illumination and a large-range number of people). Secondly, due to rare labeled data, many algorithms suffer from
overfitting, which leads to a large performance degradation
during transferring them to the wild or other scenes. In addition, there is an inherent problem in the congested crowd
datasets: the labels are not very accurate, such as some samples in UCF CC 50 [14] and Shanghai Tech A [43] (“SHT
A” for short).
In order to remedy the aforementioned problems, we start from two aspects, namely data and methodology. From
the data perspective, we develop a data collector and labeler,
which can generate synthetic crowd scenes and automatically annotate them. By the collector and labeler, we construct
a large-scale and diverse synthetic crowd counting dataset.
The data is collected from an electronic game Grand Theft
Auto V (GTA5), thus it is named as “GTA5 Crowd Counting” (“GCC” for short) dataset. Compared with the existing
real datasets, there are four advantages: 1) free collection
and annotation; 2) larger data volume and higher resolution;
3) more diversified scenes and 4) more accurate annotations. The detailed statistics are reported in Table 1.
From the methodological perspective, we propose two
18198

