Real-time self-adaptive deep stereo
Alessio Tonioni, Fabio Tosi, Matteo Poggi, Stefano Mattoccia, Luigi di Stefano
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy
{alessio.tonioni, fabio.tosi5, m.poggi, stefano.mattoccia, luigi.distefano }@unibo.it

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks trained end-to-end
are the state-of-the-art methods to regress dense disparity
maps from stereo pairs. These models, however, suffer from
a notable decrease in accuracy when exposed to scenarios
significantly different from the training set (e.g., real vs synthetic images, etc.). We argue that it is extremely unlikely to
gather enough samples to achieve effective training/tuning
in any target domain, thus making this setup impractical for
many applications. Instead, we propose to perform unsupervised and continuous online adaptation of a deep stereo
network, which allows for preserving its accuracy in any environment. However, this strategy is extremely computationally demanding and thus prevents real-time inference. We
address this issue introducing a new lightweight, yet effective, deep stereo architecture, Modularly ADaptive Network
(MADNet), and developing a Modular ADaptation (MAD)
algorithm, which independently trains sub-portions of
the network.
By deploying MADNet together with
MAD we introduce the first real-time self-adaptive
deep stereo system enabling competitive performance
on heterogeneous datasets.
Our code is publicly
available at https://github.com/CVLAB-Unibo/
Real-time-self-adaptive-deep-stereo.

1. Introduction
Many key tasks in computer vision rely on the availability of dense and reliable 3D reconstructions of the sensed
environment. Due to high precision, low latency and affordable costs, passive stereo has proven particularly amenable
to depth estimation in both indoor and outdoor set-ups. Following the groundbreaking work by Mayer et al [21], current state-of-the-art stereo methods rely on deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) that take as input a pair of
left-right frames and directly regress a dense disparity map.
In challenging real-world scenarios, like the popular KITTI
benchmarks [8, 23], these networks turn out to be more effective, and sometimes faster, than traditional algorithms.

As recently highlighted in [40, 25], learnable models suffer from loss in performance when tested on unseen scenarios due to the domain shift between training and testing data
- often synthetic and real, respectively. Good performance
can be regained by fine-tuning on few annotated samples
from the target domain. Yet, obtaining groundtruth labels
requires the use of costly active sensors (e.g., LIDAR) and
noise removal by expensive manual intervention or postprocessing [43]. Recent works [40, 25, 46, 10, 45] proposed to overcome the need for labels with unsupervised
losses that require only stereo pairs from the target domain.
Although effective, these techniques are inherently limited
by the number of samples available at training time. Unfortunately, for many tasks, like autonomous driving, it is
unfeasible to acquire, in advance, samples from all possible deployment domains (e.g., every possible road and/or
weather condition).
We propose to address the domain shift issue by casting adaptation as a continuous learning process whereby
a stereo network can evolve online based on the images
gathered by the camera during its real deployment. We
believe that the ability to continually adapt itself in realtime is key to any deep learning machinery intended to
work in real scenarios. We achieve continuous online adaptation by: deploying one of the unsupervised losses proposed in literature (i.e., [6, 10, 40, 45]); computing error
signals on the current frames; updating the whole network
by back-propagation (from now on shortened as back-prop);
and moving to the next pair of input frames. However,
such adaptation reduces inference speed greatly. Therefore, to keep a high enough frame rate we propose a novel
Modularly ADaptive Network (MADNet) architecture designed to be lightweight, fast and modular. This architecture exhibits accuracy comparable to DispNetC [21] using
one-tenth parameters, runs at around 40 FPS for disparity
inference and performs an online adaptation of the whole
network at around 15 FPS. Moreover, to achieve an even
higher frame rate during adaptation, at the cost of a slight
loss in accuracy, we develop a Modular ADaptation (MAD)
algorithm that leverages the modular architecture of MAD-

195

