Attention-based Dropout Layer for Weakly Supervised Object Localization
Junsuk Choe, and Hyunjung Shim∗
School of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University, South Korea
{junsukchoe, kateshim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Weakly Supervised Object Localization (WSOL) techniques learn the object location only using image-level labels, without location annotations. A common limitation for
these techniques is that they cover only the most discriminative part of the object, not the entire object. To address
this problem, we propose an Attention-based Dropout Layer
(ADL), which utilizes the self-attention mechanism to process the feature maps of the model. The proposed method
is composed of two key components: 1) hiding the most
discriminative part from the model for capturing the integral extent of object, and 2) highlighting the informative
region for improving the recognition power of the model.
Based on extensive experiments, we demonstrate that the
proposed method is effective to improve the accuracy of
WSOL, achieving a new state-of-the-art localization accuracy in CUB-200-2011 dataset. We also show that the proposed method is much more efficient in terms of both parameter and computation overheads than existing techniques.

1. Introduction
Weakly Supervised Object Localization (WSOL) aims
to identify the location of the object in a scene only using image-level labels, not location annotations. Existing
approaches mine and track discriminative features of each
class for object detection [45, 36, 37, 9, 45, 25, 21, 41, 19,
2, 39, 15, 63, 7, 5, 4, 48, 14, 65, 32, 31, 58, 62, 8, 6] and segmentation [33, 29, 18, 16, 24, 52, 50]. Because the discriminative power of each object part is different from another,
these techniques tend to identify only the most discriminative part of the target object, incapable of covering entire
extent of the object. For example, in the case of a person,
the face may be more discriminative than the body which
appearance changes dramatically due to clothing. In this
case, existing WSOL techniques can localize only the face,
not the entire region.
This problem can be critical in object localization.
Specifically, Class Activation Mappings (CAM) [63] utilize
∗ Corresponding author.

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) classifier for learning the discriminative features. The key idea is that the classifier with a reasonable accuracy should observe the object
region to decide the class label. In other words, the discriminative features should co-occur with the object region.
From this idea, they perform localization by tracking spatial
distribution of feature responses. Unfortunately, the classifiers tend to focus only on the most discriminative features
to increase their classification accuracy. Therefore, the spatial distribution of feature responses also tends to cover only
the most discriminative part of the object, which leads to localization accuracy degradation.
Recently, various techniques [49, 35, 17, 59, 20, 52, 51,
60] have been proposed to address this issue. Most of them
[49, 17, 35, 59, 20] erased the most discriminative region
on the input image or feature map by zeroing that region
during the training phase. These techniques are similar to
the dropout [38] in that they deactivate specific nodes of the
feature map by setting them zero during the training phase.
This prevents the model from relying solely on the most
discriminative part for classification, instead encourages it
to learn the less discriminative part as well. To achieve this
goal, Hide-and-Seek (HaS) [35] divides the input image into
grid-like patches and randomly selects the patches to erase.
While the random selection is simple and fast, it cannot effectively erase the most discriminative part.
For effectively removing only the most discriminative
part, several techniques [49, 17, 59, 20] have been proposed.
These techniques re-train the model multiple times [49, 17],
use additional classifiers [17, 59], or perform two forwardbackward propagations per one iteration [20] for finding
the most discriminative part. Consequently, huge additional
computing resources are required to eliminate the most discriminative part effectively.
From previous methods, we conclude that the idea of
erasing only the most discriminative part is effective to
capture the full extent of object. However, existing methods require substantial computing resources to remove the
most discriminative part accurately. Our goal is to erase the
most discriminative part in an effective and efficient way.
To this end, we propose an Attention-based Dropout Layer

2219

