DeepLight: Learning Illumination for Unconstrained Mobile Mixed Reality
∗

Chloe LeGendre1,2
Wan-Chun Ma1
Graham Fyffe1
John Flynn1
Laurent Charbonnel1
Jay Busch1
Paul Debevec1
1
2
Google Inc.
USC Institute for Creative Technologies

(a) training data

(b) input image

(c) output lighting (d) rendered object

(e) real object

(f) rendered object

(g) real object

Figure 1: Given an arbitrary low dynamic range (LDR) input image captured with a mobile device (b), our method produces omnidirectional high dynamic range lighting (c, lower) useful for rendering and compositing virtual objects into the scene. We train a CNN with
LDR images (a) containing three reflective spheres, each revealing different lighting cues in a single exposure. (d) and (f) show renderings
produced using our lighting, closely matching photographs of real 3D printed and painted objects in the same scene (e, g).

Abstract
We present a learning-based method to infer plausible
high dynamic range (HDR), omnidirectional illumination
given an unconstrained, low dynamic range (LDR) image
from a mobile phone camera with a limited field of view
(FOV). For training data, we collect videos of various reflective spheres placed within the camera’s FOV, leaving
most of the background unoccluded, leveraging that materials with diverse reflectance functions reveal different lighting cues in a single exposure. We train a deep neural network to regress from the LDR background image to HDR
lighting by matching the LDR ground truth sphere images to
those rendered with the predicted illumination using imagebased relighting, which is differentiable. Our inference runs
at interactive frame rates on a mobile device, enabling realistic rendering of virtual objects into real scenes for mobile mixed reality. Training on automatically exposed and
white-balanced videos, we improve the realism of rendered
objects compared to the state-of-the art methods for both
indoor and outdoor scenes.

1. Introduction
Compositing rendered virtual objects into photographs
or videos is a fundamental technique in mixed reality, visual effects, and film production. The realism of a composite depends on both geometric and lighting related fac∗ Work completed while interning at Google.

tors. An object “floating in space” rather than placed on a
surface will immediately appear fake; similarly, a rendered
object that is too bright, too dark, or lit from a direction
inconsistent with other objects in the scene can be just as
unconvincing. In this work, we propose a method to estimate plausible illumination from mobile phone images or
video to convincingly light synthetic 3D objects for realtime compositing.
Estimating scene illumination from a single photograph
with low dynamic range (LDR) and a limited field of view
(FOV) is a challenging, under-constrained problem. One
reason is that an object’s appearance in an image is the result of the light arriving from the full sphere of directions
around the object, including from directions outside the
camera’s FOV. However, in a typical mobile phone video,
only 6% of the panoramic scene is observed by the camera (see Fig. 2). Furthermore, even light sources within the
FOV will likely be too bright to be measured properly in
a single exposure if the rest of the scene is well-exposed,
saturating the image sensor due to limited dynamic range
and thus yielding an incomplete record of relative scene radiance. To measure this missing information, Debevec [10]
merged omnidirectional photographs captured with different exposure times and lit synthetic objects with these high
dynamic range (HDR) panoramas using global illumination
rendering. But in the absence of such measurements, professional lighting artists often create convincing illumina-

5918

