Compressing Convolutional Neural Networks via
Factorized Convolutional Filters
Tuanhui Li1
1

Baoyuan Wu2∗ Yujiu Yang1∗ Yanbo Fan2

Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University

Yong Zhang2
2

Wei Liu2

Tencent AI Lab

lth17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wubaoyuan1987@gmail.com,yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{fanyanbo0124,zhangyong201303}@gmail.com, wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
This work studies the model compression for deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) via filter pruning. The
workflow of a traditional pruning consists of three sequential stages: pre-training the original model, selecting the
pre-trained filters via ranking according to a manually designed criterion (e.g., the norm of filters), and learning the
remained filters via fine-tuning. Most existing works follow this pipeline and focus on designing different ranking
criteria for filter selection. However, it is difficult to control the performance due to the separation of filter selection
and filter learning. In this work, we propose to conduct filter selection and filter learning simultaneously, in a unified
model. To this end, we define a factorized convolutional
filter (FCF), consisting of a standard real-valued convolutional filter and a binary scalar, as well as a dot-product operator between them. We train a CNN model with factorized
convolutional filters (CNN-FCF) by updating the standard
filter using back-propagation, while updating the binary
scalar using the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) based optimization method. With this trained
CNN-FCF model, we only keep the standard filters corresponding to the 1-valued scalars, while all other filters and
all binary scalars are discarded, to obtain a compact CNN
model. Extensive experiments on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over
state-of-the-art filter pruning methods.

1. Introduction
Many popular deep convolutional neural networks have
emerged in recent years, e.g., VGGNet [32] and ResNet
[10], etc. These models show promising results on many
visual tasks, such as image classification [18, 36, 37, 39],
∗ indicates corresponding authors. This work was done when Tuanhui
Li was an intern at Tencent AI Lab.

semantic segmentation [2, 26], object detection [6], object
tracking [22, 43] or visual reasoning [34, 42]. However,
the model sizes and computation complexities of these deep
models also grow exponentially. For example, ResNet-152
[10] contains about 60 million parameters and 11.3 billion
FLOPS, which precludes the application of these models
to mobile systems. A feasible approach to tackle this difficulty is model compression, whose goal is to reduce the
parameters while keeping the model performance as much
as possible.
Many seminal works have been developed in the literature of model compression for deep convolutional neural
networks. They can be generally partitioned to four categories, including pruning [8, 12, 21, 23, 27], low-rank factorization [16, 19, 45], weight quantification [24, 25] and
compact network design [13, 28], respectively. In this work,
we focus on the pruning approach, and we refer the readers
to [4] for more details about other categories. Specifically,
we focus on the filter-level pruning (filter pruning), which
prunes the output channel of a filter tensor. A typical workflow of the filter pruning is demonstrated in Fig. 1 (top). It
consists of three sequential stages, including the training of
the original model, pruning filters according to a manually
designed ranking criterion, and fine-tuning the model with
remained filters. Many existing works focused on designing different ranking criteria. However, most of these criteria depend on the weights values themselves or the results
(e.g., the classification accuracy) of the pre-trained original
model. A typical criterion is the assumption that the filters
with small ’weight’ norms have small contributions to the
model, thus they can be pruned [21]. However, to the best of
our knowledge, we have never found a rigorous verification
of this assumption. What is more important, the manually
designed ranking criterion only depends on the pre-trained
original model, rather than the followed fine-tuning process
of the pruned model. The efficacy of the ranking criterion

3977

