DMC-Net: Generating Discriminative Motion Cues for
Fast Compressed Video Action Recognition
Zheng Shou1,2
Xudong Lin2
Marcus Rohrbach1
1

Facebook AI

2

Yannis Kalantidis1
Laura Sevilla-Lara1,3
2
Shih-Fu Chang
Zhicheng Yan1
3

Columbia University

Abstract

Univesity of Edinburgh

(b1) CoViAR + TV-L1 Flow

63

1. Introduction
Video is a rich source of visual content as it not only contains appearance information in individual frames, but also
temporal motion information across consecutive frames.
Previous work has shown that modeling motion is important to various video analysis tasks, such as action recognition [39, 47, 22], action localization [35, 34, 38, 5, 37,
24, 25] and video summarization [43, 28]. Currently, methods achieving state-of-the-art results usually follow the twostream network framework [39, 4, 46], which consists of
This work was partially done when Zheng Shou interned at Facebook.

Accuracy (%)

(c) DMC-Net [ours]

Motion has shown to be useful for video understanding, where motion is typically represented by optical flow.
However, computing flow from video frames is very timeconsuming. Recent works directly leverage the motion vectors and residuals readily available in the compressed video
to represent motion at no cost. While this avoids flow computation, it also hurts accuracy since the motion vector
is noisy and has substantially reduced resolution, which
makes it a less discriminative motion representation. To
remedy these issues, we propose a lightweight generator
network, which reduces noises in motion vectors and captures fine motion details, achieving a more Discriminative
Motion Cue (DMC) representation. Since optical flow is
a more accurate motion representation, we train the DMC
generator to approximate flow using a reconstruction loss
and an adversarial loss, jointly with the downstream action
classification task. Extensive evaluations on three action
recognition benchmarks (HMDB-51, UCF-101, and a subset of Kinetics) confirm the effectiveness of our method. Our
full system, consisting of the generator and the classifier, is
coined as DMC-Net which obtains high accuracy close to
that of using flow and runs two orders of magnitude faster
than using optical flow at inference time.

62

(b2) CoViAR + PWC-Net

61

60

(a) CoViAR

59
58
0.1

1

10

100

Per-frame inference time (millisecond)
(a) HMDB-51
Figure 1: Comparing inference time and accuracy for different methods on HMDB-51. (a) Compressed video based
method CoViAR [52] is very fast. (b) But in order to reach
high accuracy, CoViAR has to follow two-stream networks
to add the costly optical flow computation, either using TVL1 [55] or PWC-Net [42]. (c) The proposed DMC-Net not
only operates exclusively in the compressed domain, but
also is able to achieve high accuracy while being two orders of magnitude faster than methods that use optical flow.
The blue box denotes the improvement room from CoViAR
to CoViAR + TV-L1 Flow; x-axis is in logarithmic scale.

two Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), one for the
decoded RGB images and one for optical flow, as shown
in Figure 2a. These networks can operate on either single
frames (2D inputs) or clips (3D inputs) and may utilize 3D
spatiotemporal convolutions [44, 46].
Extracting optical flow, however, is very slow and often dominates the overall processing time of video analysis
tasks. Recent work [52, 57, 56] avoids optical flow computation by exploiting the motion information from compressed videos encoded by standards like MPEG-4 [23].
Such methods utilize the motion vectors and residuals already present in the compressed video to model motion.
The recently proposed CoViAR [52] method, for example, contains three independent CNNs operating over three
modalities in the compressed video, i.e. RGB image of Iframe (I), low-resolution Motion Vector (MV) and Residual

1268

