LSTA: Long Short-Term Attention for Egocentric Action Recognition
Swathikiran Sudhakaran1,2 , Sergio Escalera3,4 , Oswald Lanz1
1
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
2
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
3
Computer Vision Center, Barcelona, Spain
4
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
{sudhakaran,lanz}@fbk.eu, sergio@maia.ub.es

Abstract
Egocentric activity recognition is one of the most challenging tasks in video analysis. It requires a fine-grained
discrimination of small objects and their manipulation.
While some methods base on strong supervision and attention mechanisms, they are either annotation consuming or
do not take spatio-temporal patterns into account. In this
paper we propose LSTA as a mechanism to focus on features
from relevant spatial parts while attention is being tracked
smoothly across the video sequence. We demonstrate the effectiveness of LSTA on egocentric activity recognition with
an end-to-end trainable two-stream architecture, achieving
state-of-the-art performance on four standard benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Recognizing human actions from videos is a widely
studied problem in computer vision. Most research is devoted to the analysis of videos captured from distant, thirdperson views. Egocentric (first-person) video analysis is an
important and relatively less explored branch with potential applications in robotics, indexing and retrieval, humancomputer interaction, or human assistance, just to mention
a few. Recent advances in deep learning highly benefited
problems such as image classification [12, 39] and object
detection [19, 11]. However, the performance of deep learning action recognition from videos is still not comparable to
the advances made in object recognition from still images
[12]. One of the main difficulties in action recognition is
the huge variations present in the data caused by the highly
articulated nature of the human body. Human kinesics, being highly flexible in nature, results in high intra-subject and
low inter-subject variabilities. This is further challenged by
the variations introduced by the unconstrained nature of the
environment where the video is captured. Since videos are
composed of image frames, this introduces an additional dimension to the data, making it more difficult to define a
model that properly focuses on the regions of interest that

better discriminate particular action classes. In order to mitigate these problems, one approach could be the design of a
large scale dataset with fine-grain annotations covering the
space of spatio-temporal variabilities defined by the problem domain, which would be unfeasible in practice.
Here, we consider the problem of identifying finegrained egocentric activities from trimmed videos. This is
a comparatively difficult task considered to action recognition since the activity class depends on the action and the
object on to which the action is applied to. This requires
the development of a method that can simultaneously recognize the action as well as the object. In addition, the
presence of strong ego-motion caused by the sharp movements of the camera wearer introduces noise to the video
that complicates the encoding of motion in the video frame.
While incorporating object detection can help the task of
egocentric action recognition, still this would require finegrain frame level annotations, becoming costly and impractical in a large scale setup.
Attention in deep learning was recently proposed to
guide networks to focus on regions of interest relevant for a
particular recognition task. This prunes the network search
space and avoids computing features from irrelevant image regions, resulting in a better generalization. Existing
works explore both bottom-up [41] and top-down attention
mechanisms [32]. Bottom-up attention relies on the salient
features of the data and is trained to identify such visual
patterns that distinguish one class from another. Top-down
attention applies prior knowledge about the data for developing attention, e.g. the presence of certain objects which
can be obtained from a network trained for a different task.
Recently, attention mechanisms have been successfully applied to egocentric action recognition [15, 32], surpassing
the performance of non-attentive alternatives. Still, very
few attempts have been done to track attention into spatiotemporal egocentric action recognition data. As a result,
current models may lose a proper smooth tracking of attention regions in egocentric action videos. Furthermore, most

9954

