PartNet: A Recursive Part Decomposition Network for Fine-grained and
Hierarchical Shape Segmentation
Fenggen Yu1∗
Kun Liu1 *
Yan Zhang1
Chenyang Zhu2
Kai Xu2†
1
2
Nanjing University
National University of Defense Technology

Abstract
Deep learning approaches to 3D shape segmentation are
typically formulated as a multi-class labeling problem. Existing models are trained for a fixed set of labels, which
greatly limits their flexibility and adaptivity. We opt for topdown recursive decomposition and develop the first deep
learning model for hierarchical segmentation of 3D shapes,
based on recursive neural networks. Starting from a full
shape represented as a point cloud, our model performs
recursive binary decomposition, where the decomposition
network at all nodes in the hierarchy share weights. At each
node, a node classifier is trained to determine the type (adjacency or symmetry) and stopping criteria of its decomposition. The features extracted in higher level nodes are
recursively propagated to lower level ones. Thus, the meaningful decompositions in higher levels provide strong contextual cues constraining the segmentations in lower levels.
Meanwhile, to increase the segmentation accuracy at each
node, we enhance the recursive contextual feature with the
shape feature extracted for the corresponding part. Our
method segments a 3D shape in point cloud into an unfixed
number of parts, depending on the shape complexity, showing strong generality and flexibility. It achieves the stateof-the-art performance, both for fine-grained and semantic
segmentation, on the public benchmark and a new benchmark of fine-grained segmentation proposed in this work.
We also demonstrate its application for fine-grained part
refinements in image-to-shape reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Segmentation is a long-standing problem in 3D shape
analysis, on which data-driven approach has shown clear
advantage over traditional geometric methods [38]. With
the proliferation of deep learning techniques, researchers
have been seeking for exploiting the powerful feature learning ability of deep neural networks to replace the hand* Joint first authors
† Corresponding author: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com

……
…

…

Figure 1. PartNet segments 3D point clouds in a top-down recursive fashion, leading to a hierarchy of fine-grained parts. The
same model trained for Chair class can be used to segment different chair models into different number of parts, depending on
the structure complexity of the input shapes.

crafted features used in previous data-driven approaches. In
these works, deep networks are trained for multi-class labeling task, which outputs a semantic label for each geometric
primitive (such as voxels [23] or points [20]).
There are two issues with these existing models. First,
the models are trained targeting a fixed set of labels, which
greatly limits its flexibility and adaptivity. For example, a
model trained to segment a chair into three semantic parts
cannot be used to correctly segment a chair with four parts,
even they both belong to the same shape family. Training
different models for different targeted label sets is neither
general nor efficient. Second, labeling all primitives simultaneously cannot exploit the hierarchical nature of shape
decomposition. Hierarchical shape segmentation reduces
the difficulty of shape segmentation through dividing the
multi-class labeling problem into a cascade of binary labeling problems [1, 39]. On the other hand, hierarchical segmentation can utilize structural constraints across different
levels: The segmentations in higher levels provide strong
cues constraining those in the lower levels. This enables accurate segmentation into very fine-grained levels (Figure 1).
In this work, we opt for the top-down decomposition and
propose the first deep learning model for hierarchical segmentation of 3D shapes into fine-grained parts, based on recursive neural networks (RvNN). Starting from a full shape
represented as a point cloud, our model performs recursive
binary decomposition, where the decomposition network at
19491

