P3SGD: Patient Privacy Preserving SGD
for Regularizing Deep CNNs in Pathological Image Classification
Bingzhe Wu1∗
Shiwan Zhao2
Guangyu Sun1
Xiaolu Zhang3
2
4
Zhong Su
Caihong Zeng
Zhihong Liu4
1

Peking University 2 IBM Research 3 Ant Financial Service Group
{wubingzhe,gsun}@pku.edu.cn, {zhaosw,suzhong}@cn.ibm.com, yueyin.zxl@antfin.com
4
National Clinical Research Center of Kidney Diseases, Jinling Hospital
zengch nj@hotmail.com, liuzhihong@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have achieved great success in pathological image classification. However, due to the limited number of labeled
pathological images, there are still two challenges to be addressed: (1) overfitting: the performance of a CNN model
is undermined by the overfitting due to its huge amounts of
parameters and the insufficiency of labeled training data.
(2) privacy leakage: the model trained using a conventional
method may involuntarily reveal the private information of
the patients in the training dataset. The smaller the dataset,
the worse the privacy leakage.
To tackle the above two challenges, we introduce a
novel stochastic gradient descent (SGD) scheme, named patient privacy preserving SGD (P3SGD), which performs the
model update of the SGD in the patient level via a large-step
update built upon each patient’s data. Specifically, to protect privacy and regularize the CNN model, we propose to
inject the well-designed noise into the updates. Moreover,
we equip our P3SGD with an elaborated strategy to adaptively control the scale of the injected noise. To validate
the effectiveness of P3SGD, we perform extensive experiments on a real-world clinical dataset and quantitatively
demonstrate the superior ability of P3SGD in reducing the
risk of overfitting. We also provide a rigorous analysis of
the privacy cost under differential privacy. Additionally, we
find that the models trained with P3SGD are resistant to the
model-inversion attack compared with those trained using
non-private SGD.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep CNNs have emerged as powerful
tools for various pathological image analysis tasks, such as
∗ Work performed while interning at IBM Research - China.

(a) Original

(b) SGD

(c) P3SGD

Figure 1. Illustration of the model-inversion attack on ResNet18. (a) is the original image patch. (b) and (c) are the images
reconstructed from the model trained with non-private SGD and
P3SGD.

tissue classification [30, 10], lesion detection [17, 22], nuclei segmentation [38, 50, 26], etc. The superior performance of deep CNNs usually relies on large amounts of labeled training data [40]. Unfortunately, the lack of labeled
pathological images for some tasks may lead to two notorious issues: (1) overfitting of the CNN models [39, 42, 48]
and (2) privacy leakage [48, 33, 9, 46] of the patients.
Firstly, the performance of a CNN-based model is always
harmed by the overfitting due to its large amounts of parameters and the insufficiency of training data. Secondly,
pathological datasets usually contain sensitive information,
which can be associated with each individual patient. The
CNN-based models trained using conventional SGD may
involuntarily reveal the private information of patients according to recent studies [48, 9]. For example, Zhang et al.
[48] show that the CNN model can easily memorize some
samples in the training dataset. Fredrikson et al. [9] propose a model-inversion attack to reconstruct images in the
training dataset. In Figure 1 (a) and (b), we demonstrate an
attacking example in our task, reconstructing the outline of
a patch in the training dataset by leveraging a well-trained
CNN model and its intermediate feature representations.
There have been numerous studies to solve either of two
issues individually. On the one hand, to reduce the risk
of overfitting in deep CNNs, previous research suggests

2099

