NAS-FPN: Learning Scalable Feature Pyramid Architecture
for Object Detection
Golnaz Ghiasi

Tsung-Yi Lin
Google Brain

Quoc V. Le

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art convolutional architectures for
object detection are manually designed. Here we aim to
learn a better architecture of feature pyramid network for
object detection. We adopt Neural Architecture Search and
discover a new feature pyramid architecture in a novel
scalable search space covering all cross-scale connections.
The discovered architecture, named NAS-FPN, consists of
a combination of top-down and bottom-up connections to
fuse features across scales. NAS-FPN, combined with various backbone models in the RetinaNet framework, achieves
better accuracy and latency tradeoff compared to state-ofthe-art object detection models. NAS-FPN improves mobile
detection accuracy by 2 AP compared to state-of-the-art SSDLite with MobileNetV2 model in [32] and achieves 48.3
AP which surpasses Mask R-CNN [10] detection accuracy
with less computation time.

[23]
[10]

[32]

1. Introduction
Learning visual feature representations is a fundamental
problem in computer vision. In the past few years, great
progress has been made on designing the model architecture of deep convolutional networks (ConvNets) for image
classification [12, 15, 35] and object detection [21, 22]. Unlike image classification which predicts class probability for
an image, object detection has its own challenge to detect
and localize multiple objects across a wide range of scales
and locations. To address this issue, the pyramidal feature
representations, which represent an image with multiscale
feature layers, are commonly used by many modern object
detectors [11, 23, 26].
Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) [22] is one of the representative model architectures to generate pyramidal feature representations for object detection. It adopts a backbone model, typically designed for image classification, and
builds feature pyramid by sequentially combining two adjacent layers in feature hierarchy in backbone model with
top-down and lateral connections. The high-level features,
which are semantically strong but lower resolution, are up-

Figure 1: Average Precision vs. inference time per image
across accurate models (top) and fast models (bottom) on
mobile device. The green curve highlights results of NASFPN combined with RetinaNet. Please refer to Figure 9 for
details.

sampled and combined with higher resolution features to
generate feature representations that are both high resolution and semantically strong. Although FPN is simple
and effective, it may not be the optimal architecture design. Recently, PANet [25] shows adding an extra bottomup pathway on FPN features improves feature representations for lower resolution features. Many recent works
[7, 16, 17, 34, 38, 39, 40, 43, 41] propose various crossscale connections or operations to combine features to gen-

7036

