Few-shot Adaptive Faster R-CNN
Tao Wang1
1

Xiaopeng Zhang1,2

Li Yuan1

Jiashi Feng1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2

twangnh@gmail.com

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Shanghai, China

zhangxiaopeng12@huawei.com ylustcnus@gmail.com elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Image level shift

To mitigate the detection performance drop caused by
domain shift, we aim to develop a novel few-shot adaptation approach that requires only a few target domain images with limited bounding box annotations. To this end,
we first observe several significant challenges. First, the
target domain data is highly insufficient, making most existing domain adaptation methods ineffective. Second, object detection involves simultaneous localization and classification, further complicating the model adaptation process. Third, the model suffers from over-adaptation (similar
to overfitting when training with a few data example) and
instability risk that may lead to degraded detection performance in the target domain. To address these challenges,
we first introduce a pairing mechanism over source and target features to alleviate the issue of insufficient target domain samples. We then propose a bi-level module to adapt
the source trained detector to the target domain: 1) the split
pooling based image level adaptation module uniformly extracts and aligns paired local patch features over locations, with different scale and aspect ratio; 2) the instance
level adaptation module semantically aligns paired object
features while avoids inter-class confusion. Meanwhile, a
source model feature regularization (SMFR) is applied to
stabilize the adaptation process of the two modules. Combining these contributions gives a novel few-shot adaptive
Faster-RCNN framework, termed FAFRCNN, which effectively adapts to target domain with a few labeled samples.
Experiments with multiple datasets show that our model
achieves new state-of-the-art performance under both the
interested few-shot domain adaptation(FDA) and unsupervised domain adaptation(UDA) setting.

1. Introduction
Humans can easily recognize familiar objects from new
domains, while current object detection models suffer significant performance drop in unseen environments due to
domain shift. Poor adaptability to new domains severely
limits the applicability and efficacy of these models. Pre-

Instance level shift

Figure 1. Illustration of our main idea. Middle row shows two
images from Cityscapes and Foggy Cityscapes respectively. Top
row shows background patches reflecting image level domain shift
and bottom row shows independent objects (cars) reflecting object
instance level domain shift.

vious works tackling domain shift issues for deep CNN
models [12, 42, 29, 1] are mainly targeted at the unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) setting, which requires a
large amount of target domain data and comparatively long
adaptation time. Only a few works consider the supervised
domain adaptation (SDA) [39, 7, 32] setting. However, as
UDA methods, they mainly focus on the simple task of classification, and may not apply well to more complex tasks
like object detection that involves localizing and classifying
all individual objects over high resolution inputs.
In this paper, we explore the possibility of adapting an
object detector trained with source domain data to target
domain with only a few loosely annotated target image samples (not all object instances are annotated). This is based
on our key observation that limited target samples can still
largely reflect major domain characteristics, e.g. illumination, weather condition, individual object appearance, as
shown in Fig. 1. Also, the setting is appealing in practice
as collecting a few representative data from a new domain
needs negligible effort, meanwhile can reduce the inevitable
noise brought by large amount of samples. However, it is
very challenging to learn domain invariant representation
with only a few target data samples, and detectors require

7173

