Dense Depth Posterior (DDP) from Single Image and Sparse Range
Yanchao Yang, Alex Wong, Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095
{yanchao.yang, alexw, soatto}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We present a deep learning system to infer the posterior
distribution of a dense depth map associated with an image, by exploiting sparse range measurements, for instance
from a lidar. While the lidar may provide a depth value for
a small percentage of the pixels, we exploit regularities reflected in the training set to complete the map so as to have
a probability over depth for each pixel in the image. We
exploit a Conditional Prior Network, that allows associating a probability to each depth value given an image, and
combine it with a likelihood term that uses the sparse measurements. Optionally we can also exploit the availability of
stereo during training, but in any case only require a single
image and a sparse point cloud at run-time. We test our approach on both unsupervised and supervised depth completion using the KITTI benchmark, and improve the state-ofthe-art in both. Code is available at: https://github.
com/YanchaoYang/Dense-Depth-Posterior

know it projects onto a tree, trees tend to stand out from
the ground, which informs the topology of the scene. On
the other hand, pixels that straddle illumination boundaries,
like shadows cast by trees, seldom correspond to large depth
discontinuities.
Depth completion is the process of assigning a depth
value to each pixel. While there are several deep learningbased methods to do so, we wish to have the entire posterior
estimate over depths. Sparse range measurements serve to
ground the posterior estimate in a metric space. This could
then be used by a decision and control engine downstream.

1. Introduction
There are many dense depth maps that are compatible
with a given image and a sparse point cloud. Any pointestimate, therefore, depends critically on the prior assumptions made. Ideally, one would compute the entire posterior
distribution of depth maps, rather than a point-estimate. The
posterior affords to reason about confidence, integrating evidence over time, and in general, is a (Bayesian) sufficient
representation that accounts for all the information in the
data.
Motivating application. In autonomous navigation, a
sparse point cloud from lidar may be insufficient to make
planning decisions: Is the surface of the road in Fig. 1 (middle, better viewed when enlarged) littered with pot-holes,
or is it a smooth surface? Points that are nearby in image
topology, projecting onto adjacent pixels, may be arbitrarily far in the scene. For instance, pixels that straddle an
occluding boundary correspond to large depth gaps in the
scene. While the lidar may not measure every pixel, if we

Figure 1. An image (top) is insufficient to determine the geometry
of the scene; a point cloud alone (middle) is similarly ambiguous.
Lidar returns are shown as colored points, but black regions are
uninformative: Are the black regions holes in the road surface,
or due to radiometric absorption? Combining a single image, the
lidar point cloud, and previously seen scenes allows inferring a
dense depth map (bottom) with high confidence. Color bar from
left to right: zero to infinity.

Side information. If the dense depth map is obtained by
processing the given image and sparse point cloud alone,
the quality of the resulting decision or control action could

3353

