Generating 3D Adversarial Point Clouds
Bo Li

Chong Xiang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China

Charles R. Qi
Facebook AI Research
California, USA

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

xiangchong97@gmail.com

charlesq34@gmail.com

lxbosky@gmail.com

Illinois, USA

Abstract
Deep neural networks are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples which are carefully crafted instances to
cause the models to make wrong predictions. While adversarial examples for 2D images and CNNs have been extensively studied, less attention has been paid to 3D data such
as point clouds. Given many safety-critical 3D applications
such as autonomous driving, it is important to study how
adversarial point clouds could affect current deep 3D models. In this work, we propose several novel algorithms to
craft adversarial point clouds against PointNet, a widely
used deep neural network for point cloud processing. Our
algorithms work in two ways: adversarial point perturbation and adversarial point generation. For point perturbation, we shift existing points negligibly. For point generation, we generate either a set of independent and scattered
points or a small number (1-3) of point clusters with meaningful shapes such as balls and airplanes which could be
hidden in the human psyche. In addition, we formulate six
perturbation measurement metrics tailored to the attacks in
point clouds and conduct extensive experiments to evaluate
the proposed algorithms on the ModelNet40 3D shape classification dataset. Overall, our attack algorithms achieve a
success rate higher than 99% for all targeted attacks 1 .

1. Introduction
Despite of the great success in various learning tasks,
deep neural networks (DNNs) have been found vulnerable
to adversarial examples. The adversary is able to add imperceivable perturbation to the original data and mislead
DNNs with high confidence. Many algorithms have been
proposed to generate adversarial examples for data such as
2D images [25, 9, 17, 15, 3], natural languages [10, 33], and
audios [4, 5]. Several recent works [1, 7] have proposed adversarial examples in the 3D space, but they simply project
1 Untargeted attacks are easier to achieve with the proposed methods,
so in this paper we only focus on targeted attacks.

Figure 1: Attack pipeline. Our algorithms create adversarial examples by either adversarial point perturbation (left)
or adversarial point generation (right). The bottle is misclassified after our attacks.

3D objects to 2D images as data pre-processing. However,
no existing work has explored the vulnerability of actual 3D
models. In this paper, we study the robustness of 3D models which directly deal with 3D objects. Specifically, we
choose to represent 3D objects with point clouds, which are
the raw data from most 3D sensors such as depth cameras
and Lidars. Therefore, we attack 3D models by generating
3D adversarial point clouds.
As to the attacking target, we focus on the commonly
used PointNet model [19]. We choose PointNet because the
model and its variants have been widely and successfully
adopted in many applications such as 3D object detection
for autonomous driving [18, 34, 30], semantic segmentation
for indoor scene understanding [12, 19], and AI-assisted
shape design [24]. Furthermore, the model has been shown
to be robust to various input point perturbations and corruptions [19]. The demonstrated more robustness than 3D
CNNs makes it a challenging and solid benchmark model
for our evaluations. Although we focus on attacking Point19136

