Engaging Image Captioning via Personality
Kurt Shuster, Samuel Humeau, Hexiang Hu, Antoine Bordes, Jason Weston
Facebook AI Research
{kshuster,samueulhumeau,hexianghu,abordes,jase}@fb.com
Abstract
Standard image captioning tasks such as COCO and
Flickr30k are factual, neutral in tone and (to a human)
state the obvious (e.g., “a man playing a guitar”). While
such tasks are useful to verify that a machine understands
the content of an image, they are not engaging to humans as captions. With this in mind we define a new task,
P ERSONALITY-C APTIONS, where the goal is to be as engaging to humans as possible by incorporating controllable
style and personality traits. We collect and release a large
dataset of 241,858 of such captions conditioned over 215
possible traits. We build models that combine existing work
from (i) sentence representations [36] with Transformers
trained on 1.7 billion dialogue examples; and (ii) image
representations [32] with ResNets trained on 3.5 billion social media images. We obtain state-of-the-art performance
on Flickr30k and COCO, and strong performance on our
new task. Finally, online evaluations validate that our task
and models are engaging to humans, with our best model
close to human performance.

1. Introduction
If we want machines to communicate with humans, they
must be able to capture our interest by spanning both the
ability to understand and to be engaging. For agents to communicate the way people do, they must display personality
as well as perform conversational function [21, 22, 45, 23].
Consider for example an online conversational agent or
robot that can both perceive images and speak – the afforementioned capabilities would be expected from a good conversationalist.
Communication grounded in images is naturally engaging to humans [18], for example billions are shared and discussed daily online. In order to develop engaging conversational agents, it thus seems promising to allow them to comment on images naturally as humans do. Yet the majority of
studies in the research community have so far focused on
function only: standard image captioning [40] requires the
machine to generate a sentence which factually describes

the elements of the scene in a neutral tone. Similarly, visual question answering [4] and visual dialogue [9] require
the machine to answer factual questions about the contents
of the image, either in single turn or dialogue form. They
assess whether the machine can perform basic perception
over the image which humans take for granted. Hence, they
are useful for developing models that understand content,
but are not useful as an end application unless the human
cannot see the image, e.g. due to visual impairment [16].
Standard image captioning tasks simply state the obvious, and are not considered engaging captions by humans.
For example, in the COCO [8] and Flickr30k [57] tasks,
some examples of captions include “a large bus sitting next
to a very tall building” and “a butcher cutting an animal
to sell”, which describe the contents of those images in a
personality-free, factual manner. However, humans consider engaging and effective captions ones that “avoid stating the obvious”, as shown by advice to human captioners
outside of vision research.1 For example, “If the bride and
groom are smiling at each other, don’t write that they are
smiling at each other. The photo already visually shows
what the subject is doing. Rephrase the caption to reflect
the story behind the image”. Moreover, it is considered
that “conversational language works best. Write the caption
as though you are talking to a family member or friend”.2
These instructions to engage human readers seem to be in
direct opposition to standard captioning datasets.
In this work we focus on image captioning that is engaging for humans by incorporating personality. As no
large dataset exists that covers the range of human personalities, we build and release a new dataset, P ERSONALITYC APTIONS, with 241,858 captions, each conditioned on one
of 215 different possible personality traits. We show that
such captions are far more engaging than traditional ones.
We then develop model architectures that can simultaneously understand image content and provide engaging captions for humans. To build strong models, we consider both
retrieval and generative3 variants, and leverage state-of-the1 https://www.photoup.net/how- to-write- more- engaging- photo- captions/
2 https://www.poynter.org/news/6- tips- writing-photo- captions
3 ”Generative” here refers to a model that generates a caption word-by-word as opposed to a retrieval model.

12516

