R2 GAN: Cross-modal Recipe Retrieval with Generative Adversarial Network
Bin Zhu1 , Chong-Wah Ngo1 , Jingjing Chen2 , and Yanbin Hao1
1

City University of Hong Kong

binzhu4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, {cscwngo, yanbihao}@cityu.edu.hk
2

National University of Singapore
chenjingjing@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Representing procedure text such as recipe for crossmodal retrieval is inherently a difficult problem, not mentioning to generate image from recipe for visualization. This
paper studies a new version of GAN, named Recipe Retrieval Generative Adversarial Network (R2 GAN ), to explore the feasibility of generating image from procedure text
for retrieval problem. The motivation of using GAN is twofold: learning compatible cross-modal features in an adversarial way, and explanation of search results by showing
the images generated from recipes. The novelty of R2 GAN
comes from architecture design, specifically a GAN with one
generator and dual discriminators is used, which makes
the generation of image from recipe a feasible idea. Furthermore, empowered by the generated images, a two-level
ranking loss in both embedding and image spaces are considered. These add-ons not only result in excellent retrieval
performance, but also generate close-to-realistic food images useful for explaining ranking of recipes. On recipe1M
dataset, R2 GAN demonstrates high scalability to data size,
outperforms all the existing approaches, and generates images intuitive for human to interpret the search results.

1. Introduction
Food is fundamental to health and social participation.
Due to abundant food images and recipes available online,
food computing for healthcare has recently captured numerous research attentions [34, 22]. Managing to retrieve the
recipe of food intake, for example, can assist the estimation of nutrition consumption and hence benefit food logging [22, 5]. The past efforts on food computing range from
food categorization [19, 20, 21], food attribution recognition [3, 4, 23], zero-shot recipe retrieval [3] to food perception [36, 27] and recommendation [9, 8, 39].

This paper studies food-to-recipe and recipe-to-food retrieval, which is a typical problem of cross-modal retrieval [38] but peculiar to the domain of food computing.
Specifically, recipe is a text article describing preparation
of food material and procedure of cooking. A typical recipe
consists of three sections: title, ingredients, and cooking
instructions, which may or may not align with the visual
appearance of a cooked dish. For instance, some ingredients (e.g., sugar, salt) are not visible in dish. Furthermore,
cooking instruction more often implies the cause-and-effect
of cooking rather than visually depicting the dish appearance. The nature of problem conflicts with the assumption made by the existing cross-modal retrieval, which trains model using text narration that explicitly refers to visual
content [31, 32, 18]. Modeling lengthy procedure text such
as recipe can thus be a new challenge for cross-modal retrieval.
In the literature, the problem of food-to-recipe retrieval
is addressed by either classification [3, 4] or cross-modal
learning [35, 2]. Classification-based approaches annotate
rich food attributes (e.g., ingredients, cooking and cutting
methods) in food images and then match these attributes against words extracted from recipes for retrieval [4]. A major drawback is the significant efforts required in labeling
of food attributes, which are not only cost expensive and
labour intensive. Cross-modal learning smartly alleviates
this requirement, by training latent space that can accommodate both image and text modalities for similarity measurement. The labeling efforts are significantly reduced by
requiring only recipe-image pairs, which are easy to collect,
than to painstakingly annotate visual food attributes [4]. To
model text description in recipe, neural networks of different complexities have been investigated in [35, 5] to learn
embeddings for different sections of a recipe. Although efficient, cross-modal learning is inherently an unexplainable
model compared to classification-based approaches, which
are able to list out the matched attributes as evidences to re-

11477

