ROI Pooled Correlation Filters for Visual Tracking
Yuxuan Sun1 , Chong Sun2 , Dong Wang1∗, You He3 , Huchuan Lu1,4
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, China
3
Naval Aviation University, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
rumsyx@mail.dlut.edu.cn, waynecsun@tencent.com, heyou f@126.com, {wdice,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
The ROI (region-of-interest) based pooling method performs pooling operations on the cropped ROI regions for
various samples and has shown great success in the object detection methods. It compresses the model size while
preserving the localization accuracy, thus it is useful in
the visual tracking field. Though being effective, the ROIbased pooling operation is not yet considered in the correlation filter formula. In this paper, we propose a novel
ROI pooled correlation filter (RPCF) algorithm for robust visual tracking. Through mathematical derivations,
we show that the ROI-based pooling can be equivalently
achieved by enforcing additional constraints on the learned
filter weights, which makes the ROI-based pooling feasible on the virtual circular samples. Besides, we develop
an efficient joint training formula for the proposed correlation filter algorithm, and derive the Fourier solvers for
efficient model training. Finally, we evaluate our RPCF
tracker on OTB-2013, OTB-2015 and VOT-2017 benchmark
datasets. Experimental results show that our tracker performs favourably against other state-of-the-art trackers.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking aims to localize the manually specified
target object in the successive frames, and it has been
densely studied in the past decades for its broad applications in the automatic drive, human-machine interaction,
behavior recognition, etc. Till now, visual tracking is still
a very challenging task due to the limited training data and
plenty of real-world challenges, such as occlusion, deformation and illumination variations.
In recent years, the correlation filter (CF) has become
one of the most widely used formulas in visual tracking
for its computation efficiency. The success of the corre∗ Corresponding Author: Dr. Wang

RPCF

ECO

C-COT

KCF

CF2

Figure 1. Visualized tracking results of our method and other four
competing algorithms. Our tracker performs favourably against
the state-of-the-art.

lation filter mainly comes from two aspects: first, by exploiting the property of circulant matrix, the CF-based algorithms do not need to construct the training and testing
samples explicitly, and can be efficiently optimized in the
Fourier domain, enabling it to handle more features; second, optimizing a correlation filter can be equivalently converted to solving a system of linear functions, thus the filter weights can either be obtained with the analytic solution (e.g., [9, 8]) or be solved via the optimization algorithms with quadratic convergence [9, 7]. As is well recognized, the primal correlation filter algorithms have limited tracking performance due to the boundary effects and
the over-fitting problem. The phenomenon of boundary effects is caused by the periodic assumptions of the training
samples, while the over-fitting problem is caused by the unbalance between the numbers of model parameters and the

5783

