Training deep learning based image denoisers from undersampled
measurements without ground truth and without image prior
Magauiya Zhussip, Shakarim Soltanayev, Se Young Chun
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Republic of Korea
{mzhussip,shakarim,sychun}@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
Compressive sensing is a method to recover the original image from undersampled measurements. In order to
overcome the ill-posedness of this inverse problem, image
priors are used such as sparsity, minimal total-variation,
or self-similarity of images. Recently, deep learning based
compressive image recovery methods have been proposed
and have yielded state-of-the-art performances. They used
data-driven approaches instead of hand-crafted image priors to regularize ill-posed inverse problems with undersampled data. Ironically, training deep neural networks
(DNNs) for them requires “clean” ground truth images,
but obtaining the best quality images from undersampled
data requires well-trained DNNs. To resolve this dilemma,
we propose novel methods based on two well-grounded
theories: denoiser-approximate message passing (D-AMP)
and Stein’s unbiased risk estimator (SURE). Our proposed
methods were able to train deep learning based image denoisers from undersampled measurements without ground
truth images and without additional image priors, and
to recover images with state-of-the-art qualities from undersampled data. We evaluated our methods for various
compressive sensing recovery problems with Gaussian random, coded diffraction pattern, and compressive sensing
MRI measurement matrices. Our proposed methods yielded
state-of-the-art performances for all cases without ground
truth images. Our methods also yielded comparable performances to the methods with ground truth data.

astronomy [41]. CS applications have been investigated
extensively for the last decade and now some systems are
commercialized for practical usages such as low-dose CT
and accelerated MR.
CS is modeled as a linear equation for the measurement:
y = Ax + ǫ

(1)

where y ∈ RM is a measurement vector, A ∈ RM ×N is
a sensing matrix with M ≪ N , x ∈ RN is an unknown
signal to reconstruct, and ǫ ∈ RM is a noise vector. It is
a challenging ill-posed inverse problem to estimate x from
the undersampled measurements y with M ≪ N .
Sparsity has been investigated as prior to regularize the
ill-posed problem of CS recovery. CS theories allow to
use l1 norm for good signal recovery instead of l0 norm
[10, 15]. Minimizing l1 norm is advantageous for largescale inverse problems since l1 norm is convex so that conventional convex optimization can be used. There have been
many convex optimization algorithms for solving CS recovery problems with non-differentiable l1 norm such as iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm (ISTA), fast iterative
Ground Truth

TVAL3 (35.74 dB)

Proposed (38.67 dB)

1. Introduction
Compressive sensing (CS) has provided ways to sample and to compress signals at the same time with relatively long signal reconstruction time [10, 15]. The idea
of combining signal acquisition and compression immediately drew great attention in the application areas such as
MRI [29, 38], CT [11], hyperspectral imaging [49, 50],
coded aperture imaging [2], radar imaging [36] and radio

Figure 1: Ground truth MR image from fully-sampled data
(left), reconstructed MR images from 50%-sampled data
using conventional TV image prior (middle, [29]) and our
proposed deep learning based method without ground truth
(right). Our proposed method yielded significantly better
result than conventional method and result comparable to
the ground truth with very small residual error (red box).

10255

