Adversarial Attacks Beyond the Image Space
Xiaohui Zeng1 , Chenxi Liu2( ) , Yu-Siang Wang3 , Weichao Qiu2 ,
Lingxi Xie2,4 , Yu-Wing Tai5 , Chi-Keung Tang6 , Alan L. Yuille2
1
University of Toronto 2 The Johns Hopkins University 3 National Taiwan University
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 5 Tencent YouTu 6 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
xiaohui@cs.toronto.edu

cxliu@jhu.edu

b03202047@ntu.edu.tw

{qiuwch, 198808xc, yuwing, alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com

Abstract

Beyond the Image Space

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a rapid development in
the area of deep learning, in which deep neural networks
have been applied to a wide range of computer vision
tasks, such as image classification [17][13], object detection [32], semantic segmentation [35][8], visual question

In the Image Space

Gradient Back-Prop
modifying 3D scene

Generating adversarial examples is an intriguing problem and an important way of understanding the working
mechanism of deep neural networks. Most existing approaches generated perturbations in the image space, i.e.,
each pixel can be modified independently. However, in this
paper we pay special attention to the subset of adversarial
examples that correspond to meaningful changes in 3D
physical properties (like rotation and translation, illumination condition, etc.). These adversaries arguably pose
a more serious concern, as they demonstrate the possibility
of causing neural network failure by easy perturbations of
real-world 3D objects and scenes.
In the contexts of object classification and visual question answering, we augment state-of-the-art deep neural
networks that receive 2D input images with a rendering
module (either differentiable or not) in front, so that a 3D
scene (in the physical space) is rendered into a 2D image
(in the image space), and then mapped to a prediction (in
the output space). The adversarial perturbations can now
go beyond the image space, and have clear meanings in the
3D physical world. Though image-space adversaries can be
interpreted as per-pixel albedo change, we verify that they
cannot be well explained along these physically meaningful
dimensions, which often have a non-local effect. But it is
still possible to successfully attack beyond the image space
on the physical space, though this is more difficult than
image-space attacks, reflected in lower success rates and
heavier perturbations required.

cktang@cs.ust.hk

modifying 2D image

Round #1: car 
Round #2: car 
rendering

CNN

……
Round #T: bus 

3D Object

2D Image

Attack Success!

Figure 1. The vast majority of existing works on adversarial
attacks focus on modifying pixel values in 2D images to cause
wrong CNN predictions. In our work, we consider the more
complete vision pipeline, where 2D images are in fact projections
of the underlying 3D scene. This suggests that adversarial attacks
can go beyond the image space, and directly change physically
meaningful properties that define the 3D scene. We suspect that
these adversarial examples are more physically plausible and thus
pose more serious security concerns.

answering [2][14], etc. Despite the great success of deep
learning, there still lacks an effective method to understand
the working mechanism of deep neural networks. An interesting effort is to generate so-called adversarial perturbations. They are visually imperceptible noise [12] which,
after being added to an input image, changes the prediction
results completely, sometimes ridiculously. These examples
can be constructed in a wide range of vision problems,
including image classification [26], object detection and
semantic segmentation [39]. Researchers believed that the
existence of adversaries implies unknown properties in the
feature space [37].
Our work is motivated by the fact that conventional 2D
adversaries were often generated by modifying each image
pixel individually. We instead consider perturbations of
the 3D scene that are often non-local and correspond to
physical properties of the object. We notice that previous
work found adversarial examples “in the physical world”
by taking photos on the printed perturbed images [18]. But
14302

