LaSO: Label-Set Operations networks for multi-label few-shot learning
Amit Alfassy∗ 1,3 , Leonid Karlinsky∗ , Amit Aides∗ , Joseph Shtok, Sivan Harary, Rogerio Feris
1
IBM Research AI
2

Alex M. Bronstein
3
Technion

Raja Giryes
Tel-Aviv University

Abstract
Example synthesis is one of the leading methods to tackle
the problem of few-shot learning, where only a small number of samples per class are available. However, current
synthesis approaches only address the scenario of a single
category label per image. In this work, we propose a novel
technique for synthesizing samples with multiple labels for
the (yet unhandled) multi-label few-shot classification scenario. We propose to combine pairs of given examples in
feature space, so that the resulting synthesized feature vectors will correspond to examples whose label sets are obtained through certain set operations on the label sets of
the corresponding input pairs. Thus, our method is capable
of producing a sample containing the intersection, union
or set-difference of labels present in two input samples. As
we show, these set operations generalize to labels unseen
during training. This enables performing augmentation on
examples of novel categories, thus, facilitating multi-label
few-shot classifier learning. We conduct numerous experiments showing promising results for the label-set manipulation capabilities of the proposed approach, both directly
(using the classification and retrieval metrics), and in the
context of performing data augmentation for multi-label
few-shot learning. We propose a benchmark for this new
and challenging task and show that our method compares
favorably to all the common baselines.

1. Introduction
Deep learning excels in creating informative and discriminative feature spaces for many types of data, e.g. natural images [13, 14, 17]. In modern computer vision, image representation in a deep feature space is expected to
encode all of the semantic content of interest, whether it is
the object categories present in the image [14], their visual
attributes [9], or their locations [13]. Usually, these feature spaces are trained using large quantities of labeled data
tailored to the task [20, 31]. However, in many practical applications, only a handful of examples are available for the
∗ The authors have contributed equally to this work

Figure 1. LaSO networks operating in a feature space. The goal of
these networks is to synthesize new feature vectors from pairs of
input vectors so that the semantic content of the synthesized vector
matches the prescribed operation on the source vector’s label sets.

target task; this scenario is known as few-shot learning [37].
In few-shot learning, the feature spaces are usually transferred from other tasks, either directly or through metalearning that allows generating these spaces on the fly
(see survey of such techniques in Section 2). One popular approach for few-shot learning is the generative one
[12, 25, 32, 44]: Many new examples in the chosen feature space are generated from the few given training examples; these synthesized samples are in turn used to improve
the generalization of the few-shot task. Despite the increasing popularity of few-shot learning, all the current works on
few-shot classification deal with a single (class) label per
data point (e.g. C(Img) = dog), and not with the multilabel case (e.g. C(Img) = {dog, leash, person, f orest}).
In this paper, we propose a new kind of a generative approach to few-shot learning. It explicitly targets multi-label
samples; even more so, through its task definition, it targets
cases where the labels are not necessarily explicitly defined
a-priori. As an illustrative example, please consider the situation depicted in Figure 2. Suppose you wish to build a
16548

