BridgeNet: A Continuity-Aware Probabilistic Network for Age Estimation
Wanhua Li1,2,3,4 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3,∗ , Jianjiang Feng1,2,3 , Chunjing Xu4 , Jie Zhou1,2,3 , Qi Tian4
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
4
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
li-wh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{lujiwen,jfeng,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

{xuchunjing,tian.qi1}@huawei.com

Abstract
Age estimation is an important yet very challenging
problem in computer vision. Existing methods for age estimation usually apply a divide-and-conquer strategy to deal
with heterogeneous data caused by the non-stationary aging process. However, the facial aging process is also a
continuous process, and the continuity relationship between
different components has not been effectively exploited. In
this paper, we propose BridgeNet for age estimation, which
aims to mine the continuous relation between age labels effectively. The proposed BridgeNet consists of local regressors and gating networks. Local regressors partition the
data space into multiple overlapping subspaces to tackle
heterogeneous data and gating networks learn continuity
aware weights for the results of local regressors by employing the proposed bridge-tree structure, which introduces
bridge connections into tree models to enforce the similarity
between neighbor nodes. Moreover, these two components
of BridgeNet can be jointly learned in an end-to-end way.
We show experimental results on the MORPH II, FG-NET
and Chalearn LAP 2015 datasets and find that BridgeNet
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Age estimation attempts to predict the real age value or
age group based on facial images, which is an important
task in computer vision due to the broad applications such
as visual surveillance [38], human-computer interaction [9],
social media [31], and face retrieval [22], etc. Although this
problem has been extensively studied for many years, it is
still very challenging to estimate human age precisely from
a single image.
∗ Corresponding Author

Age:

19

21

26

28

62

63

Age:

5

7

13

15

50

52

Age:

0

1

7

9

15

17

High Similarity

Non-stationary

Figure 1. Facial images at different ages. The images of each row
come from the same person. On the one hand, we can see the nonstationary property of aging patterns. The facial aging process
is mainly reflected in the shape of the face during childhood and
skin texture during adulthood. On the other hand, the facial images at adjacent ages show a very high similarity caused by the
continuous aging process.

Age estimation can be cast as a regression problem by
treating age labels as numerical values. However, the human face matures in different ways at different ages, e.g.,
bone growth in childhood and skin wrinkles in adulthood
[28]. This non-stationary aging process implies that the
data of age estimation is heterogeneous. Thus many nonlinear regression approaches[12, 15] are inevitably biased
by the heterogeneous data distribution, and they are apt to
overfit the training data [4]. Many efforts [34, 31, 15, 24]
have been devoted to addressing this problem. Divide-andconquer proves to be a good strategy to tackle the heterogeneous data [18], which divides the data space into multiple
subspaces. Huang et al. use local regressors to learn ho-

1145

