Understanding the Disharmony between Dropout and Batch Normalization by
Variance Shift
Xiang Li∗1,2 , Shuo Chen1 , Xiaolin Hu†3 and Jian Yang‡1
1

2

PCALab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Abstract

1. Introduction
Srivastava et al. [28] brought Dropout as a simple way to
prevent neural networks from overfitting. It has been proved
to be significantly effective over a large range of machine
learning areas, such as image classification [26, 2], speech
∗ Xiang Li, Shuo Chen and Jian Yang are with PCA Lab, Key Lab of
Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of
Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China. Xiang Li is also a
visiting scholar at Momenta. Email: xiang.li.implus@njust.edu.cn
† Xiaolin Hu is with the Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information
Science and Technology (TNList) Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Tsinghua University, China.
‡ Corresponding author.

Dropout 𝑎~Bernoulli(𝑝)

Train Mode

Test Mode

𝑋=𝑎

1
𝑥
𝑝

3.5

Tsinghua University

BN

𝑋

𝜇 = 𝐸 𝑋 , 𝜎 2 = 𝑉𝑎𝑟 𝑋 , 𝑋෠ =

1

𝑉𝑎𝑟 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 𝑋 = 𝑝

𝑉𝑎𝑟 𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡 𝑋 = 1

𝑋=𝑥

𝑥~𝒩(0,1)

real_vari , moving_vari )
max(moving
_vari
real_vari

This paper first answers the question “why do the two
most powerful techniques Dropout and Batch Normalization (BN) often lead to a worse performance when they are
combined together in many modern neural networks, but
cooperate well sometimes as in Wide ResNet (WRN)?” in
both theoretical and empirical aspects. Theoretically, we
find that Dropout shifts the variance of a specific neural
unit when we transfer the state of that network from training to test. However, BN maintains its statistical variance,
which is accumulated from the entire learning procedure, in
the test phase. The inconsistency of variances in Dropout
and BN (we name this scheme “variance shift”) causes the
unstable numerical behavior in inference that leads to erroneous predictions finally. Meanwhile, the large feature
dimension in WRN further reduces the “variance shift” to
bring benefits to the overall performance. Thorough experiments on representative modern convolutional networks like
DenseNet, ResNet, ResNeXt and Wide ResNet confirm our
findings. According to the uncovered mechanism, we get
better understandings in the combination of these two techniques and summarize guidelines for better practices.

𝑥~𝒩(0,1)

3

Momenta

𝑋

𝐸𝑀𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑋 ← 𝐸(𝜇)

𝑋−𝜇

𝜎2 + 𝜀
𝑉𝑎𝑟𝑀𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑋 ← 𝐸(𝜎 2 )

1
𝑝

𝑉𝑎𝑟 𝑀𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑋 = 𝐸( )
1
𝑝

𝑉𝑎𝑟 𝑀𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑋 = 𝐸( )

𝑋෠ =

𝑋−𝐸 𝑀𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔 (𝑋)

𝑉𝑎𝑟 𝑀𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑋 +𝜀

Test Acc 77.42%, No Dropout in each bottleneck
Test Acc 68.55%, Dropout 0.5 in each bottleneck

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

0

20

40

60

80

BN layer index on DenseNet trained on CIFAR100

100

Figure 1. Up: a simplified mathematical illustration of “variance
shift”. In test mode, the neural variance of X is different from
that in train mode caused by Dropout, yet BN attempts to treat that
variance as the popular statistics accumulated from training. Note
that p denotes the Dropout retain ratio and a comes from Bernoulli
distribution which has probability p of being 1. Down: variance
shift in experimental statistics on DenseNet trained on CIFAR100
dataset. The curves are both calculated from the same training
data. “moving vari ” is the moving variance (take its mean value
instead if it is a vector) that the i-th BN layer accumulates during
the entire learning, and “real vari ” stands for the real variance of
neural response before the i-th BN layer in inference.

recognition [9, 5, 3] and even natural language processing
[18, 15]. Before the birth of Batch Normalization (BN),
it became a necessity of almost all the state-of-the-art networks and successfully boosted their performances against
overfitting risks, despite its amazing simplicity.
Ioffe and Szegedy [17] demonstrated BN, a powerful

2682

