Actional-Structural Graph Convolutional Networks for
Skeleton-based Action Recognition
Maosen Li1 , Siheng Chen2 , Xu Chen1 , Ya Zhang1 , Yanfeng Wang1 , and Qi Tian3
1

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Carnegie Mellon University
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

{maosen li, xuchen2016, ya zhang, wangyanfeng} @sjtu.edu.cn, sihengc@andrew.cmu.edu,
tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Action recognition with skeleton data has recently attracted much attention in computer vision. Previous studies are mostly based on fixed skeleton graphs, only capturing local physical dependencies among joints, which may
miss implicit joint correlations. To capture richer dependencies, we introduce an encoder-decoder structure, called
A-link inference module, to capture action-specific latent
dependencies, i.e. actional links, directly from actions. We
also extend the existing skeleton graphs to represent higherorder dependencies, i.e. structural links. Combing the two
types of links into a generalized skeleton graph, we further
propose the actional-structural graph convolution network
(AS-GCN), which stacks actional-structural graph convolution and temporal convolution as a basic building block, to
learn both spatial and temporal features for action recognition. A future pose prediction head is added in parallel
to the recognition head to help capture more detailed action patterns through self-supervision. We validate AS-GCN
in action recognition using two skeleton data sets, NTURGB+D and Kinetics. The proposed AS-GCN achieves consistently large improvement compared to the state-of-the-art
methods. As a side product, AS-GCN also shows promising
results for future pose prediction.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition, broadly applicable to video
surveillance, human-machine interaction, and virtual reality [9, 7, 25], has recently attracted much attention in computer vision. Skeleton data, representing dynamic 3D joint
positions, have been shown to be effective in action representation, robust against sensor noise, and efﬁcient in com-

Time

Input Action

Actional
Links

Structural
Links

Feature Response Feature Response
of AS-GCN
of ST-GCN

Figure 1. Feature learning with generalized skeleton graphs. the
actional links and structural links capture dependencies between
joints. For the action “walking”, actional links denotes that hands
and feet are correlated. The semilucent circles on the right bodies are the joint feature maps for recognition, whose areas are the
response magnitudes. Compared to ST-GCN, AS-GCN obtains
responses on collaborative moving joints (red boxes).

putation and storage [18, 30]. The skeleton data are usually obtained by either locating 2D or 3D spatial coordinates of joints with depth sensors or using pose estimation
algorithms based on videos [3].
The earliest attempts of skeleton action recognition often encode all the body joint positions in each frame to a
feature vector for pattern learning [27, 8, 6, 21]. These
models rarely explore the internal dependencies between
body joints, resulting to miss abundant actional information.
To capture joint dependencies, recent methods construct
a skeleton graph whose vertices are joints and edges are
bones, and apply graph convolutional networks (GCN) to
extract correlated features [17]. The spatio-temporal GCN
(ST-GCN) is further developed to simultaneously learn spatial and temporal features [29]. ST-GCN though extracts the

3595

