Image-Question-Answer Synergistic Network for Visual Dialog
Dalu Guo, Chang Xu, Dacheng Tao
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, FEIT,
University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
{dguo8417@uni., c.xu@, dacheng.tao@}sydney.edu.au
Abstract
The image, question (combined with the history for dereferencing), and the corresponding answer are three vital
components of visual dialog. Classical visual dialog systems integrate the image, question, and history to search for
or generate the best matched answer, and so, this approach
significantly ignores the role of the answer. In this paper, we
devise a novel image-question-answer synergistic network
to value the role of the answer for precise visual dialog. We
extend the traditional one-stage solution to a two-stage solution. In the first stage, candidate answers are coarsely
scored according to their relevance to the image and question pair. Afterward, in the second stage, answers with high
probability of being correct are re-ranked by synergizing
with image and question. On the Visual Dialog v1.0 dataset,
the proposed synergistic network boosts the discriminative
visual dialog model to achieve a new state-of-the-art of
57.88% normalized discounted cumulative gain. A generative visual dialog model equipped with the proposed technique also shows promising improvements.

1. Introduction
Visual dialog is an emerging research theme lying at the
intersection between computer vision and natural language
processing. Given the capacities of reasoning, grounding,
recognition, and translating, a visual dialog agent is expected to answer questions based on an image, caption,
and history. For example, in Figure 1, the agent first reasons what the word ‘their’ refers to in the current question
based on history, locates the bounding boxes of the five people in the picture, recognizes the color of their jackets, and
then translates the visual information into human language.
Hence, a visual dialog task can also be regarded as: (i) visual grounding [33], which further converts visual information in located bounding boxes into human language; (ii)
visual question answering (VQA) [2], which includes extra
dialog history and caption as the input; and (iii) image captioning [25], which generates a description not only based
on visual information but also the history and question.

Question

Caption
5 people skiing in a snowy area
surrounded by trees.
History
Q: Can you see more than 5 people?
A:No.
Q:Are they wearing helmets?
A:No.

What color are their jackets?
Candidates
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Black and grey
Dark blue
Red green grey and black
Grey, black and white
Blue, red, black, grey and green

Figure 1. A general visual dialog task. The correct answer is
picked from a candidate set by investigating the given image, caption, history, and question.

A general visual dialog model has two components: an
encoder to embed inputs (e.g., images and questions) into
vectors and fuse them to create a unified representation, and
a decoder either to translate the encoded vector directly into
words for an answer or to rank the given candidate answers.
Both VQA and visual dialog involve the fusion job of multiple modalities. However, as a multi-turn VQA task, in each
turn, a visual dialog system must also integrate the caption
and dialog history from past turns. Visual dialog systems
can be grouped into two main categories according to different decoders: generative models and discriminative models. Generative models usually employ seq2seq [24] or advanced reinforcement learning [29] techniques to generate
the answer set, where the highest probability answer is cho110434

