Learning Attraction Field Representation for Robust Line Segment Detection
Nan Xue1,2 , Song Bai3 , Fudong Wang1 , Gui-Song Xia1∗, Tianfu Wu2 , Liangpei Zhang1
1

Wuhan University, China

2

NC State University, USA

3

University of Oxford, UK

{xuenan, fudong-wang, guisong.xia, zlp62}@whu.edu.cn,
songbai.site@gmail.com, tianfu wu@ncsu.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a region-partition based attraction
field dual representation for line segment maps, and thus
poses the problem of line segment detection (LSD) as the
region coloring problem. The latter is then addressed by
learning deep convolutional neural networks (ConvNets)
for accuracy, robustness and efficiency. For a 2D line segment map, our dual representation consists of three components: (i) A region-partition map in which every pixel is
assigned to one and only one line segment; (ii) An attraction field map in which every pixel in a partition region is
encoded by its 2D projection vector w.r.t. the associated
line segment; and (iii) A squeeze module which squashes
the attraction field to a line segment map that almost perfectly recovers the input one. By leveraging the duality,
we learn ConvNets to compute the attraction field maps
for raw input images, followed by the squeeze module for
LSD, in an end-to-end manner. Our method rigorously addresses several challenges in LSD such as local ambiguity
and class imbalance. Our method also harnesses the best
practices developed in ConvNets based semantic segmentation methods such as the encoder-decoder architecture
and the a-trous convolution. In experiments, our method
is tested on the WireFrame dataset [12] and the YorkUrban
dataset [6] with state-of-the-art performance obtained. Especially, we advance the performance by 4.5 percents on the
WireFrame dataset. Our method is also fast with 6.6 ∼ 10.4
FPS, outperforming most of the existing line segment detectors. The source code of this paper is available at https:
//github.com/cherubicXN/afm_cvpr2019.

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation and Objective
Line segment detection (LSD) is an important yet challenging low-level task in computer vision. The resulting
∗ Corresponding author

Line Segments

Region-Partition Map

Attraction Field Map

(a) Attraction field map representation for line segments

ConvNet
AFM Prediction

Detected Line Segments

(b) Our approach for line segment detection

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed method. (a) The proposed
attraction field dual representation for line segment maps. A line
segment map can be almost perfectly recovered from its attraction
filed map (AFM), by using a simple squeeze algorithm. (b) The
proposed formulation of posing the LSD problem as the region
coloring problem. The latter is addressed by learning ConvNets.

line segment maps provide compact structural information
that facilitate many up-level vision tasks such as 3D reconstruction [6, 8], image partition [7], stereo matching [32],
scene parsing [34, 33], camera pose estimation [27], and
image stitching [25].
LSD usually consists of two steps: line heat map generation and line segment model fitting. The former can
be computed either simply by the gradient magnitude map
(mainly used before the recent resurgence of deep learning)
[23, 31, 5], or by a learned convolutional neural network
(ConvNet) [26, 18] in state-of-the-art methods [12]. The
latter needs to address the challenging issue of handling unknown multi-scale discretization nuisance factors (e.g., the
classic zig-zag artifacts of line segments in digital images)
when aligning pixels or linelets to form line segments in
the line heat map. Different schema have been proposed,
e.g., the ǫ-meaningful alignment method proposed in [23]
and the junction [24] guided alignment method proposed

1595

