Probabilistic End-to-end Noise Correction for Learning with Noisy Labels
Kun Yi
Jianxin Wu∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
yik@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning has achieved excellent performance in various computer vision tasks, but requires a lot of training
examples with clean labels. It is easy to collect a dataset
with noisy labels, but such noise makes networks overfit seriously and accuracies drop dramatically. To address this
problem, we propose an end-to-end framework called PENCIL, which can update both network parameters and label
estimations as label distributions. PENCIL is independent
of the backbone network structure and does not need an auxiliary clean dataset or prior information about noise, thus
it is more general and robust than existing methods and is
easy to apply. PENCIL outperforms previous state-of-the-art
methods by large margins on both synthetic and real-world
datasets with different noise types and noise rates. Experiments show that PENCIL is robust on clean datasets, too.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has shown very impressive performance
on various vision problems, e.g., classification, detection and
semantic segmentation. Although there are many factors for
the success of deep learning, one of the most important is
the availability of large-scale datasets with clean annotations
like ImageNet [3].
However, collecting a large scale dataset with clean labels
is expensive and time-consuming. On one hand, expert
knowledge is necessary for some datasets such as the finegrained CUB-200 [26], which demands knowledge from
ornithologists. On the other hand, we can easily collect a
large scale dataset with noisy annotations through image
search engines [4, 11, 20]. These noisy annotations can
be obtained by extracting labels from the surrounding texts
or using the searching keywords [28]. For a huge dataset
like JFT300M (which contains 300 million images), it is
∗ This research was partially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (61772256, 61422203). J. Wu is the corresponding
author.

impossible to manually label it and inevitably about 20%
noisy labels exist in this dataset [22]. Hence, being able to
deal with noisy labels is essential.
The label noise problem has been studied for a long
time [1, 17]. Along with the recent successes of various deep
learning methods, noise handling in deep learning has gained
momentum, too [18, 21, 28]. However, existing methods
often have prerequisites that may not be practical in many
applications, e.g., an auxiliary set with clean labels [28] or
prior information about the noise [16]. Some methods are
very complex [29], which hurts their deployment capability. Overfitting to noise is another serious difficulty. For a
DNN with enough capacity, it can memorize the random
labels [30]. Thus, some noise handling methods may finally
still overfit and their performance decline seriously, i.e., they
are not robust. Their accuracies on the clean test set reach a
peak in the middle of the training process, but will degrade
afterwards and the accuracies after the final training epoch
are poor [16, 24].
We attack the label noise problem from two aspects. First,
we model the label for an image as a distribution among
all possible labels [6] instead of a fixed categorical value.
This probabilistic modeling lends us the flexibility to handle
noise-contaminated and noise-free labels in a unified manner. Second, inspired by [23], we maintain and update the
label distributions in both network parameter learning (in
which label distributions act as labels) and label learning (in
which label distributions are updated to correct noise). Unlike [23] which updates labels simply by using the running
average of network predictions, we correct noise and update
our label distributions in a principled end-to-end manner.
The proposed framework is called PENCIL, meaning probabilistic end-to-end noise correction in labels. The PENCIL
framework only uses the noisy labels to initialize our label
distributions, then iteratively correct the noisy labels by updating the label distributions, and the network loss function
is computed using the label distributions rather than the noisy
labels.
Our contributions are as follows.
• We propose an end-to-end framework PENCIL for

7017

