Progressive Teacher-student Learning for Early Action Prediction
Xionghui Wang1 , Jian-Fang Hu1,3∗ , Jianhuang Lai1,3 , Jianguo Zhang2 , and Wei-Shi Zheng1,4
1

Sun Yat-sen University, China; 2 University of Dundee, United Kingdom
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
wxiongh@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, hujf5@mail.sysu.edu.cn, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
j.n.zhang@dundee.ac.uk, wszheng@ieee.org
3

Observed

Abstract

Unobserved
Learned feature

The goal of early action prediction is to recognize actions from partially observed videos with incomplete action
executions, which is quite different from action recognition.
Predicting early actions is very challenging since the partially observed videos do not contain enough action information for recognition. In this paper, we aim at improving early action prediction by proposing a novel teacherstudent learning framework. Our framework involves a
teacher model for recognizing actions from full videos,
a student model for predicting early actions from partial
videos, and a teacher-student learning block for distilling
progressive knowledge from teacher to student, crossing different tasks. Extensive experiments on three public action
datasets show that the proposed progressive teacher-student
learning framework can consistently improve performance
of early action prediction model. We have also reported the
state-of-the-art performances for early action prediction on
all of these sets.

1. Introduction
Early action prediction, i.e., predicting the label of
actions before they are fully executed, is one of the
most fundamental tasks in video analysis with many realworld applications in surveillance, self driving, and humancomputer interaction etc. Different from the traditional action recognition task that intends to recognize actions from
full videos, early action prediction aims to predict the label
of actions from partially observed videos with incomplete
action executions.
As shown in Figure 1, recognizing actions from partial
videos is very challenging, especially when the depicted actions are performed at very early stages (e.g., when 10% of
∗ Corresponding author

Raw feature

Partial video

Drinking:0.34
Eating:0.27

Knowledge
Distillation

Drinking:0.57 ՛
Eating:0.16 ՝

Full feature

Drinking:0.85
Eating:0.06

Full video

Figure 1: Schematic diagram showing our motivation of
proposing distilling knowledge from action recognition system for early action prediction.

an action is executed). However, the recognition would become much easier if the actions are fully executed and observed [16, 24]. Videos with different observation ratios often contain different degree of action context. How to mine
as much action knowledge as possible from these partially
or fully observed videos for prediction is one of the major
challenges in the community.
Many works have been proposed to exploit the partially
and fully observed videos for early action prediction. For
instance, Kong et.al. [21] assume that the prediction confidences are monotonically increasing as more video frames
are observed. Hu et.al. [16] intends to learn a soft label
for the video of each progress level so that the full and
partial videos can be learned in a unified regression framework. More recently, Kong et.al. [24] learns a reconstruction map from all partially observed videos to full videos.
These works mainly develop a joint learning framework to
learn early action predictor from partial and full videos, they
do not seek to distill some disriminative action knowledge
from the full videos to improve the early action prediction
with partial videos. As illustrated in Figure 1, the action

3556

