A Neural Temporal Model for Human Motion Prediction
Anand Gopalakrishnan1 , Ankur Mali1 , Dan Kifer1 , C. Lee Giles1 , Alexander G. Ororbia2
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 168011
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, 146232
{aug440, aam35, duk17, clg20} @psu.edu1 , ago@cs.rit.edu2

Abstract
We propose novel neural temporal models for predicting and synthesizing human motion, achieving state-of-theart in modeling long-term motion trajectories while being
competitive with prior work in short-term prediction and
requiring significantly less computation. Key aspects of our
proposed system include: 1) a novel, two-level processing architecture that aids in generating planned trajectories, 2) a simple set of easily computable features that integrate derivative information, and 3) a novel multi-objective
loss function that helps the model to slowly progress from
simple next-step prediction to the harder task of multistep, closed-loop prediction. Our results demonstrate that
these innovations improve the modeling of long-term motion trajectories. Finally, we propose a novel metric, called
Normalized Power Spectrum Similarity (NPSS), to evaluate
the long-term predictive ability of motion synthesis models, complementing the popular mean-squared error (MSE)
measure of Euler joint angles over time. We conduct a
user study to determine if the proposed NPSS correlates
with human evaluation of long-term motion more strongly
than MSE and find that it indeed does. We release code
and additional results (visualizations) for this paper at:
https://github.com/cr7anand/neural temporal models

1. Introduction
We address the problem of building predictive models
of human movement using motion capture data. Specifically, we explore models that can successfully be used in
forecasting the 3D pose of a human subject conditioned on
a small, initial history (a set of priming frames). Current
work has focused on two separate but complementary subtasks: 1) short-term motion prediction, which is generally
evaluated quantitatively by measuring mean squared error
(MSE) over a short horizon, and 2) long-term motion prediction, which is evaluated qualitatively by manual, visual
inspection of samples in order to evaluate plausible trajectories of human motion over long spans of time. Short-term

models are useful in applications of motion tracking while
long-term models are useful as motion generation tools for
computer graphics [24, 16, 12]. Models successful in these
sub-tasks are also valuable for human gait analysis, studies
in the kinematics of human motion, and in human-computer
interaction applications [2, 25].
Solving the above two sub-problems in motion prediction is challenging given the high dimensionality of the input data as well as the difficulty in capturing the nonlinear dynamics and stochasticity inherent in human motion
from observations alone. Furthermore, human motion, in
strong contrast to the motion of other objects, depends on
the subject’s underlying intent and high-level semantic concepts which are tremendously difficult to model computationally. Traditionally, models were built in the framework
of expert systems and made use of strong simplifying assumptions, such as treating the underlying process as if it
was Markovian and smooth or using low-dimensional embeddings [29, 19]. These approaches often led to less-thansatisfactory performance. With the modern successes of artificial neural networks [15] in application domains ranging
from computer vision [13] to machine translation [1] and
language modeling [18], many current models of motion
are becoming increasingly based on neural architectures.
In this paper, we attack the above two sub-problems using the following strategies. First, we augment the joint angle feature vector, typically fed into predictive neural models, with motion derivative information. This can be easily
computed using a finite-difference approximation and naturally contains (temporally) local information that is crucial for generating smooth and consistent motion trajectories. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that the popular approach of training recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
in an open loop, i.e., where ground truth input data is fed
in at every timestep t to predict output at t + 1, is insufficient when using these models for closed-loop test scenarios, i.e., where model output at timestep t is itself used as
input to model at timestep t + 1. In the case of closedloop generation, the model fails to make good predictions
over long time horizons due to drifting and an accumula4321
12116

