Group Sampling for Scale Invariant Face Detection
Xiang Ming1∗
Fangyun Wei2
Ting Zhang2
Dong Chen2
Fang Wen2
Xi’an Jiaotong University1
Microsoft Research Asia2
xjtustu.mx@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

{fawe,tinzhan,doch,fangwen}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Detectors based on deep learning tend to detect multiscale faces on a single input image for efficiency. Recent
works, such as FPN and SSD, generally use feature maps
from multiple layers with different spatial resolutions to detect objects at different scales, e.g., high-resolution feature
maps for small objects. However, we find that such multilayer prediction is not necessary. Faces at all scales can be
well detected with features from a single layer of the network. In this paper, we carefully examine the factors affecting face detection across a large range of scales, and
conclude that the balance of training samples, including
both positive and negative ones, at different scales is the key.
We propose a group sampling method which divides the anchors into several groups according to the scale, and ensure
that the number of samples for each group is the same during training. Our approach using only the last layer of FPN
as features is able to advance the state-of-the-arts. Comprehensive analysis and extensive experiments have been conducted to show the effectiveness of the proposed method.
Our approach, evaluated on face detection benchmarks including FDDB and WIDER FACE datasets, achieves stateof-the-art results without bells and whistles.

1. Introduction
Face detection is the key step of many subsequent face
related applications, such as face alignment [5, 77, 27, 28,
60], face synthesis [48, 1, 2, 78, 10, 24, 62] and face recognition [63, 7, 55, 39, 56]. Among the various factors that
confront real-world face detection, extreme scale variations
and small facial remain a big challenge.
Previous deep learning detectors detect multi-scale faces
on a single feature map, e.g., Fast R-CNN [15] and Faster
R-CNN [46]. They offer a good trade-off between accuracy and speed. However, these methods tend to miss faces
at small scale because of the large stride size of the anchor (e.g., 16 pixels in [46]), making small faces difficult

to match the appropriate anchor and thus have few positive
samples during training.
To alleviate these problems arising from scale variation
and small object instances, multiple solutions have been
proposed, including: 1) using image pyramid for training
and inference [22, 51]; 2) combining features from shallow
and deep layers for prediction [17, 29, 4]; 3) using top-down
and skip connections to produce a single high-level feature
map with fine resolution [47, 50, 44]; 4) using multiple layers with different resolutions to predict object instances of
different scales [61, 6, 38, 31, 41, 35]. All of these solutions
significantly improve the performance of detectors. Among
them, adopting several layers with different resolutions for
prediction is the most popular one, since it achieves better
performance, especially for detecting small objects.
It is generally believed that the advantage of prediction
over multiple layers stems from the multi-scale feature representation, which is more robust to scale variation than the
feature from a single layer. However, we find that this is
not the case, at least for face detection. We observe that
making predictions on multiple layers will produce different numbers of anchors for different scales1 , which is the
reason why pyramid features outperform single layer feature instead of the pyramid representation, and this factor
is overlooked in the comparison between pyramid features
and single layer feature conducted in FPN [35]. Empirically
we show that single layer predictions, if imposed with the
same number of anchors as that in FPN [35], achieve almost
the same accuracy.
Motivated by this observation, we carefully examine the
factors affecting face detection performance through extensive empirical analysis and identify a key issue in existing
anchor based face detectors, i.e., the anchors sampled at
different scales are imbalanced. To show this, we use two
representative detection architectures, the Region Proposal
Network (RPN) in Faster R-CNN [46] and FPN [35], as examples. Figure 1 illustrates the network architectures. We
calculate the number of training samples received by anchors at each scale during the training process and report
them in Figure 2 (a) and (b) for RPN and FPN, respectively.
1 The scale of a bounding box with size (w, h) is defined as

∗ Work done during the internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

3446

√

wh.

