MAP inference via Block-Coordinate Frank-Wolfe Algorithm
Paul Swoboda∗
MPI for Informatics, Germany

Vladimir Kolmogorov
IST Austria

pswoboda@mpi-inf.mpg.de

vnk@ist.ac.at

Abstract
We present a new proximal bundle method for MaximumA-Posteriori (MAP) inference in structured energy minimization problems. The method optimizes a Lagrangean relaxation of the original energy minimization problem using a
multi plane block-coordinate Frank-Wolfe method that takes
advantage of the specific structure of the Lagrangean decomposition. We show empirically that our method outperforms
state-of-the-art Lagrangean decomposition based algorithms
on some challenging Markov Random Field, multi-label discrete tomography and graph matching problems.

1. Introduction
Maximum-A-Posteriori (MAP) inference, that is minimizing an energy function f : X → R over a discrete
set of labelings X is a central tool in computer vision and
machine learning. Many solvers have been proposed for
various special forms of energy f and labeling space X ,
see [11] for an overview of solvers and applications for the
prominent special case of Markov Random Fields (MRF).
Solvers can roughly be categorized into three categories:
(i) Exact solvers that use search techniques (e.g. branchand-bound) and possibly rely on solving lower bounds with
LP-solvers to speed up search, (ii) primal heuristics that
find a suboptimal solution with an ad-hoc search strategy
adapted to the specific problem and (iii) Lagrangean decomposition (a.k.a. dual decomposition) based algorithms that
decompose the original problem into smaller efficiently optimizable subproblems and exchange Lagrangean multipliers
between subproblems until consensus between subproblems
is achieved.
Except when the energy fulfills special assumptions, exact
solvers are usually not applicable, since problem sizes in
computer vision are too large. On the other hand, primal
heuristics can be fast but solution quality need not be good
∗ The work was performed while the first author was at IST Austria.

The work was supported by the European Research Council under the
European Unions Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013)/ERC
grant agreement no 616160.

and no information is given to judge it. Moreover, algorithms
from the first two paradigms are usually developed ad-hoc for
specific optimization problems and cannot be easily extended
to other ones. Lagrangean decomposition based algorithms
are a good middle ground, since they optimize a dual lower
bound, hence can output a gap that shows the distance to
optimum, yet use techniques that scale to large problem sizes.
Generalization to new problems is also usually much easier,
since subproblems can be readily combined.
A large number of algorithmic techniques have been proposed for optimizing a Lagrangean decomposition for MRFs,
including (i) Message passing [16, 42, 38, 6] (a.k.a. block
coordinate ascent, belief propagation), (ii) first order proximal splitting methods [26, 31] and (iii) Smoothing based
methods [9, 29], (iv) Nesterov schemes [28, 10], (v) mirror
descent [22], (vi) subgradient based algorithms [30, 36, 18].
In the case of MAP inference in MRFs, the study [11] has
shown that message passing techniques outperform competing Lagrangean decomposition based methods by a large
margin. However, there are two main practical shortcomings
of message passing algorithms: (i) they need not converge
to the optimum of the relaxation corresponding to the Lagrangean decomposition: while well-designed algorithms
monotonically improve a dual lower bound, they may get
stuck in suboptimal fixed points. (ii) So called min-marginals
must be computable fast for all the subproblems in the given
Lagrangean decomposition. While the above problems do
not seem to be an issue for most MAP inference tasks in
MRFs, for other problems they are. In such cases, alternative
techniques must be used. Subgradient based methods can
help here, since they do not possess the above shortcomings:
They converge to the optimum of the Lagrangean relaxation
and only require finding solutions to the subproblems of
the decomposition, which is easier than their min-marginals
(as needed for (i)), proximal steps (as needed for (ii)) or
smoothed solutions (as needed for (iii) and (iv)).
The simplest subgradient based algorithm is subgradient
ascent. However, its convergence is typically slow. Bundle
methods, which store a series of subgradients to build a local
approximation of the function to be optimized, empirically
converge faster.
111146

