Interaction-and-Aggregation Network for Person Re-identification
Ruibing Hou1,2 , Bingpeng Ma2 , Hong Chang1,2 , Xinqian Gu1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, 200031, China
{ruibing.hou, xinqian.gu}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, bpma@ucas.ac.cn, {changhong, sgshan,xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Person re-identification (reID) benefits greatly from deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) which learn robust
feature embeddings. However, CNNs are inherently limited in modeling the large variations in person pose and
scale due to their fixed geometric structures. In this paper, we propose a novel network structure, Interaction-andAggregation (IA), to enhance the feature representation capability of CNNs. Firstly, Spatial IA (SIA) module is introduced. It models the interdependencies between spatial
features and then aggregates the correlated features corresponding to the same body parts. Unlike CNNs which
extract features from fixed rectangle regions, SIA can adaptively determine the receptive fields according to the input
person pose and scale. Secondly, we introduce Channel IA
(CIA) module which selectively aggregates channel features
to enhance the feature representation, especially for smallscale visual cues. Further, IA network can be constructed by
inserting IA blocks into CNNs at any depth. We validate the
effectiveness of our model for person reID by demonstrating
its superiority over state-of-the-art methods on three benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (reID) aims at identifying a person of interest across different cameras with a given probe.
It plays a signiﬁcant role in intelligent surveillance systems. In recent years, Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), which typically stack convolution and pooling layers to learn discriminative features, have obtained state-ofthe-art results for person reID. Despite of years of efforts,
there still exist many challenges such as large variations in
person pose, scale, and background clutter.
Body part misalignment is a critical inﬂuencing factor on
reID results, which can be attributed to two causes. First,

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. The critical inﬂuencing factors for person reID. (a) A
person appears in various poses; (b) various scales due to imperfect detection results.

pedestrians naturally take on various poses as shown in
Fig. 1 (a). Second, the body parts have various scales across
different images of the same person caused by imperfect
pedestrian detection, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b). To resolve
these problems, some approaches have been proposed recently. One way is to localize body parts explicitly and
combine the representations over them [59, 61, 38, 37, 20].
This scheme requires highly-accurate part detection. Unfortunately, even state-of-the-art part detection solutions are
not perfect. Another type of methods resorts to multi-scale
features fusion where the feature maps are computed at multiple layers of a network [5, 48, 4, 12]. Nevertheless, these
methods only employ manually speciﬁed scales, which are
ineffective to model large scale variations. In short, existing methods, which attempt to utilize body part detection or
multi-scale features, are still limited in modeling the large
variations in body pose and scale.
An essential reason why these approaches are not robust to body pose and scale variations is that they all use
CNNs to extract pedestrian features. Actually, CNNs are
inherently limited in modeling large geometric transformations. The limitation originates from the ﬁxed geometric
structures of CNNs modules: a convolution unit which samples the input feature map at ﬁxed locations and a pooling
layer which reduces the spatial resolution at a ﬁxed ratio.
There lacks internal mechanisms to handle the body pose
and scale variations. For one thing, the receptive ﬁelds of
the feature maps are pre-deﬁned rectangles, which can not
adaptively localize the non-rigid body parts with different

9317

