Detection based Defense against Adversarial Examples from the Steganalysis
Point of View
Jiayang Liu1

1

Weiming Zhang2
Yiwei Zhang1
Dongdong Hou1
1
1
Yujia Liu
Hongyue Zha
Nenghai Yu2
University of Science and Technology of China

{ljyljy,zywvvd,houdd,yjcaihon,zha00}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, 2 {zhangwm,ynh}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have recently led to significant improvements in many fields. However, DNNs are
vulnerable to adversarial examples which are samples with
imperceptible perturbations while dramatically misleading
the DNNs. Moreover, adversarial examples can be used
to perform an attack on various kinds of DNN based systems, even if the adversary has no access to the underlying
model. Many defense methods have been proposed, such
as obfuscating gradients of the networks or detecting adversarial examples. However it is proved out that these defense methods are not effective or cannot resist secondary
adversarial attacks. In this paper, we point out that steganalysis can be applied to adversarial examples detection,
and propose a method to enhance steganalysis features by
estimating the probability of modifications caused by adversarial attacks. Experimental results show that the proposed
method can accurately detect adversarial examples. Moreover, secondary adversarial attacks are hard to be directly
performed to our method because our method is not based
on a neural network but based on high-dimensional artificial features and Fisher Linear Discriminant ensemble.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have recently led to significant improvements in many fields, such as image classification [28, 15] and speech recognition [1]. However, the
generalization properties of the DNNs have been recently
questioned because these machine learning models are vulnerable to adversarial examples [31]. An adversarial example is a slightly modified sample that is intended to cause
an error output of the DNN based model. In the context
of classification task, the adversarial example is crafted to
force a model to classify it into a class different from the legitimate class. In addition, adversarial examples have crossmodel generalization property [12], so the attacker can even

generate adversarial examples without the knowledge of the
DNN. Adversarial attacks are divided into two types: targeted attack and untargeted attack. In targeted attack, the
attacker generates adversarial examples which are misclassified by the classifier into a particular class. In untargeted
attack, the attacker generates adversarial examples which
are misclassified by the classifier into any class as long as it
is different from the true class.
There are many studies which focus on methods of generating adversarial examples. Some attack methods are
based on calculating the gradient of the network, such as
Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) [12], Basic Iterative
Method (BIM) [18] and Jacobian Saliency Map Attack
Method [25]. While other methods are based on solving optimization problems, such as L-BFGS [31], Deepfool [23]
and Carlini & Wagner (C&W) attack [6].
Many defenses are proposed to mitigate adversarial examples against the above attacks. They make it harder for
the adversary to craft adversarial examples using existing
techniques or make the DNNs still give correct classifications on adversarial examples. These defenses are mainly
divided into two categories.
One way is preprocessing the input image before classification, taking advantage of the spatial instability of adversarial examples. Defenders can perform some operations
on the input image in spatial domain before giving the input image to a DNN, such as JPEG compression, scaling,
adding noise, etc. Gu et al. [14] propose to use an autoencoder to remove adversarial perturbations from inputs.
The other way is to modify the network architecture, the
optimization techniques or the training process. Goodfellow et al. [12] propose to augment the training set with
adversarial examples to increase the model’s robustness against a specific adversarial attack. However, this approach
faces difficulties because the dimension of the images and
features in networks means a great quantity of training data
is required. Defensive distillation [26] is another technique
against certain adversarial attacks. This form of network
can prevent the model from fitting too tightly to the original

4825

