Social-IQ: A Question Answering Benchmark
for Artificial Social Intelligence
Amir Zadeh1 , Michael Chan1 , Paul Pu Liang2 , Edmund Tong1 , Louis-Philippe Morency1
1 Language Technologies Institute, 2 Machine Learning Department
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
multicomp.cs.cmu.edu/social-iq
{abagherz,mkchan,pliang,edtong,morency}@cs.cmu.edu

00:29

00:37

00:37

I couldn’t …
(trying to
speak)

Steven went, got the keys and we are
gonna have them back. That easy.
(serious face)

00:40

00:40

(Interrupts) But this was
Friday Matt! This was Friday.

00:42

(silenced)
(serious face)

You said you were going to do it and
you are not doing it!

Q2: How is the man who is not being blamed responding to the situation? <advanced>
A1. He thinks the other man is slacking even if he is not saying it. <advanced>
A2. He is showing support for the woman by taking her side. <intermediate>
A3. He thinks he is better than both of the people arguing. <easy>
A4. He doesn’t want to pick a side. <advanced>

Q1: How is the discussion between the woman and the man in the white shirt ? <intermediate>
A1. The woman is blaming the man in the white shirt who seems to be in the fault. <easy>
A2. She is blaming her in a tense voice and not letting him defend himself. <advanced>
A3. They are having a romantic conversation. <easy>
A4. An active argument that both are blaming each other. <advanced>

Q3: Why is the woman seem so overwhelmed? <advanced>
A1. Because a small problem became a huge problem. <intermediate>
A2. She has too much on her plate, and this new problem overwhelms her. <advanced>
A3. The woman is upset because the men are insulting her. <easy>
A4. Because both of them men seem to be ignoring her. <intermediate>

Figure 1: Best viewed zoomed in and in color. An overview of the Social-IQ dataset questions and videos. Social-IQ evaluates
artificial social intelligence through question answering. The dataset contains 1, 250 videos, 7500 questions, 30, 000 correct
answers and 22, 500 incorrect answers. Questions and answers are annotated for complexity levels: easy, intermediate and
advanced. Q indicates questions and A indicates answers. Answers in green are correct and answers in red are incorrect.

Abstract
As intelligent systems increasingly blend into our everyday life, artificial social intelligence becomes a prominent
area of research. Intelligent systems must be socially intelligent in order to comprehend human intents and maintain
a rich level of interaction with humans. Human language
offers a unique unconstrained approach to probe through
questions and reason through answers about social situations. This unconstrained approach extends previous attempts to model social intelligence through numeric supervision (e.g. sentiment and emotions labels). In this paper,
we introduce the Social-IQ, an unconstrained benchmark
specifically designed to train and evaluate socially intelli-

gent technologies. By providing a rich source of open-ended
questions and answers, Social-IQ opens the door to explainable social intelligence. The dataset contains rigorously
annotated and validated videos, questions and answers, as
well as annotations for the complexity level of each question and answer. Social-IQ contains 1, 250 natural in-thewild social situations, 7, 500 questions and 52, 500 correct
and incorrect answers. Although humans can reason about
social situations with very high accuracy (95.08%), existing state-of-the-art computational models struggle on this
task. As a result, Social-IQ brings novel challenges that will
spark future research in social intelligence modeling, visual
reasoning, and multimodal question answering (QA).

8807

