Amodal Instance Segmentation with KINS Dataset
Lu Qi1,2 Li Jiang1,2 Shu Liu2 Xiaoyong Shen2 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 YouTu Lab, Tencent
{luqi, lijiang}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

{shawnshuliu, dylanshen, jiayajia}@tencent.com

Abstract
Amodal instance segmentation, a new direction of instance segmentation, aims to segment each object instance
involving its invisible, occluded parts to imitate human ability. This task requires to reason objects’ complex structure.
Despite important and futuristic, this task lacks data with
large-scale and detailed annotation, due to the difficulty of
correctly and consistently labeling invisible parts, which
creates the huge barrier to explore the frontier of visual
recognition. In this paper, we augment KITTI with more
instance pixel-level annotation for 8 categories, which we
call KITTI INStance dataset (KINS). We propose the network structure to reason invisible parts via a new multi-task
framework with Multi-Level Coding (MLC), which combines information in various recognition levels. Extensive
experiments show that our MLC effectively improves both
amodal and inmodal segmentation. The KINS dataset and
our proposed method are made publicly available.

(a)

(b)

1. Introduction
Human has the natural ability to perceive objects’ complete physical structure even under partial occlusion [24,
21]. This ability, which is called amodal perception, allows
us to gather integral information from not only visible clues
but also imperceptible signals. Practically, amodal perception in computer vision offers great benefit in many scenarios. Typical examples include enabling autonomous cars to
infer the whole shape of vehicles and pedestrians within the
range of vision, even if part of them is invisible, largely reducing the risk of collision. It, thus, makes the moving decision in complex traffic or living environment easier. We
note most current autonomous cars and robots still do not
have this ability.
Challenges Although amodal perception is a common
human ability, most recent visual recognition tasks, including object detection [16, 17, 36, 20, 8, 28], edge detection
[1, 11, 38], semantic segmentation [32, 41, 39] and instance
segmentation [19, 31], only focus on the visible parts of
instances. There are only a limited number of amodal seg-

(c)
Figure 1. Images in the KINS dataset are densely annotated with
object segments and contain relative occlusion order. (a) A sample
image, (b) the amodal pixel-level annotation of instances, and (c)
relative occlusion order of instances. Darker color means farther
instances in the cluster.

mentation methods [26, 43, 14] due to the difficulty in both
data preparation and network design.
Despite the community’s great achievement in image
collection, existing large-scale datasets [10, 12, 6, 29, 23]
for visual understanding are annotated without indicating
occlusion regions, thus cannot be used for amodal perception. ImageNet [10] and OpenImages [23] are mainly
used for classification and detection in image-or-box understanding. PASCAL VOC [12], COCO [29] and Cityscapes
[6] pay more attention to pixel-level segmentation, which
can be further classified into semantic segmentation and in-

3014

