Exploiting temporal context for 3D human pose estimation in the wild
Anurag Arnab1∗ †

Carl Doersch2∗

Andrew Zisserman1,2

aarnab@robots.ox.ac.uk

doersch@google.com

zisserman@google.com

1

University of Oxford

Abstract
We present a bundle-adjustment-based algorithm for recovering accurate 3D human pose and meshes from monocular videos. Unlike previous algorithms which operate on
single frames, we show that reconstructing a person over an
entire sequence gives extra constraints that can resolve ambiguities. This is because videos often give multiple views
of a person, yet the overall body shape does not change and
3D positions vary slowly. Our method improves not only on
standard mocap-based datasets like Human 3.6M – where
we show quantitative improvements – but also on challenging in-the-wild datasets such as Kinetics. Building upon our
algorithm, we present a new dataset of more than 3 million
frames of YouTube videos from Kinetics with automatically
generated 3D poses and meshes. We show that retraining a
single-frame 3D pose estimator on this data improves accuracy on both real-world and mocap data by evaluating on
the 3DPW and HumanEVA datasets.

1. Introduction
Understanding the 3D configuration of the human body
has numerous real-life applications in robotics, augmented
and virtual reality, and animation, among other fields. However, it is an inherently under-constrained problem when
only a single image is available, as there are many 3D poses
which project to the same 2D image. Data-driven methods to resolve this ambiguity are promising, but they are
typically trained and evaluated on motion capture datasets
recorded in constrained and unrealistic environments [17,
43, 29, 19].
To resolve some of the ambiguities in monocular 3D
pose estimation, we exploit temporal consistency across
frames of a video. The temporal dimension of ordinary
videos encodes valuable information: multiple views of
people are observed, where the body shape and bone lengths
remain constant throughout a video, and joint positions in
∗ Equal contribution.
† Work done during an internship at DeepMind

2

DeepMind

both 2D and 3D change slowly over time. These priors constrain the space of possible poses and thus help reduce the
ambiguity of this ill-posed problem as shown in Fig. 1. Despite its value, the temporal information in mocap datasets
is discarded by all current leading 3D pose estimation algorithms [20, 36, 45, 28] which use only single, ambiguous frames. Our approach incorporates temporal information through a form of bundle adjustment, a method used in
multi-view geometry for estimating cameras and 3D structure of rigid scenes from image correspondences [13, 48].
We repurpose bundle adjustment to deal with non-rigid (articulated) human motion in a video sequence. In contrast to
previous recurrent models for human pose [15], our method
can jointly reason about all frames in the video, and errors
made in initial frames do not accumulate over time. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the current state-of-art single frame estimation network for the SMPL model [20] fails on a number
of frames of “in the wild” videos, such as when there is occlusion, unusual poses, poor lighting or motion blur. Our
bundle adjustment method is able to correct these estimates
and infer 3D human pose for these frames.
To address the lack of real-world data in 3D pose estimation, we apply our bundle adjustment framework to “in
the wild” clips from the Kinetics dataset [22] comprised of
YouTube videos, and show how we can leverage our predictions on real-world videos as a source of weak supervision
to improve existing 3D pose estimation models. By encouraging temporal consistency with bundle adjustment and using YouTube videos as a source of weakly supervised data,
we make the following novel contributions:
First, we show that multi-frame bundle adjustment can
be specialized to human pose estimation, which improves
performance on the Human 3.6M dataset over single frame
estimation. Our method achieves the state-of-the-art for
SMPL [26] models on this dataset.
We then apply our bundle adjustment method to 107 000
YouTube videos from the Kinetics dataset [22] and generate a large-scale dataset of 3D human poses aligned with the
video frames. This dataset contains great diversity in pose,
with 400 different human actions, and will be publicly released as a training resource via the DeepMind website. As
13395

