Disentangling Latent Space for VAE by Label Relevant/Irrelevant Dimensions
Zhilin Zheng Li Sun
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing, East China Normal University
51171214020@stu.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
VAE requires the standard Gaussian distribution as a
prior in the latent space. Since all codes tend to follow
the same prior, it often suffers the so-called ”posterior collapse”. To avoid this, this paper introduces the class specific distribution for the latent code. But different from
cVAE, we present a method for disentangling the latent
space into the label relevant and irrelevant dimensions, zs
and zu , for a single input. We apply two separated encoders to map the input into zs and zu respectively, and
then give the concatenated code to the decoder to reconstruct the input. The label irrelevant code zu represent the
common characteristics of all inputs, hence they are constrained by the standard Gaussian, and their encoder is
trained in amortized variational inference way, like VAE.
While zs is assumed to follow the Gaussian mixture distribution in which each component corresponds to a particular
class. The parameters for the Gaussian components in zs
encoder are optimized by the label supervision in a global
stochastic way. In theory, we show that our method is actually equivalent to adding a KL divergence term on the joint
distribution of zs and the class label c, and it can directly
increase the mutual information between zs and the label
c. Our model can also be extended to GAN by adding a
discriminator in the pixel domain so that it produces high
quality and diverse images.

1. Introduction
Learning a deep generative model for the structured image data is difficult because this task is not simply modeling
a many-to-one mapping function such as the classification,
instead it is often required to generate diverse outputs for
similar codes sampled from a simple distribution. Furthermore, image x in the high dimension space often lies in a
complex manifold, thus the generative model should capture the underlying data distribution p(x).
Basically, Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) [33, 19] and
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [12, 24] are two
strategies for structured data generation. In VAE, the en-

sunli@ee.ecnu.edu.cn

coder qφ (z|x) maps data x into the code z in latent space.
The decoder, represented by pθ (x|z), is given a latent code
z sampled from a distribution specified by the encoder and
tries to reconstruct x. The encoder and decoder in VAE
are trained together mainly based on the data reconstruction loss. At the same time, it requires to regularize the
distribution qφ (z|x) to be simple (e.g. Gaussian) based on
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between q(z|x) and
p(z) = N (0, I), so that the sampling in latent space is easy.
Optimization for VAE is quite stable, but results from it are
blurry. Mainly because the posterior defined by qφ (z|x)
is not complex enough to capture the true posterior, also
known for ”posterior collapse”. On the other hand, GAN
treats the data generation task as a min/max game between
a generator G(z) and discriminator D(x). The adversarial
loss computed from the discriminator makes generated image more realistic, but its training becomes more unstable.
In [9, 21, 27], VAE and GAN are integrated together so that
they can benefit each other.
Both VAE and GAN work in an unsupervised way without giving any condition of the label on the generated image. Instead, conditional VAE (cVAE) [36, 3] extends it by
showing the label c for both encoder and decoder. It learns
data distribution conditioned on the given label. Hence,
the encoder and decoder become qφ (z|x, c) and pθ (x|z, c).
Similarly, in conditional GAN (cGAN) [8, 17, 32, 29] label c is given to both generator G(z, c) and discriminator
D(x, c). Theoretically, feeding label c to either the encoder
in VAE or decoder in VAE or GAN helps increasing the
mutual information between the generated x and the label
c. Thus, it can improve the quality of generated image.
This paper deals with image generation problem in VAE
with two separate encoders. For a single input x, our goal
is to disentangle the latent space code z, computed by encoders, into the label relevant dimensions zs and irrelevant
ones zu . We emphasize the difference between zs and zu ,
and their corresponding encoders. For zs , since label c is
known during training, it should be more accurate and specific. While without any label constraint, zu should be general. Specifically, the two encoders are constrained with different priors on their posterior distributions qφs (zs |x) and

12192

