DARNet: Deep Active Ray Network for Building Segmentation
Dominic Cheng1, 2
Renjie Liao1, 2, 3
Sanja Fidler1, 2, 4
Raquel Urtasun1, 2, 3
University of Toronto1 Vector Institute2 Uber ATG Toronto3 NVIDIA4
{dominic, rjliao, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

urtasun@uber.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Deep Active Ray Network
(DARNet) for automatic building segmentation. Taking an
image as input, it first exploits a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) as the backbone to predict energy maps,
which are further utilized to construct an energy function.
A polygon-based contour is then evolved via minimizing the
energy function, of which the minimum defines the final segmentation. Instead of parameterizing the contour using Euclidean coordinates, we adopt polar coordinates, i.e., rays,
which not only prevents self-intersection but also simplifies
the design of the energy function. Moreover, we propose a
loss function that directly encourages the contours to match
building boundaries. Our DARNet is trained end-to-end by
back-propagating through the energy minimization and the
backbone CNN, which makes the CNN adapt to the dynamics of the contour evolution. Experiments on three building instance segmentation datasets demonstrate our DARNet achieves either state-of-the-art or comparable performances to other competitors.

1. Introduction
The ability to automatically extract building footprints
from aerial imagery is an important task in remote sensing.
It has many applications such as cartography, urban planning, and humanitarian aid. While maps in well-established
urban areas provide precise definitions of building outlines,
in more general situations, this information may be neither
up-to-date nor available altogether. Such is the case in remote population centers and in dynamic scenarios caused
by rapid urban development or natural disasters. These situations motivate the use of automatic building segmentation
to form an understanding of an area.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have rapidly established themselves as the de facto standard for tasks of
semantic and instance segmentation, as demonstrated by
their impressive performance across a variety of datasets
[25, 7, 13]. When applied to the task of building segmentation, however, there exists room for improvement. Specifi-

Figure 1: We introduce our DARNet framework, which approaches the problem of instance segmentation by defining
a contour using active rays that evolve according to energies
parameterized by a CNN. Given an input image, a CNN outputs three maps that define energies. An initialized contour
then moves to minimize the energy, yielding an instance
segmentation.
cally, as demonstrated in [22], while CNNs are able to generate dense, pixel-based predictions with high recall, they
have issues with precise delineation of building boundaries.
Arguably, these boundaries are the most useful features
in defining the shape and location of a building. Motivated
by this, Marcos et al. proposed the deep structured active
contours (DSAC) [15] model, which combines the power
of deep CNNs with the classic polygon-based active contour model of Kass et al. [11]. This fits in particularly well
with our prior understanding of buildings, which are generally laid out as relatively simple polygons. DSAC uses
a deep CNN to predict an energy landscape on which the
active contour, also known as a snake, crawls. When the
energy reaches the minimum, the snake stops and the enclosed region is the final predicted segmentation.
Although DSAC’s contours exhibit improved coverage
compared to CNN based segmentation, they can still be
blob-like without strict adherence to building boundaries.
Additionally, the representation of contour points with two
degrees of freedom presents some challenges. Most notably, it results in extra computational overhead to minimize the proposed energy, and also allows for some contours to exhibit self-intersections. To address these limita-

7431

