“Double-DIP” :
Unsupervised Image Decomposition via Coupled Deep-Image-Priors
Yossi Gandelsman
Assaf Shocher
Michal Irani
Dept. of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics
The Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel
Project Website: www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/∼vision/DoubleDIP/

Figure 1: A unified framework for image decomposition. An image can be viewed as a mixture of “simpler” layers.
Decomposing an image into such layers provides a unified framework for many seemingly unrelated vision tasks (e.g.,
segmentation, dehazing, transparency separation). Such a decomposition can be achieved using “Double-DIP”.

Abstract
Many seemingly unrelated computer vision tasks can be
viewed as a special case of image decomposition into separate layers. For example, image segmentation (separation
into foreground and background layers); transparent layer
separation (into reflection and transmission layers); Image
dehazing (separation into a clear image and a haze map),
and more. In this paper we propose a unified framework
for unsupervised layer decomposition of a single image,
based on coupled “Deep-image-Prior” (DIP) networks. It
was shown [38] that the structure of a single DIP generator network is sufficient to capture the low-level statistics
of a single image. We show that coupling multiple such
DIPs provides a powerful tool for decomposing images into

their basic components, for a wide variety of applications.
This capability stems from the fact that the internal statistics of a mixture of layers is more complex than the statistics
of each of its individual components. We show the power
of this approach for Image-Dehazing, Fg/Bg Segmentation,
Watermark-Removal, Transparency Separation in images
and video, and more. These capabilities are achieved in
a totally unsupervised way, with no training examples other
than the input image/video itself. 1

1. Introduction
Various computer vision tasks aim to decompose an image into its individual components. In image/video segmen1 Project funded by the European Research Council (ERC) under the
Horizon 2020 research & innovation programme (grant No. 788535)

111026

