ZigZagNet: Fusing Top-Down and Bottom-Up Context for Object Segmentation
Di Lin1

Dingguo Shen1
Siting Shen1
Yuanfeng Ji1
Dani Lischinski2
Daniel Cohen-Or1
Hui Huang1∗
2
1
Shenzhen University
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

Abstract
Multi-scale context information has proven to be essential for object segmentation tasks. Recent works construct
the multi-scale context by aggregating convolutional feature
maps extracted by different levels of a deep neural network.
This is typically done by propagating and fusing features in
a one-directional, top-down and bottom-up, manner. In this
work, we introduce ZigZagNet, which aggregates a richer
multi-context feature map by using not only dense top-down
and bottom-up propagation, but also by introducing pathways crossing between different levels of the top-down and
the bottom-up hierarchies, in a zig-zag fashion. Furthermore, the context information is exchanged and aggregated
over multiple stages, where the fused feature maps from
one stage are fed into the next one, yielding a more comprehensive context for improved segmentation performance.
Our extensive evaluation on the public benchmarks demonstrates that ZigZagNet surpasses the state-of-the-art accuracy for both semantic segmentation and instance segmentation tasks.

1. Introduction
Object segmentation is a long standing challenging problem in computer vision. It encompasses a variety of tasks
including semantic and instance segmentation. Recent advanced segmentation methods have significantly improved
the accuracy of object segmentation, leveraging the power
of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to learn
from large-scale datasets.
One of the difficulties in localizing instances of objects
stems from the fact that objects in natural images may appear at a diversity of scales. Since CNNs [18, 38, 16, 40, 6]
consist of convolutional feature maps at various spatial resolutions, recent object segmentation methods [25, 2, 10] have
used convolutional feature maps from different CNN levels
to represent content at different scales.
Different convolutional feature maps have correlated in∗ Hui Huang is the corresponding author of this paper.

formation, forming a multi-scale context for object segmentation. Thus, most recent approaches further utilize topdown networks [35, 37, 21, 19, 31, 32, 22, 33, 30, 5] (see
Figure 1(a)), dense top-down networks [1, 42] (see Figure 1(b)) and successive top-down/bottom-up networks [29,
20, 24] (see Figure 1(c)) to communicate between different
levels. The motivation underlying such top-down/bottomup networks is to propagate multi-scale context across different scales, thereby augmenting the feature maps at different levels. State-of-the art methods [29, 22, 30, 24, 42],
however, propagate context information only along a single
direction.
In this paper, we advocate the idea of exchanging and
combining top-down and bottom-up context to enrich the
context information encoded by each feature map. In this
scheme, the top-down network propagates high-level large
scale semantic information down to shallow network layers, while the bottom-up network encodes the smaller scale
visual details into deeper network layers. Unlike onedirectional network architectures [29, 25, 2, 10, 37, 22, 33,
30, 24, 1, 42], our approach iteratively fuses feature maps
between the top-down and bottom-up networks, gradually
refining the aggregated multi-scale context information.
More specifically, we introduce ZigZagNet, a new
scheme for fusing multi-scale context information, illustrated in Figure 1(d). The backbone network (left) extracts a
progression of convolutional feature maps for the top-down
network (middle), where each pair of feature maps is connected with a top-down pathway. Here, each feature map
is sensitive to the context information of all higher-level
feature maps. The top-down network produces a new set
of feature maps, which are fed into the bottom-up network
(right). Similarly to the top-down pathways, the bottomup pathways enhance each feature map with all lower-level
feature maps. The feature maps produced by the top-down
and bottom-up networks are exchanged in a zig-zag fashion, and fused to aggregate the context information from all
levels. The resulting feature maps are then used by a new
round of top-down and bottom-up context propagation. Finally, the fused feature maps at the last stage are used for
the segmentation task.
17490

