ClusterNet: Deep Hierarchical Cluster Network with Rigorously
Rotation-Invariant Representation for Point Cloud Analysis
Chao Chen1
1

Guanbin Li1∗

Ruijia Xu1

Tianshui Chen1,2

Meng Wang3

Liang Lin1,2

3
DarkMatter AI Research
Hefei University of Technology
chench227@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, xurj3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
tianshuichen@gmail.com, wangmeng@hfut.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

Sun Yat-sen University

2

Abstract
Current neural networks for 3D object recognition are
vulnerable to 3D rotation. Existing works mostly rely on
massive amounts of rotation-augmented data to alleviate
the problem, which lacks solid guarantee of the 3D rotation
invariance. In this paper, we address the issue by introducing a novel point cloud representation that can be mathematically proved rigorously rotation-invariant, i.e., identical point clouds in different orientations are unified as a
unique and consistent representation. Moreover, the proposed representation is conditional information-lossless,
because it retains all necessary information of point cloud
except for orientation information. In addition, the proposed representation is complementary with existing network architectures for point cloud and fundamentally improves their robustness against rotation transformation. Finally, we propose a deep hierarchical cluster network called
ClusterNet to better adapt to the proposed representation.
We employ hierarchical clustering to explore and exploit
the geometric structure of point cloud, which is embedded in a hierarchical structure tree. Extensive experimental results have shown that our proposed method greatly
outperforms the state-of-the-arts in rotation robustness on
rotation-augmented 3D object classification benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Rotation transformation is natural and common in 3D
world, however, it gives rise to an intractable challenge for
3D recognization. Theoretically, since SO(3)1 is an infinite
∗ Corresponding author is Guanbin Li. This work was supported in part
by the State Key Development Program under Grant 2016YFB1001004,
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
No.61602533 and No.61702565, in part by the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities under Grant No.18lgpy63. This work
was also sponsored by SenseTime Research Fund.
1 3D rotation group, denoted as SO(3), contains all rotation transformations in R3 under the operation of composition.

group, a 3D object possesses rotated clones in infinite attitudes, thus a machine learning model is obliged to extract
features from an extremely huge input space. For example, in 3D object classification task, the category label of
an object is invariant against arbitrary rotation transformation in majority situations. However, from the perspective
of a classification model, an object and its rotated clone are
distinct in input metric space, hence the model, such as neural network based methods, should have enough capacity to
learn rotation invariance from data and then approximate a
complex function that maps identical objects in infinite attitudes to similar features in feature metric space.
To alleviate the curse of rotation, a straightforward
method is to design a model with high capacity, such as a
deep neural network with considerable layers, and feed the
model with great amounts of rotation-augmented data [1]
based on a well-designed augmentation pipeline. Although
data augmentation is effective to some extent, it is computationally expensive in training phase and lacks solid guarantee of rotation robustness. [11, 18] apply spatial transformer
network [5] to canonicalize the input data before feature extraction, which improves the rotation-robustness of model
but still inherits all the defects of the data augmentation.
[16] proposes a rotation-equivariant network for 3D point
clouds using a special convolutional operation with local
rotation invariance as a basic block. The method attempts
to equip the neural network with rotation-symmetry. However, it is hard to guarantee the capacity of such network to
satisfy all rotation-equivariant constraints in each layer.
We address the issue by introducing a novel Rigorous
Rotation-Invariant (RRI) representation of point cloud.
Identical objects in different orientations are unified as a
consistent representation, which implies that the input space
is heavily reduced and the 3D recognization tasks become
much easier. It can be mathematically proved that the proposed representation is rigorously rotation-invariant, and
information-lossless under a mild condition. Given any
data point in point cloud and a non-collinear neighbor ar-

4994

