Spherical Fractal Convolutional Neural Networks for Point Cloud Recognition
Yongming Rao, Jiwen Lu, Jie Zhou
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
raoyongming95@gmail.com; {lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a generic, flexible and 3D rotation invariant framework based on spherical symmetry for point cloud
recognition. By introducing regular icosahedral lattice and
its fractals to approximate and discretize sphere, convolution can be easily implemented to process 3D points.
Based on the fractal structure, a hierarchical feature learning framework together with an adaptive sphere projection
module is proposed to learn deep feature in an end-to-end
manner. Our framework not only inherits the strong representation power and generalization capability from convolutional neural networks for image recognition, but also extends CNN to learn robust feature resistant to rotations and
perturbations. The proposed model is effective yet robust.
Comprehensive experimental study demonstrates that our
approach can achieve competitive performance compared
to state-of-the-art techniques on both 3D object classiﬁcation and part segmentation tasks, meanwhile, outperform
other rotation invariant models on rotated 3D object classiﬁcation and retrieval tasks by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods for point cloud processing [16,
18, 22, 6] have attracted great attention recently. Compared
to 3D object reasoning techniques based on 3D voxels or
collections of images (i.e., views), directly processing 3D
points is more challenging. The intrinsic difﬁculty of point
cloud processing comes from its irregular format, which
makes capturing local structures of 3D objects costly. To
tackle this problem, previous works [18] utilize the set of
local points to approximate local structures by dynamically
querying the nearest points for each location, which introduces a considerable computation cost during both training
and inference, and requires carefully designed module to
handle the non-uniform density in different areas.
Point clouds are usually obtained using 3D scanners for
real-world applications such as autonomous driving and

Figure 1. Generalization ability to unseen rotations versus accuracy on ModelNet40. Although previous deep learning algorithms
for point cloud show state-of-the-art accuracy, they generalize
poorly to unseen orientations. Besides, all other methods suffer
a sharp accuracy drop in performance when arbitrary rotations are
presented. Our model achieves superior performance on both accuracy and generalization ability.

robotics, where the viewpoints, density and other attributes
of points may vary a lot in different scenarios. Therefore,
point cloud processing algorithms should be resistant to rotations, perturbations, density variability and other noise
coming from sensor and environment. Although several efforts have been devoted to learn robust feature from nonuniform density [18] and 3D rotations [6], the robustness
of point cloud processing algorithm is still far from perfect.
Existing algorithms usually fail to balance performance and
robustness, where models with strong representation capability [16, 18] cannot generalize well to unseen rotations
and rotation equivariant algorithms [6, 5] show relatively
inferior performance.
Deep convolutional neural networks [12, 20, 9] have
led to a series of breakthroughs for image recognition and
shown strong representation power and generalization ca-

452

