Visual Attention Consistency under Image Transforms
for Multi-Label Image Classification

†

Hao Guo‡ , Kang Zheng‡ , Xiaochuan Fan‡ , Hongkai Yu♯ , Song Wang†,‡,∗
Tianjin University, ‡ University of South Carolina, ♯ University of Texas - Rio Grande Valley

{hguo, zheng37}@emai1.sc.edu, efan3000@gmail.com, hongkai.yu@utrgv.edu, songwang@cec.sc.edu

original

1. Introduction
As an important computer vision task, multi-label image
classification [51, 60] aims to tell whether an image contains certain attributes, objects, etc., each of which is denoted by a label. Typical applications of multi-label image
classification include human attribute recognition [1, 10, 18,
31, 34, 61], scene understanding [45], multi-object recognition [6], facial attribute recognition [19], etc. While recent
progress on deep neural networks has improved the performance of multi-label image classification significantly, it is
still a very challenging problem due to appearance complex∗ Corresponding author.

original

ipped

proposed

Human visual perception shows good consistency for
many multi-label image classification tasks under certain
spatial transforms, such as scaling, rotation, flipping and
translation. This has motivated the data augmentation
strategy widely used in CNN classifier training – transformed images are included for training by assuming the
same class labels as their original images. In this paper, we
further propose the assumption of perceptual consistency of
visual attention regions for classification under such transforms, i.e., the attention region for a classification follows
the same transform if the input image is spatially transformed. While the attention regions of CNN classifiers can
be derived as an attention heatmap in middle layers of the
network, we find that their consistency under many transforms are not preserved. To address this problem, we propose a two-branch network with an original image and its
transformed image as inputs and introduce a new attention
consistency loss that measures the attention heatmap consistency between two branches. This new loss is then combined with multi-label image classification loss for network
training. Experiments on three datasets verify the superiority of the proposed network by achieving new state-of-theart classification performance.

ipped

existing

Abstract

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. An illustration of attention heatmaps for classifying labels (a) “face mask” and (b) “jeans” from original and horizontally
flipped images, using an existing CNN (the middle row) and the
proposed method (the bottom row).

ities, intra-label variation, and unsatisfactory image qualities [17, 55, 3, 33, 65, 21, 32, 53, 67] .
Human visual perception is consistent for many multilabel image classification tasks under certain spatial transforms, such as scaling, rotation, flipping and translation.
For example, these transforms usually do not vary human
recognition of “sunglasses” in an image. This consistency
has motivated the data augmentation strategy [26], which
has been widely used in training CNN classifiers – for each
original image with ground-truth labels, we can transform
the image to construct a new training image by assigning the
same ground-truth labels. Data augmentation reduces overfitting problem of training CNN models for classification
tasks with perceptual consistency under spatial transforms.
The perceptual consistency assumed in data augmentation is a high-level representation, at the stage of final classification. Actually, image classification is usually only relevant to certain attention regions for both human vision (according to studies on human cognitive [39, 27] and neuroscience [11]) and CNN models [66]. In this paper, we further assume a new perceptual consistency of visual attention, a middle-level representation, under the above spatial
1729

