3D Guided Fine-Grained Face Manipulation
Zhenglin Geng1,2 , Chen Cao2 , and Sergey Tulyakov2
1
Stanford University, 2 Snap Inc.
zhenglin@stanford.edu,{chen.cao,stulyakov}@snapchat.com

Figure 1: Qualitative samples. Given an image, our method can generate multiple realistic expressions of the same subject.

Abstract

We present a method for fine-grained face manipulation. Given a face image with an arbitrary expression, our
method can synthesize another arbitrary expression by the
same person. This is achieved by first fitting a 3D face
model and then disentangling the face into a texture and a
shape. We then learn different networks in these two spaces.
In the texture space, we use a conditional generative network to change the appearance, and carefully design input
formats and loss functions to achieve the best results. In the
shape space, we use a fully connected network to predict the
accurate shapes and use the available depth data for supervision. Both networks are conditioned on expression coefficients rather than discrete labels, allowing us to generate
an unlimited amount of expressions. We show the superiority of this disentangling approach through both quantitative
and qualitative studies. In a user study, our method is preferred in 85% of cases when compared to the most recent
work. When compared to the ground truth, annotators cannot reliably distinguish between our synthesized images and
real images, preferring our method in 53% of the cases.

1. Introduction
Face manipulation, a problem involving changing the facial expressions in images enables many creative applications. Until very recently, this problem was mainly addressed from a graphical perspective in which a 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) was first fitted to the image and then
re-rendered with a different facial expression. Such techniques jointly model both the shape and the appearance and
are typically trained using spatially aligned 3D scans of people [1]. A desired facial expression can then be generated
by combining graphical primitives called blendshapes [16].
The blendshapes often correspond to the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [7] which defines a set of anatomically
related muscle activations. Unfortunately, due to the Gaussian assumption, 3DMMs often produce blurry shapes and
appearances, preventing realistic face rendering.
Deep generative techniques offer a different way of solving the face manipulation problem. In contrast to 3DMMs,
they learn an internal representation that jointly models the
shape and the appearance of the faces. Manipulation is then
performed by conditioning the decoder on expression labels

9821

