Re-Identification Supervised Texture Generation
Jian Wang1∗, Yunshan Zhong2∗ , Yachun Li3∗ , Chi Zhang4 , and Yichen Wei4
1

State Key Lab. of Computer Science, ISCAS & University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Peking University 3 Zhejiang University 4 Megvii Technology
wangj@ios.ac.cn, Zhongyunshan@pku.edu.cn, liyachun@zju.edu.cn
{zhangchi,weiyichen}@megvii.com

Abstract
The estimation of 3D human body pose and shape from
a single image has been extensively studied in recent years.
However, the texture generation problem has not been fully
discussed. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end learning strategy to generate textures of human bodies under the
supervision of person re-identification. We render the synthetic images with textures extracted from the inputs and
maximize the similarity between the rendered and input images by using the re-identification network as the perceptual metrics. Experiment results on pedestrian images show
that our model can generate the texture from a single image
and demonstrate that our textures are of higher quality than
those generated by other available methods. Furthermore,
we extend the application scope to other categories and explore the possible utilization of our generated textures.

1. Introduction
The automatic generation of realistic 3D human models
is crucial for many applications, including virtual reality,
animation, video editing and clothes try-on. Among the 3D
human reconstruction approaches, generating the 3D human model from a single image receives more and more
attention. A lot of methods have been proposed in both traditional [28, 20, 11] and deep learning manner [25, 40, 49].
Even though these methods succeed in estimating the pose
and shape of the human body accurately, the generation of
texture is omitted, which is the missing part in the reconstructing the realistic 3D human body.
Even though generating human body textures from a single image is of vital importance, there are only two methods
which aim at solving it. [39] first extract the partially observed textures from different images with DensePose [22]
∗ This work was done during Jian Wang, Yunshan Zhong and Yachun
Li were interns at Megvii Technology.

Figure 1: Texture generation results on Market-1501. This
figure shows the original images (1st column), rendered 3D
models in different view points (2nd-4th columns) and rendered 3D models in standing pose (5th - 7th columns). For
better visual results, these 3D models are rendered with
Blender [1].

and obtain the full textures by combining the partial ones.
Then [39] uses the full textures as ground truth and trains a
generative network to directly infer the corresponding texture from a single image. This process is computationally
expensive and requires high-quality image based dense human pose detection method for extracting the partially observed textures, which would be challenging for lots of inthe-wild images. [26] renders synthetic images with generated textures and minimize the distance between the rendered image and the input image. However, [26] uses an
ImageNet-pretrained perceptual loss as the distance metric,

11846

