Beyond Volumetric Albedo
— A Surface Optimization Framework for Non-Line-of-Sight Imaging
Chia-Yin Tsai, Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan, and Ioannis Gkioulekas
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract

visible surface

Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging is the problem of reconstructing properties of scenes occluded from a sensor,
using measurements of light that indirectly travels from the
occluded scene to the sensor through intermediate diffuse
reflections. We introduce an analysis-by-synthesis framework that can reconstruct complex shape and reflectance of
an NLOS object. Our framework deviates from prior work
on NLOS reconstruction, by directly optimizing for a surface representation of the NLOS object, in place of commonly employed volumetric representations. At the core
of our framework is a new rendering formulation that efficiently computes derivatives of radiometric measurements
with respect to NLOS geometry and reflectance, while accurately modeling the underlying light transport physics.
By coupling this with stochastic optimization and geometry processing techniques, we are able to reconstruct NLOS
surface at a level of detail significantly exceeding what is
possible with previous volumetric reconstruction methods.

NLOS
scene
occluder

source and
sensor

ground truth

1. Introduction
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging is an emerging technology that concerns with using higher-order light transport
in order to reconstruct properties of a scene that is outside
the direct line of sight of a sensor. A common setting is the
so-called “looking around the corner” problem [41, 77] (see
Figure 1), where information about an NLOS object (geometry, reflectance, motion, class label, and other properties) is extracted from measurements of photons that bounce
between a visible wall and the object. This technology
has seen rapid advances in the past decade, as several active [68, 56, 40, 74, 13, 73, 81, 36, 42, 63, 48, 61, 50, 80]
and passive [8, 66, 6, 10, 5] techniques have been introduced
that can operate under progressively more challenging conditions (ambient lighting, real-time capture, and so on).
We are focusing on the problem of shape reconstruction
in the looking-around-the-corner setting using active illumination. Typically, active techniques use a controllable

volumetric

proposed method

Figure 1. Looking around the corner: Non-line-of-sight (NLOS)
imaging is the problem of reconstructing parts of a scene occluded
from a sensor, by analyzing light that bounces multiple times between visible and occluded surfaces. We develop an inverse rendering pipeline that uses an accurate radiometric image formation
model to produce detailed NLOS surface reconstructions.

source, such as a laser beam, to indirectly inject light into
the NLOS scene, through a reflection on the visible wall.
Then, they use time-resolved, or transient, intensity measurements [33] to reconstruct the NLOS scene.
Most existing techniques perform 3D reconstruction using an image formation model introduced by Velten et
al. [77]. This model represents the NLOS scene as an
albedo volume, where each voxel is an isotropic reflector
with an associated albedo value. This representation allows
approximately formulating transient light transport in the
NLOS scene with only linear algebraic operations. In turn,
this allows recovering the unknown albedo volume from the
11545

