Residual Regression with Semantic Prior for Crowd Counting
Jia Wan1,2∗ Wenhan Luo2 Baoyuan Wu2 Antoni B. Chan1 Wei Liu2
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent AI Lab
{jiawan1998,whluo.china,wubaoyuan1987}@gmail.com abchan@cityu.edu.hk wl2223@columbia.edu

Support Image

Abstract
Crowd counting is a challenging task due to factors such
as large variations in crowdedness and severe occlusions.
Although recent deep learning based counting algorithms
have achieved a great progress, the correlation knowledge
among samples and the semantic prior have not yet been
fully exploited. In this paper, a residual regression framework is proposed for crowd counting harnessing the correlation information among samples. By incorporating such
information into our network, we discover that more intrinsic characteristics can be learned by the network which thus
generalizes better to unseen scenarios. Besides, we show
how to effectively leverage the semantic prior to improve
the performance of crowd counting. We also observe that
the adversarial loss can be used to improve the quality of
predicted density maps, thereby leading to an improvement
in crowd counting. Experiments on public datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization ability of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting plays a very important role in intelligent
monitoring systems aiming at automatically detecting the
crowd congestion. Technically, a solution to crowd counting takes input like an image or a video clip, and outputs a
predicted number indicating the crowdedness in the input.
This is very challenging because of issues like large variations of density, scale, perspective, and severe occlusion.
Traditional algorithms count crowd numbers by detection of people, which is extremely challenging under highly
congested scenes due to severe occlusions (see Fig. 1).
To avoid difficulties in explicitly detecting people, regression based approaches are proposed to directly estimate the
crowd number by density related features. However, the
performances of these algorithms are limited due to variations of density and scale. Recently, crowd counting algorithms have achieved great advances, especially those based
∗ This work was primarily done when Jia Wan was a research intern
with Tencent AI Lab.

Support Density Map

+
Input Image

Residual Map

Predicted Map

Figure 1. Residual regression attempts to predict the residual map
(the difference of density maps) between the input image and the
support image. By predicting various residual maps based on diverse support images, the generalization capability is boosted.

on deep learning by predicting a density map and aggregating to a final count. Some of them attempt to deal with scale
variations via different network structures with different receptive field sizes. Some of the methods utilize contextual
information to improve the performance.
Unfortunately, most of the algorithms concentrate solely
on the appearance of a single image but ignore the correlation information between image samples. Existing research
works for other problems have shown that more intrinsic
features can be learned by comparing samples to mine the
correlation knowledge [29, 31]. To this end, we propose a
residual regression framework, within which more effective
features can be obtained by learning the difference between
samples. The proposed algorithm can be considered as a
data-driven learning method with prior knowledge [32, 6].
To be specific, we propose a novel algorithm to predict the
density map by taking into account not only the appearance but also the residual maps (i.e., the difference between
density maps) between the input image and labeled images
from a support set (shown in Fig. 1). As the support images are with different levels of crowdedness, comparing
the concerned image with diverse support images will improve the generalization ability in the case of unseen scenarios. The final density map is estimated by fusing density
maps that are predicted using both appearance and residual
maps.

4036

