Few-Shot Learning with Localization in Realistic Settings
Davis Wertheimer
Cornell University

Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University

dww78@cornell.edu

bh497@cornell.edu

Abstract
Traditional recognition methods typically require large,
artificially-balanced training classes, while few-shot learning methods are tested on artificially small ones. In contrast to both extremes, real world recognition problems exhibit heavy-tailed class distributions, with cluttered scenes
and a mix of coarse and fine-grained class distinctions.
We show that prior methods designed for few-shot learning do not work out of the box in these challenging conditions, based on a new “meta-iNat” benchmark. We introduce three parameter-free improvements: (a) better training procedures based on adapting cross-validation to metalearning, (b) novel architectures that localize objects using
limited bounding box annotations before classification, and
(c) simple parameter-free expansions of the feature space
based on bilinear pooling. Together, these improvements
double the accuracy of state-of-the-art models on meta-iNat
while generalizing to prior benchmarks, complex neural architectures, and settings with substantial domain shift.

1. Introduction
Image recognition models have purportedly reached human performance on benchmarks such as ImageNet, but depend critically on large, balanced, labeled training sets with
hundreds of examples per class. This requirement is impractical in many realistic scenarios, where concepts may
be rare or have very few labeled training examples. Furthermore, acquiring more labeled examples might require
expert annotators and thus be too expensive. This problem
is exacerbated in applications (e.g., robotics) that require
learning new concepts on the fly in deployment, and cannot
wait for a costly offline data collection process.
These considerations have prompted research on the
problem of “few-shot” learning: recognizing concepts from
small labeled sets [14, 18, 37, 40, 43]. This past work builds
“learners” that can learn to distinguish between a small
number of unseen classes (often fewer than 20) based on
an extremely small number of training examples (e.g. 5 per
class). However, multiple challenges plague these methods

Figure 1. Discrepancies between existing benchmarks and real
world problems. Top: Traditional recognition benchmarks use
many, equally large classes, while few-shot benchmarks use few,
equally small classes. Natural problems tend to be heavy-tailed.
Bottom: Clockwise from top left: relevant objects may be overlapping, tiny, occluded, underemphasized (bird is on the feeder),
blurry, or simply hard to delineate [39].

when they are applied to real-world recognition problems.
First, few-shot methods typically assume balanced
datasets, and optimize the learner for an exact, often unrealistically small number of training examples per class. In
contrast, real-world problems may have highly imbalanced,
heavy-tailed class distributions, with orders of magnitude
more data in some classes than in others. A practical learner
must therefore work equally well for all classes irrespective
of the number of training examples. It is unclear how or
even if few-shot methods can handle such an imbalance.
Second, few-shot learning methods often assume the
number of relevant concepts to be small, and as such highly
distinct from each other. In contrast, real world applications

6558

