A-CNN: Annularly Convolutional Neural Networks on Point Clouds
Artem Komarichev
Zichun Zhong
Jing Hua
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University
{artem.komarichev,zichunzhong,jinghua}@wayne.edu

Output
Airplane?

1. Introduction
Nowadays, the ability to understand and analyze 3D
data is becoming increasingly important in computer vision
and computer graphics communities. During the past few
years, the researchers have applied deep learning methods
to analyze 3D objects inspired by the successes of these
techniques in 2D images and 1D texts. Traditional lowlevel handcrafted shape descriptors suffer from not being
able to learn the discriminative and sufficient features from
3D shapes [1]. Recently, deep learning techniques have
been applied to extract hierarchical and effective information from 3D shape features captured by low-level descriptors [20, 6]. 3D deep learning methods are widely used in
shape classification, segmentation, and recognition, etc. But
all these methods are still constrained by the representation
power of the shape descriptors.
One of the main challenges to directly apply deep learning methods to 3D data is that 3D objects can be represented
in different formats, i.e., regular / structured representation

Part
Segmentation

A-CNN

Semantic
Segmentation

Analyzing the geometric and semantic properties of 3D
point clouds through the deep networks is still challenging
due to the irregularity and sparsity of samplings of their geometric structures. This paper presents a new method to
define and compute convolution directly on 3D point clouds
by the proposed annular convolution. This new convolution operator can better capture the local neighborhood
geometry of each point by specifying the (regular and dilated) ring-shaped structures and directions in the computation. It can adapt to the geometric variability and scalability at the signal processing level. We apply it to the
developed hierarchical neural networks for object classification, part segmentation, and semantic segmentation in
large-scale scenes. The extensive experiments and comparisons demonstrate that our approach outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods on a variety of standard benchmark datasets (e.g., ModelNet10, ModelNet40, ShapeNetpart, S3DIS, and ScanNet).

Classiﬁcation

Input

Abstract

Figure 1: The proposed annularly convolutional neural networks
(A-CNN) model on point clouds to perform classification, part
segmentation, and semantic segmentation tasks.

(e.g., multi-view images and volumes), and irregular / unstructured representation (e.g., point clouds and meshes).
There are extensive approaches based on regular / structured
representation, such as multi-view convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [32, 26, 10] and 3D volumetric / grid CNN
methods and its variants [38, 26, 28, 35, 36, 16, 9]. These
methods can be conveniently developed and implemented
in 3D data structure, but they easily suffer from the heavy
computation and large memory expense. So it is better to
define the deep learning computations based on 3D shapes
directly, i.e., irregular / unstructured representation, such as
point cloud based methods [25, 27, 13, 30, 3, 18, 19, 33, 17,
42, 34, 8, 40]. However, defining the convolution on the irregular / unstructured representation of 3D objects is not an
easy task. Very few methods on point clouds have defined
an effective and efficient convolution on each point. Meanwhile, several approaches have been proposed to develop
convolutional networks on 2D manifolds [21, 4, 23, 39].
Their representations (e.g., 3D surface meshes) have point
positions as well as connectivities, which makes it relatively
easier to define the convolution operator on them.
In this work, we present a new method to define and
compute convolutions directly on 3D point clouds effectively and efficiently by the proposed annular convolutions. This new convolution operator can better capture local neighborhood geometry of each point by specifying the
(regular and dilated) ring-shaped structures and directions
in the computation. It can adapt to the geometric variabil17421

