Effective Aesthetics Prediction with Multi-level Spatially Pooled Features
Vlad Hosu

Bastian Goldlücke
University of Konstanz, Germany

Dietmar Saupe

{vlad.hosu, bastian.goldluecke, dietmar.saupe}@uni-konstanz.de

Abstract
We propose an effective deep learning approach to aesthetics quality assessment that relies on a new type of pretrained features, and apply it to the AVA data set, the currently largest aesthetics database. While all previous approaches miss some of the information in the original images, due to taking small crops, down-scaling or warping
the originals during training, we propose the first method
that efficiently supports full resolution images as an input,
and can be trained on variable input sizes. This allows
us to significantly improve upon the state of the art, increasing the Spearman rank-order correlation coefficient
(SRCC) of ground-truth mean opinion scores (MOS) from
the existing best reported of 0.612 to 0.756. To achieve
this performance, we extract multi-level spatially pooled
(MLSP) features from all convolutional blocks of a pretrained InceptionResNet-v2 network, and train a custom
shallow Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture
on these new features.

1. Introduction
Aesthetics quality assessment (AQA) is an interesting,
yet very difficult task to perform algorithmically. It involves
predicting subjective opinions, i.e., aesthetics ratings, or
distributions thereof. The complexity of the task is due to
the many influencing factors for human judgments. An image’s aesthetic quality, in addition to photography rules-ofthumb, is influenced by affective and personal preferences,
for example for different content types or style. Earlier studies [1, 7] have tried to encode photography rules as features
that were used for training AQA models. Later works use
different hand-crafted features [13, 23, 2] or more general
purpose ones [16, 19].
A limitation of these traditional machine learning approaches is the representational power of the extracted features, and they are now outperformed by deep learning,
which has been shown to be very suitable for AQA [12, 11,
15, 9, 14, 4, 22, 18, 6]. The de facto standard for training
and evaluation is the large-scale database for Aesthetic Vi-

sual Analysis (AVA) [17]. It consists of about 250 thousand
images, collected from a photography community1 , each
rated by an average of 210 users.
Unfortunately, approaches based on deep learning typically need to perform a combination of rescaling and/or
cropping to fit to the input shape of the chosen Deep Neural Network (DNN). The reason is that for efficient computation, GPUs need to process fixed sized blocks of data
at a time, such as batches of images at the same resolution. However, AVA contains thousands of unique resolutions. Even for DNN architectures which can accept
arbitrary input image resolutions, training would be extremely inefficient due to the small batch sizes required. Not
only would processing be much slower, but learning performance would also suffer for models that employ batch
normalization, such as Inception-v3. Moreover, the AVA
database contains high resolution images, with an average
width × height of 629 × 497 and maximum of 800 × 800
pixels. Training DNN models at this size is very resource
intensive, requiring images in the database to be resampled.
An obvious solution is to rescale all images to the DNN
input resolution when training, which either removes highfrequency information when down-scaling, or introduces
artificial blurs when up-scaling. Thus, this approach removes or masks some information that the models could
learn from, leading to a lower performance [15]. Even if
we proportionally down-scale large images to at least keep
their aspect ratio, some information is still lost, and it would
not alleviate the problem of different input resolution. Consequently, several existing works [4, 10] have already noted
the drawbacks of learning to predict the aesthetics scores
from images that are not of the same resolution as the original. Images that are downsized, stretched, or cropped do not
contain the same information as the higher resolution image
that was originally assessed by human observers. Thus, predictive performance is negatively affected.
On the other hand, previous works [24, 3] have shown
the effectiveness of multi-level pre-trained features (models
trained on ImageNet) to predict perceptual judgments, either for image similarity or image quality assessment (IQA).
1 dpchallenge.com

19375

