Deep ChArUco: Dark ChArUco Marker Pose Estimation

Danying Hu, Daniel DeTone, and Tomasz Malisiewicz
Magic Leap, Inc.
{dhu,ddetone,tmalisiewicz}@magicleap.com

Abstract
ChArUco boards are used for camera calibration,
monocular pose estimation, and pose verification in both
robotics and augmented reality. Such fiducials are detectable via traditional computer vision methods (as found
in OpenCV) in well-lit environments, but classical methods fail when the lighting is poor or when the image undergoes extreme motion blur. We present Deep ChArUco,
a real-time pose estimation system which combines two
custom deep networks, ChArUcoNet and RefineNet, with
the Perspective-n-Point (PnP) algorithm to estimate the
marker’s 6DoF pose. ChArUcoNet is a two-headed markerspecific convolutional neural network (CNN) which jointly
outputs ID-specific classifiers and 2D point locations. The
2D point locations are further refined into subpixel coordinates using RefineNet. Our networks are trained using
a combination of auto-labeled videos of the target marker,
synthetic subpixel corner data, and extreme data augmentation. We evaluate Deep ChArUco in challenging low-light,
high-motion, high-blur scenarios and demonstrate that our
approach is superior to a traditional OpenCV-based method
for ChArUco marker detection and pose estimation.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we refer to computer-vision-friendly 2D
patterns that are unique and have enough points for 6DoF
pose estimation as fiducials or markers. ArUco markers [1, 2] and their derivatives, namely ChArUco markers, are frequently used in augmented reality and robotics.
For example, Fiducial-based SLAM [3, 4] reconstructs the
world by first placing a small number of fixed and unique
patterns in the world. The pose of a calibrated camera can
be estimated once at least one such marker is detected. But
as we will see, traditional ChArUco marker detection systems are surprisingly frail. In the following pages, we motivate and explain our recipe for creating a state-of-the-art
Deep ChArUco marker detector based on deep neural networks.

Figure 1. Deep ChArUco is an end-to-end system for ChArUco
marker pose estimation from a single image. Deep ChArUco is
composed of ChArUcoNet for point detection (Section 3.1), RefineNet for subpixel refinement (Section 3.2), and the Perspectiven-Point (PnP) algorithm for pose estimation (Section 3.3). For this
difficult image, OpenCV does not detect enough points to determine a marker pose.

We focus on one of the most popular class of fiducials in
augmented reality, namely ChArUco markers. In this paper,
we highlight the scenarios under which traditional computer
vision techniques fail to detect such fiducials, and present
Deep ChArUco, a deep convolutional neural network system trained to be accurate and robust for ChArUco marker
detection and pose estimation (see Figure 1). The main contributions of this work are:
1. A state-of-the-art and real-time marker detector that
improves the robustness and accuracy of ChArUco pattern detection under extreme lighting and motion
2. Two novel neural network architectures for point ID
classification and subpixel refinement
3. A novel training dataset collection recipe involving
auto-labeling images and synthetic data generation
Overview: We discuss both traditional and deep
learning-based related work in Section 2. We present
ChArUcoNet, our two-headed custom point detection network, and RefineNet, our corner refinement network in
Section 3. Finally, we describe both training and testing
ChArUco datasets in Section 4, evaluation results in Section 5, and conclude with a discussion in Section 6.

8436

