Skin-based identification from multispectral image data using CNNs
Takeshi Uemori1
Atsushi Ito2
Yusuke Moriuchi2
Alexander Gatto1
Jun Murayama2
1
2
Sony Europe B.V., Stuttgart, Germany
Sony Corporation, Tokyo, Japan
{Takeshi.Uemori,Atsushi.C.Ito,Yusuke.Moriuchi,Alexander.Gatto,Jun.Murayama}@sony.com

Abstract
User identification from hand images only is still a challenging task. In this paper, we propose a new biometric
identification system based solely on a skin patch from a
multispectral image. The system is utilizing a novel modified 3D CNN architecture which is taking advantage of multispectral data. We demonstrate the application of our system for the example of human identification from multispectral images of hands. To the best of our knowledge, this
paper is the first to describe a pose-invariant and robust
to overlapping real-time human identification system using
hands. Additionally, we provide a framework to optimize
the required spectral bands for the given spatial resolution
limitations.

1. Introduction
Personal identification using unique physiological features such as a face, an iris, fingerprints or vein, is required in a wide variety of systems and applications. Especially in the past couple of years, there has been significant increase of practical logon applications for different types of devices such as cellular phones [3, 28], laptops [24], and video game consoles [33]. In the case of
tabletop devices, which fall into the category of a so-called
tangible user interface [18, 34], identifying a user from his
hands only is desired for individual access controls and natural user interfaces. The system is required to work without any constraints on hand pose, in contrast to fingerprint
or vein which usually forces users to pause at the ideal
pose. In recent years, thanks to progress in deep learning,
there has been outstanding progress in a variety of computer vision tasks. The standard way to perform imagebased recognition is to use geometric information. While
this approach is suitable for relatively rigid objects such
as faces, hand recognition often requires a particular hand
pose [29, 5, 43, 30, 13]. Our method is pose-invariant and
can deal with occlusions.
Recently, multispectral image acquisition systems which
capture data at several specific wavelength ranges (usually

more narrowly than RGB image acquisition systems) have
become easier available. Due to the complexity of traditional multispectral acquisition systems, proposed applications have been limited to very specific fields [16, 22].
However, various types of systems [7, 11] are being developed recently and spreading to wider commercial applications [27, 6] including biometrics [45, 1]. Especially the
advent of multispectral mosaic-array sensors [42, 21, 15]
enables the acquisition of video as a sequence of singlesnapshots. However, the disadvantage of these sensors is
the trade-off between spatial resolution and the number of
spectral bands, which means the spatial resolution is sacrificed if the number of spectral bands is increased or vice
versa.
Several skin spectra models have been proposed in early
works [2, 40]. According to their optical considerations,
perceived color is mainly composed of dermis scattering,
melanin and vascular absorption which are different among
individuals due to the differences of skin chromophore concentrations [35, 40]. Our approach has been motivated by
knowledge from these studies.
In this paper, we propose a framework of hand identification using spatial and spectral distributions of skin, without using any geometric information, as shown in Figure 1.
From a small patch (i.e. 16x16 pixels) of a hand, our CNN
model can distinguish among registered users, without using any additional information about a hand’s shape. One
advantage of our patch-based identification is that it works
even when a hand of a user to be identified is overlapped
by a hand of a different user, or a part of a hand is out of
the view. Additionally, our model can distinguish between
the left and right hand of a person because our CNN model
learns different spectral and spatial features of skin for each
hand. Finally our approach works in a frame-by-frame fashion, making real time processing more feasible. We demonstrate this user identification framework in the scenario of a
tabletop projection system as shown in Figure 2. A multispectral camera, including a projection system, is mounted
over the tabletop and acquires images of hands which are
moving without any constraints on the table. These capabilities may provide a novel natural user interaction for many

12349

