COIN: A Large-scale Dataset for Comprehensive Instructional Video Analysis
Yansong Tang1
Dajun Ding2
Yongming Rao1
Yu Zheng1
Danyang Zhang1
Lili Zhao2
Jiwen Lu1∗
Jie Zhou1
2
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
Meitu Inc.
https://coin-dataset.github.io/

Abstract
There are substantial instructional videos on the Internet, which enables us to acquire knowledge for completing
various tasks. However, most existing datasets for instructional video analysis have the limitations in diversity and
scale, which makes them far from many real-world applications where more diverse activities occur. Moreover, it still
remains a great challenge to organize and harness such data. To address these problems, we introduce a large-scale
dataset called “COIN” for COmprehensive INstructional
video analysis. Organized with a hierarchical structure, the
COIN dataset contains 11,827 videos of 180 tasks in 12 domains (e.g., vehicles, gadgets, etc.) related to our daily life.
With a new developed toolbox, all the videos are annotated
effectively with a series of step descriptions and the corresponding temporal boundaries. Furthermore, we propose a
simple yet effective method to capture the dependencies among different steps, which can be easily plugged into conventional proposal-based action detection methods for localizing important steps in instructional videos. In order
to provide a benchmark for instructional video analysis, we
evaluate plenty of approaches on the COIN dataset under
different evaluation criteria. We expect the introduction of
the COIN dataset will promote the future in-depth research
on instructional video analysis for the community.

1. Introduction
Instructional videos provide intuitive visual examples for
learners to acquire knowledge to accomplish different tasks.
With the explosion of video data on the Internet, people
around the world have uploaded and watched substantial
instructional videos [10, 36], covering miscellaneous categories. According to the scientists in educational psychology [34], novices often face difficulties in learning from the
whole realistic task, and it is necessary to divide the whole
task into smaller segments or steps as a form of simplifica∗ the corresponding author is Jiwen Lu.

tion. Actually, a variety of video analysis tasks in computer vision (e.g., action temporal localization [45, 50], video
summarization [19, 30, 49] and video caption [27, 47, 53],
etc) have been developed recently. Also, growing efforts
have been devoted to exploiting different challenges of instructional video analysis [10, 24, 36, 52].
In recent years, a number of datasets for instructional
video analysis [10, 14, 28, 35, 40, 41, 52] have been collected in the community. Annotated with texts and temporal
boundaries of a series of steps to complete different tasks,
these datasets have provided good benchmarks for preliminary research. However, most existing datasets focus on a
specific domain like cooking, which makes them far from
many real-world applications where more diverse activities
occur. Moreover, the scales of these datasets are insufficient
to satisfy the hunger of recent data-driven learning methods.
To tackle these problems, we introduce a new dataset
called “COIN” for COmprehensive INstructional video
analysis. The COIN dataset contains 11,827 videos of 180
different tasks, covering the daily activities related to vehicles, gadgets, etc. Unlike existing instructional video
datasets, COIN is organized in a three-level semantic structure. Take the top row of Figure 1 as an example, the first
level of this root-to-leaf branch is a domain named “vehicles", under which there are numbers of video samples belonging to the second level tasks. For a specific task like
“change the car tire", It is comprised of a series of steps such as “unscrew the screws", “jack up the car", “put on
the tire", etc. These steps appear in different interval of a
video, which belongs to the third-level tags of COIN. We
also provide the temporal boundaries of all the steps, which
are effectively annotated based on a new developed toolbox.
As another contribution, we propose a new taskconsistency method to localize different steps in instructional videos by considering their intrinsic dependencies. First,
as a bottom-up strategy, we infer the task label of the whole video according to the prediction scores, which can be
obtained by existing proposal-based action detection methods. Then, as a top-down scheme, we refine the proposal
scores based on the predicted task label. In order to set

1207

