Pushing the Envelope for RGB-based
Dense 3D Hand Pose Estimation via Neural Rendering
Seungryul Baek
Imperial College London

Kwang In Kim
UNIST

Tae-Kyun Kim
Imperial College London

s.baek15@imperial.ac.uk

kimki@unist.ac.kr

tk.kim@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Estimating 3D hand meshes from single RGB images is
challenging, due to intrinsic 2D-3D mapping ambiguities
and limited training data. We adopt a compact parametric
3D hand model that represents deformable and articulated
hand meshes. To achieve the model fitting to RGB images,
we investigate and contribute in three ways: 1) Neural
rendering: inspired by recent work on human body, our
hand mesh estimator (HME) is implemented by a neural
network and a differentiable renderer, supervised by 2D
segmentation masks and 3D skeletons. HME demonstrates
good performance for estimating diverse hand shapes
and improves pose estimation accuracies. 2) Iterative
testing refinement: Our fitting function is differentiable. We
iteratively refine the initial estimate using the gradients, in
the spirit of iterative model fitting methods like ICP. The
idea is supported by the latest research on human body.
3) Self-data augmentation: collecting sized RGB-mesh (or
segmentation mask)-skeleton triplets for training is a big
hurdle. Once the model is successfully fitted to input RGB
images, its meshes i.e. shapes and articulations, are realistic,
and we augment view-points on top of estimated dense hand
poses. Experiments using three RGB-based benchmarks
show that our framework offers beyond state-of-the-art
accuracy in 3D pose estimation, as well as recovers
dense 3D hand shapes. Each technical component above
meaningfully improves the accuracy in the ablation study.

1. Introduction
Recovering hand poses and shapes from images enables
many real-world applications, e.g. hand gesture as a primary
interface for AR/VR. The problem is challenging due to high
dimensionality of hand space, pose and shape variations,
self-occlusions, etc [52, 43, 58, 65, 10, 61, 40, 5, 12, 63, 47,
59, 37, 67, 54, 53, 9, 44, 31, 49, 32, 20, 27, 33, 7, 64]. Most
existing methods have focused on recovering sparse hand
poses i.e. skeletal articulations from either a depth or RGB
image. However, estimating dense hand poses including
3D shapes (Fig. 1) is important as it helps understand e.g.
human-object interactions [7, 6, 3, 1] and perform robotic

Figure 1: Dense hand pose estimation examples. Our system
estimates 3D shapes, as well as articulations and viewpoints.
Left to right: input images, coarse skeletal representations,
dense hand pose representations, and recovered hand shapes
in a canonical articulation/viewpoint. Dense pose estimation
provides a richer description of hands and improves the pose
estimation accuracy.

grasping, where surface contacts are essential.
Discriminative methods based on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have shown very promising performance in estimating 3D hand poses either from RGB
images [43, 68, 4, 14, 29, 46] or depth maps [65, 30, 50, 58,
30, 64, 28, 38, 64, 2]. However, the predictions are based on
coarse skeletal representations, and no explicit kinematics
and geometric mesh constraints are often considered. On the
other hand, establishing a personalized hand model requires
a generative approach that optimizes the hand model to fit
to 2D images [40, 33, 36, 51, 49, 48]. Optimization-based
methods, besides their complexity, are susceptible to local
minima and the personalized hand model calibration contradicts the generalization ability for hand shape variations.
Sinha et al. [45] learn to generate 3D hand meshes from
depth images. A direct mapping between a depth map and
its 3D surface is learned; however, the accuracy shown is
limited. Malik et al. [26] incorporate a 3D hand mesh model
to CNNs and learn a mapping between depth maps and
mesh model parameters. They further raycast 3D meshes
with various viewpoint, shape and articulation parameters
to generate a million-scale dataset for training CNNs. Our

1067

