It’s not about the Journey; It’s about the Destination:
Following Soft Paths under Question-Guidance for Visual Reasoning
Monica Haurilet
Alina Roitberg
Rainer Stiefelhagen
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
{haurilet, alina.roitberg, rainer.stiefelhagen}@kit.edu

Scene Graph
Destination

1. Introduction
Interpreting and answering subsequent questions about
the semantic relationships of the complex and noisy environment is a key trait of our cognition. Extraordinary
progress linked to the rise of deep learning in the core vision
tasks [36, 23, 9, 26] (e.g. object recognition) has created a
solid basis for the new research direction of higher level
visual reasoning. Going beyond the conventional recognition, Visual Reasoning [37, 48] decides about the necessary future actions [16], which is crucial for artificial intelligence applications. The compositional structure of our
world makes this task especially hard, as merely recognizing individual building blocks at a lower level is not enough.
Such models require precise relational reasoning about the
entities present in the scene and their interactions with each
other.
Visual Reasoning tasks are often posed in the form of
Visual Question Answering (VQA) [37, 48, 16], which lies
in the intersection of vision and language and attempts to

D

Visual
Guide

S

Rubber

Question
What is the
material of the
sphere that is
behind the tiny
brown thing to
the right of the
green object?

…

Visual Reasoning remains a challenging task, as it has
to deal with long-range and multi-step object relationships
in the scene. We present a new model for Visual Reasoning, aimed at capturing the interplay among individual objects in the image represented as a scene graph. As not
all graph components are relevant for the query, we introduce the concept of a question-based visual guide, which
constrains the potential solution space by learning an optimal traversal scheme. The final destination nodes alone are
then used to produce the answer. We show, that finding relevant semantic structures facilitates generalization to new
tasks by introducing a novel problem of knowledge transfer:
training on one question type and answering questions from
a different domain without any training data. Furthermore,
we achieve state-of-the-art results for Visual Reasoning on
multiple query types and diverse image and video datasets.

Metal

Traveler

Prediction
Module

Abstract

Answer

Figure 1: Visual reasoning example, where object interplay is crucial for the correct answer and an overview of
our graph neural network-based approach. The visual guide
learns to give question-dependent directions to follow on
the scene graph. The final answer is then produced solely
from the embeddings of the reached destination nodes.

answer a specific question about the scene. Complex semantic associations between both, language query and the
visual scene entities (Figure 1) are characteristic to this task.
Despite the exceedingly structured nature of the visual information needed to answer open-ended questions,
the majority of previous works focus on spatial feature
maps obtained from a pre-trained CNN and further combined with an attention mechanism on parts of the image [47, 50, 39]. While pre-trained CNNs offer excellent
object embeddings, they face problems in relational reasoning about their large-scale interactions. An excellent
way to model such multi-step associations in an image are
scene graphs [46], where the nodes represent the objectand the connecting edges specify their relationship embeddings. We notice that even though the relations between objects are indispensable for the complete scene understanding, only a portion of the graph is relevant for answering a
specific question. We therefore leverage the visual graph in
a selective way through a question-dependent visual guide.
We aim at unifying graph-based inference with questionspecific visual guidance, in order to identify paths with relevant information flow and present a new model for Visual

1930

