Depth-attentional Features for Single-image Rain Removal
Xiaowei Hu1 , Chi-Wing Fu1,∗ , Lei Zhu2,1,∗, and Pheng-Ann Heng1,2
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
𝑡r

Abstract
Rain is a common weather phenomenon, where object
visibility varies with depth from the camera and objects faraway are visually blocked more by fog than by rain streaks.
Existing methods and datasets for rain removal, however,
ignore these physical properties, thereby limiting the rain
removal efficiency on real photos. In this work, we first
analyze the visual effects of rain subject to scene depth
and formulate a rain imaging model collectively with rain
streaks and fog; by then, we prepare a new dataset called
RainCityscapes with rain streaks and fog on real outdoor
photos. Furthermore, we design an end-to-end deep neural
network, where we train it to learn depth-attentional features via a depth-guided attention mechanism, and regress a
residual map to produce the rain-free image output. We performed various experiments to visually and quantitatively
compare our method with several state-of-the-art methods
to demonstrate its superiority over the others.

1. Introduction
Rain is a common weather phenomenon, but its presence
could greatly affect the visibility of objects and scene in the
captured photos. Hence, it would interfere and degrade the
performance of many computer vision and image processing tasks, e.g., object detection [17] and tracking [40] for
surveillance [2], autonomous driving [20], and driver assistance [33]. To this end, rain removal has long been a fundamental problem in computer vision research.
Rain removal is, however, a very challenging task, since
we have to remove the rain, and at the same time, recover
the occluded objects and scene. In nature, the occlusion is
caused not only by the rain streaks but also by the fog that
comes with the rain. Moreover, the scene visibility spatially
varies in the image space, since objects closer to the camera are affected mainly by the rain streaks, while objects far
away are affected more heavily by the fog; see Figure 1(a)

𝑡𝑟0

(a) input real photo

fog-like

𝑑1

𝑑2

depth

(b) rain visibility & depth

Figure 1: (a) An example real photo that demonstrates the
scene visibility variation with depth, and the presence of
rain streaks and fog; and (b) a plot of rain streak intensity
(tr ) against scene depth (d) based on the model in [13].
for a real photo example. This phenomenon is also depicted
in a model by Garg and Nayar [13] (see Figure 1(b)), which
describes the intensity of rain streaks and their transformation into the fog as a function of the scene depth.
In the literature on single-image rain removal, existing
methods focused on removing the rain streaks by adopting
various image priors [5, 19, 22, 23, 31, 32, 41, 52], or by
exploiting a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) to
learn a mapping between the training images with and without rain streaks [8, 9, 28, 30, 47, 51, 50]. While the stateof-the-art methods can already produce satisfactory results
on various synthetic datasets [47, 51, 50], they focus mainly
on removing rain streaks and ignore the physical properties
of rain; hence, they mostly fail to remove rain and fog altogether. Moreover, existing datasets for rain removal contain
only rain streaks, while some of the images are indoor rather
than outdoor, thereby also limiting the development of rain
removal methods for real photos; see Figure 2.
In this paper, we first analyze the physical properties of
rain and formulate a rain imaging process with rain streaks
and fog. By then, we prepare a new dataset for rain removal with scene depth information, and further design a
new neural network for single-image rain removal by learning depth-attentional features in a depth-guided manner. In
summary, this work has the following contributions:
• First, we design an end-to-end neural network, where
we formulate a depth-guided attention mechanism to

∗ Co-corresponding authors

8022

