HPLFlowNet: Hierarchical Permutohedral Lattice FlowNet for
Scene Flow Estimation on Large-scale Point Clouds
Xiuye Gu1,3 , Yijie Wang2 , Chongruo Wu3 , Yong Jae Lee3 , and Panqu Wang2
1

Stanford University, 2 TuSimple, 3 University of California, Davis

We present a novel deep neural network architecture for
end-to-end scene flow estimation that directly operates on
large-scale 3D point clouds. Inspired by Bilateral Convolutional Layers (BCL), we propose novel DownBCL, UpBCL, and CorrBCL operations that restore structural information from unstructured point clouds, and fuse information from two consecutive point clouds. Operating on
discrete and sparse permutohedral lattice points, our architectural design is parsimonious in computational cost. Our
model can efficiently process a pair of point cloud frames
at once with a maximum of 86K points per frame. Our
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on the FlyingThings3D and KITTI Scene Flow 2015 datasets. Moreover, trained on synthetic data, our approach shows great
generalization ability on real-world data and on different
point densities without fine-tuning.

PC1

HPLFlowNet

Abstract

PC2

Scene Flow
1. Introduction
Scene flow is the dense 3D motion field of points. It is
the 3D counterpart of optical flow, and is a more fundamental and unambiguous representation – optical flow is simply the projection of scene flow onto the image plane of a
camera [42]. Scene flow can be useful in various fields, including robotics, autonomous driving, human-computer interaction, and can also be used to complement and improve
visual odometry and SLAM algorithms [15, 30].
Estimating scene flow in 3D space directly with point
cloud inputs is appealing, as approaches that use stereo inputs require 3D motion reconstruction from optical flow and
disparities, and thus the optimization is indirect. In this
work, we focus on efficient large-scale scene flow estimation directly on 3D point clouds.
The problem statement for scene flow estimation is as
follows: The inputs are two point clouds (PC) at two consecutive frames: P C1 at time t and P C2 at time t +
1. Generally, each point has an associated feature fi =
(xi , yi , zi , . . .) ∈ Rdf , where (xi , yi , zi ) are the 3D coor-

Figure 1: Our end-to-end trainable HPLFlowNet takes two successive
frames of point cloud (PC) as input, and outputs dense estimation of the
3D motion field for every point in the first PC frame. The color for scene
flow encodes magnitude/velocity from blue to red (small to large).

dinates for each point. Other low-level features, such as
color and normal vectors, can also be included.1 The output is the predicted scene flow for each point i in P C1 :
c = (dxi , dyi , dzi ). We use the world coordinate system
sf
i
as the reference system; the goal is to estimate the scene
flow of both ego-motion and motion of dynamic objects;
see Fig. 1.
Many existing deep learning approaches for 3D point
cloud processing [33, 35, 24, 46] focus on accuracy but put
less emphasis on minimizing computational cost. Consequently, these networks can only deal with a limited number of points at once due to limited GPU memory, which
is unfavorable for large-scale scene analysis. The reason
is twofold: 1) these methods frequently resort to dividing
1 In our experiments, we only use point coordinates to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach with the bare minimum geometry information.

3254

