FickleNet: Weakly and Semi-supervised Semantic Image Segmentation
using Stochastic Inference
Jungbeom Lee
Eunji Kim
Sungmin Lee
Jangho Lee
Sungroh Yoon†
Electrical and Computer Engineering, ASRI, INMC, and Institute of Engineering Research
Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, South Korea
sryoon@snu.ac.kr

Input image

Abstract

Convolution layers
왜 사냐건 웃지요. 나를

Stochastic feature selection
X

X X X
X X

The main obstacle to weakly supervised semantic image
segmentation is the difficulty of obtaining pixel-level information from coarse image-level annotations. Most methods
based on image-level annotations use localization maps obtained from the classifier, but these only focus on the small
discriminative parts of objects and do not capture precise
boundaries. FickleNet explores diverse combinations of locations on feature maps created by generic deep neural networks. It selects hidden units randomly and then uses them
to obtain activation scores for image classification. FickleNet implicitly learns the coherence of each location in the
feature maps, resulting in a localization map which identifies both discriminative and other parts of objects. The ensemble effects are obtained from a single network by selecting random hidden unit pairs, which means that a variety of
localization maps are generated from a single image. Our
approach does not require any additional training steps and
only adds a simple layer to a standard convolutional neural network; nevertheless it outperforms recent comparable techniques on the Pascal VOC 2012 benchmark in both
weakly and semi-supervised settings.

X X

X

aeroplane

X X

X

X X

X

X X

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) FickleNet allows a single network to generate multiple localization maps from a single image. (b) Conceptual description of hidden unit selection. Selecting all hidden units (deterministic, left) produces smoothing effects as background and
foreground are activated together. Randomly selected hidden units
(stochastic, center and right) can provide more flexible combinations which can correspond more clearly to parts of objects.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is one of the most important and
interesting tasks in computer vision, and the development of
deep learning has produced tremendous progress in a fully
supervised setting [3, 36]. However, to use semantic image
segmentation in real life requires a large variety of object
classes and a great deal of labeled data for each class. Labeling pixel-level annotations of each object class is laborious,
and hampers the expansion of object classes. This problem
can be addressed by weakly supervised methods that use
annotations, which are less definite than those at the pixel
level and much easier to obtain. However, current weakly
† Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.

supervised segmentation methods produce inferior results
to fully supervised segmentation.
Pixel-level annotations allow fully supervised semantic
segmentation to achieve reliability in learning the boundaries of objects and the relationship between their components. But, it is difficult to use image-level annotations to
train segmentation networks because weakly labeled data
only indicates the existence of objects of a certain class, and
does not provide any information about their locations or
boundaries. Most weakly supervised methods using imagelevel annotations depend on localization maps obtained by
a classification network [37] to bridge the gap between

5267

