Large-scale weakly-supervised pre-training for video action recognition
Deepti Ghadiyaram, Du Tran, Dhruv Mahajan
Facebook AI
{deeptigp, trandu, dhruvm}@fb.com

Abstract
Current fully-supervised video datasets consist of only
a few hundred thousand videos and fewer than a thousand domain-specific labels. This hinders the progress towards advanced video architectures. This paper presents
an in-depth study of using large volumes of web videos for
pre-training video models for the task of action recognition. Our primary empirical finding is that pre-training
at a very large scale (over 65 million videos), despite on
noisy social-media videos and hashtags, substantially improves the state-of-the-art on three challenging public action recognition datasets. Further, we examine three questions in the construction of weakly-supervised video action datasets. First, given that actions involve interactions
with objects, how should one construct a verb-object pretraining label space to benefit transfer learning the most?
Second, frame-based models perform quite well on action
recognition; is pre-training for good image features sufficient or is pre-training for spatio-temporal features valuable for optimal transfer learning? Finally, actions are generally less well-localized in long videos vs. short videos;
since action labels are provided at a video level, how should
one choose video clips for best performance, given some
fixed budget of number or minutes of videos?

1. Introduction
It is well-established [20, 32] that pre-training on large
datasets followed by fine-tuning on target datasets boosts
performance, especially when target datasets are small
[3, 10, 26, 49]. Given the well-known complexities in constructing large-scale fully-supervised video datasets, it is intuitive that large-scale weakly-supervised pre-training is vital for video tasks.
Recent studies [36, 46, 62] have clearly demonstrated
that pre-training on hundreds of millions (billions) of noisy
web images significantly boosts the state-of-the-art in object classification. While one would certainly hope that successes would carry over from images [36, 46, 62] to videos,
action recognition from videos presents certain unique challenges that are absent from the image tasks.

First, while web images primarily face the challenge of
label noise (i.e., missing or incorrect object labels), for
videos in the wild, the challenges are two-fold: label noise
and temporal noise due to the lack of localization of action
labels. In real-world videos, a given action typically occupies only a very small portion of a video. In stark contrast, a
typical web image is a particular moment in time, carefully
selected by its creator for maximal relevance and salience.
Second, in prior work on images, labels were restricted
to scenes and objects (i.e., nouns). However, action labels
(eg: “catching a fish”) are more complex, typically involving at least one verb-object pair. Further, even at large
scale, many valid verb-object pairs may be observed rarely
or never at all; for example, “catching a bagel” is an entirely
plausible action, but rarely observed. Therefore, it is natural to inquire: is it more useful to pre-train on labels chosen
from marginal distributions of nouns and verbs, do we need
to pre-train on the observed portion of the joint distribution
of (verb, noun) labels, or do we need to focus entirely on the
target dataset’s labels? How many such labels are sufficient
for effective pre-training and how diverse should they be?
Third, the temporal dimension raises several interesting questions. By analogy to images, short videos should
be better temporally-localized than longer videos; we investigate this assumption and also ask how localization affects pre-training. In addition, longer videos contain more
frames, but short videos presumably contain more relevant
frames; what is the best choice of video lengths when constructing a pre-training dataset?
Finally, we question whether pre-training on videos (vs
images) is even necessary. Both frame-based models and
image-based pre-training methods like inflation [11] have
been successful in action recognition. Is pre-training on
video clips actually worth the increased compute, or, are
strong image features sufficient?
In this work, we address all these questions in great
detail. Our key aim is to improve the learned video feature representations by focusing exclusively on training
data, which is complementary to model-architecture design. Specifically, we leverage over 65 million public, usergenerated videos from a social media website and use the
112046

