A convex relaxation for multi-graph matching
Paul Swoboda∗,1,2 , Dagmar Kainmüller3,4 , Ashkan Mokarian3,4 , Christian Theobalt1,2 , Florian Bernard1,2
1

MPI Informatics

2

Saarland Informatics Campus

3

4

Berlin Institute of Health

Abstract

MDC Berlin

1
2

We present a convex relaxation for the multi-graph
matching problem. Our formulation allows for partial pairwise matchings, guarantees cycle consistency, and our objective incorporates both linear and quadratic costs. Moreover, we also present an extension to higher-order costs.
In order to solve the convex relaxation we employ a message passing algorithm that optimizes the dual problem.
We experimentally compare our algorithm on established
benchmark problems from computer vision, as well as on
large problems from biological image analysis, the size of
which exceed previously investigated multi-graph matching
instances.

3
graph A

1

1
2

2

3

1. Introduction

3

Finding correspondences between images or shapes is
a long-standing problem in computer vision and computer
graphics research. Such problems are of high relevance for
various applications, among them tracking, segmentation or
shape modelling. However, many formulations of the correspondence problem, such as the well-known quadratic assignment problem (QAP), are known to be NP-hard. Most
correspondence problems can be interpreted as an instance
of the graph matching problem, where the objective is to
establish correspondences between the nodes of two given
graphs, such that the edges of both graphs are matched consistently. The multi-graph matching (MGM) problem generalizes graph matching to simultaneously establishing correspondences between more than two graphs. For multiple
matchings, the notion of cycle consistency arises: assume
that Xpq is the assignment matrix between graph p and q.
The condition Xpr Xrq = Xpq ∀p, q, r is called cycle consistency, see Figure 1 for an illustration.
Multi-matching problems are, among others, relevant
for multi-view reconstruction, tracking of objects in videos
or shape collection alignment. Generally, computing correspondences via multi-graph matching results in higher∗ Email of corresponding author: pswoboda@mpi-inf.mpg.de

graph B

graph C

Figure 1. Illustration of cycle consistency in multi-graph matching (best viewed in color). Each graph A, B, C comprises three
nodes (green, blue, purple) and three edges (white lines). The true
correspondence is indicated by the node colour and node labels 1,
2, 3. Matchings between pairs of graphs are shown by coloured
lines (A↔B in yellow, A↔C in gray, and B↔C in blue). Wrong
matchings are indicated by dashed lines. The multi-matching
A1↔B2↔C2↔A2 is not cycle consistent.

quality solutions in comparison to matches computed by a
series of graph matching problems only. The reason is that
spurious matches introduced by noise in the data can be corrected, since each correspondence between two graphs depends on other matches via cycle consistency.
While matching problems between two graphs are wellstudied and have received attention since more than fifty
years [6, 18, 28, 20, 9, 36, 35, 48, 30, 26, 12, 1, 16, 11, 4, 46,
49, 14, 21, 2, 19], the multi-graph matching problem is less
well-studied and hence offers great potential for improvements, both on the theoretical and practical side. In this
work we propose a novel multi-graph matching approach
that has the following main contributions:

11156

