Class-Balanced Loss Based on Effective Number of Samples

Abstract

Number of training samples

Yin Cui1,2∗ Menglin Jia1
Tsung-Yi Lin3
Yang Song4
1
2
3
Cornell University
Cornell Tech
Google Brain

Serge Belongie1,2
4
Alphabet Inc.

103

With the rapid increase of large-scale, real-world
datasets, it becomes critical to address the problem of longtailed data distribution (i.e., a few classes account for most
of the data, while most classes are under-represented). Existing solutions typically adopt class re-balancing strategies
such as re-sampling and re-weighting based on the number
of observations for each class. In this work, we argue that
as the number of samples increases, the additional benefit
of a newly added data point will diminish. We introduce
a novel theoretical framework to measure data overlap by
associating with each sample a small neighboring region
rather than a single point. The effective number of samples
is defined as the volume of samples and can be calculated
by a simple formula (1−β n )/(1−β), where n is the number
of samples and β ∈ [0, 1) is a hyperparameter. We design a
re-weighting scheme that uses the effective number of samples for each class to re-balance the loss, thereby yielding
a class-balanced loss. Comprehensive experiments are conducted on artificially induced long-tailed CIFAR datasets
and large-scale datasets including ImageNet and iNaturalist. Our results show that when trained with the proposed
class-balanced loss, the network is able to achieve significant performance gains on long-tailed datasets.

1. Introduction
The recent success of deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for visual recognition [26, 37, 38, 16] owes
much to the availability of large-scale, real-world annotated datasets [7, 28, 49, 41]. In contrast with commonly
used visual recognition datasets (e.g., CIFAR [25, 40], ImageNet ILSVRC 2012 [7, 34] and CUB-200 Birds [43]) that
exhibit roughly uniform distributions of class labels, realworld datasets have skewed [21] distributions, with a longtail: a few dominant classes claim most of the examples,
while most of the other classes are represented by relatively
few examples. Models trained on such data perform poorly
for weakly represented classes [19, 15, 42, 4].
∗ The work was performed while Yin Cui and Yang Song worked at
Google (a subsidiary of Alphabet Inc.).

102

101

Head
0

1000

Effective number

Long Tail
2000
3000
Sorted class index

4000

5000

Re-weighted by
effective number of samples

Effective number
Re-weighted by
inverse class frequency
No re-weighting

Figure 1. Two classes, one from the head and one from the tail of
a long-tailed dataset (iNaturalist 2017 [41] in this example), have
drastically different number of samples. Models trained on these
samples are biased toward dominant classes (black solid line). Reweighing the loss by inverse class frequency usually yields poor
performance (red dashed line) on real-world data with high class
imbalance. We propose a theoretical framework to quantify the
effective number of samples by taking data overlap into consideration. A class-balanced term is designed to re-weight the loss by
inverse effective number of samples. We show in experiments that
the performance of a model can be improved when trained with
the proposed class-balanced loss (blue dashed line).

A number of recent studies have aimed to alleviate the
challenge of long-tailed training data [3, 32, 17, 42, 44, 12,
48, 45]. In general, there are two strategies: re-sampling
and cost-sensitive re-weighting. In re-sampling, the number
of examples is directly adjusted by over-sampling (adding
repetitive data) for the minor class or under-sampling (removing data) for the major class, or both. In cost-sensitive
re-weighting, we influence the loss function by assigning
19268

