Label Efficient Semi-Supervised Learning via Graph Filtering
Qimai Li1

Xiao-Ming Wu∗1
1

Han Liu1

Xiaotong Zhang1

Zhichao Guan12

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 Zhejiang University,

{csqmli,csxmwu,cshliu,csxtzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, zcguan@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

when used properly, unlabeled data can significantly improve learning performance [64, 31, 32].

Graph-based methods have been demonstrated as one
of the most effective approaches for semi-supervised learning, as they can exploit the connectivity patterns between labeled and unlabeled data samples to improve learning performance. However, existing graph-based methods either
are limited in their ability to jointly model graph structures
and data features, such as the classical label propagation
methods, or require a considerable amount of labeled data
for training and validation due to high model complexity,
such as the recent neural-network-based methods. In this
paper, we address label efficient semi-supervised learning
from a graph filtering perspective. Specifically, we propose
a graph filtering framework that injects graph similarity
into data features by taking them as signals on the graph
and applying a low-pass graph filter to extract useful data
representations for classification, where label efficiency can
be achieved by conveniently adjusting the strength of the
graph filter. Interestingly, this framework unifies two seemingly very different methods – label propagation and graph
convolutional networks. Revisiting them under the graph
filtering framework leads to new insights that improve their
modeling capabilities and reduce model complexity. Experiments on various semi-supervised classification tasks on
four citation networks and one knowledge graph and one
semi-supervised regression task for zero-shot image recognition validate our findings and proposals.

One effective approach to making use of unlabeled data
is to represent the data in a graph where each labeled or
unlabeled sample is a vertex and then model the relations
between vertices. For some applications such as social network analysis, data exhibits a natural graph structure. For
some other applications such as image or text classification,
data may come in a vector form, and a graph is usually constructed using data features. Nevertheless, in many cases,
graphs only partially encode data information. Take document classification in a citation network as an example,
the citation links between documents form a graph which
represents their citation relation, and each document is represented as a bag-of-words feature vector which describes
its content. To correctly classify a document, both the citation relations and the content information need to be taken
into account, as they contain different aspects of document
information. For graph-based semi-supervised learning, the
key challenge is to exploit graph structures as well as other
information especially data features to improve learning
performance.

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning and neural networks comes
at the cost of large amounts of labeled data and long training time. Semi-supervised learning [13] is important as it
can leverage ample available unlabeled data to aid supervised learning, thus greatly saving the cost, trouble, and
time for human labeling. Many researches have shown that
∗ Corresponding author

Despite many progresses, existing methods are still limited in their capabilities to leverage multiple modalities of
data information for learning. The classical label propagation methods only exploit graph structures to make predictions on unlabeled examples, which are often inadequate in
many scenarios. To go beyond their limit and jointly model
graph structures and data features, a common approach is
to train a supervised learner to classify data features while
regularizing the classifier with graph similarity. Manifold
regularization [4] trains a support vector machine with a
graph Laplacian regularizer. Deep semi-supervised embedding [53] and Planetoid [56] train a neural network with
an embedding-based regularizer. Recently, graph convolutional networks (GCN) [32] have demonstrated impressive
results in semi-supervised learning, due to its special design of a first-order convolutional filter that nicely integrates
graph and feature information in each layer. The success of
19582

