Gait Recognition via Disentangled Representation Learning
Ziyuan Zhang, Luan Tran, Xi Yin, Yousef Atoum, Xiaoming Liu
Michigan State University
{zhang835, tranluan, yinxi1, atoumyou, liuxm}@msu.edu

Jian Wan, Nanxin Wang
Ford Research and Innovation Center
{jwan1, nwang1}@ford.com

Abstract
Gait, the walking pattern of individuals, is one of the
most important biometrics modalities. Most of the existing gait recognition methods take silhouettes or articulated
body models as the gait features. These methods suffer from
degraded recognition performance when handling confounding variables, such as clothing, carrying and view angle. To
remedy this issue, we propose a novel AutoEncoder framework to explicitly disentangle pose and appearance features
from RGB imagery and the LSTM-based integration of pose
features over time produces the gait feature. In addition, we
collect a Frontal-View Gait (FVG) dataset to focus on gait
recognition from frontal-view walking, which is a challenging problem since it contains minimal gait cues compared to
other views. FVG also includes other important variations,
e.g., walking speed, carrying, and clothing. With extensive experiments on CASIA-B, USF and FVG datasets, our
method demonstrates superior performance to the-state-ofthe-arts quantitatively, the ability of feature disentanglement
qualitatively, and promising computational efficiency.

1. Introduction
Biometrics measures people’s unique physical and behavioral characteristics to recognize the identity of an individual.
Gait [35], the walking pattern of an individual, is one of the
biometrics modalities, e.g., face, fingerprint, and iris. Gait
recognition has the advantage that it can operate at a distance
without user cooperation. Also, it is difficult to camouflage.
Due to these advantages, gait recognition is applicable to
many applications such as person identification, criminal
investigation, and healthcare.
As other recognition problems in vision, the core of gait
recognition lies in extracting gait-related features from the
video frames of a walking person, where the prior approaches
are categorized into two types: appearance-based and modelbased methods. The appearance-based methods such as Gait

Figure 1: We propose to a novel CNN-based model, termed GaitNet, to automatically learn the disentangled gait feature from a
walking video, as opposed to handcrafted GEI, or skeleton-based
features. While many conventional gait databases study side-view
imagery, we collect a new gait database where both gallery and
probe are captured in frontal-views.

Energy Image (GEI) [20] take the averaged silhouette image
as the gait feature. While having a low computational cost
and can handle low-resolution imagery, it can be sensitive
to variations such as clothes change, carrying, view angles
and walking speed [37, 5, 46, 6, 24, 1]. The model-based
method first performs pose estimation and takes articulated
body skeleton as the gait feature. It shows more robustness
to those variations but at a price of a higher computational
cost and dependency on pose estimation accuracy [17, 2].
It is understandable that the challenge in designing a
gait feature is the necessity of being invariant to the appearance variation due to clothing, viewing angle, carrying,
etc. Therefore, our desire is to disentangle the gait feature
from the visual appearance of the walking person. For both
appearance-based or model-based methods, such disentan-

4710

