Collaborative Spatiotemporal Feature Learning for Video Action Recognition
Chao Li

Qiaoyong Zhong Di Xie Shiliang Pu
Hikvision Research Institute

{lichao15,zhongqiaoyong,xiedi,pushiliang}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Spatiotemporal feature learning is of central importance
for action recognition in videos. Existing deep neural network models either learn spatial and temporal features independently (C2D) or jointly with unconstrained parameters (C3D). In this paper, we propose a novel neural operation which encodes spatiotemporal features collaboratively by imposing a weight-sharing constraint on the learnable parameters. In particular, we perform 2D convolution along three orthogonal views of volumetric video data,
which learns spatial appearance and temporal motion cues
respectively. By sharing the convolution kernels of different views, spatial and temporal features are collaboratively learned and thus benefit from each other. The complementary features are subsequently fused by a weighted
summation whose coefficients are learned end-to-end. Our
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on largescale benchmarks and won the 1st place in the Moments
in Time Challenge 2018. Moreover, based on the learned
coefficients of different views, we are able to quantify the
contributions of spatial and temporal features. This analysis sheds light on interpretability of the model and may also
guide the future design of algorithm for video recognition.

1. Introduction
Recently, video action recognition has drawn increasing
attention considering its potential in a wide range of applications such as video surveillance, human-computer interaction and social video recommendation. The key to this
task lies in joint spatiotemporal feature learning. The spatial feature mainly describes appearance of objects involved
in an action and the scene configuration as well within each
frame of the video. Spatial feature learning is analogous
to that of still image recognition, and thus easily benefits
from the recent advancements brought by deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [13]. While the temporal feature captures motion cues embedded in the evolving
frames over time. There are two challenges that arise. One
is how to learn the temporal feature. The other is how to

𝐻

𝑊

𝑇

𝑇

Figure 1. Visualization of three views of a video, which motivates
our design of collaborative spatiotemporal feature learning. Top
left: view of H-W . Top right: view of T -H. Bottom: view of
T -W .

properly fuse spatial and temporal features.
The first attempt of researchers is to model temporal motion information explicitly and in parallel to spatial information. Raw frames and optical flow between adjacent frames
are exploited as two input streams of a deep neural network [23, 6]. On the other hand, as a generalization of 2D
ConvNets (C2D) for still image recognition, 3D ConvNets
(C3D) are proposed to tackle 3D volumetric video data [24].
In C3D, spatial and temporal features are closely entangled
and jointly learned. That is, rather than learning spatial and
temporal features separately and fusing them at the top of
the network, joint spatiotemporal features are learned by
3D convolutions distributed over the whole network. Considering the excellent feature representation learning capability of CNN, ideally C3D should achieve great success on
video understanding just as C2D does on image recognition. However, the huge number of model parameters and
computational inefficiency limit the effectiveness and practicality of C3D.
In this paper, we propose a novel Collaborative Spa17872

