GPSfM: Global Projective SFM Using Algebraic Constraints
on Multi-View Fundamental Matrices
Yoni Kasten*

Amnon Geifman*
Meirav Galun
Weizmann Institute of Science

Ronen Basri

{yoni.kasten,amnon.geifman,meirav.galun,ronen.basri}@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of recovering projective camera matrices from collections of fundamental matrices in multiview
 settings. We make two main contributions.
First, given n2 fundamental matrices computed for n images, we provide a complete algebraic characterization in
the form of conditions that are both necessary and sufficient
to enabling the recovery of camera matrices. These conditions are based on arranging the fundamental matrices
as blocks in a single matrix, called the n-view fundamental matrix, and characterizing this matrix in terms of the
signs of its eigenvalues and rank structures. Secondly, we
propose a concrete algorithm for projective structure-frommotion that utilizes this characterization. Given a complete
or partial collection of measured fundamental matrices, our
method seeks camera matrices that minimize a global algebraic error for the measured fundamental matrices. In
contrast to existing methods, our optimization, without any
initialization, produces a consistent set of fundamental matrices that corresponds to a unique set of cameras (up to a
choice of projective frame). Our experiments indicate that
our method achieves state of the art performance in both
accuracy and running time.

1. Introduction
This paper considers the problem of recovering projective camera matrices from collections of fundamental
matrices. Many multiview structure from motion (SFM)
pipelines begin, given n images, I1 , ..., In , by robustly estimating fundamental matrices between image pairs from
collections of point matches, e.g., using RANSAC.
 However, in typical settings, only a subset of the n2 pairwise
fundamental matrices can be estimated, and the estimated
matrices may be subject at times to significant errors. Moreover, fundamental matrices are defined through a homogeneous equation and can thus assume any scale factor, but
*Equal contributors

a consistent setting of these scales is important in multiview settings [20, 22] (in analogy to resolving the distance
between cameras in a calibrated setting). Consequently, accurate recovery of camera matrices is interesting both from
theoretical and practical standpoints. Our paper makes contributions to both of these aspects.
An important theoretical question is, given a collection
of n2 fundamental matrices, whether these fundamental
matrices are consistent, in the sense that there exist n camera matrices that produce these fundamental matrices. Below we address this question by providing a set of algebraic
constraints that form both necessary and sufficient conditions for the consistency of fundamental matrices. Our formulation, which extends the partial list of necessary condimatrix F
tions introduced in [22], considers the symmetric

of size 3n × 3n, formed by stacking all n2 fundamental
matrices. It provides a complete characterization of F in
terms of the signs of its eigenvalues and rank patterns.
An advantage of our algebraic characterization is that it
can readily be used to construct optimization algorithms to
recover camera matrices. In the second part of this paper we
introduce an efficient algorithm to recover projective camera matrices directly from measured fundamental matrices.
Our algorithm, which utilizes the consistency constraints
presented in this paper, uses global optimization for camera
recovery, overcoming noise and missing measurements. It
further avoids one of the main difficulties in a previous approach [22] – the need to accurately recover a scale factor
for each of the estimated fundamental matrix. This allows
us to obtain state-of-the-art results without any initialization. We demonstrate the utility of our method by applying
it to uncalibrated image collections of various sizes. Our
experiments indicate that our method outperforms previous
methods in both accuracy and runtime.

1.1. Previous work
The recovery of projective camera matrices was addressed in several lines of work.
Incremental algorithms [13, 15, 19] process the images
sequentially, interleaving camera and depth recovery for ev13264

