Large-Scale Distributed Second-Order Optimization Using Kronecker-Factored
Approximate Curvature for Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
Kazuki Osawa1 Yohei Tsuji1,5 Yuichiro Ueno1 Akira Naruse3 Rio Yokota2,5 Satoshi Matsuoka4,1
1

2

School of Computing, Tokyo Institute of Technology
Global Scientific Information and Computing Center, Tokyo Institute of Technology
3
NVIDIA
4
RIKEN Center for Computational Science
5
AIST-Tokyo Tech RWBC-OIL, AIST
{oosawa.k.ad, tsuji.y.ae, ueno.y.ai}@m.titech.ac.jp
anaruse@nvidia.com, rioyokota@gsic.titech.ac.jp, matsu@is.titech.ac.jp

Abstract
Large-scale distributed training of deep neural networks
suffer from the generalization gap caused by the increase
in the effective mini-batch size. Previous approaches try to
solve this problem by varying the learning rate and batch
size over epochs and layers, or some ad hoc modification of the batch normalization. We propose an alternative approach using a second-order optimization method
that shows similar generalization capability to first-order
methods, but converges faster and can handle larger minibatches. To test our method on a benchmark where highly
optimized first-order methods are available as references,
we train ResNet-50 on ImageNet. We converged to 75%
Top-1 validation accuracy in 35 epochs for mini-batch sizes
under 16,384, and achieved 75% even with a mini-batch
size of 131,072, which took only 978 iterations.

1. Introduction
As the size of deep neural network models and the training data continues to increase rapidly, the demand for distributed parallel computing is increasing. A common approach is to use the data-parallel approach, where the data
is distributed across different processes while the model is
replicated across them. When the mini-batch size per process is fixed to increase the ratio of computation over communication, the effective mini-batch size over the entire system grows proportional to the number of processes.
When the mini-batch size is increased beyond a certain
point, the validation accuracy starts to degrade. This generalization gap caused by large mini-batch sizes have been

studied extensively for various models and datasets [23].
Hoffer et al. attribute this generalization gap to the limited
number of updates, and suggest to train longer [13]. This
has lead to strategies such as scaling the learning rate proportional to the mini-batch size, while using the first few
epochs to gradually warmup the learning rate [24]. Such
methods have enabled the training for mini-batch sizes of
8K, where ImageNet [7] with ResNet-50 [12] could be
trained for 90 epochs to achieve 76.3% top-1 validation
accuracy in 60 minutes [9]. Combining this learning rate
scaling with other techniques such as RMSprop warm-up,
batch normalization without moving averages, and a slowstart learning rate schedule, Akiba et al. were able to train
the same dataset and model with a mini-batch size of 32K
to achieve 74.9% accuracy in 15 minutes [3].
More complex approaches for manipulating the learning
rate were proposed, such as LARS [29], where a different
learning rate is used for each layer by normalizing them
with the ratio between the layer-wise norms of the weights
and gradients. This enabled the training with a mini-batch
size of 32K without the use of ad hoc modifications, which
achieved 74.9% accuracy in 14 minutes (64 epochs) [29].
It has been reported that combining LARS with counter intuitive modifications to the batch normalization, can yield
75.8% accuracy even for a mini-batch size of 65K [15].
The use of small batch sizes to encourage rapid convergence in early epochs, and then progressively increasing the
batch size is yet another successful approach [8, 24]. Using
such an adaptive batch size method, Mikami et al. were able
to train 122 seconds with an accuracy of 75.3%. The hierarchical synchronization of mini-batches have also been proposed [18], but such methods have not been tested at scale

12359

