Non-Adversarial Image Synthesis with Generative Latent Nearest Neighbors
Yedid Hoshen1, 2 , Ke Li3 , and Jitendra Malik2, 3
1

Hebrew University of Jerusalem
2
Facebook AI Research
3
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Unconditional image generation has recently been dominated by generative adversarial networks (GANs). GAN
methods train a generator which regresses images from random noise vectors, as well as a discriminator that attempts
to differentiate between the generated images and a training set of real images. GANs have shown amazing results at
generating realistic looking images. Despite their success,
GANs suffer from critical drawbacks including: unstable
training and mode-dropping. The weaknesses in GANs have
motivated research into alternatives including: variational
auto-encoders (VAEs), latent embedding learning methods
(e.g. GLO) and nearest-neighbor based implicit maximum
likelihood estimation (IMLE). Unfortunately at the moment,
GANs still significantly outperform the alternative methods
for image generation. In this work, we present a novel
method - Generative Latent Nearest Neighbors (GLANN)
- for training generative models without adversarial training. GLANN combines the strengths of IMLE and GLO in
a way that overcomes the main drawbacks of each method.
Consequently, GLANN generates images that are far better
than GLO and IMLE. Our method does not suffer from mode
collapse which plagues GAN training and is much more stable. Qualitative results show that GLANN outperforms a
baseline consisting of 800 GANs and VAEs on commonly
used datasets. Our models are also shown to be effective for
training truly non-adversarial unsupervised image translation.

1. Introduction
Generative image modeling is a long-standing goal for
computer vision. Unconditional generative models attempt
to learn functions that generate the entire image distribution given a finite number of training samples. Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9] are a recently introduced

technique for image generative modeling. They are used
extensively for image generation owing to: i) training effective unconditional image generators ii) being almost the
only method for unsupervised image translation between
domains (but see NAM [15]) iii) being an effective perceptual image loss function (e.g. Pix2Pix [16]).
Along with their obvious advantages, GANs have critical disadvantages: i) GANs are very hard to train, this is
expressed by a very erratic progression of training, sudden
run collapses, and extreme sensitivity to hyper-parameters.
ii) GANs suffer from mode-dropping - the modeling of only
some but not all the modes of the target distribution. The
birthday paradox can be used to measure the extent of mode
dropping [2]: The number of modes modeled by a generator can be estimated by generating a fixed number of images and counting the number of repeated images. Empirical evaluation of GANs found that the number of modes is
significantly lower than the number in the training distribution.
The disadvantages of GANs gave rise to research into
non-adversarial alternatives for training generative models.
GLO [4] and IMLE [23] are two such methods. GLO, introduced by Bojanowski et al., embeds the training images in a
low dimensional space, so that they are reconstructed when
the embedding is passed through a jointly trained deep generator. The advantages of GLO are i) encoding the entire
distribution without mode dropping ii) the learned latent
space corresponds to semantic image properties i.e. Euclidean distances between latent codes correspond to semantically meaningful differences. A critical disadvantage
of GLO is that there is not a principled way to sample new
images from it. Although the authors recommended fitting
a Gaussian to the latent codes of the training images, this
does not result in high-quality image synthesis.
IMLE was proposed by Li and Malik [23] for training generative models by sampling a large number of latent codes from an arbitrary distribution, mapping each to
the image domain using a trained generator and ensuring
15811

