Iterative Normalization: Beyond Standardization towards Efficient Whitening
Lei Huang Yi Zhou Fan Zhu Li Liu Ling Shao
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
{lei.huang, yi.zhou, fan.zhu, li.liu, ling.shao} @inceptioniai.org

Abstract
Batch Normalization (BN) is ubiquitously employed for
accelerating neural network training and improving the generalization capability by performing standardization within
mini-batches. Decorrelated Batch Normalization (DBN) further boosts the above effectiveness by whitening. However,
DBN relies heavily on either a large batch size, or eigendecomposition that suffers from poor efficiency on GPUs. We
propose Iterative Normalization (IterNorm), which employs
Newton’s iterations for much more efficient whitening, while
simultaneously avoiding the eigen-decomposition. Furthermore, we develop a comprehensive study to show IterNorm
has better trade-off between optimization and generalization,
with theoretical and experimental support. To this end, we
exclusively introduce Stochastic Normalization Disturbance
(SND), which measures the inherent stochastic uncertainty
of samples when applied to normalization operations. With
the support of SND, we provide natural explanations to several phenomena from the perspective of optimization, e.g.,
why group-wise whitening of DBN generally outperforms
full-whitening and why the accuracy of BN degenerates with
reduced batch sizes. We demonstrate the consistently improved performance of IterNorm with extensive experiments
on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet over BN and DBN.

1. Introduction
Centering, scaling and decorrelating the input data is
known as data whitening, which has demonstrated enormous
success in speeding up training [25]. Batch Normalization
(BN) [19] extends the operations from the input layer to
centering and scaling activations of each intermediate layer
within a mini-batch so that each neuron has a zero mean and
a unit variance (Figure 1 (a)). BN has been extensively used
in various network architectures [11, 43, 12, 50, 42, 14] for
its benefits in improving both the optimization efficiency
[19, 9, 21, 5, 37] and generalization capability [19, 3, 5, 48].
However, instead of performing whitening, BN is only capable of performing standardization, which centers and scales
the activations but does not decorrelate them [19]. On the

(a) Standardization of BN

(b) ZCA whitening of DBN

(c) Efficient ZCA whitening of IterNorm

Figure 1. Illustrations of multiple normalization methods on centered data. (a) BN [19] performs standardization by stretching/squeezing the data along the axes, such that each dimension
has a unit variance; (b) DBN performs ZCA whitening by stretching/squeezing the data along the eigenvectors, such that the covariance matrix is identical. (c) IterNorm performs efficient ZCA
whitening by progressively adjusting the data along the eigenvectors without eigen-decomposition.

other hand, previous works suggest that further decorrelating
the activations is beneficial to both the optimization [9, 29]
and generalization [6, 49]. To the end of improving BN with
whitening, Decorrelated Batch Normalization (DBN) [17]
is proposed to whiten the activations of each layer within a
mini-batch, such that the output of each layer has an isometric diagonal covariance matrix (Figure 1 (b)). DBN improves
over BN in regards to both training efficiency and generalization capability, but it relies heavily on a large batch size
and eigen-decompositions or singular value decomposition
(SVD), which suffers from poor efficiency on GPUs.
In order to address these issues, we propose Iterative
Normalization (IterNorm) to further enhance BN with more
efficient whitening. IterNorm avoids eigen-decomposition
or SVD by employing Newton’s iteration for approximating
the whitening matrix. Thus, the capacity of GPUs can be
effectively exploited. Eigenvalues of the covariance matrix
are normalized prior to the iterations with guaranteed convergence condition of Newton’s iteration. As illustrated in
(Figure 1 (c)), IterNorm stretches the dimensions along the
eigenvectors progressively, so that the associated eigenvalues
converge to 1 after normalization. One desirable property is

4874

