Deep Flow-Guided Video Inpainting
Rui Xu1
1

Xiaoxiao Li1

Bolei Zhou1

Chen Change Loy2

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Nanyang Technological University
{xr018, bzhou@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

lxx1991@gmail.com

Abstract
Video inpainting, which aims at filling in missing regions of a video, remains challenging due to the difficulty
of preserving the precise spatial and temporal coherence of
video contents. In this work we propose a novel flow-guided
video inpainting approach. Rather than filling in the RGB
pixels of each frame directly, we consider video inpainting as a pixel propagation problem. We first synthesize a
spatially and temporally coherent optical flow field across
video frames using a newly designed Deep Flow Completion network. Then the synthesized flow field is used to guide
the propagation of pixels to fill up the missing regions in the
video. Specifically, the Deep Flow Completion network follows a coarse-to-fine refinement to complete the flow fields,
while their quality is further improved by hard flow example mining. Following the guide of the completed flow, the
missing video regions can be filled up precisely. Our method
is evaluated on DAVIS and YouTube-VOS datasets qualitatively and quantitatively, achieving the state-of-the-art performance in terms of inpainting quality and speed. Codes
and models are available at https://github.com/
nbei/Deep-Flow-Guided-Video-Inpainting

1. Introduction
The goal of video inpainting is to fill in missing regions
of a given video sequence with contents that are both spatially and temporally coherent [4, 12, 22, 24]. Video inpainting, also known as video completion, has many realworld applications such as undesired object removal [9] and
video restoration [32].
Inpainting real-world high-definition video sequences
remains challenging due to the camera motion and the complex movement of objects. Most existing video inpainting
algorithms [12, 21, 22, 27, 30] follow the traditional image inpainting pipeline, by formulating the problem as a
patch-based optimization task, which fills missing regions
through sampling spatial or spatial-temporal patches of the
known regions then solve minimization problem. Despite
some good results, these approaches suffer from two draw-

ccloy@ntu.edu.sg }

backs. First, these methods typically assume smooth and
homogeneous motion field in the missing region, therefore
they cannot handle videos with complex motions. A failure
case is shown in Fig. 1(b). Second, the computational complexity of optimization-based methods is high thus those
methods are infeasible for the real-world applications. For
instance, the method by Huang et al. [12] requires approximately 3 hours to inpaint a 854×480-sized video with 90
frames containing 18% missing regions.
Although significant progress has been made in image
inpainting [15, 17, 23, 26, 35] through the use of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [18], video inpainting using deep learning remains much less explored. There are
several challenges for extending deep learning-based image
inpainting approaches to the video domain. As shown in
Fig. 1(c), a direct application of an image inpainting algorithm on each frame individually will lead to temporal artifacts and jitters. On the other hand, due to the large amount
of RGB frames, feeding the entire video sequence at once to
a 3D CNN is also difficult to ensure the temporal coherence.
Meanwhile, an extremely large model capacity is needed to
directly inpaint the entire video sequence, which is not computationally practical given its large memory consumption.
Rather than filling the RGB pixels, we propose an alternative flow-guided approach for video inpainting. The motivation behind our approach is that completing a missing
flow is much easier than filling in pixels of a missing region
directly, while using the flow to propagate pixels temporally preserves the temporal coherence naturally. As shown
in Fig. 1(d), compared with RGB pixels, the optical flow
is far less complex and easier to complete since the background and most objects in a scene typically have trackable
motion. This observation inspires us to design our method
to alleviate the difficulty of video inpainting by first synthesizing a coherent flow field across frames. Most pixels
in the missing regions can then be propagated and warped
from the visible regions. Finally we can fill up the small
amount of regions that are not seen in the entire video using
the pixel hallucination [35].
In order to fill up the optical flows in videos, we design
a novel Deep Flow Completion Network (DFC-Net) with

3723

