Sliced Wasserstein Generative Models
Jiqing Wu*1 Zhiwu Huang*1 Dinesh Acharya1 Wen Li1
Janine Thoma1 Danda Pani Paudel1 Luc Van Gool1,2
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2 VISICS, KU Leuven, Belgium
{jwu, zhiwu.huang, liwen, jthoma, paudel, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

*Equal contribution

Abstract
In generative modeling, the Wasserstein distance (WD)
has emerged as a useful metric to measure the discrepancy
between generated and real data distributions. Unfortunately, it is challenging to approximate the WD of highdimensional distributions. In contrast, the sliced Wasserstein
distance (SWD) factorizes high-dimensional distributions
into their multiple one-dimensional marginal distributions
and is thus easier to approximate.
In this paper, we introduce novel approximations of the
primal and dual SWD. Instead of using a large number of
random projections, as it is done by conventional SWD approximation methods, we propose to approximate SWDs with
a small number of parameterized orthogonal projections in
an end-to-end deep learning fashion. As concrete applications of our SWD approximations, we design two types
of differentiable SWD blocks to equip modern generative
frameworks—Auto-Encoders (AE) and Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN).
In the experiments, we not only show the superiority of
the proposed generative models on standard image synthesis
benchmarks, but also demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance on challenging high resolution image and video
generation in an unsupervised manner 1 .

relaxed versions of the primal form. The dual form of the
WD can be more easily derived, but it remains difficult to
approximate its k-Lipschitz constraint [36, 37].
Given the weaknesses of the WD, the sliced Wasserstein
distance (SWD) suggests itself as a potential alternative. The
SWD factorizes high-dimensional distributions into their
multiple one-dimensional marginal distributions and can
therefore be approximated more easily, as studied in [5, 21,
19, 9]. However, due to the inefficient approximations of
the SWD in existing methods, its potential in generative
modeling has not been fully explored yet.
In this paper, we address this issue. Our contributions can
be summarized as follows:
• Relying on our novel primal SWD approximation,
we propose sliced Wasserstein Auto-Encoder (SWAE)
models. By seamlessly stacking the proposed primal
SWD blocks (layers) on top of the standard encoder, we
give the traditional AE generative capabilities. State-ofthe-art AE-based generative models usually require an
additional regularizer to achieve the same effect.
• Based on our new dual SWD approximation, we introduce a sliced version of Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Networks (SWGAN) by applying the proposed
dual SWD blocks to the discriminator. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first work to study the dual
SWD and its application to generative models.

1. Introduction
The Wasserstein distance (WD) is an important metric,
which was originally applied in the optimal transport problem2 [33]. Recently, [3, 11, 30, 36, 31, 23, 1, 2] discovered
the advantages of the WD in generative models and achieved
state-of-the-art performance for image synthesis. However,
the WD has some drawbacks. For instance, its primal form
is generally intractable for high-dimensional probability distributions, although some works [31, 10, 30] have proposed

• To satisfy the orthogonality constraint required by the
projection matrices of the proposed SWD blocks, we apply a non-Euclidean optimization algorithm on Stiefel
manifolds to update the projection matrices.
• Motivated by the improvements of visual quality and
model stability demonstrated on the standard image
synthesis benchmarks, we apply our proposed model
to the challenging task of unsupervised high resolution
image and video synthesis. These evaluations confirm
the advantage of our model under non-trivial cases.

1 Code: https://github.com/musikisomorphie/swd.git
2 Optimal transport addresses the problem of finding an optimal plan to
transfer a source distribution to a target distribution at minimal cost.

3713

