Image Super-Resolution by Neural Texture Transfer
Zhifei Zhang
Adobe Research

Zhaowen Wang
Adobe Research

Zhe Lin
Adobe Research

Hairong Qi
University of Tennessee

zzhang@adobe.com

zhawang@adobe.com

zlin@adobe.com

hqi@utk.edu

Abstract
Due to the significant information loss in low-resolution
(LR) images, it has become extremely challenging to further
advance the state-of-the-art of single image super-resolution (SISR). Reference-based super-resolution (RefSR), on
the other hand, has proven to be promising in recovering
high-resolution (HR) details when a reference (Ref) image
with similar content as that of the LR input is given. However, the quality of RefSR can degrade severely when Ref
is less similar. This paper aims to unleash the potential of
RefSR by leveraging more texture details from Ref images
with stronger robustness even when irrelevant Ref images
are provided. Inspired by the recent work on image stylization, we formulate the RefSR problem as neural texture
transfer. We design an end-to-end deep model which enriches HR details by adaptively transferring the texture from
Ref images according to their textural similarity. Instead of
matching content in the raw pixel space as done by previous
methods, our key contribution is a multi-level matching conducted in the neural space. This matching scheme facilitates
multi-scale neural transfer that allows the model to benefit more from those semantically related Ref patches, and
gracefully degrade to SISR performance on the least relevant Ref inputs. We build a benchmark dataset for the general research of RefSR, which contains Ref images paired
with LR inputs with varying levels of similarity. Both quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate the superiority of our method over state-of-the-art1 .

1. Introduction
The traditional single image super-resolution (SISR)
problem is defined as recovering a high-resolution (HR) image from its low-resolution (LR) observation [38]. As in
other fields of computer vision studies, the introduction of
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [5, 37, 22, 25, 35,
13] has greatly advanced the state-of-the-art of SISR. However, due to the ill-posed nature of SISR problems, most
1 Code: https://github.com/ZZUTK/SRNTT

existing methods still suffer from blurry results at large upscaling factors, e.g., 4×, especially when it comes to the
recovery of fine texture present in the original HR image
but lost in its LR counterpart. In recent years, perceptualrelated constraints, e.g., perception loss [20] and adversarial
loss [11], have been introduced to the SISR problem formulation, leading to major breakthroughs on visual quality
under large upscaling factors [24, 30]. However, they tend
to hallucinate fake textures and even produce artifacts.
This paper diverts from the traditional SISR and explores
the reference-based super-resolution (RefSR). RefSR utilizes rich textures from the HR references (Ref) to compensate for the lost details in the LR images, relaxing the
ill-posed issue and producing more detailed and realistic
textures with the help of reference images. Note that the
Ref images can be obtained from various sources like photo
albums, video frames, web image search, etc. There are existing RefSR approaches [8, 3, 7, 33, 39, 34, 27, 41] that
adopt internal examples (self-example) or external highfrequency information to enhance textures. However, these
approaches assume the reference images possess similar
content as that of the LR image and/or with good alignment.
Otherwise, their performance would significantly degrade
and even become worse than SISR methods. In contrast,
the Ref images play a different role in our setting: it does
not require well alignment or similar content to the LR image. Instead, we only intend to transfer the semantically
relevant texture from Ref images to the output SR image.
Ideally, a robust RefSR algorithm should outperform SISR
when good Ref images are given, and achieve comparable
performance as SISR when Ref images are not provided or
do not possess relevant texture at all. Note that content similarity would infer texture similarity but not vice versa.
Inspired by the recent work on image stylization [10,
20, 4], we propose a new RefSR algorithm, named SuperResolution by Neural Texture Transfer (SRNTT), which
adaptively transfers textures from the Ref images to the SR
image. More specifically, SRNTT conducts local texture
matching in the feature space and transfers matched textures to the final output through a deep model. The texture
transfer model learns the complicated dependency between

7982

