Noise-Aware Unsupervised Deep Lidar-Stereo Fusion
Xuelian Cheng1,2 , ∗ Yiran Zhong2,4,5 , Yuchao Dai1 , Pan Ji3 , Hongdong Li2,4
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Australian National University
3
NEC Laboratories America, 4 ACRV, 5 Data61 CSIRO

∗

Abstract
In this paper, we present LidarStereoNet, the first unsupervised Lidar-stereo fusion network, which can be trained
in an end-to-end manner without the need of ground truth
depth maps. By introducing a novel “Feedback Loop”
to connect the network input with output, LidarStereoNet
could tackle both noisy Lidar points and misalignment between sensors that have been ignored in existing Lidarstereo fusion studies. Besides, we propose to incorporate
a piecewise planar model into network learning to further
constrain depths to conform to the underlying 3D geometry. Extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations on
both real and synthetic datasets demonstrate the superiority of our method, which outperforms state-of-the-art stereo
matching, depth completion and Lidar-Stereo fusion approaches significantly.

Input

Lidar

GT

S2D [19]

1. Introduction
Accurately perceiving surrounding 3D information from
passive and active sensors is crucial for numerous applications such as localization and mapping [15], autonomous
driving [18], obstacle detection and avoidance [25], and
3D reconstruction [10, 33]. However, each kind of sensors alone suffers from its inherent drawbacks. Stereo cameras are well-known for suffering from computational complexities and their incompetence in dealing with textureless/repetitive areas and occlusion regions [28], while Lidar
sensors often provide accurate but relatively sparse depth
measurements [5].
Therefore, it is highly desired to fuse measurements from
Lidar and stereo cameras to achieve high-precision depth
perception by exploiting their complementary properties.
However, it is a non-trivial task as accurate Stereo-Lidar fusion requires a proper registration between Lidar and stereo
images and noise-free Lidar points. Existing methods are
not satisfactory due to the following drawbacks:
• Existing deep neural network based Lidar-Stereo fu-

Ours
SINet [30]
Figure 1. Results on KITTI 2015. We highlight the displacement
error of Lidar points with bounding boxes. Lidar points are dilated
for better visualization and we overlay our disparity maps to the
colour images for illustration. Note the Lidar points for the foreground car and utility pole have been aligned to the background.
Our method successfully recovers accurate disparities on tiny and
moving objects while the other methods are misled by drifted and
noisy Lidar points.

sion studies [2, 20, 26] strongly depend on the availability of large-scale ground truth depth maps, and thus
their performance is fundamentally limited by their
generalization ability to real-world applications.
• Due to rolling-shutter effects of Lidar and other calibration imperfections, a direct registration will introduce significant alignment errors between Lidar and
stereo depth. Furthermore, existing methods tend to
assume the Lidar measurements are noise-free [19,

∗ These authors contributed equally in this work.

6339

