Character Region Awareness for Text Detection
Youngmin Baek, Bado Lee, Dongyoon Han, Sangdoo Yun, and Hwalsuk Lee∗
Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp.
{youngmin.baek, bado.lee, dongyoon.han, sangdoo.yun, hwalsuk.lee}@navercorp.com

1. Introduction
Scene text detection has attracted much attention in the
computer vision field because of its numerous applications,
such as instant translation, image retrieval, scene parsing,
geo-location, and blind-navigation. Recently, scene text detectors based on deep learning have shown promising performance [7, 40, 20, 3, 9, 8, 10, 11, 16, 23, 24, 31, 25].
These methods mainly train their networks to localize wordlevel bounding boxes. However, they may suffer in difficult
cases, such as texts that are curved, deformed, or extremely
long, which are hard to detect with a single bounding box.
Alternatively, character-level awareness has many advantages when handling challenging texts by linking the successive characters in a bottom-up manner. Unfortunately,
∗ Corresponding author.

Curved
Arbitrary

Scene text detection methods based on neural networks
have emerged recently and have shown promising results.
Previous methods trained with rigid word-level bounding
boxes exhibit limitations in representing the text region in
an arbitrary shape. In this paper, we propose a new scene
text detection method to effectively detect text area by exploring each character and affinity between characters. To
overcome the lack of individual character level annotations,
our proposed framework exploits both the given characterlevel annotations for synthetic images and the estimated
character-level ground-truths for real images acquired by
the learned interim model. In order to estimate affinity between characters, the network is trained with the newly
proposed representation for affinity. Extensive experiments
on six benchmarks, including the TotalText and CTW-1500
datasets which contain highly curved texts in natural images, demonstrate that our character-level text detection
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art detectors. According to the results, our proposed method guarantees high
flexibility in detecting complicated scene text images, such
as arbitrarily-oriented, curved, or deformed texts.

Horizontal

Abstract

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Visualization of character-level detection using CRAFT.
(a) Heatmaps predicted by our proposed framework. (b) Detection
results for texts of various shape.

most of the existing text datasets do not provide characterlevel annotations, and the work needed to obtain characterlevel ground truths is too costly.
In this paper, we propose a novel text detector that localizes the individual character regions and links the detected
characters to a text instance. Our framework, referred to as
CRAFT for Character Region Awareness For Text detection, is designed with a convolutional neural network producing the character region score and affinity score. The
region score is used to localize individual characters in
the image, and the affinity score is used to group each
character into a single instance. To compensate for the
lack of character-level annotations, we propose a weaklysupervised learning framework that estimates characterlevel ground truths in existing real word-level datasets.
Figure. 1 is a visualization of CRAFT’s results on
various shaped texts. By exploiting character-level region awareness, texts in various shapes are easily represented. We demonstrate extensive experiments on ICDAR
datasets [13, 12, 27] to validate our method, and the experi19365

