Depth-Aware Video Frame Interpolation
Wenbo Bao1 Wei-Sheng Lai3 Chao Ma2 Xiaoyun Zhang1∗ Zhiyong Gao1 Ming-Hsuan Yang3,4
1
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
4
University of California, Merced
Google

Overlayed inputs

Estimated optical flow

Estimated depth map

Interpolated frame

Ground-truth frame

Figure 1. Example of video frame interpolation. We propose a depth-aware video frame interpolation approach to exploit the depth cue
for detecting occlusion. Our method estimates optical flow with clear motion boundaries and thus generates high-quality frames.

Abstract
Video frame interpolation aims to synthesize nonexistent frames in-between the original frames. While significant advances have been made from the recent deep
convolutional neural networks, the quality of interpolation is often reduced due to large object motion or occlusion. In this work, we propose a video frame interpolation method which explicitly detects the occlusion by exploring the depth information. Specifically, we develop a
depth-aware flow projection layer to synthesize intermediate flows that preferably sample closer objects than farther ones. In addition, we learn hierarchical features to
gather contextual information from neighboring pixels. The
proposed model then warps the input frames, depth maps,
and contextual features based on the optical flow and local interpolation kernels for synthesizing the output frame.
Our model is compact, efficient, and fully differentiable.
Quantitative and qualitative results demonstrate that the
proposed model performs favorably against state-of-the-art
frame interpolation methods on a wide variety of datasets.
The source code and pre-trained model are available at
https://github.com/baowenbo/DAIN .

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation has attracted considerable attention in the computer vision community as it can be applied to numerous applications such as slow motion gen∗ Corresponding author

eration [14], novel view synthesis [10], frame rate upconversion [3, 4], and frame recovery in video streaming [38]. The videos with a high frame rate can avoid common artifacts, such as temporal jittering and motion blurriness, and therefore are visually more appealing to the viewers. However, with the advances of recent deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on video frame interpolation [14, 21, 23, 25, 39], it is still challenging to generate
high-quality frames due to large motion and occlusions.
To handle large motion, several approaches use a coarseto-fine strategy [21] or adopt advanced flow estimation architecture [23], e.g., PWC-Net [34], to estimate more accurate optical flow. On the other hand, a straightforward approach to handle occlusion is to estimate an occlusion mask
for adaptively blending the pixels [2, 14, 39]. Some recent
methods [24, 25] learn spatially-varying interpolation kernels to adaptively synthesize pixels from a large neighborhood. Recently, the contextual features from a pre-trained
classification network have been shown effective for frame
synthesis [23] as the contextual features are extracted from
a large receptive field. However, all the existing methods
rely on a large amount of training data and the model capacity to implicitly infer the occlusion, which may not be
effective to handle a wide variety of scenes in the wild.
In this work, we propose to explicitly detect the occlusion by exploiting the depth information for video frame
interpolation. The proposed algorithm is based on a simple
observation that closer objects should be preferably synthesized in the intermediate frame. Specifically, we first estimate the bi-directional optical flow and depth maps from
the two input frames. To warp the input frames, we adopt a

3703

