Boosting Local Shape Matching for Dense 3D Face Correspondence
∗

Zhenfeng Fan1,2 , Xiyuan Hu1,2 , Chen Chen1,2 , and Silong Peng1,2,3
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beijing Visytem Co. Ltd.

{fanzhenfeng2016,xiyuan.hu,chen.chen,silong.peng}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Dense 3D face correspondence is a fundamental and
challenging issue in the literature of 3D face analysis. Correspondence between two 3D faces can be viewed as a nonrigid registration problem that one deforms into the other,
which is commonly guided by a few facial landmarks in
many existing works. However, the current works seldom
consider the problem of incoherent deformation caused by
landmarks. In this paper, we explicitly formulate the deformation as locally rigid motions guided by some seed points,
and the formulated deformation satisfies coherent local motions everywhere on a face. The seed points are initialized
by a few landmarks, and are then augmented to boost shape
matching between the template and the target face step by
step, to finally achieve dense correspondence. In each step,
we employ a hierarchical scheme for local shape registration, together with a Gaussian reweighting strategy for accurate matching of local features around the seed points. In
our experiments, we evaluate the proposed method extensively on several datasets, including two publicly available
ones: FRGC v2.0 and BU-3DFE. The experimental results
demonstrate that our method can achieve accurate feature
correspondence, coherent local shape motion, and compact
data representation. These merits actually settle some important issues for practical applications, such as expressions, noise, and partial data.

1. Introduction
Dense correspondence seeks canonical representations
of data such that both global and local structures of them
∗ All correspondences should be forwarded to Xiyuan Hu.
This
work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFC0803505), the Natural Science Foundation of China
(61571438), and the Open Project of National Engineering Laboratory for
Forensic Science (2017NELKFKT02).

can be compared. It can be viewed as a non-rigid registration problem [55], which is fundamental in the field of 3D
face analysis. While landmark correspondence [29, 32] only matches sparse and anatomically meaningful key-points
for different faces, dense correspondence matches all points
that are sufficient for detailed descriptions of the whole facial regions. Accurate point-to-point correspondence contributes to many applications of 3D faces [18, 41, 5, 42, 66,
56, 39, 60, 28, 24, 13, 14, 33].
However, dense 3D face correspondence remains a challenging task, particularly for data with large expressions.
It can be argued that this problem is implicit both mathematically and physically. In the mathematical view, unlike
the rigid case, the non-rigid registration problem belongs
to a much larger class that has no explicit formulation, and
large expressions add another layer of complexity for the
registration considering large deformations. In the physical
view, while locating landmarks on 3D faces can be guided by the common knowledge of the anatomical structures,
correspondence of points on smooth regions (such as the
check and forehead) has no solid definition. This also raises
difficulties in assessing the correspondence results.
The state-of-the-art literature [2, 35, 46, 28, 37, 63,
62, 65] commonly uses triangle mesh data and templatewarping strategies to establish dense correspondence between different faces. The mesh connection relationship
(topology) is intrinsically fixed during the correspondence
process, which is beneficial for accurate point-to-point correspondence. We adopt the template-warping strategy in
this work. First an arbitrary but noiseless face is chosen
as the template. After the correspondences of all faces are
completed, we use the average face of all neutral faces as
the template.
A single-template strategy cannot guarantee good results for large expression variations. To address this problem,
some existing works [37, 36, 51] treat the chin as articulate
shape and use blendshapes to model open-mouth motions,

10944

