Re-ranking via Metric Fusion for Object Retrieval and Person Re-identification
Song Bai1 Peng Tang2 Philip H.S. Torr1 Longin Jan Latecki3
1
University of Oxford 2 Huazhong University of Science and Technology 3 Temple University
{songbai.site,tangpeng723}@gmail.com, philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk, latecki@temple.edu

Abstract
This work studies the unsupervised re-ranking procedure
for object retrieval and person re-identification with a specific concentration on an ensemble of multiple metrics (or
similarities). While the re-ranking step is involved by running a diffusion process on the underlying data manifolds,
the fusion step can leverage the complementarity of multiple
metrics.
We give a comprehensive summary of existing fusion
with diffusion strategies, and systematically analyze their
pros and cons. Based on the analysis, we propose a unified yet robust algorithm which inherits their advantages
and discards their disadvantages. Hence, we call it Unified Ensemble Diffusion (UED). More interestingly, we derive that the inherited properties indeed stem from a theoretical framework, where the relevant works can be elegantly summarized as special cases of UED by imposing
additional constraints on the objective function and varying the solver of similarity propagation. Extensive experiments with 3D shape retrieval, image retrieval and person
re-identification demonstrate that the proposed framework
outperforms the state of the arts, and at the same time suggest that re-ranking via metric fusion is a promising tool to
further improve the retrieval performance of existing algorithms.

1. Introduction
Due to the advance in the acquisition, storage, and sharing of visual content, the image and multimedia collections have shown a continuous and consistent growth, both
in scope and diversity. Consequently, the development of
methods for indexing and retrieving such information has
become essential. Given a query instance, the goal of visual
retrieval is to find objects sharing similar visual appearances
with the query in a large database. Therefore, a reliable
metric (or similarity) function is vital to the retrieval performance.
However, traditional object retrieval systems perform
only pairwise comparisons, i.e., computing distance (or

similarity) measures between object pairs and ignoring the
contextual information encoded in the relationships among
objects. To address this issue, re-ranking approaches [33,
4, 5, 21] have been proposed for the sake of refining
the retrieval results without the need of user intervention.
Such methods (e.g., manifold ranking [71], diffusion process [10]) replace the pairwise distances by more global
similarity measures, capable of analyzing data collections
more globally and taking into account the underlying manifold structure to reveal the intrinsic relationship between
objects.
Meanwhile, with the long-standing development of feature learning, plenty of visual descriptors have been proposed, from the conventional handcrafted ones [56, 55, 45,
29] to deep-learned ones [11, 60, 66, 25]. Different visual
descriptors generally focus on different visual characteristics of objects. As a result, significant efforts [36] have been
devoted recently to metric fusion to leverage the complementary nature. Generally, metric (or similarity) fusion can
be done in any stage of a typical retrieval pipeline (e.g., feature learning stage [37], indexing stage [48, 65, 39]). In this
work, we consider metric fusion in the re-ranking stage, particularly diffusion process [10], to capture the geometrical
structure of multiple data manifolds.
Existing fusion with diffusion methods can be coarsely
divided into three categories. Naive Fusion (NF) simply averages the edge weights of multiple affinity graphs,
such as locally constrained mixed diffusion [32], graph fusion [68, 67], and Yang et al. [61]. In order to combine
two distinct and complementary metrics, Tensor Product
Fusion (TPF) [72] considers a homogeneous fusion on a
tensor product graph. To handle noisy input metric, Regularized Ensemble Diffusion (RED) [7] performs similarity
learning and weight learning simultaneously to maximize
the smoothness of multiple graph-based manifolds.
As detailed in Sec. 2, NF is the fastest among these methods, but it is extremely susceptible to noisy similarities. By
contrast, TPF considers the interplay of two similarities, attaining robustness to noise to a certain extent. However, it
can only fuse two similarities each time. Although RED
can eliminate the influence of noises via a dynamic weight

740

