Fast, Diverse and Accurate Image Captioning Guided By Part-of-Speech
Aditya Deshpande1∗, Jyoti Aneja1∗, Liwei Wang2 , Alexander Schwing1 and David Forsyth1
ardeshp2,janeja2,aschwing,daf@illinois.edu
1

Abstract
Image captioning is an ambiguous problem, with many
suitable captions for an image. To address ambiguity, beam
search is the de facto method for sampling multiple captions. However, beam search is computationally expensive
and known to produce generic captions [8, 10]. To address
this concern, some variational auto-encoder (VAE) [32]
and generative adversarial net (GAN) [5, 25] based methods have been proposed. Though diverse, GAN and VAE are
less accurate. In this paper, we first predict a meaningful
summary of the image, then generate the caption based on
that summary. We use part-of-speech as summaries, since
our summary should drive caption generation. We achieve
the trifecta: (1) High accuracy for the diverse captions as
evaluated by standard captioning metrics and user studies; (2) Faster computation of diverse captions compared
to beam search and diverse beam search [28]; and (3) High
diversity as evaluated by counting novel sentences, distinct
n-grams and mutual overlap (i.e., mBleu-4) scores.

1. Introduction
In this paper we show how to force an image captioning system to generate diverse captions by conditioning on
different high-level summaries of the image. Our summaries are quantized part-of-speech (POS) tag sequences.
Our system generates captions by (a) predicting different
summaries from the image then (b) predicting captions conditioned on each summary. This approach leads to captions
that are accurate, quick to obtain, and diverse. Our system
is accurate, because it is able to steer a number of narrow
beam searches to explore the space of caption sequences
more efficiently. It is fast because each beam is narrow. And
the captions are diverse, because depending on the summary (i.e., part-of-speech) the system is forced to produce
captions that contain (for example) more or less adjectives.
This means we can avoid the tendency to produce minimal
or generic captions that is common in systems that try to
∗ Denotes equal contribution.

liweiwang@tencent.com
2

University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
Method

Tencent AI Lab, Seattle
Fast

Diverse

Accurate

Beam search
×
×
X
×
×
X
Diverse beam search [28]
AG-CVAE [32]
X
X
×
X
X
X
Ours (POS)
Table 1: We show that our part-of-speech (POS) based
method achieves the trifecta of high accuracy, fast computation and more diversity. Beam search and diverse
beam search are slow. They also produce captions with high
mutual overlap and lower distinct n-grams than POS (see
mBleu-4, div-1 and div-2 in Tab. 5). POS and AG-CVAE
are fast, however POS does better on captioning metrics in
Fig. 3 and is therefore more accurate.
optimize likelihood without awareness of language priors
(like part-of-speech).
A large body of literature has focused on developing predictive image captioning techniques, often using recurrent
neural nets (RNN) [20, 29, 34, 12, 2]. More recently [3, 33],
demonstrate predictive captioning with accuracy similar to
RNNs while using convolutional networks. An essential
feature of captioning is that it is ambiguous – many captions
can describe the same image. This creates a problem, as
image captioning programs trained to maximize some score
may do so by producing strongly non-committal captions. It
also creates an opportunity for research – how can one produce multiple, diverse captions that still properly describe
the image? Our method offers a procedure to do so.
Tractable image captioning involves factoring the sequence model for the caption. Inference then requires beam
search, which investigates a set of captions determined by
local criteria to find the caption with highest posterior probability. Finding very good captions requires a wide beam,
which is slow. Moreover, beam search is also known to
generate generic captions that lack diversity [8, 10]. Variational auto-encoder (VAE) [32] and generative adversarial net (GAN) [5, 25, 14] formulations outperform beam
search on diversity metrics. VAE and GAN-based methods
sample latent vectors from some distribution, then generate
captions conditioned on these samples. The latent variables
have no exposed semantics, and captions tend not to score
as well (on captioning metrics) as those produced by beam
110695

