Revisiting Perspective Information for Efficient Crowd Counting
Miaojing Shi✶ , Zhaohui Yang✷ , Chao Xu✷ , Qijun Chen✸
✶
Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA
✷
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Peking University
✸
Department of Control Science and Engineering, Tongji University

Abstract
Crowd counting is the task of estimating people numbers in crowd images. Modern crowd counting methods
employ deep neural networks to estimate crowd counts via
crowd density regressions. A major challenge of this task
lies in the perspective distortion, which results in drastic
person scale change in an image. Density regression on the
small person area is in general very hard. In this work,
we propose a perspective-aware convolutional neural network (PACNN) for efficient crowd counting, which integrates the perspective information into density regression
to provide additional knowledge of the person scale change
in an image. Ground truth perspective maps are firstly generated for training; PACNN is then specifically designed to
predict multi-scale perspective maps, and encode them as
perspective-aware weighting layers in the network to adaptively combine the outputs of multi-scale density maps. The
weights are learned at every pixel of the maps such that the
final density combination is robust to the perspective distortion. We conduct extensive experiments on the ShanghaiTech, WorldExpo’10, UCF CC 50, and UCSD datasets,
and demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of PACNN
over the state-of-the-art.

Density Map

Perspective Map

Figure 1: The density map shows the locally smoothed crowd
count at every location in the image. The perspective map reflects
the perspective distortion at every location in the image, e.g. how
many pixels correspond to a human height of one meter at each
location [46]. Person scale changes drastically due to the perspective distortion. Density regression on the small person area is in
general very hard. We integrate the perspective map into density
regression to provide additional information about the general person scale change from near to far in the image.

1. Introduction

regression [7, 15, 16] and soon outperformed by deep representations [25, 46, 47].

The rapid growth of the world’s population has led to
fast urbanization and resulted in more frequent crowd gatherings, e.g. sport events, music festivals, political rallies.
Accurate and fast crowd counting thereby becomes essential to handle large crowds for public safety. Traditional
crowd counting methods estimate crowd counts via the detection of each individual pedestrian [44, 39, 3, 27, 21]. Recent methods conduct crowd counting via the regression of
density maps [5, 7, 30, 12]: the problem of crowd counting
is casted as estimating a continuous density function whose
integral over an image gives the count of persons within that
image [7, 15, 16, 25, 46, 47, 31] (see Fig. 1: Density Map).
Handcrafted features were firstly employed in the density

A major challenge of this task lies in the drastic perspective distortions in crowd images (see Fig. 1). The perspective problem is related to camera calibration which estimates a camera’s 6 degrees-of freedom (DOF) [10]. Besides
the camera DOFs, it is also defined in way to signify the
person scale change from near to far in an image in crowd
counting task [5, 6, 46, 11]. Perspective information has
been widely used in traditional crowd counting methods to
normalize features extracted at different locations of the image [5, 16, 9, 22]. Despite the great benefits achieved by
using image perspectives, there exists one clear disadvantage regarding its acquisition, which normally requires additional information/annotations of the camera parameters
17279

