Exploiting Kernel Sparsity and Entropy for Interpretable CNN Compression
Yuchao Li1# , Shaohui Lin1#, Baochang Zhang3 , Jianzhuang Liu4 ,
David Doermann5 , Yongjian Wu6 , Feiyue Huang6 , Rongrong Ji1,2∗
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Department of Cognitive Science,
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China, 3 Beihang University, China, 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
5
University at Buffalo, USA, 6 BestImage, Tencent Technology (Shanghai) Co.,Ltd, China
xiamenlyc@gmail.com, shaohuilin007@gmail.com, bczhang@buaa.edu.cn, liu.jianzhuang@huawei.com,
doermann@buffalo.edu, littlekenwu@tencent.com, garyhuang@tencent.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Compressing convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has
received ever-increasing research focus. However, most existing CNN compression methods do not interpret their inherent structures to distinguish the implicit redundancy. In
this paper, we investigate the problem of CNN compression
from a novel interpretable perspective. The relationship between the input feature maps and 2D kernels is revealed
in a theoretical framework, based on which a kernel sparsity and entropy (KSE) indicator is proposed to quantitate
the feature map importance in a feature-agnostic manner
to guide model compression. Kernel clustering is further
conducted based on the KSE indicator to accomplish highprecision CNN compression. KSE is capable of simultaneously compressing each layer in an efficient way, which is
significantly faster compared to previous data-driven feature map pruning methods. We comprehensively evaluate
the compression and speedup of the proposed method on
CIFAR-10, SVHN and ImageNet 2012. Our method demonstrates superior performance gains over previous ones. In
particular, it achieves 4.7× FLOPs reduction and 2.9×
compression on ResNet-50 with only a Top-5 accuracy drop
of 0.35% on ImageNet 2012, which significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved great success in various computer vision tasks,
including object classification [5, 9, 12, 34], detection
[31, 32] and semantic segmentation [2, 23]. However,
deep CNNs typically require high computation overhead
# Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding author.

Conv Layer

*
Sparsity

=
Sparsity

Feature map

2D kernels
Information richness

Entropy

Figure 1. The relationship between an input feature map and its
corresponding 2D kernels is investigated. We introduce the kernel
sparsity and entropy (KSE) to represent the sparsity and information richness of the input feature maps.

and large memory footprint, which prevents them from being directly applied on mobile or embedded devices. As a
result, extensive efforts have been made for CNN compression and acceleration, including low-rank approximation
[13, 17, 18, 39], parameter quantization [11, 47] and binarization [30]. One promising direction to reduce the redundancy of CNNs is network pruning [3, 4, 7, 10, 20, 24, 43],
which can be applied to different elements of CNNs such as
the weights, the filters and the layers.
Early works in network pruning [3, 4] mainly resort to
removing less important weight connections independently
with precision loss as little as possible. However, these unstructured pruning methods require specialized software or
hardware designs to store a large number of indices for efficient speedup. Among them, filter pruning has received
ever-increasing research attention, which can simultaneously reduce computation complexity and memory overhead by directly pruning redundant filters, and is well supported by various off-the-shelf deep learning platforms. For
5120
2800

