Efficient Video Classification Using Fewer Frames
Shweta Bhardwaj∗
shweta@cse.iitm.ac.in

Mukundhan Srinivasan

Mitesh M. Khapra∗

NVIDIA Bangalore

miteshk@cse.iitm.ac.in

msrinivasan@nvidia.com

Abstract
Recently, there has been a lot of interest in building compact models for video classification which have a small
memory footprint (< 1 GB) [16]. While these models are
compact, they typically operate by repeated application of
a small weight matrix to all the frames in a video. For example, recurrent neural network based methods compute
a hidden state for every frame of the video using a recurrent weight matrix. Similarly, cluster-and-aggregate based
methods such as NetVLAD have a learnable clustering matrix which is used to assign soft-clusters to every frame in
the video. Since these models look at every frame in the
video, the number of floating point operations (FLOPs) is
still large even though the memory footprint is small. In this
work, we focus on building compute-efficient video classification models which process fewer frames and hence have
less number of FLOPs. Similar to memory efficient models, we use the idea of distillation albeit in a different setting. Specifically, in our case, a compute-heavy teacher
which looks at all the frames in the video is used to train a
compute-efficient student which looks at only a small fraction of frames in the video. This is in contrast to a typical memory efficient Teacher-Student setting, wherein both
the teacher and the student look at all the frames in the
video but the student has fewer parameters. Our work thus
complements the research on memory efficient video classification. We do an extensive evaluation with three types
of models for video classification, viz., (i) recurrent models
(ii) cluster-and-aggregate models and (iii) memory-efficient
cluster-and-aggregate models and show that in each of
these cases, a see-it-all teacher can be used to train a compute efficient see-very-little student. Overall, we show that
the proposed student network can reduce the inference time
by 30% and the number of FLOPs by approximately 90%
with a negligible drop in the performance.

∗ Indian Institute of Technology Madras and Robert Bosch Centre for
Data Science and AI (RBC-DSAI)

1. Introduction
Today video content has become extremely prevalent on
the internet influencing all aspects of our life such as education, entertainment, communication etc. This has led to
an increasing interest in automatic video processing with
the aim of identifying activities [32, 40], generating textual
descriptions [9], generating summaries [11, 27], answering
questions [15] and so on. On one hand, with the availability
of large-scale datasets [34, 36, 18, 1, 39] for various video
processing tasks, it has now become possible to train increasingly complex models which have high memory and
computational needs but on the other hand there is a demand for running these models on low power devices such
as mobile phones and tablets with stringent constraints on
latency, memory and computational cost. It is important to
balance the two and design models which can learn from
large amounts of data but still be computationally cheap at
inference time.
In this context, the recently concluded ECCV workshop
on YouTube-8M Large-Scale Video Understanding (2018)
[16] focused on building memory efficient models which
use less than 1GB of memory. The main motivation was to
discourage the use of ensemble based methods and instead
focus on memory efficient single models. One of the main
ideas explored by several participants [24, 28, 30] in this
workshop was to use knowledge distillation to build more
compact student models. More specifically, they first train
a teacher network which has a large number of parameters
and then use this network to guide a much smaller student
network which has limited memory requirements and can
thus be employed at inference time. Of course, in addition to requiring less memory, such a model would also require fewer FLOPs as the size of weight matrices, hidden
representations, etc. would be smaller. However, there is
scope for reducing the FLOPs further because existing models process all frames in the video which may be redundant.
Based on the results of the ECCV workshop [16], we
found that the two most popular paradigms for video classification are (i) recurrent neural network based methods and
(ii) cluster-and-aggregate based methods. Not surprisingly,
the third type of approaches based on C3D (3D convolu-

354

