EventNet: Asynchronous Recursive Event Processing
Yusuke Sekikawa† , Kosuke Hara† , and Hideo Saito‡
†

Denso IT Laboratory, ‡ Keio University

Abstract
Event cameras are bio-inspired vision sensors that mimic
retinas to asynchronously report per-pixel intensity changes
rather than outputting an actual intensity image at regular intervals. This new paradigm of image sensor offers
significant potential advantages; namely, sparse and nonredundant data representation. Unfortunately, however,
most of the existing artificial neural network architectures,
such as a CNN, require dense synchronous input data, and
therefore, cannot make use of the sparseness of the data. We
propose EventNet, a neural network designed for real-time
processing of asynchronous event streams in a recursive and
event-wise manner. EventNet models dependence of the output on tens of thousands of causal events recursively using
a novel temporal coding scheme. As a result, at inference
time, our network operates in an event-wise manner that
is realized with very few sum-of-the-product operations—
look-up table and temporal feature aggregation—which enables processing of 1 mega or more events per second on
standard CPU. In experiments using real data, we demonstrated the real-time performance and robustness of our
framework.

1. Introduction
Existing frame-based paradigms—dense synchronous
video stream acquisition and dense/batch processing—
cannot scale to higher frame rates or finer temporal resolutions because the computational complexity grows linearly with the processing rate or temporal resolution (Fig.
1 top). The grows of the computational complexity comes
from the redundant synchronous measurement/transmission
of dense intensity frames for unchanged pixels and the following redundant signal processing algorithm, such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [24, 7, 4, 20, 28], which
computes the sum of the products, even for the unchanged
pixels. Furthermore, the same frames are computed multiple times (temporal sliding window operation) to model
temporal dependencies [24].

The event-based camera [10] discards the frame-based
paradigm and instead adopts a bio-inspired approach of independent and asynchronous pixel brightness change measurement without redundancy. This new type of data acquisition has the potential to enable a new paradigm of highspeed, non-redundant signal processing using the naturally
compressed non-redundant event stream.
Our research goal was to develop a neural network architecture that can process an extremely high-rate,1 variable length, and non-uniform raw event stream in real time.
To this end, we proposed EventNet, a neural network designed for the real-time processing of an asynchronous
event stream in an event-wise manner. Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
Recursive Architecture
We proposed a recursive algorithm by formulating dependence on causal events (which could be tens of thousands)
to the output recursively using a novel temporal coding and
aggregation scheme that comprises a complex phase rotation and complex max operation.
Lookup Table Realization of MLP
The deep multi-layer-perceptron (MLP) appears in the recursive formula and dominates most of the computation. It
was replaced by a lookup table (LUT) at inference time by
the factorization of the temporal term. This replacement removed most of the sum-of-product operations of the MLP.
Asynchronously Two Module Architecture
The entire network was separated into two modules working asynchronously; an event-driven module that updates
the global feature immediately as it receives a new event,
and the on-demand module that computes the final output
with a lightweight MLP. This separate architecture avoids a
wasteful computation of output that is not used by applications (Fig. 1 bottom).
Applicability to Real-World Data
We demonstrated the applicability of EventNet for realworld applications using publicly available datasets. We
applied EventNet to event-wise semantic segmentation, ob1 Maximum event rate of the iniVation DAVIS240 camera is 12 mega
events per second.

i3887

