Feedback Network for Image Super-Resolution
Zhen Li1 Jinglei Yang2 Zheng Liu3 Xiaomin Yang1∗ Gwanggil Jeon4 Wei Wu1∗
1
Sichuan University, 2 University of California, Santa Barbara, 3 University of British Columbia,
4
Incheon National University

Abstract
Recent advances in image super-resolution (SR) explored the power of deep learning to achieve a better reconstruction performance. However, the feedback mechanism, which commonly exists in human visual system, has
not been fully exploited in existing deep learning based
image SR methods. In this paper, we propose an image
super-resolution feedback network (SRFBN) to refine lowlevel representations with high-level information. Specifically, we use hidden states in a recurrent neural network
(RNN) with constraints to achieve such feedback manner.
A feedback block is designed to handle the feedback connections and to generate powerful high-level representations. The proposed SRFBN comes with a strong early reconstruction ability and can create the final high-resolution
image step by step. In addition, we introduce a curriculum learning strategy to make the network well suitable
for more complicated tasks, where the low-resolution images are corrupted by multiple types of degradation. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superiority of
the proposed SRFBN in comparison with the state-of-theart methods. Code is avaliable at https://github.
com/Paper99/SRFBN_CVPR19.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) is a low-level computer vision task, which aims to reconstruct a high-resolution (HR)
image from its low-resolution (LR) counterpart. It is inherently ill-posed since multiple HR images may result
in an identical LR image. To address this problem, numerous image SR methods have been proposed, including interpolation-based methods[45], reconstruction-based
methods[42], and learning-based methods [33, 26, 34, 15,
29, 6, 18].
Since Dong et al. [6] firstly introduced a shallow Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to implement image SR,
deep learning based methods have attracted extensive at∗ Corresponds to: {arielyang,wuwei}@scu.edu.cn

Output

t 1
Fout

Fin

Feedback
block

t
Fout

Input

(a)
More clearly
SR1

SR

SR 2

SR 3

Unfold in time

LR

LR

LR

t 1

t2

LR

t 3

(b)
Figure 1. The illustrations of the feedback mechanism in the proposed network. Blue arrows represent the feedback connections.
(a) Feedback via the hidden state at one iteration. The feedback
block (FB) receives the information of the input Fin and hidden
t−1
t
state from last iteration Fout
, and then passes its hidden state Fout
to the next iteration and output. (b) The principle of our feedback
scheme.

tention in recent years due to their superior reconstruction
performance. The benefits of deep learning based methods
mainly come from its two key factors, i.e., depth and skip
connections (residual or dense) [18, 36, 31, 11, 47, 46, 37].
The first one provides a powerful capability to represent and
establish a more complex LR-HR mapping, while preserving more contextual information with larger receptive fields.
The second factor can efficiently alleviate the gradient vanishing/exploding problems caused by simply stacking more
layers to deepen networks.
As the depth of networks grows, the number of parameters increases. A large-capacity network will occupy huge

3867

