Local Features and Visual Words Emerge in Activations
Oriane Siméoni1

Yannis Avrithis1

1 Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA

Ondřej Chum2

2 VRG, FEE, CTU in Prague

Abstract
We propose a novel method of deep spatial matching
(DSM) for image retrieval. Initial ranking is based on image descriptors extracted from convolutional neural network activations by global pooling, as in recent state-ofthe-art work. However, the same sparse 3D activation
tensor is also approximated by a collection of local features. These local features are then robustly matched to
approximate the optimal alignment of the tensors. This happens without any network modification, additional layers or
training. No local feature detection happens on the original
image. No local feature descriptors and no visual vocabulary are needed throughout the whole process.
We experimentally show that the proposed method
achieves the state-of-the-art performance on standard
benchmarks across different network architectures and different global pooling methods. The highest gain in performance is achieved when diffusion on the nearest-neighbor
graph of global descriptors is initiated from spatially verified images.

1. Introduction
Image and specific object retrieval is commonly addressed as large scale image matching: a query is matched
against the database images and the final ranking is given
by the matching score. In the early retrieval days, methods based on local features were dominating [35, 23]. The
matching score was first approximated by a similarity of
bag of words [35] or aggregated descriptors [14], and then
re-ranked by efficient spatial verification [26, 25].
Recently, image retrieval is dominated by convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [10, 29]. Image representation is
derived from the output of the CNN, which can be interpreted as a collection of 2D response maps of pattern detectors. The position of the response indicates the location of
the pattern in the image, the size of the pattern is limited by
the receptive field, and the value of the response indicates
the confidence in the presence of the pattern.
1 Answer: (d) [this work].

Figure 1. Fast spatial matching [26] finds a linear geometric transformation between two views of an object based on a local feature
representation. This is used for spatial verification in large-scale
image retrieval. Inlier correspondences shown, colored by visual
word. What is the underlying representation?1
(a) SIFT [19] descriptors on Hessian-affine [22] local features.
(b) Descriptors on detected patches by an end-to-end differentiable pipeline using patch pair labels [42].
(c) A subset of convolutional features at locations selected by an
attention mechanism learned on image-level labels [24].
(d) Local maxima on each channel of a vanilla feature map. No
vocabulary needed.

Images of corresponding objects or object parts have
similar response in all channels. It is known that the imageto-image mapping can be recovered by correlating the response tensors of the two images [18, 4, 31].
In general, the CNN activation tensor size depends on
the number of channels and the image size. It is is too
large to be stored, especially for large-scale applications. To
construct a descriptor of a fixed and reasonable size, vectors obtained by global pooling are extracted instead, for
instance mean pooling [2], max pooling [40], generalizedmean pooling [29], and others [15, 40]. If the CNNresponse tensors are matching, the statistics obtained after
the global pooling should be matching too.
Global pooling not only reduces the size of the descriptor, but also injects view-point invariance. In fact, the global
pooling is, similarly as bag of features, invariant to a very
111651

