An Attention Enhanced Graph Convolutional LSTM Network for
Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Chenyang Si1,2
Wentao Chen1,3
Wei Wang1,2∗
Liang Wang1,2
Tieniu Tan1,2,3
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
University of Science and Technology of China (USTC)
{chenyang.si, wentao.chen}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {wangwei, wangliang, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Skeleton-based action recognition is an important task
that requires the adequate understanding of movement characteristics of a human action from the given skeleton sequence. Recent studies have shown that exploring
spatial and temporal features of the skeleton sequence is
vital for this task. Nevertheless, how to effectively extract
discriminative spatial and temporal features is still a challenging problem. In this paper, we propose a novel Attention Enhanced Graph Convolutional LSTM Network (AGCLSTM) for human action recognition from skeleton data.
The proposed AGC-LSTM can not only capture discriminative features in spatial configuration and temporal dynamics but also explore the co-occurrence relationship between
spatial and temporal domains. We also present a temporal hierarchical architecture to increase temporal receptive
fields of the top AGC-LSTM layer, which boosts the ability
to learn the high-level semantic representation and significantly reduces the computation cost. Furthermore, to select
discriminative spatial information, the attention mechanism is employed to enhance information of key joints in each
AGC-LSTM layer. Experimental results on two datasets are
provided: NTU RGB+D dataset and Northwestern-UCLA
dataset. The comparison results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach and show that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on both datasets.

1. Introduction
In the computer vision field, human action recognition
plays a fundamental and important role, with the purpose
of predicting the action classes from videos. It has been s∗ Corresponding Author: Wei Wang

Figure 1. The structure of one AGC-LSTM layer. Different from
traditional LSTM, the graph convolutional operator within AGCLSTM causes the input, hidden state, and cell memory of AGCLSTM to be graph-structured data.

tudied for decades and is still very popular due to its extensive potential applications, e.g., video surveillance, humancomputer interaction, sports analysis and so on [18, 36, 1].
Action recognition is a challenging task in the computer vision community. There are various attempts on human action recognition based on RGB video and 3D skeleton data. The RGB video based action recognition methods
[24, 34, 27, 35] mainly focus on modeling spatial and temporal representations from RGB frames and temporal optical flow. Despite RGB video based methods have achieved
promising results, there still exist some limitations, e.g.,
background clutter, illumination changes, appearance variation, and so on. 3D skeleton data represents the body structure with a set of 3D coordinate positions of key joints. Since skeleton sequence does not contain color information,
it is not affected by the limitations of RGB video. Such
robust representation allows to model more discriminative
temporal characteristics about human actions. Moreover,
Johansson et al. [9] have given an empirical and theoretical
basis that key joints can provide highly effective information about human motion. Besides, the Microsoft Kinect

1227

