DuDoNet: Dual Domain Network for CT Metal Artifact Reduction
Wei-An Lin*1 Haofu Liao*2 Cheng Peng1 Xiaohang Sun3 Jingdan Zhang4
Jiebo Luo2 Rama Chellappa1 Shaohua Kevin Zhou5,6
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 University of Rochester 3 Princeton University
4
Z2W Corporation 5 Chinese Academy of Sciences 6 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen

Abstract
Computed tomography (CT) is an imaging modality
widely used for medical diagnosis and treatment. CT images are often corrupted by undesirable artifacts when
metallic implants are carried by patients, which creates the
problem of metal artifact reduction (MAR). Existing methods for reducing the artifacts due to metallic implants are
inadequate for two main reasons. First, metal artifacts
are structured and non-local so that simple image domain
enhancement approaches would not suffice. Second, the
MAR approaches which attempt to reduce metal artifacts
in the X-ray projection (sinogram) domain inevitably lead
to severe secondary artifact due to sinogram inconsistency.
To overcome these difficulties, we propose an end-to-end
trainable Dual Domain Network (DuDoNet) to simultaneously restore sinogram consistency and enhance CT images.
The linkage between the sinogram and image domains is
a novel Radon inversion layer that allows the gradients to
back-propagate from the image domain to the sinogram domain during training. Extensive experiments show that our
method achieves significant improvements over other single
domain MAR approaches. To the best of our knowledge, it
is the first end-to-end dual-domain network for MAR.

1. Introduction
Computed tomography (CT) images reconstructed from
X-ray projections allow effective medical diagnosis and
treatment. However, due to increasingly common metallic
implants, CT images are often adversely affected by metal
artifacts which not only exhibit undesirable visual effects
but also increase the possibility of false diagnosis. This
creates the problem of metal artifact reduction (MAR), for
which existing solutions are inadequate.
Unlike typical image restoration tasks such as superresolution [14, 32, 25, 35], compression artifact removal [31, 7], and denoising [3, 16, 15], metal artifacts
* First two authors contributed equally.

(a) CT with metal artifacts

(b) RDN2 [32]

(c) CNNMAR [33]

(d) DuDoNet (Ours)

Figure 1: (a) Sample MAR results for a CT image with
intense metal artifact. Metal implants are colored in yellow. (b) Artifacts are not fully reduced and a ‘white band’
is present between the two implants. (c) Organ boundaries
on the right are smeared out. (d) DuDoNet effectively reduces metal shadows and recovers fine details.

are often structured and non-local (e.g. streaking and
shadowing artifacts as in Figure 1a). Modeling such artifacts in image domain is extremely difficult. Therefore, before the emergence of deep learning, most existing
works [12, 4, 18, 17] proposed to reduce metal artifact in the
X-ray projection (sinogram) domain. The metal-corrupted
regions are viewed as missing, and replaced by interpolated
values. However, as the projections are taken from a single
object under certain geometry, physical constraints should
be satisfied by the enhanced sinogram. Otherwise, severe
secondary artifacts can be introduced in the reconstructed
CT images.
2 The residual dense network (RDN) proposed in [32] without upscaling layers.

10512

