Geometry-Consistent Generative Adversarial Networks for One-Sided
Unsupervised Domain Mapping

1

Huan Fu∗ 1
Mingming Gong∗ 2,3
Chaohui Wang4
Kayhan Batmanghelich2
Kun Zhang3
Dacheng Tao1
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, FEIT, University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
2
Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh
3
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
4
Université Paris-Est, LIGM (UMR 8049), CNRS, ENPC, ESIEE Paris, UPEM, Marne-la-Vallée, France

{hufu6371@uni., dacheng.tao@}sydney.edu.au

{mig73, kayhan}@pitt.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised domain mapping aims to learn a function
GXY to translate domain X to Y in the absence of paired
examples. Finding the optimal GXY without paired data
is an ill-posed problem, so appropriate constraints are required to obtain reasonable solutions. While some prominent constraints such as cycle consistency and distance
preservation successfully constrain the solution space, they
overlook the special properties of images that simple geometric transformations do not change the image’s semantic structure. Based on this special property, we develop
a geometry-consistent generative adversarial network (GcGAN), which enables one-sided unsupervised domain mapping. GcGAN takes the original image and its counterpart
image transformed by a predefined geometric transformation as inputs and generates two images in the new domain
coupled with the corresponding geometry-consistency constraint. The geometry-consistency constraint reduces the
space of possible solutions while keep the correct solutions
in the search space. Quantitative and qualitative comparisons with the baseline (GAN alone) and the state-of-the-art
methods including CycleGAN [66] and DistanceGAN [5]
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Domain mapping or image-to-image translation, which
targets at translating an image from one domain to another,
has been intensively investigated over the past few years.
Let X ∈ X denote a random variable representing source
domain images and Y ∈ Y represent target domain images.
According to whether we have access to a paired sample
{(xi , yi )}N
i=1 , domain mapping can be studied in a super∗ equal contribution

chaohui.wang@u-pem.fr

kunz1@cmu.edu

vised or unsupervised manner. While several works have
successfully produced high-quality translations by focusing
on supervised domain mapping with constraints provided
by cross-domain image pairs [46, 26, 59, 58], the progress
of unsupervised domain mapping is relatively slow.
In unsupervised domain mapping, the goal is to model
the joint distribution PXY given samples drawn from the
marginal distributions PX and PY in individual domains.
Since the two marginal distributions can be inferred from
an infinite set of possible joint distributions, it is difficult
to guarantee that an individual input x ∈ X and the output
GXY (x) are paired up in a meaningful way without additional assumptions or constraints.
To address this problem, recent approaches have exploited the cycle-consistency assumption, i.e., a mapping
GXY and its inverse mapping GY X should be bijections
[66, 28, 61]. Specifically, when feeding an example x ∈ X
into the networks GXY ◦ GY X : X → Y → X, the output
should be a reconstruction of x and vise versa for y, i.e.,
GY X (GXY (x)) ≈ x and GXY (GY X (y)) ≈ y. Further,
DistanceGAN [5] showed that maintaining the distances
between images within domains allows one-sided unsupervised domain mapping.
Existing constraints overlook the special properties of
images that simple geometric transformations (global geometric transformations without shape deformation) do not
change the image’s semantic structure. Here, semantic
structure refers to the information that distinguishes different object/staff classes, which can be easily perceived by
humans regardless of trivial geometric transformations such
as rotation. Based on this property, we develop a geometryconsistency constraint, which helps in reducing the search
space of possible solutions while still keeping the correct set
of solutions under consideration, and results in a geometryconsistent generative adversarial network (GcGAN).
Our geometry-consistency constraint is motivated by the
12427

