Towards Natural and Accurate Future Motion Prediction of Humans and
Animals
Zhenguang Liu∗1 , Shuang Wu∗2,3 , Shuyuan Jin4 , Qi Liu4 , Shijian Lu3 , Roger Zimmermann4 , Li Cheng2,5
1
Zhejiang Gongshang University, 2 Bioinformatics Institute, A*STAR,
3
Nanyang Technological University, 4 National University of Singapore, 5 University of Alberta
liuzhenguang2008@gmail.com, wushuang@bii.a-star.edu.sg, shuyuanjin@u.nus.edu,
leuchine@gmail.com, shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg, rogerz@comp.nus.edu.sg, chengli@bii.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract

animal simulation in games and movies, human or animal
tracking, and intelligent driving [4, 25, 21, 31].

Anticipating the future motions of 3D articulate objects
is challenging due to its non-linear and highly stochastic
nature. Current approaches typically represent the skeleton
of an articulate object as a set of 3D joints, which unfortunately ignores the relationship between joints, and fails
to encode fine-grained anatomical constraints. Moreover,
conventional recurrent neural networks, such as LSTM and
GRU, are employed to model motion contexts, which inherently have difficulties in capturing long-term dependencies.
To address these problems, we propose to explicitly encode
anatomical constraints by modeling their skeletons with a
Lie algebra representation. Importantly, a hierarchical recurrent network structure is developed to simultaneously
encodes local contexts of individual frames and global contexts of the sequence. We proceed to explore the applications of our approach to several distinct quantities including human, fish, and mouse. Extensive experiments show
that our approach achieves more natural and accurate predictions over state-of-the-art methods.

In this paper, we focus on the problem of predicting future 3D poses of an articulate object given its prior skeleton
sequence. The problem is challenging due to the non-linear
dynamics, high dimensionality, and stochastic nature of human or animal movements. Conventional approaches utilize
latent-variable models, such as hidden Markov models [18],
Gaussian processes [29], and restricted Boltzmann machine
[26] to capture the temporal dynamics of human motions.
Recently, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) based methods
are introduced with improved performance. For example,
[9] uses an Encoder-Recurrent-Decoder network where the
long short-term memory (LSTM) is utilized in the recurrent
layer. [17] divides human body into spine, arms, and legs,
and uses multiple RNNs to model interactions between different body parts. Further, [21] and [25] resort to residual
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) and Modified Highway Unit
(MHU) to capture motion contexts.

1. Introduction
For a human being, it is usually not very hard to predict short-term future motions of the moving objects around
them. Without this ability, it would be extremely difficult
for us to walk in a crowded street, get past defenders in
a football game, or avoid imminent dangers in movement.
Similarly, anticipating the movements of articulate objects,
especially humans and animals, is crucial for a machine to
adjust its behavior, plan its action, and properly allocate its
attention when interacting with humans and animals. Natural and accurate future motion prediction is also highly valuable for a wide range of applications including high-fidelity
∗ Denotes equal contribution

Scrutinizing the released implementations of existing
methods [17, 21, 9], one observes that current methods often encounter difficulties in obtaining natural and accurate
future motion prediction. Specifically, for relatively longterm prediction, existing methods tend to degrade into motionless states or drift away to non-human like motions. For
short-term prediction, there often exists a clear discontinuity between the prior pose sequence and the first prediction
[17]. Interestingly, quantitative evaluations revealed that
many existing methods may be outperformed by a trivial
baseline that simply predicts the future as its last observed
pose [21].
We believe these issues are mainly due to the following
reasons. First, current algorithms do not respect the physical laws of motions based on the skeletal anatomy. This
often leads to strange distortions in the predicted motion.
Second, In modelling temporal motion dynamics, current
approaches rely on conventional recurrent units, such as
110004

