Biologically-Constrained Graphs for Global Connectomics Reconstruction
Brian Matejek∗1 , Daniel Haehn1 , Haidong Zhu2 , Donglai Wei1 , Toufiq Parag3 , and Hanspeter Pfister1
1

Harvard University

2

Tsinghua University

3

Comcast Research

Abstract

of neurons is infeasible and automatic segmentation techniques are required.

Most current state-of-the-art connectome reconstruction
pipelines have two major steps: initial pixel-based segmentation with affinity prediction and watershed transform, and
refined segmentation by merging over-segmented regions.
These methods rely only on local context and are typically
agnostic to the underlying biology. Since a few merge errors can lead to several incorrectly merged neuronal processes, these algorithms are currently tuned towards oversegmentation producing an overburden of costly proofreading. We propose a third step for connectomics reconstruction pipelines to refine an over-segmentation using both local and global context with an emphasis on adhering to the
underlying biology. We first extract a graph from an input segmentation where nodes correspond to segment labels and edges indicate potential split errors in the oversegmentation. To increase throughput and allow for largescale reconstruction, we employ biologically inspired geometric constraints based on neuron morphology to reduce
the number of nodes and edges. Next, two neural networks
learn these neuronal shapes to aid the graph construction
process further. Lastly, we reformulate the region merging problem as a graph partitioning one to leverage global
context. We demonstrate the performance of our approach
on four real-world connectomics datasets with an average
variation of information improvement of 21.3%.

Current state-of-the-art automatic 3D reconstruction approaches typically use pixel-based convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and watershed transforms to generate an
initial over-segmentation [24, 37, 42], followed by region
merging steps [11, 21, 25, 30, 35]. Flood-filling networks
combine these two steps into one by gradually expanding
segments from a seed voxel [18]. However, all of these
above strategies make decisions using only the local context and do not consider the global ramifications to individual merges. Therefore, a small number of compounding
merge errors can create an under-segmentation with several neuronal processes labeled as one neuron. Since correcting such merge errors is computationally challenging,
current methods typically favor over-segmentation where a
neuronal process is segmented into multiple labels. Unfortunately proofreading these split errors, while easier, still
remains onerous [33].

1. Introduction
By studying connectomes–wiring diagrams extracted
from the brain containing every neuron and the synapses between them–neuroscientists hope to understand better certain neurological diseases, generate more faithful models of
the brain, and advance artificial intelligence [12, 15]. To
this end, neuroscientists produce high-resolution images of
brain tissue with electron microscopes where every synapse,
mitochondrion, and cell boundary is visible [19]. Since
these datasets now exceed a petabyte in size, manual tracing
∗ Corresponding author, bmatejek@seas.harvard.edu

We propose a third step for connectomics reconstruction
workflows to refine these over-segmentations and close the
gap between automatic and manual segmentation. We reformulate the region merging problem as a graph partitioning one to leverage global context during the agglomeration
process. Thus far the computational burden associated with
global optimization strategies remains their biggest drawback despite some research into parallelizing the computation [2]. Performing the graph partitioning step after an existing agglomeration technique allows us to capture larger
shape context when making decisions. Furthermore, the
amount of computation significantly decreases as the input
method correctly segments a large number of supervoxels.
The remaining split errors typically occur in places where
a neuronal process becomes quite thin or the corresponding
image data noisy—difficult locations to reconstruct using
only the local context from images and affinities.
When constructing our graph, we employ geometric constraints guided by the underlying biological morphology
to reduce the number of nodes and edges. Due to their
biological nature, over-segmented regions should be con12089

