Ensemble Deep Manifold Similarity Learning using Hard Proxies
Nicolas Aziere and Sinisa Todorovic
School of EECS, Oregon State University
azieren@oregonstate.edu, sinisa@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
This paper is about deep image-similarity learning such
that images of the same class have more similar deep
feature representations than those belonging to different
classes. For learning, prior work typically specifies loss
in terms of ℓ2 -distances or dot-products between deep features, despite the well-known non-Euclidean nature of deep
feature spaces. Our first contribution is in specifying the
N -pair loss using a manifold similarity of deep features.
We introduce a new time- and memory-efficient estimation
of the manifold similarities that uses a closed-form convergence solution of the Random Walk algorithm. We randomly
partition the deep feature space, and express the manifold
similarities via representatives of the resulting subspaces,
a.k.a. proxies. Multiple random partitions of the deep feature space gives an ensemble of proxies which can be jointly
used for estimating image similarity. Our second contribution is aimed at reducing overfitting by estimating hard
proxies that are as close to one another as possible, but remain in their respective subspaces. We outperform the state
of the art in both image retrieval and clustering on the CUB200-2011, Cars196, and Stanford Online Products datasets
with the same complexity as related ensemble methods.

1. Introduction
This paper presents an approach to deep metric learning. Our objective is to learn deep representations of images such that images belonging to the same class have
more similar representations than those belonging to different classes. This is an important problem with a wide range
of applications, including image retrieval [16, 17], image
clustering [18], and fine-grained image classification [4,11].
Recent work uses a convolutional neural network (CNN)
to compute the image’s deep feature which satisfies the
above objective. The CNN is typically trained with the
contrastive loss [2], triplet loss [7, 21], or N -pair loss [17].
These loss functions are usually specified in terms of ℓ2 distances or dot-products which are ill-suited to the highly
non-Euclidean deep feature space.

Recent works address this issue by: (i) Specifying loss as
a function of manifold distances of deep features [1,8,9]; or
(ii) Partitioning the deep feature space first into subspaces,
then projecting data to a new space spanned by representatives of the subspaces, and finally estimating loss in the
new space [10, 12, 13, 23]. Both groups of methods have
shortcomings that we seek to alleviate.
The first group of methods uses the Random Walk algorithm [24] for estimating a geodesic distance (or similarity)
between data points on a manifold, referred to as manifold
distance (or manifold similarity). However, incorporating
Random Walk in deep learning is difficult, because the former requires access to all data whereas deep learning organizes training in mini-batches. Also, Random Walk, being
iterative, significantly increases complexity of training.
Weaknesses of the second group of methods pertain to
specification of the new embedding space. For example,
deep features are projected onto the new space spanned by:
(a) One-hot vectors [23], or (b) Randomly sampled vectors,
a.k.a. proxies [12]. Both one-hot vectors and randomly
sampled proxies are heuristic and not learned end-to-end.
Toward addressing the aforementioned shortcomings,
we make two contributions in training of our CNN, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (left). Our first contribution is in specifying a time- and memory-efficient algorithm for estimating
loss in terms of manifold similarities between deep features.
Unlike prior work, we adapt Random Walk to estimate the
manifold similarities of only a small number of data in each
mini-batch of deep learning, rather than on all training data.
This allows for efficiently computing the manifold similarities using the closed-form convergence solution of Random
Walk, rather than running its many iterations.
Following the above second group of approaches, we
randomly partition the training dataset, where each partition
represents a meta-class of images. A meta-class may comprise only a part of images belonging to one class, or images
from several distinct image classes. Similar to [12], we take
representatives of the meta-classes to stand in as proxies for
images when estimating the N-pair loss in training. Specifically, the N-pair loss on all images that got assigned to a
meta-class is computed as a loss of the proxy vector repre-

7299

