HorizonNet: Learning Room Layout with 1D Representation and Pano Stretch
Data Augmentation
Cheng Sun

Chi-Wei Hsiao
Min Sun
Hwann-Tzong Chen
National Tsing Hua University

{chengsun, chiweihsiao}@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

htchen@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Figure 1: Some examples of 3D reconstructed room layouts by our HorizonNet.

Abstract
We present a new approach to the problem of estimating
the 3D room layout from a single panoramic image. We represent room layout as three 1D vectors that encode, at each
image column, the boundary positions of floor-wall and
ceiling-wall, and the existence of wall-wall boundary. The
proposed network, HorizonNet, trained for predicting 1D
layout, outperforms previous state-of-the-art approaches.
The designed post-processing procedure for recovering 3D
room layouts from 1D predictions can automatically infer
the room shape with low computation cost—it takes less
than 20ms for a panorama image while prior works might
need dozens of seconds. We also propose Pano Stretch Data
Augmentation, which can diversify panorama data and be
applied to other panorama-related learning tasks. Due to
the limited data available for non-cuboid layout, we relabel 65 general layout from the current dataset for finetuning. Our approach shows good performance on general
layouts by qualitative results and cross-validation.

1. Introduction
The goal of this work is to predict the room layout from
a panoramic image. Most of the state-of-the-art methods

solve this problem by adopting more effective deep network architectures for their models to learn from different
cues in the image. Assumptions about the room structures
are often made to constrain the solution space so that the
predictions of the deep model would not deviate from the
common cases too much. Post-processing steps can further be performed to refine the predictions. Given a number of images with annotated layouts for training, state-ofthe-art methods are able to achieve good results on the test
data. However, acquiring high-quality room-layout annotations for panoramic images is labor-demanding. The annotations done by different people might be inconsistent due
to ambiguities about the locations of wall boundaries, especially for well-decorated rooms. Moreover, currently available datasets do not include more images of complex room
layouts. The annotation for a complex layout would just be
approximated as a cuboid-shaped or L-shaped layout, introducing even more ambiguities for training and testing.
Two important and correlated issues may be further addressed for improving state-of-the-art methods. The first
issue is the lack of more training and validation data with
precise annotations. The second issue is that, without more
annotated data for training, the deep networks cannot be too
large, otherwise the test accuracy might be low due to overfitting. Collecting more data to train a more sophisticated

1047

