Joint Discriminative and Generative Learning for Person Re-identification
Zhedong Zheng1,2∗ Xiaodong Yang1 Zhiding Yu1
Liang Zheng3 Yi Yang2 Jan Kautz1
2
1
NVIDIA CAI, University of Technology Sydney 3 Australian National University

Abstract
Person re-identification (re-id) remains challenging due
to significant intra-class variations across different cameras. Recently, there has been a growing interest in using
generative models to augment training data and enhance
the invariance to input changes. The generative pipelines
in existing methods, however, stay relatively separate from
the discriminative re-id learning stages. Accordingly, re-id
models are often trained in a straightforward manner on the
generated data. In this paper, we seek to improve learned
re-id embeddings by better leveraging the generated data.
To this end, we propose a joint learning framework that
couples re-id learning and data generation end-to-end. Our
model involves a generative module that separately encodes
each person into an appearance code and a structure code,
and a discriminative module that shares the appearance encoder with the generative module. By switching the appearance or structure codes, the generative module is able to
generate high-quality cross-id composed images, which are
online fed back to the appearance encoder and used to improve the discriminative module. The proposed joint learning framework renders significant improvement over the
baseline without using generated data, leading to the stateof-the-art performance on several benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id) aims to establish identity correspondences across different cameras. It is often
approached as a metric learning problem [52], where one
seeks to retrieve images containing the person of interest
from non-overlapping cameras given a query image. This
is challenging in the sense that images captured by different cameras often contain significant intra-class variations
caused by the changes in background, viewpoint, human
pose, etc. As a result, designing or learning representations
that are robust against intra-class variations as much as possible has been one of the major targets in person re-id.
∗ Work done during an internship at NVIDIA Research.

Figure 1: Examples of generated images on Market-1501
by switching appearance or structure codes. Each row and
column corresponds to different appearance and structure.

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have recently
become increasingly predominant choices in person re-id
thanks to their strong representation power and the ability
to learn invariant deep embeddings. Current state-of-theart re-id methods widely formulate the tasks as deep metric learning problems [12, 53], or use classification losses
as the proxy targets to learn deep embeddings [22, 38, 40,
47, 52, 55]. To further reduce the influence from intra-class
variations, a number of existing methods adopt part-based
matching or ensemble to explicitly align and compensate
the variations [34, 36, 45, 50, 55].
12138

