Learning Single-Image Depth from Videos using Quality Assessment Networks
Weifeng Chen1,2 Shengyi Qian1 Jia Deng2
1

2

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{wfchen,syqian}@umich.edu

Abstract
Depth estimation from a single image in the wild remains a challenging problem. One main obstacle is the
lack of high-quality training data for images in the wild.
In this paper we propose a method to automatically generate such data through Structure-from-Motion (SfM) on
Internet videos. The core of this method is a Quality Assessment Network that identifies high-quality reconstructions obtained from SfM. Using this method, we collect single-view depth training data from a large number of YouTube videos and construct a new dataset called
YouTube3D. Experiments show that YouTube3D is useful in training depth estimation networks and advances
the state of the art of single-view depth estimation in
the wild. Project website: http://www-personal.
umich.edu/˜wfchen/youtube3d.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the problem of single-image depth
estimation, a fundamental computer vision problem that remains challenging. Despite significant recent progress [45,
15, 35, 24, 17, 27, 46, 49, 11, 25, 22, 50, 23, 13, 43, 54,
20, 44], current systems still perform poorly on arbitrary
images in the wild [6]. One major obstacle is the lack
of diverse training data, as most existing RGB-D datasets
were collected via depth sensors and are limited to rooms
[39, 10, 5] and roads [14]. As shown by recent work [6],
systems trained on such data are unable to generalize to diverse scenes in the real world.
One way to address this data issue is crowdsourcing, as
demonstrated by Chen et al. [6], who crowdsourced human annotations of depth and constructed a dataset called
“Depth-in-the-Wild (DIW)” that captures a broad range of
scenes. One drawback, though, is that it requires a large
amount of manual labor. Another possibility is to use synthetic data [4, 28, 34, 21], but it remains unclear how to
automatically generate scenes that match the diversity of
real-world images.
In this paper we explore a new approach that automat-

Princeton University

jiadeng@cs.princeton.edu

ically collects single-view training data on natural in-thewild images, without the need for crowdsourcing or computer graphics. The idea is to reconstruct 3D points from
Internet videos using Structure-from-Motion (SfM), which
matches feature points across video frames and infers depth
using multiview geometry. The reconstructed 3D points can
then be used to train single-view depth estimation. Because
there is a virtually unlimited supply of Internet videos,
this approach is especially attractive for generating a large
amount of single-view training data.
However, to implement such an approach in practice,
there remains a significant technical hurdle—despite great
successes [1, 19, 36, 37, 30], existing SfM systems are still
far from reliable when applied to arbitrary Internet videos.
This is because SfM operates by matching features across
video frames and reconstructing depth assuming a static
scene, but feature matches are often unreliable and scenes
often contain moving objects, both of which cause SfM to
produce erroneous 3D reconstructions. That is, if we simply apply an off-the-shelf SfM system to arbitrary Internet videos, the resulting single-view training data will have
poor quality.
To address this issue, we propose to train a deep network to automatically assess the quality of a SfM reconstruction. The network predicts a quality score of a SfM
construction by examining the operation of the entire SfM
pipeline—the input, the final output, along with intermediate outputs generated inside the pipeline. We call this
network a Quality Assessment Network (QANet). Using a
QANet, we filter out unreliable reconstructions and obtain
high-quality single-view training data. Fig. 1 illustrates our
data collection method.
It is worth noting that because Internet videos are virtually unlimited, it is sufficient for a QANet to be able to
reliably identify a small proportion of high-quality reconstructions. In other words, high precision is necessary but
high recall is not. This means that training a QANet will
not be hopelessly difficult because we do not need to detect
every good reconstruction, only some good reconstructions.
We experiment using Internet videos in the wild. Our experiments show that with QANet integrated with SfM, we
15604

