Perceive Where to Focus: Learning Visibility-aware Part-level Features
for Partial Person Re-identification
Yifan Sun1 , Qin Xu1 , Yali Li1 , Chi Zhang2 , Yikang Li1 , Shengjin Wang1∗, Jian Sun2
1
Tsinghua University 2 Megvii Technology
{sunyf15, xuq16, liyk11}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{liyali13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

{zhangchi, sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract
This paper considers a realistic problem in person reidentification (re-ID) task, i.e., partial re-ID. Under partial re-ID scenario, the images may contain a partial observation of a pedestrian. If we directly compare a partial pedestrian image with a holistic one, the extreme spatial misalignment significantly compromises the discriminative ability of the learned representation. We propose
a Visibility-aware Part Model (VPM), which learns to perceive the visibility of regions through self-supervision. The
visibility awareness allows VPM to extract region-level features and compare two images with focus on their shared
regions (which are visible on both images). VPM gains
two-fold benefit toward higher accuracy for partial re-ID.
On the one hand, compared with learning a global feature, VPM learns region-level features and benefits from
fine-grained information. On the other hand, with visibility
awareness, VPM is capable to estimate the shared regions
between two images and thus suppresses the spatial misalignment. Experimental results confirm that our method
significantly improves the learned representation and the
achieved accuracy is on par with the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) aims to spot the appearances of same person in different observations by comparing the query image with the gallery images (i.e., the
database). In spite that the re-ID research community has
achieved significant progress during the past few years, reID systems are still faced with a series of realistic difficulties. A prominent challenge is the partial re-ID problem
[34, 7, 33, 36], which requires accurate retrieval with partial
observation of the pedestrian. More concretely, in realistic
re-ID systems, a pedestrian may happen to be partially occluded or be walking out of the field of camera view, and

(b)

(a)

shared region features

(c)

Figure 1. Two challenges related to partial-re-ID and our solution
with the proposed VPM. (a) aggravation of spatial misalignment,
(b) distracting noises from unshared regions (the blue region on the
left image) and (c) VPM locates visible regions on a given image
and extracts region-level features. With visibility-awareness, VPM
compares two images by focusing on their shared regions.

the camera fails to capture the holistic pedestrian.
Intuitively, partial re-ID increases the difficulty to make
correct retrieval. Analytically, we find that partial reID raises two more unique challenges, compared with the
holistic person re-ID, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
• First, partial re-ID aggravates the spatial misalignment
between probe and gallery images. Under holistic reID setting, the spatial misalignment mainly originates
from the articulate movement of pedestrian and the
viewpoint variation. Under partial re-ID setting, even
when two pedestrian with same pose are captured from
same viewpoints, there still exists severe spatial misalignment between the two images (Fig. 1 (a)).
• Second, when we directly compare a partial pedestrian
against a holistic one, the unshared body regions in the
holistic pedestrian become distracting noises, rather

∗ Corresponding author.

393

