Expressive Body Capture: 3D Hands, Face, and Body from a Single Image
Georgios Pavlakos*1,2 , Vasileios Choutas*1 , Nima Ghorbani1 , Timo Bolkart1 , Ahmed A. A. Osman1 ,
Dimitrios Tzionas1 , and Michael J. Black1
1

MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, DE , 2 University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA

{gpavlakos, vchoutas, nghorbani, tbolkart, aosman, dtzionas, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
To facilitate the analysis of human actions, interactions and emotions, we compute a 3D model of human
body pose, hand pose, and facial expression from a single monocular image. To achieve this, we use thousands
of 3D scans to train a new, unified, 3D model of the human body, SMPL-X, that extends SMPL with fully articulated hands and an expressive face. Learning to regress
the parameters of SMPL-X directly from images is challenging without paired images and 3D ground truth. Consequently, we follow the approach of SMPLify, which estimates 2D features and then optimizes model parameters
to fit the features. We improve on SMPLify in several significant ways: (1) we detect 2D features corresponding to
the face, hands, and feet and fit the full SMPL-X model to
these; (2) we train a new neural network pose prior using
a large MoCap dataset; (3) we define a new interpenetration penalty that is both fast and accurate; (4) we automatically detect gender and the appropriate body models
(male, female, or neutral); (5) our PyTorch implementation
achieves a speedup of more than 8× over Chumpy. We use
the new method, SMPLify-X, to fit SMPL-X to both controlled images and images in the wild. We evaluate 3D accuracy on a new curated dataset comprising 100 images
with pseudo ground-truth. This is a step towards automatic
expressive human capture from monocular RGB data. The
models, code, and data are available for research purposes
at https://smpl-x.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Humans are often a central element in images and
videos. Understanding their posture, the social cues they
communicate, and their interactions with the world is critical for holistic scene understanding. Recent methods have
shown rapid progress on estimating the major body joints,
hand joints and facial features in 2D [15, 31, 70]. Our interactions with the world, however, are fundamentally 3D and
recent work has also made progress on the 3D estimation
∗ equal contribution

Figure 1: Communication and gesture rely on the body
pose, hand pose, and facial expression, all together. The
major joints of the body are not sufficient to represent this
and current 3D models are not expressive enough. In contrast to prior work, our approach estimates a more detailed
and expressive 3D model from a single image. From left to
right: RGB image, major joints, skeleton, SMPL (female),
SMPL-X (female). The hands and face in SMPL-X enable
more holistic and expressive body capture.
of the major joints and rough 3D pose directly from single
images [10, 37, 59, 62].
To understand human behavior, however, we have to capture more than the major joints of the body – we need the
full 3D surface of the body, hands and the face. There is
no system that can do this today due to several major challenges including the lack of appropriate 3D models and rich
3D training data. Figure 1 illustrates the problem. The interpretation of expressive and communicative images is difficult using only sparse 2D information or 3D representations
that lack hand and face detail. To address this problem, we
need two things. First, we need a 3D model of the body that
is able to represent the complexity of human faces, hands,
and body pose. Second, we need a method to extract such a
model from a single image.
Advances in neural networks and large datasets of manually labeled images have resulted in rapid progress in 2D
human “pose” estimation. By “pose”, the field often means

10975

