Learning to Explore Intrinsic Saliency for Stereoscopic Video
Qiudan Zhang1,2 Xu Wang1∗ Shiqi Wang2 Shikai Li1 Sam Kwong2 Jianmin Jiang1
1
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
The human visual system excels at biasing the stereoscopic visual signals by the attention mechanisms. Traditional methods relying on the low-level features and depth
relevant information for stereoscopic video saliency prediction have fundamental limitations. For example, it is cumbersome to model the interactions between multiple visual
cues including spatial, temporal, and depth information as
a result of the sophistication. In this paper, we argue that
the high-level features are crucial and resort to the deep
learning framework to learn the saliency map of stereoscopic videos. Driven by spatio-temporal coherence from
consecutive frames, the model first imitates the mechanism
of saliency by taking advantage of the 3D convolutional
neural network. Subsequently, the saliency originated from
the intrinsic depth is derived based on the correlations between left and right views in a data-driven manner. Finally,
a Convolutional Long Short-Term Memory (Conv-LSTM)
based fusion network is developed to model the instantaneous interactions between spatio-temporal and depth attributes, such that the ultimate stereoscopic saliency maps
over time are produced. Moreover, we establish a new
large-scale stereoscopic video saliency dataset (SVS) including 175 stereoscopic video sequences and their fixation
density annotations, aiming to comprehensively study the
intrinsic attributes for stereoscopic video saliency detection. Extensive experiments show that our proposed model
can achieve superior performance compared to the state-ofthe-art methods on the newly built dataset for stereoscopic
videos.

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed the strong growth
of 3D content and fast development of 3D display technologies, such that the automatic prediction of saliency on
stereoscopic videos has become ever important. Stereoscopic video saliency prediction (see Fig. 1), which at∗ Corresponding author. wangxu@szu.edu.cn

Figure 1. Examples of left view clip (including five consecutive
frames), ground truth and their saliency results obtained with our
model on the newly built SVS dataset.

tempts to distinguish salient regions or objects in diverse,
dynamic and immersive scenes, is challenging yet rewarding. For example, it can serve as the perceptual preprocessing for numerous stereoscopic applications, such as
stereoscopic video coding, quality assessment, medical image analysis and robot vision. However, the saliency prediction of stereoscopic videos is quite complex as non-intuitive
interactions between the video pair and depth clues are involved, making it difficult to directly apply the traditional
2D saliency prediction algorithm.
With a variety of deep learning architectures available,
significant advances have been achieved in static image
saliency prediction due to the successful deployment of convolutional neural networks (ConvNet) [5, 15]. The features
learned based on ConvNet are commendable for saliency inference, as they are capable of mining underlying cues and
heuristic semantic priors to better interpret the image content compared to traditional hand-crafted features. Nevertheless, it is not feasible to infer dynamic video saliency by
straightforwardly applying static image saliency models, especially for stereoscopic videos. In particular, since videos
are composed of consecutive frames, temporal coherence is
an important element in stereoscopic video saliency prediction. While recent studies [36, 9, 27] mostly adopt optical
flow to explore saliency in temporal domain for dynamic
scenes, it will induce non-salient features and lead to more
time consumed during inferring. Moreover, depth serves
as an important component for holistic stereoscopic video
19749

