Enhanced Bayesian Compression via Deep Reinforcement Learning
Xin Yuan1,2,3,∗, Liangliang Ren1,2,3,∗ , Jiwen Lu1,2,3†, Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, Tsinghua University
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
{yuanx16, renll16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Enhanced Bayesian Compression method to flexibly compress the deep networks via
reinforcement learning. Unlike existing Bayesian compression methods which can not explicitly enforce quantization
weights during training, our method learns flexible codebooks in each layer for an optimal network quantization.
To dynamically adjust the state of codebooks, we employ
an Actor-Critic network to collaborate with the original
deep network. Unlike most existing network quantization
methods, our EBC doesn’t require re-training procedures
after the quantization. Experimental results show that our
method obtains low-bit precision with acceptable accuracy
drop on MNIST, CIFAR and ImageNet.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved dramatic
accuracy improvements in a variety of machine learning
tasks such as image classification [35, 52], speech recognition [14] and natural language processing [53]. Recent research progress further shows that the performance of
DNNs on these tasks can benefit from increasing network
depth and width [19, 24]. Despite the success, large size
DNNs are difficult to be deployed on resource-limited devices such as mobiles and embedded systems because of the
high cost of computations and hardware resources. To address this, some deep network compression methods have
been proposed to reduce the parameter redundancy and the
effective fixed point precision in recent years.
Most existing networks compression methods focus on
pruning and quantization. Network pruning [17, 16] aim
to remove redundant weight parameters, neurons or filters
permanently from neural network. For example, [18, 16]
pruned unnecessary connections according to the absolute
∗ Indicates equal contribution
† Corresponding author.

-400

-200

0

200

(a) original model

400

-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

(b) EBC model

Figure 1. The main idea of the proposed Enhanced Bayesian Compression (EBC) method. EBC aims to learn flexible codebooks in
each layer for an optimal network quantization. The original model weights in (a) have a new distribution as shown in (b) after our
EBC training, which can be directly quantized to the codebook
values with a restrained quantization error impact.

weight value, which may fail to determine the weights that
indeed contribute much to the overall computation. Network quantization [18, 59, 28] has been proposed for the
reduction of the bit precision of weights, activations or
even gradients. For example, [18] employed a conventional quantization method for network quantization. However,
these methods suffer from accuracy losses because of the
quantization errors and rely on a highly computational retraining after quantization. There are some other works involving CNNs efficiency improvements, which have been
studied in previous works [27, 22, 58, 23]. For example,
[25, 49] are proposed using binary weights and activations,
which benefit from the small storage and efficient computation by bit-counting operation. Another popular variant is
depth-wise separable convolution [50], which applies a separate convolutional kernel to each channel, followed by a
point-wise convolution over all channels [10, 22, 58]. Most
of these methods focus on finding an efficient alternative for
standard spatial convolutions hence learning a compressed
network from scratch.
More recently, some compression methods [42, 55, 45,
46] have been proposed to prune the network and reduce

6946

