Learning to Quantize Deep Networks by
Optimizing Quantization Intervals with Task Loss
Sangil Jung1∗

Changyong Son1∗
Seohyung Lee1
1
Youngjun Kwak
Sung Ju Hwang2

Jinwoo Son1
Jae-Joon Han1
1
Changkyu Choi

1

2

Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), South Korea
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea

Abstract
Reducing bit-widths of activations and weights of deep
networks makes it efficient to compute and store them in
memory, which is crucial in their deployments to resourcelimited devices, such as mobile phones. However, decreasing bit-widths with quantization generally yields drastically
degraded accuracy. To tackle this problem, we propose to
learn to quantize activations and weights via a trainable
quantizer that transforms and discretizes them. Specifically,
we parameterize the quantization intervals and obtain their
optimal values by directly minimizing the task loss of the
network. This quantization-interval-learning (QIL) allows
the quantized networks to maintain the accuracy of the fullprecision (32-bit) networks with bit-width as low as 4-bit
and minimize the accuracy degeneration with further bitwidth reduction (i.e., 3 and 2-bit). Moreover, our quantizer
can be trained on a heterogeneous dataset, and thus can
be used to quantize pretrained networks without access to
their training data. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
trainable quantizer on ImageNet dataset with various network architectures such as ResNet-18, -34 and AlexNet, on
which it outperforms existing methods to achieve the stateof-the-art accuracy.

1. Introduction
Increasing the depth and width of a convolutional neural network generally improves its accuracy [24, 8] in exchange for the increased memory and the computational
cost. Such a memory- and computation- heavy network is
difficult to be deployed to resource-limited devices such as
mobile phones. Thus, many prior work have sought various
means to reduce the model size and computational cost, including the use of separable filters [13, 10, 21], weight pruning [7] and bit-width reduction of weights or activations
∗ These two authors contributed equally.

[27, 22, 4, 26, 25, 30]. Our work aims to reduce bit-widths
of deep networks both for weights and activations, while
preserving the accuracy of the full-precision networks.
Reducing bit-width inherently includes a quantization
process which maps continuous real values to discrete integers. Decrease in bit-width of deep networks naturally
increases the quantization error, which in turn causes accuracy degeneration, and to preserve the accuracy of a fullprecision network, we need to reduce the quantization error.
For example, Cai et al. [3] optimize the activation quantizer by minimizing mean-squared quantization error using
Lloyd’s algorithm with the assumption of half-wave Gaussian distribution of the response map, and some other work
approximate the layerwise convolutional outputs [22, 16].
However, while such quantization approaches may accurately approximate the original distribution of the weights
and activations, there is no guarantee that they will be
beneficial toward suppressing the prediction error from increasing. To overcome this limitation, our trainable quantizer approximates neither the weight/activation values nor
layerwise convolutional outputs. Instead, we quantize the
weights and activations for each layer by directly minimizing the task loss of the networks, which helps it to preserve
the accuracy of the full-precision counterpart.
Our quantizer can be viewed as a composition of a transformer and a discretizer. The transformer is a (non-linear)
function from the unbounded real values to the normalized
real values (i.e., R(−∞,∞) → R[−1,1] ), and the discretizer
maps the normalized values to integers (i.e., R[−1,1] → I).
Here, we propose to parameterize quantization intervals for
the transformer, which allows our quantizer to focus on appropriate interval for quantization by pruning (less important) small values and clipping (rarely appeared) large values.
Since reducing bit-widths decreases the number of discrete values, this will generally cause the quantization error
to increase. To maintain or increase the quantization resolution while reducing the bit-width, the interval for quanti-

4350

