MeshAdv: Adversarial Meshes for Visual Recognition
Chaowei Xiao ∗1

Dawei Yang ∗1,2 Jia Deng 2 Mingyan Liu 1
1
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
2
Princeton University
3
UIUC

Bo Li 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Despite the increasing successes in various domains [10,
13, 19, 44], deep neural networks (DNNs) are found vulnerable to adversarial examples: a deliberate perturbation
of small magnitude on the input can make a network output
incorrect predictions. Such adversarial examples have been
widely studied in 2D domain [5, 17, 35, 38, 47, 53–55],
but the attack generated by directly manipulating pixels can
be defended by securing the camera, so that the generated
images are not realizable in practice. To overcome this issue, there has been significant prior progress on generating
physically possible adversarial examples [1, 4, 14, 27] by
altering the texture of a 3D surface, i.e. applying adversar∗ Alphabetical ordering; The first two authors contributed equally.

Rendering Engine

2D Rendering

Machine Learning Models

3D Mesh
“car”

...

g
Adversarial
shape/texture

2D Rendering (Adversarial)

g
“Adversarial Mesh”

“boat”
...

Highly expressive models such as deep neural networks
(DNNs) have been widely applied to various applications.
However, recent studies show that DNNs are vulnerable to
adversarial examples, which are carefully crafted inputs
aiming to mislead the predictions. Currently, the majority of these studies have focused on perturbation added to
image pixels, while such manipulation is not physically realistic. Some works have tried to overcome this limitation
by attaching printable 2D patches or painting patterns onto
surfaces, but can be potentially defended because 3D shape
features are intact. In this paper, we propose meshAdv to
generate “adversarial 3D meshes” from objects that have
rich shape features but minimal textural variation. To manipulate the shape or texture of the objects, we make use of a
differentiable renderer to compute accurate shading on the
shape and propagate the gradient. Extensive experiments
show that the generated 3D meshes are effective in attacking both classifiers and object detectors. We evaluate the
attack under different viewpoints. In addition, we design
a pipeline to perform black-box attack on a photorealistic
renderer with unknown rendering parameters.

Figure 1: The pipeline of “adversarial mesh” generation by
meshAdv.

ial printable 2D patches or painting patterns. Such attacks,
however, are less suitable for textureless objects, because
adding texture to an otherwise textureless surface may increase the chance of being detected and defended.
In this work, we explore a new avenue of attack where
we generate physically possible adversarial examples by altering 3D shape. We explore 3D objects that have rich shape
features but minimal texture variation, and show that we can
still fulfill the adversarial goal by perturbing the shape of
those 3D objects, while the same method can still be applied to textures. Specifically, we propose meshAdv to generate adversarial meshes with negligible perturbations. We
leverage a physically based differentiable renderer [24] to
accurately render the mesh under certain camera and lighting parameters. A deep network then outputs a prediction
given the rendered image as input. Since this whole process
is differentiable, gradients can be propagated from the network prediction back to the shape or texture of the mesh.
Therefore, we can use gradient based optimization to generate shape based or texture based perturbation by applying
losses on the network output. The entire pipeline is shown
in Figure 1.
Even though we are only manipulating physical properties (shape and texture) of a 3D object, we can always fool
state of the art DNNs (see Section 6.2). Specifically, we
show that for any fixed rendering conditions (i.e. lighting
and camera parameters), state of the art object classifiers
(DenseNet [22] and Inception-v3 [48]) and detector (Yolo16898

