Recurrent Neural Networks with Intra-Frame Iterations for Video Deblurring
Seungjun Nah

Sanghyun Son

Kyoung Mu Lee

Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
seungjun.nah@gmail.com, {thstkdgus35, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are widely used for
sequential data processing. Recent state-of-the-art video
deblurring methods bank on convolutional recurrent neural
network architectures to exploit the temporal relationship
between neighboring frames. In this work, we aim to improve the accuracy of recurrent models by adapting the hidden states transferred from past frames to the frame being
processed so that the relations between video frames could
be better used. We iteratively update the hidden state via reusing RNN cell parameters before predicting an output deblurred frame. Since we use existing parameters to update
the hidden state, our method improves accuracy without additional modules. As the architecture remains the same regardless of iteration number, fewer iteration models can be
considered as a partial computational path of the models
with more iterations. To take advantage of this property, we
employ a stochastic method to optimize our iterative models better. At training time, we randomly choose the iteration number on the fly and apply a regularization loss that
favors less computation unless there are considerable reconstruction gains. We show that our method exhibits stateof-the-art video deblurring performance while operating in
real-time speed.

1. Introduction
Videos captured in dynamic environments typically contain blurs where the relative motions occur. Hand-held cameras are more likely to be shaken during shooting, and fastmoving objects can exist at any time in the scene. Especially, a long exposure time is required in the low-light environment or for the widely used mobile cameras. Since the
motions during the exposure time directly cause the blurs in
captured frames, blurs are among the most common degradation artifacts in videos. Those motions of various objects or a camera give rise to spatially non-uniform blurs
that make the deblurring problem challenging. In real-world
scenarios, the problem becomes more challenging since the

sharp video frames should be recovered without knowing
the information of the spatially varying motions or the local blur kernels. Furthermore, abrupt motions often cause
severe blurs with diverse strengths and types.
In video deblurring, it is crucial to analyze the relevant
information between consecutive frames as well as the information in the target frame. In recent deep neural network
based approaches, several designs of CNNs and RNNs are
adopted to incorporate temporal information. Su et al. [34]
introduced a 2-stage approach to handle misplacement from
large motions between frames and the fuse information between the frames. A sequence of frames is spatially aligned
to the middle frame by homography or optical flow. Those
frames are then fed into a CNN to get a deblurred middle
frame. On the other hand, Wieschollek et al. [39] and Kim
et al. [18] proposed recurrent network architectures that can
operate on arbitrary length videos. While [39] used information from past frames by simply copying features, [18]
presented a Dynamic Temporal Blending module on a fast
RNN. The module blends the hidden state from past frames
and feature from the current frame to transfer the temporal
information through hidden states.
These neural network-based approaches mainly focus on
how to adopt the related information from the neighboring
frames to restore the target frame and show significant improvements. However, these methods try to handle temporal relation in a single-step operation, which may not be
optimal. Traditionally, the difficulty of estimating motion
information or blur kernel from multiple frames was mitigated by iterative estimation steps [44, 41, 17, 1, 31]. Furthermore, handling the neighbor frames with the alignment
from optical flow [34] or heavy neural network [39] is expensive in computation. Thus, to resolve these issues, temporal information transfer method both fast and more optimal is required.
We set up a baseline model in a light and fast convolutional RNN architecture that exploits the inter-frame information. Like [18], we deliver information from past frames
to the current frame in the form of hidden state. To let the
propagated hidden state fit to the target frame, we employ
18102

