LO-Net: Deep Real-time Lidar Odometry
Qing Li1 , Shaoyang Chen1 , Cheng Wang1 , Xin Li2 , Chenglu Wen1 , Ming Cheng1 , Jonathan Li1
1
Xiamen University, Fujian, China
2
Louisiana State University, Louisiana, USA
{hello.qingli,tinyyoh}@gmail.com, xinli@cct.lsu.ed, {cwang,clwen,chm99,junli}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D position and orientation of a mobile platform is a fundamental problem in 3D computer vision, and
it provides important navigation information for robotics
and autonomous driving. Mobile platforms usually collect
information from the real-time perception of the environment and use on-board sensors such as lidars, Inertial Measurement Units (IMU), or cameras, to estimate their motions. Lidar can obtain robust features of different environments as it is not sensitive to lighting conditions, and it also
acquires more accurate distance information than cameras.
Therefore, developing an accurate and robust real-time lidar
odometry estimation system is desirable.
Classic lidar-based registration methods used in pose estimation include Iterative Closest Point (ICP) [3], ICP variants [24], and feature-based approaches [26]. But due to the
nonuniformity and sparsity of the lidar point clouds, these
methods often fail to match such data. ICP approaches
find transformations between consecutive scans by minimizing distances between corresponding points from these
scans, but points in one frame may miss their spatial coun-

St-1

Normal

St

Normal

Odometry

We present a novel deep convolutional network pipeline,
LO-Net, for real-time lidar odometry estimation. Unlike most existing lidar odometry (LO) estimations that
go through individually designed feature selection, feature matching, and pose estimation pipeline, LO-Net can
be trained in an end-to-end manner. With a new maskweighted geometric constraint loss, LO-Net can effectively
learn feature representation for LO estimation, and can implicitly exploit the sequential dependencies and dynamics in
the data. We also design a scan-to-map module, which uses
the geometric and semantic information learned in LO-Net,
to improve the estimation accuracy. Experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that LO-Net outperforms existing learning based approaches and has similar accuracy
with the state-of-the-art geometry-based approach, LOAM.

Mask

Odometry Regression
Normal Estimation

Mask

Input

Output

Conv Block

Fire Module

FC

F-deconv

Figure 1. Top: Data stream of LO-Net. Bottom: Network architecture of feature extraction layers (red dashed line) and mask prediction layers (black dashed line) . Our network takes two consecutive
lidar scans as input and infers the relative 6-DoF pose. The output
data will be further processed by the mapping module.

terparts in the next frame, due to sparsity of scan resolution. Feature-based methods are less sensitive to the quality of scans, and hence, are more powerful. However, they
are usually more computationally expensive. Furthermore,
most feature-based methods are sensitive to another environmental factor, dynamic objects in the scene. These two
issues inhibit many feature-based methods from producing
effective odometry estimation.
Recently, deep learning-based methods have outperformed classic approaches in many computer vision problems. Many Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) architectures and training models have become the state-ofthe-art in these tasks. However, the exploration of effective CNNs in some 3D geometric data processing problems,
such as 6-DoF pose estimation, has not been this successful yet. Although quite a few CNN-based 6-DoF pose estimation (from RGB images) strategies [34, 43, 36, 39] have
been explored recently, these methods often suffer from

8473

