Long-Term Feature Banks for Detailed Video Understanding
Chao-Yuan Wu1,2
Kaiming He2
1

Christoph Feichtenhofer2
Philipp Krähenbühl1

The University of Texas at Austin

2

Abstract
To understand the world, we humans constantly need to
relate the present to the past, and put events in context.
In this paper, we enable existing video models to do the
same. We propose a long-term feature bank—supportive
information extracted over the entire span of a video—to
augment state-of-the-art video models that otherwise would
only view short clips of 2-5 seconds. Our experiments
demonstrate that augmenting 3D convolutional networks
with a long-term feature bank yields state-of-the-art results
on three challenging video datasets: AVA, EPIC-Kitchens,
and Charades. Code is available online1 .

1. Introduction
What is required to understand a movie? Many aspects
of human intelligence, for sure, but memory is particularly
important. As a film unfolds there’s a constant need to relate
whatever is happening in the present to what happened in
the past. Without the ability to use the past to understand
the present, we, as human observers, would not understand
what we are watching.
In this paper, we propose the idea of a long-term feature
bank that stores a rich, time-indexed representation of the
entire movie. Intuitively, the long-term feature bank stores
features that encode information about past and (if available) future scenes, objects, and actions. This information
provides a supportive context that allows a video model,
such as a 3D convolutional network, to better infer what
is happening in the present (see Fig. 1, 2, and 5).
We expect the long-term feature bank to improve stateof-the-art video models because most make predictions
based only on information from a short video clip, typically 2-5 seconds [5, 33, 46–48, 51, 52, 56]. The reason for
this short-term view is simple: benchmark advances have
resulted from training end-to-end networks that use some
form of 3D convolution, and these 3D convolutions require
dense sampling in time to work effectively. Therefore, to fit
in GPU memory the video inputs must be short.
1 https://github.com/facebookresearch/
video-long-term-feature-banks

Haoqi Fan2
Ross Girshick2

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
Target frame

Input clip (4 seconds)

Figure 1. What are these people doing? Current 3D CNN video
models operate on short clips spanning only ∼4 seconds. Without observing longer-term context, recognition is difficult. (Video
from the AVA dataset [14]; see next page for the answer.)

The long-term feature bank is inspired by works that
leverage long-range temporal information by using precomputed visual features [25, 31, 45, 57]. However, these
approaches extract features from isolated frames using an
ImageNet pre-trained network, and then use the features as
input into a trained pooling or recurrent network. Thus the
same features represent both the present and the long-term
context. In contrast, we propose to decouple the two: the
long-term feature bank is an auxiliary component that augments a standard video model, such as a state-of-the-art 3D
CNN. This design enables the long-term feature bank to
store flexible supporting information, such as object detection features, that differ from what the 3D CNN computes.
Integrating the long-term feature bank with 3D CNNs
is straightforward. We show that a variety of mechanisms
are possible, including an attentional mechanism that relates
information about the present (from the 3D CNN) to longrange information stored in the long-term feature bank. We
illustrate its application to different tasks with different output requirements: we show results on datasets that require
object-level as well as frame- or video-level predictions.
Finally, we conduct extensive experiments demonstrating that augmenting 3D CNNs with a long-term feature bank yields state-of-the-art results on three challenging video datasets: AVA spatio-temporal action localization [14], EPIC-Kitchens verb, noun, and action classification [6], and Charades video classification [38]. Our ablation study establishes that the improvements on these tasks
arise from the integration of long-term information.

284

