Heterogeneous Memory Enhanced Multimodal Attention Model for
Video Question Answering
Chenyou Fan1,∗ , Xiaofan Zhang1 , Shu Zhang1 , Wensheng Wang1 , Chi Zhang1 , Heng Huang1,2,∗
1
JD.COM, 2 JD Digits
∗

chenyou.fan@jd.com, ∗ heng.huang@jd.com

Abstract
...

In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end trainable
Video Question Answering (VideoQA) framework with three
major components: 1) a new heterogeneous memory which
can effectively learn global context information from appearance and motion features; 2) a redesigned question
memory which helps understand the complex semantics of
question and highlights queried subjects; and 3) a new multimodal fusion layer which performs multi-step reasoning
by attending to relevant visual and textual hints with selfupdated attention. Our VideoQA model firstly generates
the global context-aware visual and textual features respectively by interacting current inputs with memory contents.
After that, it makes the attentional fusion of the multimodal
visual and textual representations to infer the correct answer. Multiple cycles of reasoning can be made to iteratively refine attention weights of the multimodal data and
improve the final representation of the QA pair. Experimental results demonstrate our approach achieves state-of-theart performance on four VideoQA benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Video Question Answering (VideoQA) is to learn a
model that can infer the correct answer for a given question in human language related to the visual content of a
video clip. VideoQA is a challenging computer vision task,
as it requires to understand a complex textual question first,
and then to figure out the answer that can best associate the
semantics to the visual contents in an image sequence.
Recent work [2,3,10,11,15,29] proposed to learn models
of encoder-decoder structure to tackle the VideoQA problem. A common practice is to use LSTM-based encoders
to encode CNN features of video frames and embeddings
of question words into encoded visual sequence and word
sequence. Proper reasoning is then performed to produce
the correct answer, by associating the relevant visual contents with the question. For example, learning soft weights

...

Video
Attention

Q: Who drives by a hitchhiking man who is smoking? (answer: woman)
Question
Attention

A: Our model: woman

Existing model: man

Figure 1. VideoQA is a challenging task as it requires the model to
associate relevant visual contents in frame sequence with the real
subject queried in question sentence. For a complex question such
as “Who drives by a hitchhiking man who is smoking?”, the model
needs to understand that the driver is the queried person and then
localize the frames in which the driver is driving in the car.

of frames will help attend to events that are queried by the
questions, while learning weights of regions in every single
frame will help detect details and localize the subjects in
the query. The former one aims to find relevant frame-level
details by applying temporal attention to encoded image sequence [10, 15, 27]. The latter one aims to find region-level
details by spatial attention [2, 12, 26, 29].
Jang et al. [10] applied spatiotemporal attention mechanism on both spatial and temporal dimension of video features. They also proposed to use both appearance (e.g.,
VGG [22]) and motion features (e.g., C3D [24]) to better
represent video frames. Their practice is to make early fusion of the two features and feed the concatenated feature
to a video encoder. But such straightforward feature integration leads to suboptimal results. Gao et al. [5] proposed
to replace the early fusion with a more sophisticated comemory attention mechanism. They used one type of feature to attend to the other and fused the final representations
of these two feature types at the final stage. However, this
method doesn’t synchronize the attentions detected by appearance and motion features, thus could generate incorrect
attentions. Meanwhile, this method will also miss the attention which can be inferred by the combined appearance and
11999

