Coordinate-Free Carlsson-Weinshall Duality and Relative Multi-View Geometry
Matthew Trager1 , Martial Hebert2 , and Jean Ponce3,4
1

2
3
New York University
Carnegie Mellon University
INRIA, Paris, France
4
Département dinformatique de lENS, ENS, CNRS, PSL University, Paris, France

Abstract
We present a coordinate-free description of CarlssonWeinshall duality between scene points and camera pinholes and use it to derive a new characterization of primal/dual multi-view geometry. In the case of three views,
a particular set of reduced trilinearities provide a novel
parameterization of camera geometry that, unlike existing
ones, is subject only to very simple internal constraints.
These trilinearities lead to new “quasi-linear” algorithms
for primal and dual structure from motion. We include some
preliminary experiments with real and synthetic data.

1. Introduction
The idea of picking a few scene features as anchors to
simplify the solution of structure-from-motion (SFM) problems dates back to the 1990s, notably with the pioneering
work of Koenderink & van Doorn [13] and Faugeras [4],
among others [10, 16]. This approach involves fewer parameters than traditional ones [4, 13] and leads to the socalled Carlsson-Weinshall (in this presentation, CW) duality [1], where camera pinholes and scene points play symmetric roles and can easily be swapped in SFM algorithms.
However, methods based on this type of “relative” multiview geometry are reputed to lead to poor-quality reconstructions, in part because the corresponding algorithms
do not benefit from traditional data preconditioning methods [8]. We propose to revisit this approach from a geometric perspective, shedding new light on some well-known
problems with a string of new results (Props. 2.3, 2.5, 3.4,
4.3), and dispelling through experiments some of its bad
reputation.

1.1. Background
As shown in [18, 22] for example, point correspondences
across multiple images can be characterized by studying incidence relations among the corresponding visual rays. This
approach has the merit of making explicit the geometric
constraints defining correspondences, which are often hidden behind algebra in the traditional multilinear approaches

to structure from motion [1, 5, 6, 7, 11, 14, 15, 20, 24]. In
particular, Ponce, Sturmfels and Trager introduced in [18]
the concurrent lines variety Vn formed by all n-tuples of
lines in P3 that meet at some point, and showed that constraining the lines in each tuple to pass through n fixed and
distinct points yields a three-dimensional sub-variety of Vn
isomorphic to Triggs’s joint image [23], that can either be
seen as the set of all possible images taken by n fixed perspective cameras (Fig. 1 [a]), or as the set of all possible images of n fixed points (Fig. 1 [b]), revealing a profound geometric duality between camera pinholes and scene points.
Unfortunately, this duality collapses when one introduces image measurements, since the retinal plane of a camera (or, equivalently, the line bundle of its pinhole) must be
equipped with a coordinate system for the measurements
to make sense. Contrary to images and the corresponding
bundles (Fig. 1 [c]), however, scene points are not associated with coordinate systems. It was shown by Carlsson
and Weinshall that this disparity can be addressed by using four fiducial scene points observed by all cameras, and
by algebraically manipulating the coordinates of pinholes
and scene points before inverting their roles (see [4, 11, 14]
for related work). In particular, as argued in [1, 11], this
implies that any algorithm for solving the structure-frommotion (SFM) problem from m images of n scene points
also provides a (dual) solution to the SFM problem from
n − 4 images and m + 4 scene points. Carlsson and Weinshall’s take on duality is however mainly analytical. Our
point of departure in this presentation is to bridge the gap
between their approach and the geometric viewpoint advocated earlier.

1.2. Objectives and contributions
Our aim in this presentation is threefold:
(1) To explain CW duality [1] which, in its classical textbook form [11], emerges from seemingly accidental algebraic symmetries like Venus from the sea. Concretely,
we introduce in Sect. 2 a new, coordinate-free derivation
of the duality between scene points and camera pinholes
(Prop. 2.3). Our viewpoint hopefully clarifies the geometry
that underlies CW duality, and also emphasizes that analyt-

225

