Object detection with location-aware deformable convolution and backward
attention filtering
Chen Zhang
Illinois Institute of Technology
Chicago, USA

Joohee Kim
Illinois Institute of Technology
Chicago, USA

czhang57@hawk.iit.edu

joohee@ece.iit.edu

Abstract
Multi-class and multi-scale object detection for autonomous driving is challenging because of the high variation in object scales and the cluttered background in complex street scenes. Context information and high-resolution
features are the keys to achieve a good performance in
multi-scale object detection. However, context information
is typically unevenly distributed, and the high-resolution
feature map also contains distractive low-level features. In
this paper, we propose a location-aware deformable convolution and a backward attention filtering to improve the detection performance. The location-aware deformable convolution extracts the unevenly distributed context features
by sampling the input from where informative context exists. Different from the original deformable convolution, the
proposed method applies an individual convolutional layer
on each input sampling grid location to obtain a wide and
unique receptive field for a better offset estimation. Meanwhile, the backward attention filtering module filters the
high-resolution feature map by highlighting the informative features and suppressing the distractive features using
the semantic features from the deep layers. Extensive experiments are conducted on the KITTI object detection and
PASCAL VOC 2007 datasets. The proposed method shows
an average 6% performance improvement over the Faster
R-CNN baseline, and it has the top-3 performance on the
KITTI leaderboard with the fastest processing speed.

1. Introduction
Vision-based object detection is one of the most active
research areas in computer vision for a long time. For applications such as autonomous driving, accurate real-time
multi-class object detection is required to understand the
driving situation and avoid hitting other traffic participants.
Traditional object detection systems rely on hand-crafted
feature extraction and machine learning based classifica-

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) Faster R-CNN and (b) our proposed method on KITTI object detection dataset. Different box
color indicates different object category. Our method successfully detects the cyclists behind the pedestrian, and two small cars,
which are not detected by Faster R-CNN.

tion. Recently, object detectors based on deep convolutional
neural networks (CNN) [1] have shown a huge performance
improvement in the benchmark such as KITTI [2] that focuses on driving scenes.
A typical driving scene is shown in Figure 1, which is
captured by a car-mounted camera. Three main objects that
should be detected accurately in the driving scene are pedestrians, cyclists, and cars. These traffic participants interact
with the autonomous car all the time and must be detected in
real-time to avoid accident. Multi-class object detection for
these traffic participants is challenging because they have
different distance to the camera, which results in high scale
variation. Also, pedestrians, cyclists and cars interact with
each other frequently, as a result, occlusion occurs quite often. Furthermore, a street scene in a modern city contains
cluttered backgrounds with various visual attributes, which
makes the object detection even harder.
According to previous studies [3] [4] [5], context infor-

9452

