Spot and Learn:
A Maximum-Entropy Patch Sampler for Few-Shot Image Classification
∗

Wen-Hsuan Chu1 , Yu-Jhe Li2,3 , Jing-Cheng Chang2,3 , Yu-Chiang Frank Wang2,3
1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
3
MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare
1

chuwenhsuan@cmu.edu, 2 {yujheli, b04901138, ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) requires one to learn from object categories with a small amount of training data (as
novel classes), while the remaining categories (as base
classes) contain a sufficient amount of data for training. It is
often desirable to transfer knowledge from the base classes
and derive dominant features efficiently for the novel samples. In this work, we propose a sampling method that decorrelates an image based on maximum entropy reinforcement learning, and extracts varying sequences of patches
on every forward-pass with discriminative information observed. This can be viewed as a form of “learned” data
augmentation in the sense that we search for different sequences of patches within an image and performs classification with aggregation of the extracted features, resulting
in improved FSL performances. In addition, our positive
and negative sampling policies along with a newly defined
reward function would favorably improve the effectiveness
of our model. Our experiments on two benchmark datasets
confirm the effectiveness of our framework and its superiority over recent FSL approaches.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved extraordinary performance in supervised visual learning tasks [13, 23, 10]
in recent years. However, these supervised learning methods often require a large amount of training data and annotations to achieve such performance. This significantly
limits the problems they can be applied to, as it may be
expensive to acquire enough annotations for the training
data, or worse, the training data may be difficult to acquire themselves. In comparison, humans are surprisingly
good at learning new concepts using very little supervised
∗ Work done while at National Taiwan University.

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed patch sampling strategy for FSL. If varying glimpse trajectories can be obtained
on each forward-pass, one can create a variety of input patch
sequences for training from the same input image.
information. For example, humans (both adult and children) can learn to recognize a new animal just from a
couple of pictures in books or from online sources. On
the other hand, neural networks would suffer from the issue of severe data over-fitting, resulting in poor generalization results during inference. This has motivated researchers to propose different methods for few-shot learning [12, 27, 20, 1, 21, 24, 5, 9, 25, 6, 29, 7, 19, 28]. Few-shot
learning aims to classify novel visual classes from very few
labeled samples. Contemporary methods usually tackle this
challenge using meta-learning approaches [5, 20] or metriclearning approaches [27, 24]. Another branch of algorithms
focus on data hallucination to generate more training samples [9, 29, 32]. There has also been some works on using
soft attention for Few-Shot Learning using attention generated from semantic information [28, 3]. Current “attention”
mechanisms are largely inspired by the human visual systems, where we only focus on small regions located at the
center of our view or gaze, while the areas further away
from the center are in fact very “blurry”. As a result, we
build our understanding of a scene by aggregating infor-

6251

