Efficient Online Multi-Person 2D Pose Tracking with
Recurrent Spatio-Temporal Affinity Fields
Yaadhav Raaj
Haroon Idrees
Gines Hidalgo
Yaser Sheikh
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

We present an online approach to efficiently and simultaneously detect and track 2D poses of multiple people in
a video sequence. We build upon Part Affinity Fields (PAF)
representation designed for static images, and propose an
architecture that can encode and predict Spatio-Temporal
Affinity Fields (STAF) across a video sequence. In particular, we propose a novel temporal topology cross-linked
across limbs which can consistently handle body motions
of a wide range of magnitudes. Additionally, we make the
overall approach recurrent in nature, where the network ingests STAF heatmaps from previous frames and estimates
those for the current frame. Our approach uses only online
inference and tracking, and is currently the fastest and the
most accurate bottom-up approach that is runtime-invariant
to the number of people in the scene and accuracy-invariant
to input frame rate of camera. Running at ∼30 fps on a
single GPU at single scale, it achieves highly competitive
results on the PoseTrack benchmarks. 1

1. Introduction
Multi-person human pose estimation has received considerable attention in the past few years assisted by deep
convolutional learning as well as COCO [21] and MPII [3]
datasets. The recently introduced PoseTrack dataset [17]
has provided the community with a large scale corpus of
video data with multiple people in the scenes. In this paper,
our aim is to utilize these towards building a truly online
and real-time multi-person 2D pose estimator and tracker
that is deployable and scalable while achieving high performance and requiring minimal post-processing. The potential uses include real-time and closed-loop applications with
low latency where the execution is in sync with frame rate
of camera such as self-driving cars and augmented reality.
The real-time and online nature of such an approach introduces several challenges: i) scenes with multiple peo1 Project Page

Limb TAFs

Abstract

Keypoint TAFs

{raaj@cmu.edu, hidrees@cs.cmu.edu, gines@cmu.edu, yaser@cs.cmu.edu}

t
t+1

t
t+1
t
t+1

t
t+1

Large Motion

Negligible Motion

Figure 1: We solve multi-person human pose tracking by
encoding change in position and orientation of keypoints
or limbs across time as Temporal Affinity Fields (TAFs) in
a recurrent fashion. Top: Modeling TAFs (blue arrows)
through keypoints works when motion occurs but fails during limited motion making temporal association difficult.
Bottom: Cross-linked TAFs across limbs perform consistently for all kinds of motions providing redundancy and
smoother encoding for further refinement and prediction.

ple demand handling of occlusion, proximity and contact
as well as limb articulation, and ii) it should be runtimeinvariant to the number of people in the scene. Furthermore, iii) it must be capable of handling challenges induced from video data, such as large camera motion and
motion blur across frames. We build upon the Part Affinity Fields (PAFs) [6] to overcome these challenges, which
represent connections across body keypoints in static images as normalized 2D vector fields with position and orientation. In this work, we propose Temporal Affinity
Fields (TAFs) which encode connections between keypoints
across frames, including a unique cross-linked limb topology as seen in bottom row of Figure 1. In the absence of motion or when there is not enough data from previous frames,
TAFs constructed between same keypoints, e.g., wrist-wrist
or elbow-elbow across frames lose all associative properties
(see top row of Fig. 1). In this case, the nullification of magnitude and orientation provides no useful information to dis14620

