SoPhie: An Attentive GAN for Predicting Paths Compliant to Social and
Physical Constraints
Amir Sadeghian1,2∗ Vineet Kosaraju1∗ Ali Sadeghian3 Noriaki Hirose1
S. Hamid Rezatofighi1,4 Silvio Savarese1
1

Stanford University

2

Aibee Inc

3

University of Florida

4

University of Adelaide

amirabs@aibee.com

Abstract

Physical Attention
Social Attention

This paper addresses the problem of path prediction for
multiple interacting agents in a scene, which is a crucial
step for many autonomous platforms such as self-driving
cars and social robots. We present SoPhie; an interpretable
framework based on Generative Adversarial Network (GAN),
which leverages two sources of information, the path history
of all the agents in a scene, and the scene context information, using images of the scene. To predict a future path for
an agent, both physical and social information must be leveraged. Previous work has not been successful to jointly model
physical and social interactions. Our approach blends a social attention mechanism with physical attention that helps
the model to learn where to look in a large scene and extract the most salient parts of the image relevant to the path.
Whereas, the social attention component aggregates information across the different agent interactions and extracts the
most important trajectory information from the surrounding
neighbors. SoPhie also takes advantage of GAN to generates more realistic samples and to capture the uncertain
nature of the future paths by modeling its distribution. All
these mechanisms enable our approach to predict socially
and physically plausible paths for the agents and to achieve
state-of-the-art performance on several different trajectory
forecasting benchmarks.

1. Introduction
When people navigate through a park or crowded mall,
they follow common sense rules in view of social decorum
to adjust their paths. At the same time, they are able to adapt
to the physical space and obstacles in their way. Interacting
with the physical terrain as well as humans around them is
by no means an easy task; because it requires:
∗ indicates equal contribution

Figure 1. SoPhie predicts trajectories that are socially and physically plausible. To perform this, our approach incorporates the
influence of all agents in the scene as well as the scene context.

• Obeying physical constraints of the environment. In
order to be able to walk on a feasible terrain and avoid obstacles or similar physical constraints, we have to process
the local and global spatial information of our surroundings and pay attention to important elements around us.
For example, when reaching a curved path, we focus more
on the curve rather than other constraints in the environment, we call this physical attention[26].
• Anticipating movements and social behavior of other
people. To avoid collisions with other people, disturbing
their personal space, or interrupting some social interactions (e.g. a handshake), we must have a good understanding of others’ movements and the social norms of an
environment and adjust our path accordingly. We should
take into account that some agents have more influence
in our decision. For example, when walking in a corridor,
we pay more attention to people in front of us rather than
the ones behind us, we call this social attention. Modeling
these social interactions is a non-trivial task.
• Finding more than a single feasible path. To get to our
destination, there often exists more than a single choice
for our path, which is the fuzzy nature of human motion.
11349

