Wide-Context Semantic Image Extrapolation
Yi Wang1,2 Xin Tao2 Xiaoyong Shen2 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 YouTu Lab, Tencent
yiwang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

{xintao, dylanshen, jiayajia}@tencent.com

Abstract
This paper studies the fundamental problem of extrapolating visual context using deep generative models, i.e., extending image borders with plausible structure and details.
This seemingly easy task actually faces many crucial technical challenges and has its unique properties. The two major
issues are size expansion and one-side constraints. We propose a semantic regeneration network with several special
contributions and use multiple spatial related losses to address these issues. Our results contain consistent structures
and high-quality textures. Extensive experiments are conducted on various possible alternatives and related methods. We also explore the potential of our method for various interesting applications that can benefit research in a
variety of fields.

1. Introduction
Humans have the natural ability to perceive unseen surroundings based on limited visual content. For computer
vision, accomplishing this task requires generating semantically meaningful and consistent structure and texture. In
this paper, we focus on the special task to infer unseen content outside image boundaries.
This task finds several related methods and topics in
image processing and graphics. It was treated as an intriguing application in view expansion [35, 43, 49], image editing [2], texture synthesis [10, 11, 41], to name a
few. These methods exploit information from either external images or internal statistics. For example, algorithms
of [35, 43, 49] enlarge the view by matching and stitching similar candidates. Another line [15] uses retargeting. It is also a natural choice to use inpainting methods
[1, 5, 7, 20, 23, 25, 37] for extrapolating images. We note
that these methods are not specially designed for our task
and thus have their respective limitations when applied to
content generation. External-image-based algorithms require a large amount of or structurally very similar reference
images while internal pixels/patches-based methods mostly
produce apparently similar or repeated patterns.

Figure 1. Illustration of our pursuit with examples of face, dog,
bird, and human body, which are all highly semantically sensitive
and representative.

Different from the results shown in previous work, the
illustration in Figure 1 indicates that our method has its
unique and strong capability. It can generate the full portrait
with hair and background even from a small part of faces
(top row of Figure 1), create bird head and tail based on
body shape (bottom left of Figure 1), or produce a full human body given only upper body information (bottom right
of Figure 1). Note that in all these examples, the algorithm
needs to suitably take vastly different context of each incomplete image into account and predict up to 3 times more
unknown pixels than known ones.
In regard to technical strategies, deep learning becomes
popular and effective in low-level vision [8, 26, 39, 46, 48].
Applying it to this context generation task, however, still
needs to consider the following two issues.
Image Size Change Image expansion extends image size
beyond boundaries. A similar task is super-resolution
[8, 24, 36, 38], which produces high-res (HR) results from
low-res (LR) input. Current SR frameworks either upsample input before fed into networks [8], or use spatial expansion modules [24, 36, 38] within the network. So the first
issue to conquer in our framework is to properly increase
size with structure and detail generation.
One-sided Constraints The boundary condition in context generation has only one side, as illustrated in Figure 1
where black arrows show inference direction. This configuration is different from that of general image-to-image

1399

