SIXray: A Large-scale Security Inspection X-ray Benchmark
for Prohibited Item Discovery in Overlapping Images
Caijing Miao† , Lingxi Xie‡♮ , Fang Wan† , Chi Su♯ , Hongye Liu♯ , Jianbin Jiao† , Qixiang Ye†§∗
†
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences ‡ The Johns Hopkins University ♯ Kingsoft Cloud
♮
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Inc. § Peng Cheng Laboratory
{miaocaijing16, wanfang13}@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
{suchi, liuhongye}@kingsoft.com,

198808xc@gmail.com

{jiaojb, qxye}@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present a large-scale dataset and establish a baseline for prohibited item discovery in Security Inspection X-ray images. Our dataset, named SIXray,
consists of 1,059,231 X-ray images, in which 6 classes of
8,929 prohibited items are manually annotated. It raises
a brand new challenge of overlapping image data, meanwhile shares the same properties with existing datasets, including complex yet meaningless contexts and class imbalance. We propose an approach named class-balanced hierarchical refinement (CHR) to deal with these difficulties.
CHR assumes that each input image is sampled from a mixture distribution, and that deep networks require an iterative process to infer image contents accurately. To accelerate, we insert reversed connections to different network
backbones, delivering high-level visual cues to assist midlevel features. In addition, a class-balanced loss function
is designed to maximally alleviate the noise introduced by
easy negative samples. We evaluate CHR on SIXray with
different ratios of positive/negative samples. Compared to
the baselines, CHR enjoys a better ability of discriminating
objects especially using mid-level features, which offers the
possibility of using a weakly-supervised approach towards
accurate object localization. In particular, the advantage of
CHR is more significant in the scenarios with fewer positive
training samples, which demonstrates its potential application in real-world security inspection.1

1. Introduction
Security inspection has been playing a critical role in
protecting public space from safety threatening such as terrorism. With the growth of population in large cities and
crowd density in public transportation hubs, it becomes
∗ Qixiang Ye is the corresponding author.
1 Data and code: https://github.com/MeioJane/SIXray.

Gun

Knife

Wrench

Pliers

Scissors

Hammer

Negative

Figure 1. Example images in the presented SIXray dataset with
six categories of prohibited items. Challenges include large variety in object scale and viewpoint, object overlapping and complex
backgrounds (please zoom in for details).

more and more important to fast, automatically and accurately recognize prohibited items in X-ray scanned images.
Recent years, the rapid development of deep learning [19]
in particular convolutional neural networks has brought an
evolution to image processing and visual understanding, including discovering and recognizing objects in X-ray images [23] [27] [24]. Different from natural images and
other X-ray scans [36], security inspection often deals with
a baggage or suitcase where objects are randomly stacked
and heavily overlapped with each other. Therefore, in the
scanned images, the objects of interest may be mixed with
arbitrary and meaningless clutters and thus can be ignored
even by human inspectors, Fig. 1.
To provide a public benchmark for research in this ﬁeld,
in this paper, we present a dataset named Security Inspection X-ray (SIXray), which is 100 times larger than the existing largest image collection for prohibited item discovery,
i.e., the baggage group in the GDXray dataset [25]. SIXray
contains more than one million X-ray images in which only
less than 1% images have positive labels (i.e., prohibited
items are annotated). It mimics a similar testing environment to the real-world scenarios where inspectors often aim

2119

