Dense Relational Captioning:
Triple-Stream Networks for Relationship-Based Captioning
Dong-Jin Kim1 Jinsoo Choi1 Tae-Hyun Oh 2 In So Kweon1
1
KAIST, South Korea. 2 MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, MA.
1
{djnjusa,jinsc37,iskweon77}@kaist.ac.kr 2 taehyun@csail.mit.edu

1. Introduction
Human visual system has the capability to effectively
and instantly collect a holistic understanding of contextual
associations among objects in a scene [16, 23] by densely
and adaptively skimming the visual scene through the eyes,
i.e. the saccadic movements. Such instantly extracted rich
and dense information allows humans to have the superior
capability of object-centric visual understanding. Motivated
by this, in this work, we present a new concept of scene
understanding, called dense relational captioning, that provides dense but selective, expressive, and relational representation in a human interpretable way, i.e., via captions.
Richer representation of an image often leads to numerous potential applications or performance improvements of
subsequent computer vision algorithms [22, 23]. In order
to achieve richer object-centric understanding, Johnson et
al. [12] proposed a framework called DenseCap that generates captions for each of the densely sampled local image
regions. These regional descriptions facilitate both rich and

Simple label

Sentence

Object Detection

Dense Captioning

person

Output

The man is wearing a black shirt.

motorcycle

The motorcycle is red in color.

dog

The dog is brown and black.

Relationship Detection

Relational Captioning

person
‘riding’

The man riding a red motorcycle.

motorcycle

Relationships

Our goal in this work is to train an image captioning
model that generates more dense and informative captions.
We introduce “relational captioning,” a novel image captioning task which aims to generate multiple captions with
respect to relational information between objects in an image. Relational captioning is a framework that is advantageous in both diversity and amount of information, leading to image understanding based on relationships. Part-ofspeech (POS, i.e. subject-object-predicate categories) tags
can be assigned to every English word. We leverage the
POS as a prior to guide the correct sequence of words in a
caption. To this end, we propose a multi-task triple-stream
network (MTTSNet) which consists of three recurrent units
for the respective POS and jointly performs POS prediction
and captioning. We demonstrate more diverse and richer
representations generated by the proposed model against
several baselines and competing methods.

Single box

Abstract

dog
‘behind’

The dog sitting behind the person.

person
dog
‘on’

Small dog sitting on a motorcycle.

motorcycle
person
‘in front of’

Input

Old man in the front of brown dog.

dog

Figure 1: Overall description of the proposed relational captioning framework. Compared to traditional frameworks,
our framework is advantageous in both interaction understanding and high-level interpretation.
dense semantic understanding of a scene in a form of interpretable language. However, the information in the image
that we want to acquire includes not only the information of
the object itself but also the interaction with other objects
or the environment.
As an alternative way of representing an image, we focus on dense relationships between objects. In the context
of human cognition, there has been a general consensus that
objects and particular environments near the target object
affect search and recognition efficiency. Understanding the
relationships between objects clearly reveal object interactions and object-attribute combinations [11, 14, 20].
Interestingly, we observe that the annotations done by
humans on computer vision datasets predominantly contain relational forms; in Visual Genome [15] and MS
COCO [19] caption datasets, most of the labels take the
format of subject-predicate-object more so than subjectpredicate. Moreover, UCF101 [31] action recognition
dataset contains 85 actions out of 101 (84.2%) that are described in terms of human interactions with other objects or
surroundings. These aspects tell us that understanding interaction and relationships between objects facilitate a major

6271

