Hierarchical Cross-Modal Talking Face Generation
with Dynamic Pixel-Wise Loss
Lele Chen

Ross K. Maddox Zhiyao Duan Chenliang Xu
University of Rochester, USA
{lchen63, rmaddox}@ur.rochester.edu, {zhiyao.duan, chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu

Abstract
on

nti

tte

We devise a cascade GAN approach to generate talking face video, which is robust to different face shapes,
view angles, facial characteristics, and noisy audio conditions. Instead of learning a direct mapping from audio to video frames, we propose first to transfer audio to
high-level structure, i.e., the facial landmarks, and then
to generate video frames conditioned on the landmarks.
Compared to a direct audio-to-image approach, our cascade approach avoids fitting spurious correlations between
audiovisual signals that are irrelevant to the speech content. We, humans, are sensitive to temporal discontinuities and subtle artifacts in video. To avoid those pixel
jittering problems and to enforce the network to focus on
audiovisual-correlated regions, we propose a novel dynamically adjustable pixel-wise loss with an attention mechanism. Furthermore, to generate a sharper image with
well-synchronized facial movements, we propose a novel
regression-based discriminator structure, which considers
sequence-level information along with frame-level information. Thoughtful experiments on several datasets and realworld samples demonstrate significantly better results obtained by our method than the state-of-the-art methods in
both quantitative and qualitative comparisons.

1. Introduction
Modeling the dynamics of a moving human face/body
conditioned on another modality is a fundamental problem in computer vision, where applications are ranging
from audio-to-video generation [28, 3, 2] to text-to-video
generation [23, 19] and to skeleton-to-image/video generation [21, 7]. This paper considers such a task: given a target
face image and an arbitrary speech audio recording, generating a photo-realistic talking face of the target subject saying that speech with natural lip synchronization while maintaining a smooth transition of facial images over time (see
Fig. 1). Note that the model should have a robust general-

Identity image A

Motion

Re

su

Tell where
to change
Tell how
to change

lt

Audio signal

Figure 1: Problem description. The model takes an arbitrary audio speech and one face image, and synthesizes a
talking face saying the speech. The synthesized frames (last
row) consist of synthesized attention (first row) and motion
(second row), which demonstrate where and how the dynamics are synthesizing. For example, the face in the green
box looks similar to the example face so that the attention
map is almost dark; the face in the red box differs much
from the example image, and hence the attention highlights
the mouth region and the motion part hints white pixels for
teeth.

ization capability to different types of faces (e.g., cartoon
faces, animal faces) and to noisy speech conditions (see
Fig. 7). Solving this task is crucial to enabling many applications, e.g., lip-reading from over-the-phone audio for
hearing-impaired people, generating virtual characters with
synchronized facial movements to speech audio for movies
and games.
The main difference between still image generation and
video generation is temporal-dependency modeling. There
are two main reasons why it imposes additional challenges:
people are sensitive to any pixel jittering (e.g., temporal discontinuities and subtle artifacts) in a video; they are also
sensitive to slight misalignment between facial movements
and speech audio. However, recent researchers [3, 12, 17]
tended to formulate video generation as a temporally independent image generation problem. For example, Chung
et al. [3] proposed an encoder-decoder structure to generate one image from 0.35-second audio at each time. Song
et al. [27] adopted a recurrent network to consider temporal dependency. They applied RNN in the feature extraction part, however, each frame was generated inde4321
7832

