Polarimetric Camera Calibration Using an LCD Monitor
Zhixiang Wang1
1

Yinqiang Zheng2∗

National Taiwan University

Abstract
It is crucial for polarimetric imaging to accurately calibrate the polarizer angles and the camera response function
(CRF) of a polarizing camera. When this polarizing camera
is used in a setting of multiview geometric imaging, it is
often required to calibrate its intrinsic and extrinsic parameters as well, for which Zhang’s calibration method is the
most widely used with either a physical checker board, or
more conveniently a virtual checker pattern displayed on a
monitor. In this paper, we propose to jointly calibrate the
polarizer angles and the inverse CRF (ICRF) using a slightly
adapted checker pattern displayed on a liquid crystal display
(LCD) monitor. Thanks to the lighting principles and the
industry standards of the LCD monitors, the polarimetric
and radiometric calibration can be significantly simplified,
when assisted by the extrinsic parameters estimated from the
checker pattern. We present a simple linear method for polarizer angle calibration and a convex method for radiometric
calibration, both of which can be jointly refined in a process
similar to bundle adjustment. Experiments have verified the
feasibility and accuracy of the proposed calibration method.

1. Introduction
Polarization of a beam of light reflected from a surface
conveys information about the azimuth and zenith angles,
which can be used to determine the surface normal [8]. Surface reconstruction based on this principle is known as shape
from polarization (SfP) [31, 25, 27, 6, 33, 41]. Compared
to multi-view stereo methods, SfP has the advantage of independence from discriminative surface texture, and can
be extended to reconstruct transparent objects [31, 25] or
challenging dielectric objects [27, 6]. To capture polarimetric information, one can use a commodity polarizing
camera [1, 2, 3], or conveniently construct a prototype by
attaching a linear polarizer onto an ordinary camera, like a
DLSR camera or an embedded camera in the mobile device.
To precisely estimate the surface normal using polariza∗ Corresponding Author, E-mail: yqzheng@nii.ac.jp

2

Yung-Yu Chuang1

National Institute of Informatics

tion, it is required to calibrate the camera response function
(CRF) and the rotation angles of the polarizer. To control
the exposure allows to calibrate the CRF, or equivalently the
inverse CRF (ICRF), and to use a mechanical rotator can
determine the polarizer angles, both of which are not always
accessible. On the contrary, image-based self-calibration
methods are more convenient in use, yet they usually suffer
from issues in applicability and reliability. For example,
the state-of-the-art self-calibration methods [32, 36] can estimate polarizer angles of a camera with linear/nonlinear
response respectively. However, these methods require four
and more polarizer angles, and thus do not work for polarizing cameras with no more than three polarizing channels,
such as the FluxData camera [2]. As for reliability, their
alternating optimization scheme depends on a good angle
initialization for convergence, which is not always available.
Also, when the CRF is nonlinear, the estimated angles will
be severely distorted, unless an additional radiometric calibration method [35, 11, 28] is used beforehand to correct
the image intensity. Therefore, a general, reliable and convenient method for radiometric and polarimetric calibration is
needed.
Recently, polarization has been combined with other
imaging modalities, such as depth sensors [15], binocular
stereo [7] and multiview stereo [26, 9], because of their
complementary characteristics. It requires to calibrate the
camera’s intrinsic and extrinsic parameters as well. Zhang’s
calibration method [43] is arguably the most widely used for
this purpose, because of its proper tradeoff between the calibration accuracy and the difficulty in making a calibration
target. Rather than using a physical checker board, some
researches [14, 42, 34, 19] proposed to use a virtual checker
pattern on a monitor, not only because of the easy availability of monitors, but also the augmented performance arising
from monitor’s properties. Given the popularity of geometric
camera calibration using a checker pattern displayed on a
monitor, a radiometric and polarimetric calibration method
using similar calibration setup for a polarizing camera is
likely to be widely used in practice.
In this paper, we first propose to calibrate the polarizer angles using the standard checker pattern displayed on a liquid
crystal display (LCD) monitor. When the CRF is unknown,

3743

