Context-Aware Visual Compatibility Prediction
Guillem Cucurull
Element AI

Perouz Taslakian
Element AI

David Vazquez
Element AI

gcucurull@elementai.com

perouz@elementai.com

dvazquez@elementai.com

Abstract
How do we determine whether two or more clothing
items are compatible or visually appealing? Part of the
answer lies in understanding of visual aesthetics, and is
biased by personal preferences shaped by social attitudes,
time, and place. In this work we propose a method that
predicts compatibility between two items based on their visual features, as well as their context. We define context as
the products that are known to be compatible with each of
these item. Our model is in contrast to other metric learning approaches that rely on pairwise comparisons between
item features alone. We address the compatibility prediction
problem using a graph neural network that learns to generate product embeddings conditioned on their context. We
present results for two prediction tasks (fill in the blank and
outfit compatibility) tested on two fashion datasets Polyvore
and Fashion-Gen, and on a subset of the Amazon dataset;
we achieve state of the art results when using context information and show how test performance improves as more
context is used.

1. Introduction
Predicting fashion compatibility refers to the task of
determining whether a set of fashion items go well together. In its ideal form, it involves understanding the visual styles of garments, being cognizant of social and cultural attitudes, and making sure that when worn together
the outfit is aesthetically pleasing. The task is fundamental to a variety of industry applications such as personalized fashion design [19], outfit composition [7], wardrobe
creation [16], item recommendation [31] and fashion trend
forecasting [1]. Fashion compatibility, however, is a complex task that depends on subjective notions of style, context, and trend – all properties that may vary from one individual to another and evolve over time.
Previous work [24, 36] on the problem of fashion compatibility prediction uses models that mainly perform pairwise comparisons between items based on item information
such as image, category, description, . . . , etc. These ap-

?

?

?

?

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Fashion compatibility. We use context information around fashion items to improve the task of fashion compatibility prediction. (a) standard methods compare
pairs of items (b) we use a graph to exploit relational information to know the context of the items.

proaches have the drawback that each pair of items considered are treated independently, making the final prediction
rely on comparisons between the features of each item in
isolation. In such a comparison mechanism that discards
context, the model makes the same prediction for a given
pair of clothing items every time. For example, if the model
is trained to match a specific style of shirt with a specific
style of shoes, it will consistently make this same prediction every time. However, as compatibility is a subjective
measure that can change with trends and across individuals, such inflexible behaviour is not always desirable at test
time. The compatibility between the aforementioned shirt
and shoes is not only defined by the features of these items
alone, but is also biased by the individual’s preferences and
sense of fashion. We thus define the context of a clothing
item to be the set of items that it is compatible with, and
address the limitation of inflexible predictions by introducing a model that makes compatibility decisions based on
the visual features, as well as the context of each item. This
consideration gives the model some background as to what
we consider “compatible”, in itself a subjective bias of the
individual and the trend of the time.

12617

