A Sufficient Condition for Convergences of Adam and RMSProp
Fangyu Zou†∗ , Li Shen‡∗ , Zequn Jie‡ , Weizhong Zhang‡ , Wei Liu‡
‡
†
Tencent AI Lab
Stony Brook University
fangyu.zou@stonybrook.edu, mathshenli@gmail.com, zequn.nus@gmail.com,
zhangweizhongzju@gmail.com, wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
Adam and RMSProp are two of the most influential adaptive stochastic algorithms for training deep neural networks,
which have been pointed out to be divergent even in the convex setting via a few simple counterexamples. Many attempts,
such as decreasing an adaptive learning rate, adopting a
big batch size, incorporating a temporal decorrelation technique, seeking an analogous surrogate, etc., have been tried
to promote Adam/RMSProp-type algorithms to converge. In
contrast with existing approaches, we introduce an alternative easy-to-check sufficient condition, which merely depends
on the parameters of the base learning rate and combinations of historical second-order moments, to guarantee the
global convergence of generic Adam/RMSProp for solving
large-scale non-convex stochastic optimization. Moreover,
we show that the convergences of several variants of Adam,
such as AdamNC, AdaEMA, etc., can be directly implied via
the proposed sufficient condition in the non-convex setting.
In addition, we illustrate that Adam is essentially a specifically weighted AdaGrad with exponential moving average
momentum, which provides a novel perspective for understanding Adam and RMSProp. This observation coupled
with this sufficient condition gives much deeper interpretations on their divergences. At last, we validate the sufficient
condition by applying Adam and RMSProp to tackle a certain
counterexample and train deep neural networks. Numerical
results are exactly in accord with our theoretical analysis.

1. Introduction
Large-scale non-convex stochastic optimization [5], covering a slew of applications in statistics and machine learning
[13, 5] such as learning a latent variable from massive data
whose probability density distribution is unknown, takes the
following generic formulation:


min f (x) = Eξ∼P fe(x, ξ) ,

x∈Rd

(1)

∗ The first two authors contribute equally. † This work was partially done
when Fangyu Zou was a research intern at Tencent AI Lab, China.

where f (x) is a non-convex function and ξ is a random
variable satisfying an unknown distribution P.
Due to the uncertainty of distribution P, the batch gradient descent algorithm [4] is impractical to employ full gradient ∇f (x) to solve problem (1). Alternatively, a compromised approach to handle this difficulty is to use an unbiased
stochastic estimate of ∇f (x), denoted as g(x, ξ), which
leads to the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm
[21]. Its coordinate-wise version is defined as follows:
xt+1,k = xt,k − ηt,k gt,k (xt , ξt ),

(2)

for k = 1, 2, . . . , d, where ηt,k ≥ 0 is the learning rate of
the k-th component of stochastic gradient g(xt , ξt ) at the
t-th iteration. A sufficient condition [21] to ensure the global
convergence of vanilla SGD (2) is to require ηt to meet
∞
P

t=1

kηt k = ∞ and

∞
P

t=1

kηt k2 < ∞.

(3)

Although the vanilla SGD algorithm with learning rate ηt
satisfying condition (3) does converge, its empirical performance could be still stagnating, since it is difficult to tune an
effective learning rate ηt via condition (3).
To further improve the empirical performance of SGD,
a large variety of adaptive SGD algorithms, including AdaGrad [9], RMSProp [11], Adam [14], Nadam [8], etc., have
been proposed to automatically tune the learning rate ηt by
using second-order moments of historical stochastic gradients. Let vt,k and mt,k be the linear combinations of the
2
2
2
historical second-order moments (g1,k
, g2,k
, · · · , gt,k
) and
stochastic gradient estimates (g1,k , g2,k , · · · , gt,k ), respectively. Then, the generic iteration scheme of these adaptive
SGD algorithms [20, 6] is summarized as
√
xt+1,k = xt,k − ηt,k mt,k , with ηt,k = αt / vt,k , (4)
for k = 1, 2, . . . , d, where αt > 0 is called base learning
rate and it is independent of stochastic gradient estimates
(g1,k , g2,k , · · · , gt,k ) for all t ≥ 1. Although RMSProp,
Adam, and Nadam work well for solving large-scale convex and non-convex optimization problems such as training
deep neural networks, they have been pointed out to be divergent in some scenarios via convex counterexamples [20].

11127

