Variational Bayesian Dropout with a Hierarchical Prior
Yuhang Liu1,2 , Wenyong Dong1 , Lei Zhang3,2 , Dong Gong2 , and Qinfeng Shi2
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Hubei, China
2
The University of Adelaide, Australia 3 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
https://sites.google.com/view/yuhangliu/pro

Abstract
Variational dropout (VD) is a generalization of Gaussian dropout, which aims at inferring the posterior of network weights based on a log-uniform prior on them to learn
these weights as well as dropout rate simultaneously. The
log-uniform prior not only interprets the regularization capacity of Gaussian dropout in network training, but also
underpins the inference of such posterior. However, the
log-uniform prior is an improper prior (i.e., its integral is
infinite), which causes the inference of posterior to be illposed, thus restricting the regularization performance of
VD. To address this problem, we present a new generalization of Gaussian dropout, termed variational Bayesian
dropout (VBD), which turns to exploit a hierarchical prior on the network weights and infer a new joint posterior.
Specifically, we implement the hierarchical prior as a zeromean Gaussian distribution with variance sampled from a
uniform hyper-prior. Then, we incorporate such a prior into inferring the joint posterior over network weights and the
variance in the hierarchical prior, with which both the network training and dropout rate estimation can be cast into
a joint optimization problem. More importantly, the hierarchical prior is a proper prior which enables the inference
of posterior to be well-posed. In addition, we further show
that the proposed VBD can be seamlessly applied to network compression. Experiments on classification and network compression demonstrate the superior performance of
the proposed VBD in regularizing network training.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have gained great success in various artificial intelligence research areas, e.g., computer vision [12, 8], natural language processing [4], etc. Nevertheless, due to the limited samples with annotation in practice, training deep neural networks with extensive parameters often suffers from over-fitting problem [35]. Dropout
proves to be a practical technique to alleviate this problem, which stochastically regularizes network weights by

7KHORJXQLIRUP



:

c



*DXVVLDQ

8QLIRUP

:

H

9DULDWLRQDOGURSRXW

9DULDWLRQDO%D\HVLDQGURSRXW

PLQ DKL q : __ p : _ 

PLQ DKL q : H __ p : H _ 

a

b

Figure 1: Variational dropout v.s. the proposed variational
Bayesian dropout.
randomly enforcing multiplicative noise on input features
during training [13]. Over the past several years, various
dropout methods have been proposed [13, 29, 33]. Among
them, Gaussian dropout [33] provides a general framework,
which introduces the distribution of network weights into
model training and thus can well approximate the conventional dropout with different types of noise, such as binary
noise [13] or Gaussian noise [29]. While these methods
have shown promising regularization performance in various deep network architectures [20, 28, 16, 18, 9], the reason behind such success is not clear, and their performance
heavily depends on a predefined dropout rate, for which traditional grid-search based methods is a prohibitive operation for large network models.
Variational dropout (VD) [19] is a generalization of
Gaussian dropout, which focuses on inferring the posterior of network weights based on a log-uniform prior. By
doing this, VD can address these two aspects of the problems mentioned above. 1) Bayesian Interpretation. It has
been proved [19] that VD can be consistent with Gaussian dropout for a fixed dropout rate by enforcing the loguniform prior on network weights. This implies that incorporating Gaussian dropout into network training amounts to
variational inference on the network weights, where these
weights are regularized by the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the variational posterior, i.e., the distribution of network weights introduced by Gaussian dropout,
and the log-uniform prior. In other words, the log-uniform
prior endows Gaussian dropout with the regularization capacity. 2) Adaptive dropout rate. Based on the log-uniform
prior, VD [19] can simultaneously learn network weights
as well as dropout rate via inferring the posterior on these
17124

