Soft Labels for Ordinal Regression
Raúl Dı́az, Amit Marathe
HP Inc.
{raul.diaz.garcia, amit.marathe}@hp.com

Abstract
Ordinal regression attempts to solve classification problems in which categories are not independent, but rather
follow a natural order. It is crucial to classify each class
correctly while learning adequate interclass ordinal relationships. We present a simple and effective method that
constrains these relationships among categories by seamlessly incorporating metric penalties into ground truth label representations. This encoding allows deep neural networks to automatically learn intraclass and interclass relationships without any explicit modification of the network
architecture. Our method converts data labels into soft
probability distributions that pair well with common categorical loss functions such as cross-entropy. We show that
this approach is effective by using off-the-shelf classification and segmentation networks in four wildly different scenarios: image quality ranking, age estimation, horizon line
regression, and monocular depth estimation. We demonstrate that our general-purpose method is very competitive
with respect to specialized approaches, and adapts well to
a variety of different network architectures and metrics.

1. Introduction
Ordinal classification, typically known as ordinal regression, is a type of machine learning task that resembles a
mixture of traditional regression of real-valued metrics, and
independent, multi-class classification problems. The goal
is to predict the category of an input instance from a discrete
set of labels, just like classification. Its main difference is
that the categories are related in a natural or implied order.
Common examples of such tasks are movie ratings (e.g., a
movie can be rated from 1 star to 5 stars) or customer satisfaction surveys, where users are requested to respond to
certain questions from a range of answers with a logical order (e.g., from ’poor’ to ’excellent’).
In a more broader view, ordinal regression attempts to
solve classification problems in which not all wrong classes
are equally wrong. Going back to the movie rating example, if a particular movie has a true rating of 4 stars,

a mis-classification of 3 stars is less incorrect than a misclassification of 1 star. Obviously, the actual goal of the
system is to classify the movie as 4 stars. However, in the
event of not yielding the correct rating, it is desirable to output a rating as close as possible to the ground truth one.
While classification in all its various forms (image and
object classification, segmentation, etc.) and metric regression have always dominated most of the research challenges, ordinal regression is certainly not a novel problem
and has also been investigated for several years [21, 14, 9,
37]. Generally speaking, ordinal regression studies can be
classified either from those treating the problem as a version
of traditional metric regression in which the thresholds that
discretize the domain need to be estimated, or those who
frame the problem as a classification objective, by fixing a
set of thresholds on the domain space and learning classifiers for each one of them.
When ordinal regression is approached from a regression
perspective, the literature tends to focus on mapping the inputs to a real line and predicting the boundaries between ordinal categories to define the final output class. Examples of
threshold approaches like [7, 6] use SVM or MAP respectively to find the rank k of an input x given the boundaries b
and model weights w, either by finding the linear mapping
wT x ∈ [bk−1 , bk ] or by assuming that the latent function is
a Gaussian process.
Ordinal regression works from a classification point of
view typically assume a K-rank formulation by breaking the
problem domain into multiple ranks or thresholds. For instance, [14] use K − 1 binary classifiers, each one trained to
classify whether or not a particular input x has a response
y > k, where k is the rank for which the binary classifier is
trained. Alternatives using data replication methods can be
found in [29, 2]. Generally speaking, the ground truth representation of ordinality is expressed by hard vectors: each
ground truth label generates K − 1 binary one-hot vectors
for each of the threshold classifiers. The rank prediction
of each input instance typically consists on the accumulation of positive responses from the ensemble of these binary
classifiers. These type of approaches particularly suit well
on neural network architectures designed for classification.
14738

