Domain-Symmetric Networks for Adversarial Domain Adaptation
Yabin Zhang1,2 , Hui Tang1 , Kui Jia ∗1 , and Mingkui Tan1
1

South China University of Technology
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group

{zhang.yabin,eehuitang}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {kuijia,mingkuitan}@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation aims to learn a model
of classifier for unlabeled samples on the target domain,
given training data of labeled samples on the source domain. Impressive progress is made recently by learning
invariant features via domain-adversarial training of deep
networks. In spite of the recent progress, domain adaptation
is still limited in achieving the invariance of feature distributions at a finer category level. To this end, we propose in
this paper a new domain adaptation method called DomainSymmetric Networks (SymNets). The proposed SymNet is
based on a symmetric design of source and target task classifiers, based on which we also construct an additional classifier that shares with them its layer neurons. To train the
SymNet, we propose a novel adversarial learning objective
whose key design is based on a two-level domain confusion
scheme, where the category-level confusion loss improves
over the domain-level one by driving the learning of intermediate network features to be invariant at the corresponding categories of the two domains. Both domain discrimination and domain confusion are implemented based on
the constructed additional classifier. Since target samples
are unlabeled, we also propose a scheme of cross-domain
training to help learn the target classifier. Careful ablation
studies show the efficacy of our proposed method. In particular, based on commonly used base networks, our SymNets
achieve the new state of the art on three benchmark domain
adaptation datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have achieved great success in
various machine learning tasks. A common pre-requisite
for such success is the availability of massive amounts of
annotated training data. For many other tasks, however,
∗ Corresponding author

these training data are either difficult to collect, or annotating them costs prohibitively. Therefore, to address the
scarcity of annotated data on some target tasks/domains,
there is a strong motivation to leverage the massively available annotated data on related source ones via a manner of
transfer learning or domain adaptation [17]. Unfortunately,
this attractive learning paradigm suffers from the problem
of domain shift [8], which stands as a major obstacle for
adapting the learned models on source domains to be useful
for target ones.
Domain adaptation aims to obtain models that have
smaller risks on target data. Theoretical analysis [2] suggests that such a target risk can be minimized by bounding
the risk of a model on the source data and the discrepancy
between distributions of the two domains, which inspires
many of existing methods [28, 31, 11, 32, 25, 3, 4, 26, 27,
10, 19]. Among existing methods, those based on domainadversarial training of deep networks [3, 4] achieve the current state of the art on many benchmark domain adaptation datasets [21, 1, 29]. Inspired by generative adversarial
networks [6], domain-adversarial training typically plays a
minimax game to learn a domain discriminator, which aims
to distinguish features of source samples from those of target samples, and a feature extractor, which aims to learn
domain-invariant feature representations in order to confuse
the domain discriminator. Domain alignment is expected
when the minimax optimization reaches an equilibrium.
In spite of the remarkable empirical results achieved by
domain-adversarial training methods, they still suffer from
a major limitation: even though the feature extractor is well
trained to give domain-invariant features of both the source
and target samples, the corresponding model/classifier is
trained on the source samples and cannot perfectly generalize to the target ones, i.e., the joint distributions of feature and category are not well aligned across data domains.
Some of existing methods have paid attention to this issue.
For example, in [22, 34, 30], pseudo labels are assigned
to target samples, on which the category-level alignment

5031

