Competitive Collaboration: Joint Unsupervised Learning of Depth, Camera
Motion, Optical Flow and Motion Segmentation
Anurag Ranjan1 Varun Jampani2 Lukas Balles1
Kihwan Kim 2 Deqing Sun 2 Jonas Wulff 1,3 Michael J. Black1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 2 NVIDIA 3 MIT
{aranjan, lballes, jwulff, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de
{vjampani, kihwank, deqings}@nvidia.com

Abstract
We address the unsupervised learning of several interconnected problems in low-level vision: single view depth prediction, camera motion estimation, optical flow, and segmentation of a video into the static scene and moving regions. Our
key insight is that these four fundamental vision problems are
coupled through geometric constraints. Consequently, learning to solve them together simplifies the problem because the
solutions can reinforce each other. We go beyond previous
work by exploiting geometry more explicitly and segmenting the scene into static and moving regions. To that end,
we introduce Competitive Collaboration, a framework that
facilitates the coordinated training of multiple specialized
neural networks to solve complex problems. Competitive
Collaboration works much like expectation-maximization,
but with neural networks that act as both competitors to explain pixels that correspond to static or moving regions, and
as collaborators through a moderator that assigns pixels to
be either static or independently moving. Our novel method
integrates all these problems in a common framework and
simultaneously reasons about the segmentation of the scene
into moving objects and the static background, the camera
motion, depth of the static scene structure, and the optical
flow of moving objects. Our model is trained without any supervision and achieves state-of-the-art performance among
joint unsupervised methods on all sub-problems. .

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have achieved state-of-the-art results on computer vision problems with supervision using
large amounts of data [9, 18, 21]. However, for many vision
problems requiring dense, continuous-valued outputs, it is eiThis project was formerly referred by Adversarial Collaboration: Joint
Unsupervised Learning of Depth, Camera Motion, Optical Flow and Motion
Segmentation

Figure 1: Unsupervised Learning of Depth, Camera Motion, Optical Flow and Motion Segmentation. Left, top to
bottom: sample image, soft masks representing motion segmentation, estimated depth map. Right, top to bottom: static
scene optical flow, segmented flow in the moving regions
and combined optical flow.
ther impractical or expensive to gather ground truth data [6].
We consider four such problems in this paper: single view
depth prediction, camera motion estimation, optical flow,
and motion segmentation. Previous work has approached
these problems with supervision using real [5] and synthetic
data [4]. However there is always a realism gap between
synthetic and real data, and real data is limited or inaccurate.
For example, depth ground truth obtained using LIDAR [6]
is sparse. Furthermore, there are no sensors that provide
ground truth optical flow, so all existing datasets with real
imagery are limited or approximate [1, 6, 13]. Motion segmentation ground truth currently requires manual labeling
of all pixels in an image [26].
Problem. Recent work has tried to address the problem
of limited training data using unsupervised learning [14, 24].
To learn a mapping from pixels to flow, depth, and camera
motion without ground truth is challenging because each
of these problems is highly ambiguous. To address this,
additional constraints are needed and the geometric relations
between static scenes, camera motion, and optical flow can
be exploited. For example, unsupervised learning of depth

12240

