Siamese Cascaded Region Proposal Networks for Real-Time Visual Tracking
Heng Fan
Haibin Ling∗
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA USA
{hengfan,hbling}temple.edu

Abstract
Recently, the region proposal networks (RPN) have been
combined with the Siamese network for tracking, and shown
excellent accuracy with high efficiency. Nevertheless, previously proposed one-stage Siamese-RPN trackers degenerate
in presence of similar distractors and large scale variation.
Addressing these issues, we propose a multi-stage tracking
framework, Siamese Cascaded RPN (C-RPN), which consists of a sequence of RPNs cascaded from deep high-level
to shallow low-level layers in a Siamese network. Compared to previous solutions, C-RPN has several advantages:
(1) Each RPN is trained using the outputs of RPN in the
previous stage. Such process stimulates hard negative sampling, resulting in more balanced training samples. Consequently, the RPNs are sequentially more discriminative
in distinguishing difficult background (i.e., similar distractors). (2) Multi-level features are fully leveraged through a
novel feature transfer block (FTB) for each RPN, further improving the discriminability of C-RPN using both high-level
semantic and low-level spatial information. (3) With multiple steps of regressions, C-RPN progressively refines the
location and shape of the target in each RPN with adjusted
anchor boxes in the previous stage, which makes localization more accurate. C-RPN is trained end-to-end with the
multi-task loss function. In inference, C-RPN is deployed as
it is, without any temporal adaption, for real-time tracking.
In extensive experiments on OTB-2013, OTB-2015, VOT2016, VOT-2017, LaSOT and TrackingNet, C-RPN consistently achieves state-of-the-art results and runs in real-time.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is one of the most fundamental problems
in computer vision, and has a long list of applications such
as robotics, human-machine interaction, intelligent vehicle,
surveillance and so forth. Despite great advances in recent
years, visual tracking remains challenging due to many fac∗ Corresponding author.

GT

C-RPN

Siamese-RPN

Figure 1. Comparisons between one-stage Siamese-RPN [23] and
C-RPN on two challenging sequences: Bolt2 (the top row) with
similar distractors and CarScale (the bottom row) with large scale
changes. We observe that C-RPN can distinguish the target from
distractors, while Siamese-RPN drifts to the background in Bolt2.
In addition, compared to using a single regressor in Siamese-RPN,
multi-regression in C-RPN can better localize the target in presence of large scale changes in CarScale. Best viewed in color.

tors including occlusion, scale variation, etc.
Recently, Siamese network has drawn great attention in
the tracking community owing to its balanced accuracy and
speed. By formulating object tracking as a matching problem, Siamese trackers [2, 17, 19, 23, 45, 46, 51, 59] aim to
learn offline a generic similarity function from a large set of
videos. Among these methods, the work of [23] proposes a
one-stage Siamese-RPN for tracking by introducing the regional proposal networks (RPN), originally used for object
detection [38], into Siamese network. With the proposal
extraction by RPN, this approach simultaneously performs
classification and localization from multiple scales, achieving excellent performance. Besides, the use of RPN avoids
applying the time-consuming pyramid for target scale estimation [2], leading to a super real-time solution.

1.1. Problem and Motivation
Despite having achieved promising result, Siamese-RPN
may drift to the background especially in presence of similar semantic distractors (see Fig. 1). We identify two reasons accounting for this.
First, the distribution of training samples is imbalanced:

7952

