Structured Pruning of Neural Networks with Budget-Aware Regularization
Carl Lemaire
Université de Sherbrooke
Sherbrooke, Canada

Andrew Achkar
Miovision Technologies Inc.
Kitchener, Canada

Pierre-Marc Jodoin
Université de Sherbrooke
Sherbrooke, Canada

carl.lemaire@usherbrooke.ca

aachkar@miovision.com

pierre-marc.jodoin@usherbrooke.ca

Abstract
Pruning methods have shown to be effective at reducing the size of deep neural networks while keeping accuracy almost intact. Among the most effective methods are
those that prune a network while training it with a sparsity prior loss and learnable dropout parameters. A shortcoming of these approaches however is that neither the size
nor the inference speed of the pruned network can be controlled directly; yet this is a key feature for targeting deployment of CNNs on low-power hardware. To overcome
this, we introduce a budgeted regularized pruning framework for deep CNNs. Our approach naturally fits into traditional neural network training as it consists of a learnable masking layer, a novel budget-aware objective function, and the use of knowledge distillation. We also provide
insights on how to prune a residual network and how this
can lead to new architectures. Experimental results reveal
that CNNs pruned with our method are more accurate and
less compute-hungry than state-of-the-art methods. Also,
our approach is more effective at preventing accuracy collapse in case of severe pruning; this allows pruning factors
of up to 16× without significant accuracy drop.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have proven to
be effective feature extractors for many computer vision
tasks [12, 15, 18, 31]. The design of several CNNs involve
many heuristics, such as using increasing powers of two as
the number of feature maps, or width, of each layer. While
such heuristics allow achieving excellent results, they may
be too crude in situations where the amount of compute
power and memory is restricted, such as with mobile platforms. Thus arises the problem of finding the right number
of layers that solve a given task while respecting a budget.
Since the number of layers depends highly on the effectiveness of the learned filters (and their combination), one cannot determine these hyper-parameters a priori.
Convolution operations constitute the main computational burden of a CNN. The execution of these operations
benefit from a high degree of parallelism, which requires
them to have regular structures. This implies that one can-

not remove isolated neurons from a CNN filter as they must
be full grids. To achieve the same effect as removing a neuron, one can zero-out its weights. While doing this reduces
the theoretical size of the model, it does not reduce the computational demands of the model nor the amount of feature
map memory. Therefore, to accelerate a CNN and reduce
its memory footprint, one has to rely on structured sparsity
pruning methods that aim at reducing the number of feature
maps and not just individual neurons.
By removing unimportant filters from a network and retraining it, one can shrink it while maintaining good performance [10, 19]. This can be explained by the following hypothesis: the initial value of a filter’s weights is not guaranteed to allow the learning of a useful feature; thus, a trained
network might contain many expendable features [7].
Among the structured pruning methods, those that implement a sparsity learning (SL) framework have shown
to be effective as pruning and training are done simultaneously [1, 17, 21, 22, 24, 27]. Unfortunately, most SL
methods cannot prune a network while respecting a neuron
budget imposed by the very nature of a device on which the
network shall be deployed. As of today, pruning a network
while respecting a budget can only be done by trial-anderror, typically by training multiple times a network with
various compression hyperparameters.
In this paper, we present a SL framework which allows
learning and selecting filters of a CNN while respecting a
neuron budget. Our main contributions are:
• We present a novel objective function which includes
a variant of the log-barrier [2] function for simultaneously training and pruning a CNN while respecting a
total neuron budget;
• We propose a variant of the barrier method [2] for optimizing a CNN;
• We demonstrate the effectiveness of combining SL and
knowledge distillation [14];
• We empirically confirm the existence of the automatic depth determination property of residual networks pruned with filter-wise methods, and give insights on how to ensure the viability of the pruned network by preventing “fatal pruning”;

9108

