Automatic adaptation of object detectors to new domains using self-training
Aruni RoyChowdhury
Prithvijit Chakrabarty
Ashish Singh
SouYoung Jin
Huaizu Jiang
Liangliang Cao
Erik Learned-Miller
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{arunirc, pchakrabarty, ashishsingh, souyoungjin, hzjiang, llcao, elm}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
This work addresses the unsupervised adaptation of an
existing object detector to a new target domain. We assume that a large number of unlabeled videos from this
domain are readily available. We automatically obtain labels on the target data by using high-confidence detections
from the existing detector, augmented with hard (misclassified) examples acquired by exploiting temporal cues using a tracker. These automatically-obtained labels are then
used for re-training the original model. A modified knowledge distillation loss is proposed, and we investigate several
ways of assigning soft-labels to the training examples from
the target domain. Our approach is empirically evaluated
on challenging face and pedestrian detection tasks: a face
detector trained on WIDER-Face, which consists of highquality images crawled from the web, is adapted to a largescale surveillance data set; a pedestrian detector trained on
clear, daytime images from the BDD-100K driving data set
is adapted to all other scenarios such as rainy, foggy, nighttime. Our results demonstrate the usefulness of incorporating hard examples obtained from tracking, the advantage
of using soft-labels via distillation loss versus hard-labels,
and show promising performance as a simple method for
unsupervised domain adaptation of object detectors, with
minimal dependence on hyper-parameters.

1. Introduction
The success of deep neural networks has resulted in
state-of-the-art object detectors that obtain high accuracy
on standard vision benchmarks (e.g. MS-COCO [35], PASCAL VOC [11], etc.), and are readily available for download as out-of-the-box detection models [16, 22]. However,
it is unrealistic to expect a single detector to generalize to
every domain. Due to the data-hungry nature of supervised
training of deep networks, it would require a lot of labeling efforts to re-train a detector in a completely supervised
manner for a new scenario.

Face detection: WIDER à CS6

Pedestrian detection: BDD(clear,daytime) à BDD(rest)

Figure 1: Unsupervised cross-domain object detection.
Top: adapting a face detector trained on labeled highquality web images from WIDER-Face [64] to unlabeled
CS6/IJB-S [28] video frames. Bottom: adapting a pedestrian detector trained on labeled images from the (clear,
daytime) split of the BDD-100k dataset [65] to unlabeled
videos from all the other conditions (e.g. night-time, foggy,
rainy, etc.).
This paper considers the following problem: Given an
off-the-shelf detector, can we let it automatically improve
itself by watching a video camera? We hope to find a new
algorithm based on unsupervised self-training that leverages
large amounts of readily-available unlabeled video data, so
that it can relieve the requirement of labeling effort for the
new domain, which is tedious, expensive, and difficult to
scale up. Such a solution may be very useful to generalize existing models to new domains without supervision,
e.g. a pedestrian detection system trained on imagery of US
streets can adapt to cities in Europe or Asia, or help an offthe-shelf face detector improve its performance on video
footage. Such an algorithm would be a label efficient solution for large-scale domain adaptation, obviating the need
for costly bounding-box annotations when faced with a new
domain.
Recent approaches to unsupervised domain adaptation
in deep networks have attempted to learn domain invari-

780

