Superquadrics Revisited: Learning 3D Shape Parsing beyond Cuboids
Despoina Paschalidou1,4 Ali Osman Ulusoy2 Andreas Geiger1,3,4
1
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI for Intelligent Systems Tübingen
2
Microsoft 3 University of Tübingen 4 Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Abstracting complex 3D shapes with parsimonious partbased representations has been a long standing goal in
computer vision. This paper presents a learning-based solution to this problem which goes beyond the traditional
3D cuboid representation by exploiting superquadrics as
atomic elements. We demonstrate that superquadrics lead
to more expressive 3D scene parses while being easier to
learn than 3D cuboid representations. Moreover, we provide an analytical solution to the Chamfer loss which avoids
the need for computational expensive reinforcement learning or iterative prediction. Our model learns to parse 3D
objects into consistent superquadric representations without supervision. Results on various ShapeNet categories as
well as the SURREAL human body dataset demonstrate the
flexibility of our model in capturing fine details and complex
poses that could not have been modelled using cuboids.

(a) Input Mesh

(b) Inferred Cuboid Representation [36]

1. Introduction
Evolution has developed a remarkable visual system that
allows humans to robustly perceive their 3D environment.
It has long been hypothesized [2] that the human visual
system processes the vast amount of raw visual input into
compact parsimonious representations, where complex objects are decomposed into a small number of shape primitives that can each be represented using low-dimensional
descriptions. Indeed, experiments show that humans can
understand complex scenes from renderings of simple shape
primitives such as cuboids or geons [3].
Likewise, machines would tremendously benefit from
being able to parse 3D data into compact low-dimensional
representations. Such representations would provide useful cues for recognition, detection, shape manipulation and
physical reasoning such as path planning and grasping. In
the early days of computer vision, researchers explored
shape primitives such as 3D polyhedral shapes [8], generalized cylinders [4], geons [2] and superquadrics [24]. However, it proved very difficult to extract such representations

(c) Inferred Superquadric Representation (Ours)

Figure 1: 3D Shape Parsing. We consider the problem
of learning to parse unstructured 3D data (e.g., meshes or
point clouds) into compact part-based representations. Prior
work [22, 36, 43] has considered cuboid representations (b)
which capture the overall object structure, but lack expressiveness. In this work, we propose an unsupervised model
for superquadrics (c), which allows us to capture details
such as the body of the airplane and the ears of the rabbit.
from images due to the lack of computation power and data
at the time. Thus, the research community shifted their focus away from the shape primitive paradigm.
In the last decade, major breakthroughs in shape extraction were due to deep neural networks coupled with the
abundance of visual data. Recent works focus on learning
3D reconstruction using 2.5D [14, 15, 23, 42], volumetric
[7, 11, 13, 17, 29, 41], mesh [12, 20] and point cloud [10, 26]
110344

