Feature Selective Anchor-Free Module for Single-Shot Object Detection
Chenchen Zhu
Yihui He
Marios Savvides
Carnegie Mellon University
{chenchez, he2, marioss}@andrew.cmu.edu

person
0.53
person
person
0.690.53
person
0.680.57
person
person 0.69
person 0.90

person 0.83
person 0.90

skis 0.59

a: RetinaNet (anchor-based, ResNeXt-101)

b: Ours (anchor-based + FSAF, ResNet-50)

Figure 1: Qualitative results of the anchor-based RetinaNet [22] using powerful ResNeXt-101 (left) and our detector with
additional FSAF module using just ResNet-50 (right) under the same training and testing scale. Our FSAF module helps
detecting hard objects like tiny person and flat skis with a less powerful backbone network. See Figure 7 for more examples.

Abstract
We motivate and present feature selective anchor-free
(FSAF) module, a simple and effective building block for
single-shot object detectors. It can be plugged into singleshot detectors with feature pyramid structure. The FSAF
module addresses two limitations brought up by the conventional anchor-based detection: 1) heuristic-guided feature selection; 2) overlap-based anchor sampling. The
general concept of the FSAF module is online feature selection applied to the training of multi-level anchor-free
branches. Specifically, an anchor-free branch is attached
to each level of the feature pyramid, allowing box encoding and decoding in the anchor-free manner at an arbitrary level. During training, we dynamically assign each
instance to the most suitable feature level. At the time of inference, the FSAF module can work independently or jointly
with anchor-based branches. We instantiate this concept
with simple implementations of anchor-free branches and
online feature selection strategy. Experimental results on

the COCO detection track show that our FSAF module performs better than anchor-based counterparts while being
faster. When working jointly with anchor-based branches,
the FSAF module robustly improves the baseline RetinaNet
by a large margin under various settings, while introducing nearly free inference overhead. And the resulting best
model can achieve a state-of-the-art 44.6% mAP, outperforming all existing single-shot detectors on COCO.

1. Introduction
Object detection is an important task in the computer
vision community. It serves as a prerequisite for various downstream vision applications such as instance segmentation [12], facial analysis [1, 39], autonomous driving cars [6, 20], and video analysis [25, 33]. The performance of object detectors has been dramatically improved
thanks to the advance of deep convolutional neural networks [16, 29, 13, 34] and well-annotated datasets [7, 23].
One long-standing problem for object detection is scale

840

