KE-GAN: Knowledge Embedded Generative Adversarial Networks
for Semi-Supervised Scene Parsing
Mengshi Qi1,2 , Yunhong Wang∗1,2 , Jie Qin3 , and Annan Li2
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
2
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

Abstract
In recent years, scene parsing has captured increasing
attention in computer vision. Previous works have demonstrated promising performance in this task. However, they
mainly utilize holistic features, whilst neglecting the rich
semantic knowledge and inter-object relationships in the
scene. In addition, these methods usually require a large
number of pixel-level annotations, which is too expensive
in practice. In this paper, we propose a novel Knowledge
Embedded Generative Adversarial Networks, dubbed as
KE-GAN, to tackle the challenging problem in a semisupervised fashion. KE-GAN captures semantic consistencies of different categories by devising a Knowledge Graph
from the large-scale text corpus. In addition to readilyavailable unlabeled data, we generate synthetic images to
unveil rich structural information underlying the images.
Moreover, a pyramid architecture is incorporated into the
discriminator to acquire multi-scale contextual information
for better parsing results. Extensive experimental results on
four standard benchmarks demonstrate that KE-GAN is capable of improving semantic consistencies and learning better representations for scene parsing, resulting in the stateof-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Scene parsing [22, 23, 42, 45, 47], i.e. assigning semantic class labels to pixels in a scene image, is one of the most
crucial research topics in computer vision. It has a variety
of applications, such as autonomous driving and robot navigation. As shown in Figure 1, every pixel annotated in the
image can be classified into two categories, i.e. stuff (e.g.
∗ Corresponding author: yhwang@buaa.edu.cn

Figure 1. Scene parsing with knowledge embedding. We measure
the semantic consistency between class labels to re-optimize the
parsing result, by utilizing a large-scale knowledge graph to quantify the relationships between labels in the scene image.

sky, field, sea, and beach) and object (e.g. tree, people, and
dog). Because of the diversity of stuff/objects and complex
relationships between them, scene parsing still remains a
very challenging problem.
A variety of significant efforts have been devoted to this
issue in the past decades. The early attempts mainly include
non-parametric methods [40] and parametric ones [19, 37].
However, most of them work in a similar manner as coarselevel image retrieval, making them arduous to measure accurate similarities between images and pixels. Meanwhile,
these methods are lack of generality due to employing lowlevel hand-crafted features for classification. Recently, most
of the state-of-the-art approaches [6, 7, 26, 44] adopt Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based models for scene
parsing and have achieved very promising results. However, the above CNN based approaches tend to predict all
semantic labels independently from each other, overlooking the semantic relationship between each label and pixel.
This directly leads to some failure cases including inaccurate confusion categories, missing inconspicuous classes,

5237

