Animating Arbitrary Objects via Deep Motion Transfer
Aliaksandr Siarohin1 , Stéphane Lathuilière1 , Sergey Tulyakov2 , Elisa Ricci1,3 and Nicu Sebe1,4
1
DISI, University of Trento, Italy, 2 Snap Inc., Santa Monica, CA,
3
Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK), Trento, Italy,
4
Huawei Technologies Ireland, Dublin, Ireland
{aliaksandr.siarohin,stephane.lathuilire,e.ricci,niculae.sebe}@unitn.it, stulyakov@snap.com

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel deep learning framework
for image animation. Given an input image with a target
object and a driving video sequence depicting a moving
object, our framework generates a video in which the target object is animated according to the driving sequence.
This is achieved through a deep architecture that decouples appearance and motion information. Our framework
consists of three main modules: (i) a Keypoint Detector unsupervisely trained to extract object keypoints, (ii) a Dense
Motion prediction network for generating dense heatmaps
from sparse keypoints, in order to better encode motion
information and (iii) a Motion Transfer Network, which
uses the motion heatmaps and appearance information extracted from the input image to synthesize the output frames.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on several
benchmark datasets, spanning a wide variety of object appearances, and show that our approach outperforms stateof-the-art image animation and video generation methods.
Our source code is publicly available 1 .

1. Introduction
This paper introduces a framework for motion-driven
image animation to automatically generate videos by combining the appearance information derived from a source
image (e.g. depicting the face or the body silhouette of a
certain person) with motion patterns extracted from a driving video (e.g. encoding the facial expressions or the body
movements of another person). Several examples are given
in Fig. 1. Generating high-quality videos from static images
is challenging, as it requires learning an appropriate representation of an object, such as a 3D model of a face or a human body. This task also requires accurately extracting the
motion patterns from the driving video and mapping them
on the object representation. Most approaches are objectspecific, using techniques from computer graphics [7, 38].
These methods also use an explicit object representation,
1 https://github.com/AliaksandrSiarohin/monkey-net

Figure 1: Our deep motion transfer approach can animate
arbitrary objects following the motion of the driving video.
such as a 3D morphable model [5], to facilitate animation,
and therefore only consider faces.
Over the past few years, researchers have developed approaches for automatic synthesis and enhancement of visual
data. Several methods derived from Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN) [16] and Variational Autoencoders (VAE)
[24] have been proposed to generate images and videos
[19, 32, 30, 39, 29, 37, 36, 33]. These approaches use additional information such as conditioning labels (e.g. indicating a facial expression, a body pose) [45, 31, 15, 35]. More
specifically, they are purely data-driven, leveraging a large
collection of training data to learn a latent representation
of the visual inputs for synthesis. Noting the significant
progress of these techniques, recent research studies have
started exploring the use of deep generative models for image animation and video retargeting [46, 9, 4, 43, 3]. These
works demonstrate that deep models can effectively transfer motion patterns between human subjects in videos [4],
or transfer a facial expression from one person to another
[46]. However, these approaches have limitations: for example, they rely on pre-trained models for extracting object
representations that require costly ground-truth data annotations [9, 43, 3]. Furthermore, these works do not address
the problem of animating arbitrary objects: instead, consid4321
2377

