Geometry-Aware Symmetric Domain Adaptation for Monocular Depth
Estimation
Shanshan Zhao1
Huan Fu1
Mingming Gong2,3
Dacheng Tao1
1
UBTECH Sydney AI Center, School of Computer Science, FEIT,
University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
2
Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh
3
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
{szha4333@uni., hufu6371@uni., dacheng.tao@}sydney.edu.au

mig73@pitt.edu

Abstract
Supervised depth estimation has achieved high accuracy
due to the advanced deep network architectures. Since the
groundtruth depth labels are hard to obtain, recent methods try to learn depth estimation networks in an unsupervised way by exploring unsupervised cues, which are effective but less reliable than true labels. An emerging way
to resolve this dilemma is to transfer knowledge from synthetic images with ground truth depth via domain adaptation techniques. However, these approaches overlook specific geometric structure of the natural images in the target domain (i.e., real data), which is important for highperforming depth prediction. Motivated by the observation,
we propose a geometry-aware symmetric domain adaptation framework (GASDA) to explore the labels in the synthetic data and epipolar geometry in the real data jointly. Moreover, by training two image style translators and
depth estimators symmetrically in an end-to-end network,
our model achieves better image style transfer and generates high-quality depth maps. The experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method and
comparable performance against the state-of-the-art. Code
will be publicly available at: https://github.com/
sshan-zhao/GASDA.

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation [44, 45, 9, 28] has been an
active research area in the field of computer vision. Recent
years have witnessed the great strides in this task, especially after deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) were
exploited to estimate depth from a single image successfully [9]. Until now, there have been lots of follow-up works [35, 30, 8, 31, 54, 51, 10] improving or extending this
work. However, since the proposed deep models are trained

Real Image

Synthetic Image

Real2Syn Image

Syn2Real Image

Ground Truth

GASDA

Figure 1: Estimated Depth by GASDA. Top to bottom: input real image in the target domain (KITTI dataset [38]) and synthetic
image for training (vKITTI dataset [11]), intermediate generated
images in our approach, ground truth depth map and estimated
depth map using proposed GASDA.

in a fully supervised fashion, they require a large amount of
data with ground truth depth, which is expensive to acquire
in practice. To address this issue, unsupervised monocular
depth estimation has been proposed [16, 57, 14, 53], using
geometry-based cues and without the need of image-depth
pairs during training. Unfortunately, this kind of method
tends to be vulnerable to illumination change, occlusion and
blurring and so on. Compared to real-world data, synthetic data is much easier to obtain the depth map. As a result, some works propose to exploit synthetic data for visual
tasks [29, 37, 7]. However, due to domain shift from synthetic to real, the model trained on synthetic data often fails
to perform well on real data. To deal with this issue, domain
adaptation techniques are utilized to reduce the discrepancy
between datasets/domains 1 [2, 5, 37].
1 We will use domain and dataset interchangeably for the same meaning
in most cases.

9788

