Pyramidal Person Re-IDentification via Multi-Loss Dynamic Training
Feng Zheng∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Southern University of Science and Technology
Shenzhen 518055, China
Xing Sun†, Xinyang Jiang, Xiaowei Guo,
Zongqiao Yu, Feiyue Huang
YouTu Lab Tencent, Shanghai, China

Cheng Deng
School of Electronic Enigineering
Xidian University
Xi’an 710071, China

Rongrong Ji‡
School of Information Science and Engineering,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

Abstract

Person Re-IDentification (Re-ID) aims to associate the
images of the same person captured at different physical
sites, facilitating cross-camera tracking techniques used in
vision-based smart retail and security surveillance. In general, person Re-ID is considered to be the next high-level
task after a pedestrian detection system, so the basic as∗ Major work was done when the author worked in YouTu Lab.
† Corresponding Author: winfredsun@tencent.com
‡ Corresponding Author: rrji@xmu.edu.cn

…

...

1. Introduction

...

Most existing Re-IDentification (Re-ID) methods are
highly dependent on precise bounding boxes that enable images to be aligned with each other. However, due to the
challenging practical scenarios, current detection models
often produce inaccurate bounding boxes, which inevitably
degenerate the performance of existing Re-ID algorithms.
In this paper, we propose a novel coarse-to-fine pyramid
model to relax the need of bounding boxes, which not only
incorporates local and global information, but also integrates the gradual cues between them. The pyramid model
is able to match at different scales and then search for the
correct image of the same identity, even when the image
pairs are not aligned. In addition, in order to learn discriminative identity representation, we explore a dynamic
training scheme to seamlessly unify two losses and extract
appropriate shared information between them. Experimental results clearly demonstrate that the proposed method
achieves the state-of-the-art results on three datasets. Especially, our approach exceeds the current best method by
9.5% on the most challenging CUHK03 dataset.

Image

…

Figure 1. The examples of part-based matching at different scales,
when bounding boxes are not aligned or parts of human body have
been occluded. The red bounding box indicates that most cues in
the two parts are varied. We can see that, in a finely partitioned
way, a handful of horizontal stripes (left) cannot be well-matched
due to different cues, while those stripes (right) in a more global
view have more similar cues.

sumption of Re-ID is that the detection model can provide
precise and highly-aligned bounding boxes. Despite the recent great progress, there are limited room for the performance improvement of existing methods due to the problems with part-based models and the difficulties in training.
Drawbacks of part-based models: As it is well-known,
part-based models can generally achieve promising performance in many computer vision tasks, because these models are potentially robust to some unavoidable challenges
such as occlusion and partial variations. Actually, the performance of person Re-ID in the real-world applications is
severely affected by these challenges. Thus, the recent proposed Part-based Convolutional Baseline (PCB) [24] can
achieve the state-of-the-art results. PCB is simple but very
effective and even can outperform other learned part models. Nevertheless, in PCB, directly partitioning the feature

8514

