Rethinking Knowledge Graph Propagation for Zero-Shot Learning
Michael Kampffmeyer∗1 , Yinbo Chen∗2 , Xiaodan Liang†3 , Hao Wang4 , Yujia Zhang5 , and Eric P. Xing6
1

UiT The Arctic University of Norway, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Sun Yat-sen University, 4 Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 5 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
6
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Graph convolutional neural networks have recently
shown great potential for the task of zero-shot learning.
These models are highly sample efficient as related concepts in the graph structure share statistical strength allowing generalization to new classes when faced with a
lack of data. However, multi-layer architectures, which are
required to propagate knowledge to distant nodes in the
graph, dilute the knowledge by performing extensive Laplacian smoothing at each layer and thereby consequently
decrease performance. In order to still enjoy the benefit
brought by the graph structure while preventing dilution of
knowledge from distant nodes, we propose a Dense Graph
Propagation (DGP) module with carefully designed direct
links among distant nodes. DGP allows us to exploit the hierarchical graph structure of the knowledge graph through
additional connections. These connections are added based
on a node’s relationship to its ancestors and descendants. A
weighting scheme is further used to weigh their contribution
depending on the distance to the node to improve information propagation in the graph. Combined with finetuning
of the representations in a two-stage training approach our
method outperforms state-of-the-art zero-shot learning approaches.

1. Introduction
With the ever-growing supply of image data, from an
ever-expanding number of classes, there is an increasing
need to use prior knowledge to classify images from unseen classes into correct categories based on semantic relationships between seen and unseen classes. This task is
called zero-shot image classification. Crucial to this task is
precise modeling of class relationships based on prior class
∗ Indicates equal contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

knowledge. Previously, prior knowledge has been incorporated in form of semantic descriptions of classes, such as
attributes [1, 28, 19] or word embeddings [30, 11, 18], or by
using semantic relations such as knowledge graphs [24, 27,
29, 20]. Approaches that use knowledge graphs are lessexplored and generally assume that unknown classes can
exploit similarity to known classes. Recently, the benefit of
hybrid approaches that combine knowledge graph and semantic class descriptions has been illustrated [33].
The current state-of-the-art by Wang et al. [33] processes
the unweighted knowledge graph by exploiting recent developments in neural networks for non-Euclidean spaces,
such as graph and manifold spaces [2]. A deep graph
convolutional neural network (GCN) [14] is used and the
problem is phrased as a regression task, where the GCN
is trained to output a classifier for each class by regressing real-valued weight vectors. These weight vectors correspond to the last layer weights of a pretrained convolutional neural network (CNN) and can be viewed as logistic
regression classifiers on top of the feature extraction produced by the CNN. GCNs balance model complexity and
expressiveness with a simple scalable model relying on the
idea of message passing, i.e. nodes pass knowledge to their
neighbors. However, these models were originally designed
for classification tasks, albeit semi-supervised, an arguably
simpler task than regression. In recent work, it has been
shown that GCNs perform a form of Laplacian smoothing,
where feature representations will become more similar as
depth increases leading to easier classification [17]. In the
regression setting, instead, the aim is to exchange information between nodes in the graph and extensive smoothing is
not desired as it dilutes information and does not allow for
accurate regression. For instance, in a connected graph all
features in a GCN with n layers will converge to the same
representation as n → ∞ under some conditions, hence
washing out all information [17].
Therefore, we argue that this approach is not ideal for
the task of zero-shot learning and that the number of lay-

11487

