PointConv: Deep Convolutional Networks on 3D Point Clouds
Wenxuan Wu, Zhongang Qi, Li Fuxin
CORIS Institute, Oregon State University
wuwen, qiz, lif@oregonstate.edu

Abstract

of the segmentation ambiguities from 2D imagery, and surface normals provide important cues of the scene geometry.

Unlike images which are represented in regular dense
grids, 3D point clouds are irregular and unordered, hence
applying convolution on them can be difficult. In this paper,
we extend the dynamic filter to a new convolution operation, named PointConv. PointConv can be applied on point
clouds to build deep convolutional networks. We treat convolution kernels as nonlinear functions of the local coordinates of 3D points comprised of weight and density functions. With respect to a given point, the weight functions
are learned with multi-layer perceptron networks and density functions through kernel density estimation. The most
important contribution of this work is a novel reformulation proposed for efficiently computing the weight functions,
which allowed us to dramatically scale up the network and
significantly improve its performance. The learned convolution kernel can be used to compute translation-invariant
and permutation-invariant convolution on any point set in
the 3D space. Besides, PointConv can also be used as deconvolution operators to propagate features from a subsampled point cloud back to its original resolution. Experiments
on ModelNet40, ShapeNet, and ScanNet show that deep
convolutional neural networks built on PointConv are able
to achieve state-of-the-art on challenging semantic segmentation benchmarks on 3D point clouds. Besides, our experiments converting CIFAR-10 into a point cloud showed that
networks built on PointConv can match the performance of
convolutional networks in 2D images of a similar structure.

In 2D images, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have fundamentally changed the landscape of computer vision by greatly improving results on almost every vision
task. CNNs succeed by utilizing translation invariance, so
that the same set of convolutional filters can be applied on
all the locations in an image, reducing the number of parameters and improving generalization. We would hope such
successes to be transferred to the analysis of 3D data. However, 3D data often come in the form of point clouds, which
is a set of unordered 3D points, with or without additional
features (e.g. RGB) on each point. Point clouds are unordered and do not conform to the regular lattice grids as
in 2D images. It is difficult to apply conventional CNNs on
such unordered input. An alternative approach is to treat the
3D space as a volumetric grid, but in this case, the volume
will be sparse and CNNs will be computationally intractable
on high-resolution volumes.

1. Introduction
In recent robotics, autonomous driving and virtual/augmented reality applications, sensors that can directly obtain 3D data are increasingly ubiquitous. This includes indoor sensors such as laser scanners, time-of-flight
sensors such as the Kinect, RealSense or Google Tango,
structural light sensors such as those on the iPhoneX, as
well as outdoor sensors such as LIDAR and MEMS sensors.
The capability to directly measure 3D data is invaluable in
those applications as depth information could remove a lot

In this paper, we propose a novel approach to perform
convolution on 3D point clouds with non-uniform sampling.
We note that the convolution operation can be viewed as a
discrete approximation of a continuous convolution operator. In 3D space, we can treat the weights of this convolution
operator to be a (Lipschitz) continuous function of the local
3D point coordinates with respect to a reference 3D point.
The continuous function can be approximated by a multilayer perceptron(MLP), as done in [33] and [16]. But these
algorithms did not take non-uniform sampling into account.
We propose to use an inverse density scale to re-weight the
continuous function learned by MLP, which corresponds to
the Monte Carlo approximation of the continuous convolution. We call such an operation PointConv. PointConv
involves taking the positions of point clouds as input and
learning an MLP to approximate a weight function, as well
as applying a inverse density scale on the learned weights
to compensate the non-uniform sampling.
The naive implementation of PointConv is memory inefficient when the channel size of the output features is very
large and hence hard to train and scale up to large networks.
In order to reduce the memory consumption of PointConv,
19621

