CapSal: Leveraging Captioning to Boost Semantics for Salient Object Detection
Lu Zhang1 , Jianming Zhang2 , Zhe Lin2 , Huchuan Lu1 , You He3
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Adobe Research, USA
3
Naval Aviation University, China
luzhang dut@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {jianmzha, zlin}@adobe.com, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn, heyou f@126.com

A woman in
white is playing
tennis on a court.
A dog sitting on a
coach with a
laptop.

Input

GT

DSS

BMPM

DGRL

Baseline

CapSal

Generated Caption

Figure 1: Visual comparison with other CNN-based methods. From left to right: input image, ground truth, saliency maps of
DSS [11], BMPM [41], DGRL [35], our baseline model, CapSal model and generated caption by ICN. The words highlighted
in red gain higher attention scores. Our CapSal network is trained to leverage the semantics in captioning task for salient
object detection, which can precisely localize the salient regions from cluttered background.

Abstract
Detecting salient objects in cluttered scenes is a big challenge. To address this problem, we argue that the model
needs to learn discriminative semantic features for salient
objects. To this end, we propose to leverage captioning
as an auxiliary semantic task to boost salient object detection in complex scenarios. Specifically, we develop a CapSal model which consists of two sub-networks, the Image
Captioning Network (ICN) and the Local-Global Perception Network (LGPN). ICN encodes the embedding of a generated caption to capture the semantic information of major
objects in the scene, while LGPN incorporates the captioning embedding with local-global visual contexts for predicting the saliency map. ICN and LGPN are jointly trained to
model high-level semantics as well as visual saliency. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of image
captioning in boosting the performance of salient object detection. In particular, our model performs significantly better than the state-of-the-art methods on several challenging
datasets of complex scenarios.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection is a fundamental problem in
computer vision, aiming to localize and segment the most
conspicuous regions in an image. In recent years, it has

achieved much attention due to its usefulness to many computer vision applications [12, 36, 44].
Although significant progresses have been made in this
area thanks to the deep learning technology, it still remains
a big challenge to accurately detect salient objects in cluttered scenes (see Fig.1). To address this problem, we argue
that the model needs to learn discriminative semantic features for salient objects, such as object categories, attributes
and the semantic context. However, existing salient object
detection networks are only trained on pixel-level mask annotations, with no supervision on higher-level semantics.
In this work, we propose to use image captioning [37,
26, 30] as an auxiliary task to boost the semantics for salient
object detection. The connection between image captioning
and saliency detection has already been explored in the image captioning domain. Some works [1, 28] utilize saliency
detection to make the network attend to relevant regions for
captioning. These works assume that the objects being mentioned in caption are largely consistent and correlated with
the salient objects [40]. Based on the same assumption, we
believe that the captioning task can provide rich semantic
supervision for salient object detection. For example, from
the caption “A woman in white is playing tennis on a court”,
we can obtain the overall knowledge about the category, attribute and motion of salient object (see Fig.1).
To this end, we propose CapSal, a salient object detection framework that exploits image captioning to pro-

6024

