Pseudo-LiDAR from Visual Depth Estimation:
Bridging the Gap in 3D Object Detection for Autonomous Driving
Yan Wang, Wei-Lun Chao, Divyansh Garg, Bharath Hariharan, Mark Campbell, and Kilian Q. Weinberger
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
{yw763, wc635, dg595, bh497, mc288, kqw4}@cornell.edu

Input

Abstract
3D object detection is an essential task in autonomous
driving. Recent techniques excel with highly accurate detection rates, provided the 3D input data is obtained from
precise but expensive LiDAR technology. Approaches based
on cheaper monocular or stereo imagery data have, until
now, resulted in drastically lower accuracies — a gap that
is commonly attributed to poor image-based depth estimation. However, in this paper we argue that it is not the quality of the data but its representation that accounts for the
majority of the difference. Taking the inner workings of convolutional neural networks into consideration, we propose
to convert image-based depth maps to pseudo-LiDAR representations — essentially mimicking the LiDAR signal. With
this representation we can apply different existing LiDARbased detection algorithms. On the popular KITTI benchmark, our approach achieves impressive improvements over
the existing state-of-the-art in image-based performance —
raising the detection accuracy of objects within the 30m
range from the previous state-of-the-art of 22% to an unprecedented 74%. At the time of submission our algorithm
holds the highest entry on the KITTI 3D object detection
leaderboard for stereo-image-based approaches.

1. Introduction
Reliable and robust 3D object detection is one of the fundamental requirements for autonomous driving. After all, in
order to avoid collisions with pedestrians, cyclist, and cars,
a vehicle must be able to detect them in the first place.
Existing algorithms largely rely on LiDAR (Light Detection And Ranging), which provide accurate 3D point clouds
of the surrounding environment. Although highly precise,
alternatives to LiDAR are desirable for multiple reasons.
First, LiDAR is expensive, which incurs a hefty premium
for autonomous driving hardware. Second, over-reliance on
a single sensor is an inherent safety risk and it would be
advantageous to have a secondary sensor to fall-back onto

Pseudo-LiDAR (Bird’s-eye)
View)

Depth Map

Figure 1: Pseudo-LiDAR signal from visual depth estimation. Top-left: a KITTI street scene with super-imposed
bounding boxes around cars obtained with LiDAR (red) and
pseudo-LiDAR (green). Bottom-left: estimated disparity
map. Right: pseudo-LiDAR (blue) vs. LiDAR (yellow) —
the pseudo-LiDAR points align remarkably well with the
LiDAR ones. Best viewed in color (zoom in for details.)
in case of an outage. A natural candidate are images from
stereo or monocular cameras. Optical cameras are highly
affordable (several orders of magnitude cheaper than LiDAR), operate at a high frame rate, and provide a dense
depth map rather than the 64 or 128 sparse rotating laser
beams that LiDAR signal is inherently limited to.
Several recent publications have explored the use of
monocular and stereo depth (disparity) estimation [13, 19,
32] for 3D object detection [5, 6, 22, 30]. However, to-date
the main successes have been primarily in supplementing
LiDAR approaches. For example, one of the leading algorithms [17] on the KITTI benchmark [11, 12] uses sensor
fusion to improve the 3D average precision (AP) for cars
from 66% for LiDAR to 73% with LiDAR and monocular
images. In contrast, among algorithms that use only images,
the state-of-the-art achieves a mere 10% AP [30].
One intuitive and popular explanation for such inferior
performance is the poor precision of image-based depth estimation. In contrast to LiDAR, the error of stereo depth estimation grows quadratically with depth. However, a visual
comparison of the 3D point clouds generated by LiDAR and
a state-of-the-art stereo depth estimator [3] reveals a high
quality match (cf. Fig. 1) between the two data modalities
— even for faraway objects.
18445

