Semantic Component Decomposition for Face Attribute Manipulation
Ying-Cong Chen1 Xiaohui Shen4 Zhe Lin3 Xin Lu3 I-Ming Pao3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent Youtu Lab 3 Adobe Research
{ycchen,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

shenxiaohui@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep neural network-based methods were proposed for
face attribute manipulation. There still exist, however, two
major issues, i.e., insufficient visual quality (or resolution)
of the results and lack of user control. They limit the applicability of existing methods since users may have different
editing preference on facial attributes. In this paper, we
address these issues by proposing a semantic component
model. The model decomposes a facial attribute into multiple semantic components, each corresponds to a specific
face region. This not only allows for user control of edit
strength on different parts based on their preference, but
also makes it effective to remove unwanted edit effect. Further, each semantic component is composed of two fundamental elements, which determine the edit effect and region
respectively. This property provides fine interactive control.
As shown in experiments, our model not only produces highquality results, but also allows effective user interaction.

1. Introduction
The popularity of sharing selfies and portrait photos online motivates the rapid development of face edit tools.
Facial attribute manipulation is especially attractive with
the functions of adding/removing face accessories, such as
facial hair and eyeglasses, and/or changing intrinsic face
properties, such as age and gender.
Facial attribute manipulation has attracted great interest
[10, 2, 4, 3, 30, 26, 22], because of the great chance it brings
to research and real-world application. Early work focuses
on specific attributes of facial hair generation [1], expression change [31, 22, 30], beautification/de-beautification
[14, 6], aging [10], etc. These approaches are designed for
specific tasks, and require prior knowledge that is not applicable to new editing tasks.
Recently, with the development of deep neural networks,
especially generative adversarial networks, several general face attribute manipulation frameworks were proposed
[20, 19, 12, 16, 17, 32, 13, 8]. These approaches take facial attribute edit as an unpaired learning task, and thus are

Jiaya Jia1,2
4
ByteDance AI Lab

{zlin, xinl, pao}@adobe.com

capable of handling different attributes by only changing
the data. Our method can be categorized into this group,
which aims to provide a general solution for different facial
attributes.
Limitation of Existing Solutions Since most facial attributes of a person are immutable within a short period
of time, collecting paired images with only desired change
seems difficult and costly. Most frameworks resort to the
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [8, 32, 29, 17, 27,
16, 11, 13, 20, 24, 35, 25, 7, 19, 35, 34], which is popular
for unsupervised learning. However, despite recent progress
[9, 25], training a suitable GAN is still difficult.
In addition, there is no effective indicator to monitor the
training process, which makes it hard to choose the “best”
model during training. These difficulties could cause nonoptimal training and produce unsatisfying results. Note that
when the result is not as expected, there is few options to
guide the system to fix the problem.
Our Solution Inspired by CapsuleNet [18] that divides the
final prediction to smaller parts, we seek for an approach
that divides a high-level attribute edit into multiple semantic components, where each works on one semantic region
of a human face. With this scheme, our model allows
component-level user control, which is more flexible than
existing solutions.
Moreover, we decompose each component into two factors, i.e., the attention map and the semantic painter. The
attention map highlights altered region of the corresponding component, and the semantic painter corresponds to the
kind of effect applied to that region. These two factors enable us to manipulate each component by changing either
the edit region or the semantic painter. This further allows
interactive manipulation.
It is notable that our system conceptually mimics the way
image-editing software works: different semantic components can be viewed as “layers” in Photoshop, and all layers
jointly compose the final edit result. During testing, our
model generates an initial high-quality result for the target
attribute. If users have other requirements, they can further
adjust it in different levels of our system output.
Despite the simple and natural work-flow, decomposing

9859

