Accelerating Convolutional Neural Networks via Activation Map Compression
Georgios Georgiadis
Samsung Semiconductor, Inc.
g.geor@samsung.com

Abstract

100%
90%

The deep learning revolution brought us an extensive array of neural network architectures that achieve state-ofthe-art performance in a wide variety of Computer Vision
tasks including among others, classification, detection and
segmentation. In parallel, we have also been observing an
unprecedented demand in computational and memory requirements, rendering the efficient use of neural networks
in low-powered devices virtually unattainable. Towards this
end, we propose a three-stage compression and acceleration pipeline that sparsifies, quantizes and entropy encodes
activation maps of Convolutional Neural Networks. Sparsification increases the representational power of activation
maps leading to both acceleration of inference and higher
model accuracy. Inception-V3 and MobileNet-V1 can be
accelerated by as much as 1.6× with an increase in accuracy of 0.38% and 0.54% on the ImageNet and CIFAR-10
datasets respectively. Quantizing and entropy coding the
sparser activation maps lead to higher compression over
the baseline, reducing the memory cost of the network execution. Inception-V3 and MobileNet-V1 activation maps,
quantized to 16 bits, are compressed by as much as 6× with
an increase in accuracy of 0.36% and 0.55% respectively.

1. Introduction
With the resurgence of Deep Neural Networks occurring in 2012 [33], efforts from the research community
have led to a multitude of neural network architectures
[20, 55, 59, 60] that have repeatedly demonstrated improvements in model accuracy. The price paid for this improved
performance comes in terms of an increase in computational
and memory cost as well as in higher power consumption.
For example, AlexNet [33] requires 720 million multiplyaccumulate (MAC) operations and features 60 million parameters, while VGG-16 [55] requires a staggering 15 billion MAC’s and features 138 million parameters. While the
size and number of MAC operations of these networks can
be handled with modern desktop computers (mainly due
to the advent of Graphical Processing Units (GPU)), low-

80%
70%

60%
50%

40%
30%

20%
10%

0%
Baseline

Sparse

Sparse_v2

Baseline

Sparse

Sparse_v2

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Figure 1. Percentage of non-zero activations (above) and compression gain (below) per layer of ResNet-34. Left to right order corresponds to first to last layer in the network. Baseline corresponds
to the original model, while sparse and sparse_v2 correspond to
our sparsified models.

powered devices such as mobile phones and autonomous
driving vehicles do not have the resources to process inputs at an acceptable rate (especially when the application
demands real-time processing). Therefore, there is a great
need to develop systems and algorithms that would allow us
to run these networks under a limited resource budget.
There has been a plethora of works that attempt to meet
this need via a variety of different methods. The majority
of the approaches [18, 26, 29] attempt to approximate the
weights of a neural network in order to reduce the number of parameters (model compression) and/or the number
of MAC’s (model acceleration). For example, pruning [18]
compresses and accelerates a neural network by reducing
17085

