Robustness of 3D Deep Learning in an Adversarial Setting
Matthew Wicker
University of Oxford

Marta Kwiatkowska
University of Oxford

matthew.wicker@cs.ox.ac.uk

marta.kwiatkowska@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Understanding the spatial arrangement and nature of
real-world objects is of paramount importance to many
complex engineering tasks, including autonomous navigation. Deep learning has revolutionized state-of-the-art performance for tasks in 3D environments; however, relatively
little is known about the robustness of these approaches in
an adversarial setting. The lack of comprehensive analysis
makes it difficult to justify deployment of 3D deep learning
models in real-world, safety-critical applications. In this
work, we develop an algorithm for analysis of pointwise robustness of neural networks that operate on 3D data. We
show that current approaches presented for understanding
the resilience of state-of-the-art models vastly overestimate
their robustness. We then use our algorithm to evaluate
an array of state-of-the-art models in order to demonstrate
their vulnerability to occlusion attacks. We show that, in
the worst case, these networks can be reduced to 0% classification accuracy after the occlusion of at most 6.5% of the
occupied input space.

1. Introduction
Over the past several years, the machine learning community has worked to adapt the success of deep 2D vision algorithms to the 3D setting. Though initially slow
to reach the performance level of its 2D counterpart, recent
advances have increased the accuracy of 3D deep learning
pipelines by around 18% on the ModelNet10 and ModelNet40 benchmarks [31]. Now that 3D deep learning algorithms are able to achieve remarkable performance on
standard benchmarks (currently topping out at 95% accuracy), there have been many encouraging attempts to adapt
these models to real-time, safety-critical scenarios such as
landing zone detection for airborne drones [15] and object recognition and classification for autonomous vehicles
[20, 32, 3]. In spite of the recent developments, the robustness of these pipelines remains poorly understood.
The rapidly growing literature on the robustness (or lack
thereof) of 2D vision algorithms casts doubt on the stabil-

Figure 1: Despite the fact that PointNet [21] is able to
achieve high accuracy on the ModelNet40 test set, we show
that by exploiting the low cardinality of the induced critical point set we can cause the network to misclassify a man
wearing a winter coat and beanie as a plant after only 32 out
of 2048 points have been removed from the point cloud.

ity of their 3D relatives. In this work, we demonstrate the
lack of robustness of 3D deep learning to adversarial occlusion, despite the results of random input occlusion suggesting that they are relatively invariant to perturbation. Developing comprehensive testing methods for these systems
is of paramount importance given that misclassification of
pedestrians (which is demonstrated in Figure 1) as plants
can induce poor planning by autonomous vehicles, an issue
highlighted by a fatality in the real world [9].
In the past few years, many methods for crafting adversarial examples have emerged [25, 13, 19, 28], including
several frameworks for verification of safety [12, 11]. In
contrast to studies of weaknesses in deep learning models
for image recognition due to their susceptibility to adversarial examples, very little work has been done to understand
the robustness of 3D deep learning pipelines. This is in
part because the data representation schemes utilized by 3D
deep learning algorithms are not amenable to many current
robustness analysis tools (see discussion in Section 2.2).

11767

