Hyperspectral Imaging with Random Printed Mask
Yuanyuan Zhao1

Hui Guo1 Zhan Ma1 Xun Cao1 Tao Yue1,2 Xuemei Hu1
1
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
NJU institute of sensing and imaging engineering, Nanjing, China

{yuan square,

guo hui}@smail.nju.edu.cn

{mazhan,

caoxun,

yuetao,

xuemeihu}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Hyperspectral images can provide rich clues for various computer vision tasks. However, the requirements of
professional and expensive hardware for capturing hyperspectral images impede its wide applications. In this paper, based on a simple but not widely noticed phenomenon
that the color printer can print color masks with a large
number of independent spectral transmission responses, we
propose a simple and low-budget scheme to capture the
hyperspectral images with a random mask printed by the
consumer-level color printer. Specifically, we notice that the
printed dots with different colors are stacked together, forming multiplicative, instead of additive, spectral transmission
responses. Therefore, new spectral transmission response
uncorrelated with that of the original printer dyes are generated. With the random printed color mask, hyperspectral
images could be captured in a snapshot way. A convolutional neural network (CNN) based method is developed to
reconstruct the hyperspectral images from the captured image. The effectiveness and accuracy of the proposed system
are verified on both synthetic and real captured images.

1. Introduction
Spectra can provide additional information of scenes beyond the ability of human eyes and commercial RGB cameras, having great potential to facilitate computer vision
tasks [3, 9, 29]. However, the high complexity and cost of
spectral imaging systems greatly raise the difficulty of acquiring spectral images, and thus limit the wide application
of spectral imaging.
Traditionally, to capture hyperspectral images, the scanning based methods (either the spatial scanning [18] or the
spectral scanning [15]) are required. These scanning based
systems can capture images with several to hundreds spectral channels, while the ability to handle dynamic scenes are
sacrificed. To take the spectral image in a single snapshot,
the snapshot spectral imaging methods are proposed in the
past few years [6, 10, 16, 25, 31, 32]. However, most of

1
2
3
4
5

CNN-Based Method

Input

Output

Coded Image

Hyperspectral Data

6

7

Acquisition

Reconstruction

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed hyperspectral imaging system:
with a consumer-level printer, a random color printed mask can be
attached to the sensor of the camera to sample the hyperspectal
images. Through randomly overlaying ink droplets, the spectral
transmission responses of different points are rendered highly uncorrelated and facilitate the full spectrum recovery with details.
A convolutional neural network is proposed to recover the hyperspectral images from the randomly coded images.

these systems suffer from the system complexity and calibration difficulty. Customized spectral filter based methods are proposed to realize compact hyperspectral imaging [5, 20, 23, 28], while these methods suffer from the fabrication cost of the filters. RGB cameras are also studied to
be turned into spectrometers [2, 4, 27, 24, 33]. However,
the uncorrelated spectral modulations (i.e. RGB Bayer filter) are limited and spectral details are hard to be retrieved.
In this paper, we propose a simple and low-cost spectral
imaging scheme with a color mask, which can be printed by
consumer-level printers. The idea of the proposed system is
based on a simple but not widely noticed phenomenon, i.e.
the spectral transmission responses of overlapping printed
color dots are the multiplication of the spectral transmission response of each overlapped color dots. The multiplied spectral transmission response is linearly uncorrelated
with that of the printer inks. Therefore, we can generate
the color mask with a large number of uncorrelated spectral
transmission responses. With the color mask, hyperspectral images can be encoded in high quality. We develop a
CNN-based method to reconstruct the hyperspectral images
from the captured image and built a prototype hyperspec110149

