Multi-level Multimodal Common Semantic Space for Image-Phrase Grounding
Hassan Akbari, Svebor Karaman, Surabhi Bhargava, Brian Chen,
Carl Vondrick, and Shih-Fu Chang
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
{ha2436,sk4089,sb4019,bc2754,cv2428,sc250}@columbia.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of phrase grounding by learning a multi-level common semantic space shared by the textual and visual modalities. We exploit multiple levels of
feature maps of a Deep Convolutional Neural Network, as
well as contextualized word and sentence embeddings extracted from a character-based language model. Following
dedicated non-linear mappings for visual features at each
level, word, and sentence embeddings, we obtain multiple
instantiations of our common semantic space in which comparisons between any target text and the visual content is
performed with cosine similarity. We guide the model by
a multi-level multimodal attention mechanism which outputs attended visual features at each level. The best level
is chosen to be compared with text content for maximizing
the pertinence scores of image-sentence pairs of the ground
truth. Experiments conducted on three publicly available
datasets show significant performance gains (20%-60% relative) over the state-of-the-art in phrase localization and set
a new performance record on those datasets. We provide a
detailed ablation study to show the contribution of each element of our approach and release our code on GitHub1 .

1. Introduction
Phrase grounding [39, 32] is the task of localizing within
an image a given natural language input phrase, as illustrated in Figure 1. This ability to link text and image content is a key component of many visual semantic tasks such
as image captioning [10, 21, 18], visual question answering [2, 30, 48, 52, 11], text-based image retrieval [12, 40],
and robotic navigation [44]. It is especially challenging as it
requires a good representation of both the visual and textual
domain and an effective way of linking them.
On the visual side, most of the works exploit Deep Convolutional Neural Networks but often rely on bounding box
1 https://github.com/hassanhub/MultiGrounding

A crowd of onlookers on a tractor ride watch a farmer hard at work in the field

Figure 1. The phrase grounding task in the pointing game setting.
Given the sentence on top and the image on the left, the goal is
to point (illustrated by the stars here) to the correct location of
each natural language query (colored text). Actual example of our
method results on Flickr30k.

proposals [39, 42, 15] or use a global feature of the image [10], limiting the localization ability and freedom of
the method. On the textual side, methods rely on a closed
vocabulary or try to train their own language model using
small image-caption pairs datasets [17, 59, 53, 9]. Finally,
the mapping between the two modalities is often performed
with a weak linear strategy [39, 51]. We argue that approaches in the literature have not fully leveraged the potential of the more powerful visual and textual model developed recently, and there is room for developing more sophisticated representations and mapping approaches.
In this work, we propose to explicitly learn a non-linear
mapping of the visual and textual modalities into a common space, and do so at different granularity for each domain. Indeed, different layers of a deep network encode
each region of the image with gradually increasing levels of
discriminativeness and context awareness, similarly single
words and whole sentences contain increasing levels of semantic meaning and context. This common space mapping
is trained with weak supervision and exploited at test-time
with a multi-level multimodal attention mechanism, where
a natural formalism for computing attention heatmaps at
each level, attended features and pertinence scoring, enables us to solve the phrase grounding task elegantly and
effectively. We evaluate our model on three commonly used
datasets in the literature of textual grounding and show that
it sets a new state-of-the-art performance by a large margin.
112476

