CityFlow: A City-Scale Benchmark for Multi-Target
Multi-Camera Vehicle Tracking and Re-Identification
∗

Zheng Tang1 Milind Naphade2 Ming-Yu Liu2 Xiaodong Yang2 Stan Birchfield2
Shuo Wang2 Ratnesh Kumar2 David Anastasiu3 Jenq-Neng Hwang1
1
University of Washington 2 NVIDIA 3 San Jose State University

Abstract
Urban traffic optimization using traffic cameras as sensors is driving the need to advance state-of-the-art multitarget multi-camera (MTMC) tracking. This work introduces CityFlow, a city-scale traffic camera dataset consisting of more than 3 hours of synchronized HD videos
from 40 cameras across 10 intersections, with the longest
distance between two simultaneous cameras being 2.5 km.
To the best of our knowledge, CityFlow is the largest-scale
dataset in terms of spatial coverage and the number of cameras/videos in an urban environment. The dataset contains
more than 200K annotated bounding boxes covering a wide
range of scenes, viewing angles, vehicle models, and urban traffic flow conditions. Camera geometry and calibration information are provided to aid spatio-temporal analysis. In addition, a subset of the benchmark is made available for the task of image-based vehicle re-identification
(ReID). We conducted an extensive experimental evaluation
of baselines/state-of-the-art approaches in MTMC tracking,
multi-target single-camera (MTSC) tracking, object detection, and image-based ReID on this dataset, analyzing the
impact of different network architectures, loss functions,
spatio-temporal models and their combinations on task effectiveness. An evaluation server is launched with the release of our benchmark at the 2019 AI City Challenge that
allows researchers to compare the performance of their
newest techniques. We expect this dataset to catalyze research in this field, propel the state-of-the-art forward, and
lead to deployed traffic optimization(s) in the real world.

1. Introduction
The opportunity for cities to use traffic cameras as citywide sensors in optimizing flows and managing disruptions
is immense. Where we are lacking is our ability to track
vehicles over large areas that span multiple cameras at different intersections in all weather conditions. To achieve
∗ Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

Figure 1. MTMC tracking combines MTSC tracking, image-based
ReID, and spatio-temporal information. The colored curves in
Camera #1 and Camera #2 are trajectories from MTSC tracking
to be linked across cameras by visual-spatio-temporal association.

this goal, one has to address three distinct but closely related research problems: 1) Detection and tracking of targets within a single camera, known as multi-target singlecamera (MTSC) tracking; 2) Re-identification of targets
across multiple cameras, known as ReID; and 3) Detection
and tracking of targets across a network of cameras, known
as multi-target multi-camera (MTMC) tracking. MTMC
tracking can be regarded as the combination of MTSC
tracking within cameras and image-based ReID with spatiotemporal information to connect target trajectories between
cameras, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Much attention has been paid in recent years to the problem of person-based ReID and MTMC tracking [58, 34, 61,
46, 22, 21, 11, 14, 8, 57, 34, 50, 7, 60]. There have also
been some works on providing datasets for vehicle-based
ReID [28, 26, 52]. Although the state-of-the-art performance on these latter datasets has been improved by recent
approaches, accuracy in this task still falls short compared
to that in person ReID. The two main challenges in vehicle
ReID are small inter-class variability and large intra-class
variability, i.e., the variety of shapes from different viewing
angles is often greater than the similarity of car models produced by various manufacturers [10]. We note that, in order to preserve the privacy of drivers, captured license plate
information—which otherwise would be extremely useful
for vehicle ReID—should not be used [2].

8797

