On Implicit Filter Level Sparsity in Convolutional Neural Networks
Dushyant Mehta1,3 Kwang In Kim2 Christian Theobalt1,3
1
MPI For Informatics 2 UNIST 3 Saarland Informatics Campus
Abstract
We investigate filter level sparsity that emerges in convolutional neural networks (CNNs) which employ Batch Normalization and ReLU activation, and are trained with adaptive gradient descent techniques and L2 regularization or
weight decay. We conduct an extensive experimental study
casting our initial findings into hypotheses and conclusions
about the mechanisms underlying the emergent filter level
sparsity. This study allows new insight into the performance gap obeserved between adapative and non-adaptive
gradient descent methods in practice. Further, analysis of
the effect of training strategies and hyperparameters on the
sparsity leads to practical suggestions in designing CNN
training strategies enabling us to explore the tradeoffs between feature selectivity, network capacity, and generalization performance. Lastly, we show that the implicit sparsity
can be harnessed for neural network speedup at par or better than explicit sparsification / pruning approaches, with
no modifications to the typical training pipeline required.

1. Introduction
In this work we show that filter1 level sparsity emerges in
certain types of feedforward convolutional neural networks.
In networks which employ Batch Normalization and
ReLU activation, after training, certain filters are observed
to not activate for any input. Importantly, the sparsity
emerges in the presence of non sparsity inducing regularizers such as L2 and weight decay (WD), and vanishes when
regularization is removed. We investigate how this sparsity
manifests under different hyperparameter settings, and propose an experimentally backed hypothesis for the cause of
this emergent sparsity, and the implications of our findings.
We find that adaptive flavours of SGD produce a higher
degree of sparsity than (m)SGD, both with L2 regularization and weight decay (WD). Further, L2 regularization results in a higher degree of sparsity with adaptive methods
than weight decay. Additionally, we show that a multitude
1 Filter refers to the weights and the nonlinearity associated with a particular feature, acting together as a unit. We use filter and feature interchangeably throughout the document.

of seemingly unrelated factors such as mini-batch size, network size, and task difficulty impact the extent of sparsity.
These findings are important in light of contemporary
attempts to explain the performance gap between (m)SGD
and adaptive variants. Any theoretical and practical explorations towards explaining the performance gap between
SGD and adaptive variants should account for this inadvertent reduction in network capacity when using adaptive
methods, which interplays with both the test accuracy and
the generalization gap. Contemporaneous work [27] has
also observed that Adam induces filter sparsity in ReLU networks, but lacks a thorough investigation of the causes.
Through a systematic experimental study, we hypothesize that the emergence of sparsity is the direct result of a
disproportionate relative influence of the regularizer (L2 or
WD) viz a viz the gradients from the primary training objective of ReLU networks. Multiple factors subtly impact
the relative influence of the regularizer in previously known
and unknown ways, and various hyperparameters and design choices for training neural networks interplay via these
factors to impact the extent of emergent sparsity.
We show that understanding the impact of these design choices yields useful and readily controllable sparsity
which can be leveraged for considerable neural network
speed up, without trading the generalization performance
and without requiring any explicit pruning [18, 13] or sparsification [14] steps. The implicit sparsification process can
remove 70-80% of the convolutional filters from VGG-16
on CIFAR10/100, far exceeding that for [13], and performs
comparable to [14] for VGG-11 on ImageNet.

2. Observing Filter Sparsity in CNNs
We begin with the setup for our initial experiments, and
present our primary findings. In subsequent sections we further probe the manifestation of filter sparsity, and present an
experimentally backed hypothesis regarding the cause.

2.1. Setup and Preliminaries
Our basic setup is comprised of a 7-layer convolutional
network with 2 fully connected layers as shown in Figure 1.
This work was funded by the ERC Consolidator Grant 4DRepLy
(770784).

1520

