Connecting the Dots:
Learning Representations for Active Monocular Depth Estimation

1

Gernot Riegler1,∗ Yiyi Liao2,∗ Simon Donne2 Vladlen Koltun1 Andreas Geiger2
2
Intel Intelligent Systems Lab
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI-IS / University of Tübingen
{firstname.lastname}@intel.com

Abstract
We propose a technique for depth estimation with a
monocular structured-light camera, i.e., a calibrated stereo
set-up with one camera and one laser projector. Instead
of formulating the depth estimation via a correspondence
search problem, we show that a simple convolutional architecture is sufficient for high-quality disparity estimates
in this setting. As accurate ground-truth is hard to obtain, we train our model in a self-supervised fashion with a
combination of photometric and geometric losses. Further,
we demonstrate that the projected pattern of the structured
light sensor can be reliably separated from the ambient information. This can then be used to improve depth boundaries in a weakly supervised fashion by modeling the joint
statistics of image and depth edges. The model trained in
this fashion compares favorably to the state-of-the-art on
challenging synthetic and real-world datasets. In addition,
we contribute a novel simulator, which allows to benchmark
active depth prediction algorithms in controlled conditions.

1. Introduction
With the introduction of the Microsoft Kinect, active
consumer depth cameras have greatly impacted the field of
computer vision, leading to algorithmic innovations [13, 28]
and novel 3D datasets [6, 7, 35, 37], especially in the context of indoor environments. Likewise, the increasing availability of affordable and comparably robust depth sensing
technologies has accelerated research in robotics.
While this progress is remarkable, current research based
on consumer depth cameras is limited by the depth sensing technology used onboard these devices, which is typically kept simple due to computational and memory constraints. For instance, the original Kinect v1 uses a simple
correlation-based block matching technique [33], while Intel RealSense cameras exploit semi-global matching [16].
However, neither of these approaches is state-of-the-art in
current stereo benchmarks [25, 32, 34], most of which are
dominated by learning-based approaches.
∗ Joint first authors with equal contribution.

{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

In this paper, we exploit the potential of deep learning
for this task. In particular, we consider the setting of active
monocular depth estimation. Our setup comprises a camera and a laser projector which illuminates the scene with a
known random dot pattern. Depending on the depth of the
scene this pattern varies from the viewpoint of the camera.
This scenario is appealing as it requires only a single camera
compared to active stereo systems. Furthermore, the neural
network is not tasked to find correspondences between images. Instead, our network directly estimates disparity from
the point pattern in a local neighborhood of a pixel.
Training deep neural networks for active depth estimation is difficult as obtaining sufficiently large amounts of accurately aligned ground-truth is very challenging. We therefore propose to train active depth estimation networks without access to ground-truth depth in a fully self-supervised,
or weakly supervised fashion. Towards this goal, we combine a photometric loss with a disparity loss which considers the edge information available in the ambient image. We
further propose a geometric loss which enforces multi-view
consistency of the predicted geometry. To the best of our
knowledge this is the first deep learning approach to active
monocular depth estimation.
In summary, we make the following contributions: We
find that a convolutional network is surprisingly effective at
estimating disparity, despite the fact that information about
the absolute location is not explicitly encoded in the input
features. Based on these findings, we propose a deep network for active monocular depth prediction. Our method
does not require pseudo ground-truth from classical stereo
algorithms as in [10]. Instead, it gains robustness by photometric and geometric losses. We show that the ambient edge
information can be disentangled reliably from a single input
image, yielding highly accurate depth boundaries despite
the sparsity of the projected IR pattern. Research on active
depth prediction is hampered by the lack of large datasets
with accurate ground-truth depth. We thus contribute a simulator and dataset which allow to benchmark active depth
prediction algorithms in realistic, but controlled conditions.

7624

