Mapping, Localization and Path Planning for
Image-based Navigation using Visual Features and Map
Janine Thoma1 , Danda Pani Paudel1 , Ajad Chhatkuli1 , Thomas Probst1 , Luc Van Gool1,2
1 Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2 VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
Building on progress in feature representations for image retrieval, image-based localization has seen a surge of
research interest. Image-based localization has the advantage of being inexpensive and efficient, often avoiding the
use of 3D metric maps altogether. That said, the need to
maintain a large amount of reference images as an effective support of localization in a scene, nonetheless calls for
them to be organized in a map structure of some kind.
The problem of localization often arises as part of a navigation process. We are, therefore, interested in summarizing
the reference images as a set of landmarks, which meet the
requirements for image-based navigation. A contribution
of this paper is to formulate such a set of requirements for
the two sub-tasks involved: compact map construction and
accurate self localization. These requirements are then exploited for compact map representation and accurate selflocalization, using the framework of a network flow problem. During this process, we formulate the map construction and self-localization problems as convex quadratic and
second-order cone programs, respectively. We evaluate our
methods on publicly available indoor and outdoor datasets,
where they outperform existing methods significantly1 .

1. Introduction
Vision-based navigation is one of the key components
of robotics, self-driving cars and many mobile applications. It is tackled either by using a 3D map representation such as in Structure-from-Motion (SfM) based methods [11, 17, 23, 22, 29, 7] and Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) methods [20, 8, 6, 5, 10] or
by using a map purely represented with geo-tagged images [3, 24, 4, 12]. In contrast to SfM and SLAM-based
1 Code: https://github.com/janinethoma/

methods, localization by image retrieval (or simply imagebased localization) is inexpensive, with a simple map representation, which also scales better in larger spaces [3, 23].
The problem of image-based localization is posed as the
matching of one or more query images taken at unknown
locations to a set of reference images captured at known
locations in a map. Recent developments in learning image feature representations for object and place recognition [16, 24, 4, 3] have made image retrieval a viable method
for localization. Despite the increased interest, image-based
navigation methods are largely error-prone due to matching inaccuracies [1]. Some existing methods address this
by learning better feature representations for place recognition [3, 24, 4, 12]. Nonetheless, errors in matches cannot
be avoided in realistic settings with changes in illumination,
camera pose and dynamic objects [1]. Methods that directly
regress poses [26, 14, 13] naturally run into similar problems. We argue that, in addition to feature representation,
the success of localization in navigation is determined by
several other key factors. In particular, current methods do
not adequately address the problem of map representation.
Many methods use a large (or even complete) reference
image set in order to localize a given query image [4, 12, 1].
Although a large reference set has a higher chance of a similar (in pose and illumination) reference and query image
pair to exist, it not only leads to higher memory requirements but may also become sub-optimal for the matching
process. Another important neglected aspect in image based
localization is the order of query image sequences, which is
the key to the success of visual SLAM methods. Unlike
SLAM, localization by retrieval often works with a much
sparser sequence of query images. Exploiting information
from such interleaved image sequences is very challenging.
In this context, [19] localizes a sequence of query images
by assuming a linear change of features over time. However, this assumption is rather naive, since it fails as soon as
some objects appear (or disappear) in images. As a conse-

7383

