Representation Flow for Action Recognition
AJ Piergiovanni and Michael S. Ryoo
Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47408
{ajpiergi,mryoo}@indiana.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a convolutional layer inspired
by optical flow algorithms to learn motion representations.
Our representation flow layer is a fully-differentiable layer
designed to capture the ‘flow’ of any representation channel
within a convolutional neural network for action recognition.
Its parameters for iterative flow optimization are learned in
an end-to-end fashion together with the other CNN model
parameters, maximizing the action recognition performance.
Furthermore, we newly introduce the concept of learning
‘flow of flow’ representations by stacking multiple representation flow layers. We conducted extensive experimental evaluations, confirming its advantages over previous recognition
models using traditional optical flows in both computational
speed and performance. The code is publicly available. 1

1. Introduction
Activity recognition is an important problem in computer
vision with many societal applications including surveillance,
robot perception, smart environment/city, and more. Use of
video convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become
the standard method for this task, as they can learn more optimal representations for the problem. Two-stream networks
[20], taking both RGB frames and optical flow as input, provide state-of-the-art results and have been extremely popular.
3-D spatio-temporal CNN models, e.g., I3D [3], with XYT
convolutions also found that such two-stream design (RGB
+ optical flow) increases their accuracy. Abstracting both
appearance information and explicit motion flow benefits the
recognition.
However, optical flow is expensive to compute. It often
requires hundreds of optimization iterations every frame, and
causes learning of two separate CNN streams (i.e., RGBstream and flow-stream). This requires significant computation cost and a great increase in the number of model parameters to learn. Further, this means that the model needs to
compute optical flow every frame even during inference and
1 Code/models available here: https://piergiaj.github.io/rep-flow-site/

Figure 1: Comparing the results of (b) TVL-1 and (c) our
learned flow when applied to RGB images. Our layer is able
to capture similar motion information to TVL-1. However,
compared to TVL-1, our layer is faster, is learnable, and
can be applied directly to any intermediate CNN feature
maps. With the representation flow layer, optical flow preextraction is no longer needed and a single-stream CNN
design becomes possible.

run two parallel CNNs, limiting its real-time applications.
There were previous works to learn representations capturing motion information without using optical flow as input,
such as motion feature networks [15] and ActionFlowNet
[16]. However, although they were more advantageous in
terms of the number of model parameters and computation
speed, they suffered from inferior performance compared
to two-stream models on public datasets such as Kinetics
[13] and HMDB [14]. We hypothesize that the iterative optimization performed by optical flow methods produces an
important feature that other methods fail to capture.
In this paper, we propose a CNN layer inspired by optical
flow algorithms to learn motion representations for action
recognition without having to compute optical flow. Our representation flow layer is a fully-differentiable layer designed
to capture ‘flow’ of any representation channels within the
model. Its parameters for iterative flow optimization are
learned together with other model parameters, maximizing
the action recognition performance. This is also done without having/training multiple network streams, reducing the
number of parameters in the model. Further, we newly introduce the concept of learning ‘flow of flow’ representations
by stacking multiple representation flow layers. We conduct
19945

