Meta-Learning with Differentiable Convex Optimization
Kwonjoon Lee2
Subhransu Maji1,3
Avinash Ravichandran1
Stefano Soatto1,4
1
2
3
4
Amazon Web Services
UC San Diego
UMass Amherst
UCLA
kwl042@ucsd.edu
{smmaji,ravinash,soattos}@amazon.com
Abstract
Many meta-learning approaches for few-shot learning
rely on simple base learners such as nearest-neighbor classifiers. However, even in the few-shot regime, discriminatively trained linear predictors can offer better generalization. We propose to use these predictors as base learners to
learn representations for few-shot learning and show they
offer better tradeoffs between feature size and performance
across a range of few-shot recognition benchmarks. Our
objective is to learn feature embeddings that generalize well
under a linear classification rule for novel categories. To
efficiently solve the objective, we exploit two properties of
linear classifiers: implicit differentiation of the optimality
conditions of the convex problem and the dual formulation
of the optimization problem. This allows us to use highdimensional embeddings with improved generalization at a
modest increase in computational overhead. Our approach,
named MetaOptNet, achieves state-of-the-art performance
on miniImageNet, tieredImageNet, CIFAR-FS, and FC100
few-shot learning benchmarks. Our code is available online1 .

1. Introduction
The ability to learn from a few examples is a hallmark
of human intelligence, yet it remains a challenge for modern machine learning systems. This problem has received
significant attention from the machine learning community
recently where few-shot learning is cast as a meta-learning
problem (e.g., [22, 8, 33, 28]). The goal is to minimize generalization error across a distribution of tasks with few training examples. Typically, these approaches are composed of
an embedding model that maps the input domain into a feature space and a base learner that maps the feature space
to task variables. The meta-learning objective is to learn
an embedding model such that the base learner generalizes
well across tasks.
While many choices for base learners exist, nearestneighbor classifiers and their variants (e.g., [28, 33]) are
1 https://github.com/kjunelee/MetaOptNet

popular as the classification rule is simple and the approach
scales well in the low-data regime. However, discriminatively trained linear classifiers often outperform nearestneighbor classifiers (e.g., [4, 16]) in the low-data regime
as they can exploit the negative examples which are often
more abundant to learn better class boundaries. Moreover,
they can effectively use high dimensional feature embeddings as model capacity can be controlled by appropriate
regularization such as weight sparsity or norm.
Hence, in this paper, we investigate linear classifiers as
the base learner for a meta-learning based approach for fewshot learning. The approach is illustrated in Figure 1 where
a linear support vector machine (SVM) is used to learn a
classifier given a set of labeled training examples and the
generalization error is computed on a novel set of examples
from the same task. The key challenge is computational
since the meta-learning objective of minimizing the generalization error across tasks requires training a linear classifier in the inner loop of optimization (see Section 3). However, the objective of linear models is convex and can be
solved efficiently. We observe that two additional properties
arising from the convex nature that allows efficient metalearning: implicit differentiation of the optimization [2, 11]
and the low-rank nature of the classifier in the few-shot setting. The first property allows the use of off-the-shelf convex optimizers to estimate the optima and implicitly differentiate the optimality or Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions to train embedding model. The second property
means that the number of optimization variables in the dual
formation is far smaller than the feature dimension for fewshot learning.
To this end, we have incorporated a differentiable
quadratic programming (QP) solver [1] which allows endto-end learning of the embedding model with various linear
classifiers, e.g., multiclass support vector machines (SVMs)
[5] or linear regression, for few-shot classification tasks.
Making use of these properties, we show that our method
is practical and offers substantial gains over nearest neighbor classifiers at a modest increase in computational costs
(see Table 3). Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on 5-way 1-shot and 5-shot classification for popu-

10657

