End-to-End Supervised Product Quantization for Image Search and Retrieval
Benjamin Klein1 and Lior Wolf1,2
1

The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Israel
2
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Product Quantization, a dictionary based hashing
method, is one of the leading unsupervised hashing techniques. While it ignores the labels, it harnesses the features
to construct look up tables that can approximate the feature
space. In recent years, several works have achieved state
of the art results on hashing benchmarks by learning binary
representations in a supervised manner. This work presents
Deep Product Quantization (DPQ), a technique that leads
to more accurate retrieval and classification than the latest
state of the art methods, while having similar computational
complexity and memory footprint as the Product Quantization method. To our knowledge, this is the first work to introduce a dictionary-based representation that is inspired
by Product Quantization and which is learned end-to-end,
and thus benefits from the supervised signal. DPQ explicitly learns soft and hard representations to enable an efficient and accurate asymmetric search, by using a straightthrough estimator. Our method obtains state of the art results on an extensive array of retrieval and classification
experiments.

1. Introduction
Computer vision practitioners have adopted the Product
Quantization (PQ) method [15] as a leading approach for
conducting Approximated Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search
in large scale databases. However, the research community has recently shifted its focus toward using methods
that compute Hamming distances on binary representations
learned by supervised dictionary-free methods, and showed
its superiority on the standard PQ techniques [14]. In this
work, we present a technique inspired by PQ and named
Deep Product Quantization (DPQ) that outperforms previous methods on many known benchmarks. While standard PQ is learned in an unsupervised manner, our DPQ
is learned in an end-to-end fashion, and benefits from the
task-related supervised signal.
PQ methods decompose the embedding manifold into

a Cartesian product of M disjoint partitions, and quantize
each partition into K clusters. An input vector x ∈ RM D
is split into M sub-vectors in RD , x = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xM ]
and then encoded by PQ as zx ∈ {0, 1}M ·log2 (K) . Each
group of log2 (K) bits decodes the index k ∈ {1 . . . K}
of the cluster to which the sub-vector belongs (note that
the clusters vary between the subspaces). A representative
vector cm,k ∈ RD is associated with each cluster k of
each partition m. An approximation of the original vector,
x̃, can be readily reconstructed from zx , by concatenating
the representative vectors of the matching clusters. The
common practice for training a PQ is to run K-means in
an unsupervised manner on each partition, and to use the
centroid of each cluster as the representative vector.
The advantages of using the PQ technique are the reduction in memory footprint and the acceleration of search
time. The decomposition of the embedding into a Cartesian
product of M sub-vectors is the key ingredient in the effectiveness of PQ in reducing the retrieval search time, since
it allows to compute the approximated distance of a pair of
vectors, x and y, directly from their compressed representations, zx and zy , using look-up tables. PQ methods can also
achieve better retrieval performance by using an asymmetric search, in which the distance is computed between the
source vector, x, and the compressed vector, zy , with the
same amount of computation as the symmetric search.
Another common technique for ANN search is transforming the embedding into a binary representation, without using a dictionary, and performing the comparison using Hamming distance. Several works have achieved state
of the art results on retrieval benchmarks, by learning the binary representation as part as of the classification model optimization in an end-to-end fashion. The binary representation is thus trained using a supervised signal and, therefore,
the distance between two binary representations reflects the
end goal of the system.
In this work, we present a new technique, Deep Product
Quantization, which to our knowledge, is the first to learn a
compressed representation inspired by PQ, which is learned

5041

