DenseFusion: 6D Object Pose Estimation by Iterative Dense Fusion
Chen Wang2
1
2

Danfei Xu1
Yuke Zhu1
Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n1
Cewu Lu2
Li Fei-Fei1
Silvio Savarese1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University

Department of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
A key technical challenge in performing 6D object pose
estimation from RGB-D image is to fully leverage the two
complementary data sources. Prior works either extract information from the RGB image and depth separately or use
costly post-processing steps, limiting their performances in
highly cluttered scenes and real-time applications. In this
work, we present DenseFusion, a generic framework for
estimating 6D pose of a set of known objects from RGBD images. DenseFusion is a heterogeneous architecture
that processes the two data sources individually and uses a
novel dense fusion network to extract pixel-wise dense feature embedding, from which the pose is estimated. Furthermore, we integrate an end-to-end iterative pose refinement
procedure that further improves the pose estimation while
achieving near real-time inference. Our experiments show
that our method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in
two datasets, YCB-Video and LineMOD. We also deploy our
proposed method to a real robot to grasp and manipulate
objects based on the estimated pose. Our code and video
are available at https://sites.google.com/view/densefusion/.

1. Introduction
6D object pose estimation is the crux to many important
real-world applications, such as robotic grasping and manipulation [7, 35, 44], autonomous navigation [6, 11, 42],
and augmented reality [19, 20]. Ideally, a solution should
deal with objects of varying shape and texture, show robustness towards heavy occlusion, sensor noise, and changing
lighting conditions, while achieving the speed requirement
of real-time tasks. The advent of cheap RGB-D sensors
has enabled methods that infer poses of low-textured objects even in poorly-lighted environments more accurately
than RGB-only methods. Nonetheless, it is difficult for existing methods to satisfy the requirements of accurate pose
estimation and fast inference simultaneously.
Classical approaches first extract features from RGB-D
data and perform correspondence grouping and hypothesis
verification [3, 12, 13, 15, 26, 33, 38]. However, the re-

RGB-D

DenseFusion

Figure 1. We develop an end-to-end deep network model for 6D
pose estimation from RGB-D data, which performs fast and accurate predictions for real-time applications such as robot grasping
and manipulation.

liance on handcrafted features and fixed matching procedures have limited their empirical performances in presence
of heavy occlusion and lighting variation. Recent success
in visual recognition has inspired a family of data-driven
methods that use deep networks for pose estimation from
RGB-D inputs, such as PoseCNN [41] and MCN [16].
However, these methods require elaborate post-hoc refinement steps to fully utilize the 3D information, such
as a highly customized Iterative Closest Point (ICP) [2]
procedure in PoseCNN and a multi-view hypothesis verification scheme in MCN. These refinement steps cannot
be optimized jointly with the final objective and are prohibitively slow for real-time applications. In the context of
autonomous driving, a third family of solutions has been
proposed to better exploit the complementary nature of
color and depth information from RGB-D data with endto-end deep models, such as Frustrum PointNet [23] and
PointFusion [42]. These models have achieved good performances in driving scenes and the capacity of real-time
inference. However, as we demonstrate empirically, these
methods fall short under heavy occlusion, which is common

3343

