Data-Driven Neuron Allocation for Scale Aggregation Networks
Yi Li

Zhanghui Kuang

Yimin Chen
SenseTime

Wayne Zhang

{liyi,kuangzhanghui,chenyimin,wayne.zhang}@sensetime.com

Abstract

feature maps

c3

Successful visual recognition networks benefit from aggregating information spanning from a wide range of
scales. Previous research has investigated information fusion of connected layers or multiple branches in a block,
seeking to strengthen the power of multi-scale representations. Despite their great successes, existing practices often
allocate the neurons for each scale manually, and keep the
same ratio in all aggregation blocks of an entire network,
rendering suboptimal performance. In this paper, we propose to learn the neuron allocation for aggregating multiscale information in different building blocks of a deep network. The most informative output neurons in each block
are preserved while others are discarded, and thus neurons
for multiple scales are competitively and adaptively allocated. Our scale aggregation network (ScaleNet) is constructed by repeating a scale aggregation (SA) block that
concatenates feature maps at a wide range of scales. Feature maps for each scale are generated by a stack of downsampling, convolution and upsampling operations. The
data-driven neuron allocation and SA block achieve strong
representational power at the cost of considerably low computational complexity. The proposed ScaleNet, by replacing
all 3×3 convolutions in ResNet with our SA blocks, achieves
better performance than ResNet and its outstanding variants like ResNeXt and SE-ResNet, in the same computational complexity. On ImageNet classification, ScaleNets
absolutely reduce the top-1 error rate of ResNets by 1.12
(101 layers) and 1.82 (50 layers). On COCO object detection, ScaleNets absolutely improve the mAP with backbone
of ResNets by 3.6 and 4.6 on Faster-RCNN, respectively.
Code and models are released on https://github.com/EliYiLi/ScaleNet.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been
successfully applied to a wide range of computer vision
tasks, such as image classification [18], object detection [25], and semantic segmentation [22], due to their

c2
1: downsample

3: upsample
c1

2: convolution

4: concatenate

8th SA Block
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

block

c3
c2

c1
1

2

3

4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
scale 1
scale 2
scale 3
scale 4
Neuron proportion in each SA block

Figure 1: Illustration of the data-driven neuron allocation for the
scale aggregation (SA) block. The proportion of output neurons
(or channels) of different scales in an SA block is learned, and
thus adaptively changes across layers in a network.

powerful end-to-end learnable representations. From bottom to top, the layers of CNNs have larger receptive fields
with coarser scales, and their corresponding representations
become more semantic. Aggregating context information
from multiple scales has been proved to be effective for improving accuracy [32, 9, 13, 20, 6, 3, 16, 28, 4]. Small
scale representations encode local structures such as textures, corners and edges, and are useful for localization,
while coarse scale representations encode global contexts
such as object categories, object interaction and scene, and
thus clarify local confusion.
There exist many previous attempts to fuse multi-scale
representations by designing network architecture. They
aggregate multi-scale representations of connected layers
with different depths [32, 9, 13, 20, 6, 3, 16, 12, 26] or
multiple branches in a block with different convolutional
kernel sizes [28, 4]. The proportion of multi-scale representations for in each aggregation block is manually set
in a trial-and-error process and kept the same in the entire
network. Ideally, the most efficient architecture design of
multi-scale information aggregation is adaptive. The pro-

11526

