Hybrid-Attention based Decoupled Metric Learning for Zero-Shot Image
Retrieval

1

Binghui Chen1, 2 , Weihong Deng1∗
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
AI Labs, Didi Chuxing, Beijing 100193, China
chenbinghui@bupt.edu.cn, whdeng@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
In zero-shot image retrieval (ZSIR) task, embedding
learning becomes more attractive, however, many methods follow the traditional metric learning idea and omit
the problems behind zero-shot settings. In this paper, we
first emphasize the importance of learning visual discriminative metric and preventing the partial/selective learning behavior of learner in ZSIR, and then propose the Decoupled Metric Learning (DeML) framework to achieve
these individually. Instead of coarsely optimizing an unified metric, we decouple it into multiple attention-specific
parts so as to recurrently induce the discrimination and explicitly enhance the generalization. And they are mainly
achieved by our object-attention module based on random
walk graph propagation and the channel-attention module
based on the adversary constraint, respectively. We demonstrate the necessity of addressing the vital problems in ZSIR
on the popular benchmarks, outperforming the state-of-theart methods by a significant margin. Code is available at
http://www.bhchen.cn

1. Introduction
In zero-shot image retrieval (ZSIR), the model is required to learn embedding from the seen classes and
then to be capable of utilizing the learned knowledge
to distinguish the unseen classes without any attributes
or semantic information. Most existing works adopt
deep embedding (metric) learning and dedicate to exploring powerful loss functions, such as pair-based methods
[33, 43, 29, 23, 32, 2, 35], and hard-example mining strategies [16, 39, 29, 32], etc. These ideas can be summarised as:
learn a good matric on the seen categories so as to boost the
performance on the unseen ones. However, in fact, they neglect the existence and significance of some vital problems
to ZSIR, thus are easily stuck in the particular data distribution and knowledge zone of the seen training set, some
helpful knowledge for unseen classes may have been left
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1: Differences between (a) unified metric learning and (b) DeML. Our DeML
decouples the unified representations into multiple attention-specific learners so as to
encourage the discrimination and generalization of the holistic metric.

out with a high probability, as a result, their performances
are almost on par with each other and unsatisfactory.
Specifically, in ZSIR, the ideas above are actually unreasonable as the discrimination and generalization abilities of the learned metric are highly influenced by the following two aspects: (1) the undiscriminating visual input,
which contains much noisy information (it is hard to know
where should be focused on), resulting in poor descriptors
and inducing difficulty in distinguishing the unseen classes.
In another word, undiscriminating visual input deteriorates
the discrimination of features. (2) partial/selective learning
behavior of deep models[3], specifically, for a functional
learner parameterized by CNN, when given an arbitrary input, it will selectively learn partial attributes knowledge that
are the easiest ones to decrease the current training empirical risk over the seen categories, instead of learning allsided details and information, thus yielding over-fitting on
seen categories and generalizing worse to the unseen ones.
For example on birds, if the head knowledge is enough to
distinguish the training seen classes, the deep model will
only focus on the head and ignore the other body parts
like back, foot and wing, while when testing on the unseen classes (which have similar head features but different wing features), the trained model will easily fail to distinguish them1 . This partial learning behavior sometimes
1 Since in zero-shot settings, the unseen classes have no intersection
with the seen classes, this partial learning behavior is common.

2750

