Transferable Interactiveness Knowledge for
Human-Object Interaction Detection
Yong-Lu Li, Siyuan Zhou, Xijie Huang, Liang Xu, Ze Ma, Hao-Shu Fang, Yan-Feng Wang, Cewu Lu∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yonglu li, ssluvble, otaku huang, liangxu, maze1234556}@sjtu.edu.cn
fhaoshu@gmail.com, wangyanfeng@sjtu.edu.cn, lucewu@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) Detection is an important problem to understand how humans interact with objects. In this paper, we explore Interactiveness Knowledge which indicates whether human and object interact with each other or not. We found that interactiveness knowledge can be learned across HOI datasets, regardless of HOI category settings. Our core idea is
to exploit an Interactiveness Network to learn the general interactiveness knowledge from multiple HOI datasets
and perform Non-Interaction Suppression before HOI classification in inference. On account of the generalization of interactiveness, interactiveness network is a transferable knowledge learner and can be cooperated with
any HOI detection models to achieve desirable results.
We extensively evaluate the proposed method on HICODET and V-COCO datasets. Our framework outperforms
state-of-the-art HOI detection results by a great margin, verifying its efficacy and flexibility. Code is available at https://github.com/DirtyHarryLYL/
Transferable-Interactiveness-Network.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection retrieves human and object locations and infers the interaction classes
from still image. As a sub-task of visual relationship [24,
17], HOI is strongly related to the human body and object understanding [33, 36, 39, 11, 26, 21, 38]. It is crucial
for behavior understanding and can facilitate activity understanding [9, 28], imitation learning [3], etc. Recently, impressive progress has been made by utilizing Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) in this area [34, 19, 32, 31].
∗ Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, he is also a member of Depart-

ment of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, and SJTU-SenseTime AI lab.

Interactiveness

HOI Detection
Model

HOIs

(a)
(b)

Interactiveness Prior Learning
Interactiveness
Network

HOI Classifier

HOIs

Multiple HOI Datasets

Figure 1. Interactiveness Knowledge Learning. (a) HOI datasets
contain implicit interactiveness knowledge. We can learn it better
by performing explicit interactiveness discrimination, and utilize
it to improve the HOI detection performance. (b) Interactiveness
knowledge is beyond the HOI categories and can be learned across
datasets, which can bring greater performance improvement.

Generally, human and objects need to be detected first.
Given an image and its detections, human and objects are
often paired exhaustively [19, 31, 32]. HOI detection task
aims to classify these pairs as different HOI categories. Previous one-stage methods [34, 19, 31, 13, 32] directly classify a pair as specific HOIs. These methods actually predict
interactiveness implicitly at the same time, where interactiveness indicates whether a human-object pair is interactive. For example, when a pair is classified as HOI “eat
apple”, we can implicitly predict that it is interactive.
Though interactiveness is an essential element for HOI
detection, we neglected to study how to utilize it and improve its learning. In comparison to HOI categories, interactiveness conveys more basic information. Such attribute makes it easier for interactiveness to transfer across
datasets.Based on this inspiration, we propose a Interactiveness Knowledge learning method as seen in Figure 1.
With our framework, interactiveness can be learned across
datasets and applied to any specific dataset. By utilizing
interactiveness, we take two stages to identify HOIs: we
first discriminate a human-object pair as interactive or not

3585

