Speed Invariant Time Surface
for Learning to Detect Corner Points with Event-Based Cameras
Jacques Manderscheid1 , Amos Sironi1 , Nicolas Bourdis1 , Davide Migliore1 and Vincent Lepetit2
1
Prophesee, Paris, France, 2 University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France
{jmanderscheid, asironi, nbourdis, dmigliore}@prophesee.ai, vincent.lepetit@u-bordeaux.fr

Abstract
We propose a learning approach to corner detection for
event-based cameras that is stable even under fast and
abrupt motions. Event-based cameras offer high temporal resolution, power efficiency, and high dynamic range.
However, the properties of event-based data are very different compared to standard intensity images, and simple
extensions of corner detection methods designed for these
images do not perform well on event-based data. We first
introduce an efficient way to compute a time surface that is
invariant to the speed of the objects. We then show that
we can train a Random Forest to recognize events generated by a moving corner from our time surface. Random Forests are also extremely efficient, and therefore a
good choice to deal with the high capture frequency of
event-based cameras—our implementation processes up to
1.6Mev/s on a single CPU. Thanks to our time surface formulation and this learning approach, our method is significantly more robust to abrupt changes of direction of the corners compared to previous ones. Our method also naturally
assigns a confidence score for the corners, which can be
useful for postprocessing. Moreover, we introduce a highresolution dataset suitable for quantitative evaluation and
comparison of corner detection methods for event-based
cameras. We call our approach SILC, for Speed Invariant
Learned Corners, and compare it to the state-of-the-art with
extensive experiments, showing better performance.

1. Introduction
By capturing very efficiently local illuminance
changes (’events’), event-based cameras [32, 46, 53]
open the door to novel very fast and low-power computer vision algorithms able to deal with large dynamic
ranges [6, 27, 48, 5]. However, because the events are
created asynchronously, as shown in Fig. 1 (a), novel
algorithms have to be developed to perform fundamental
computer vision tasks that are typically performed on
regular frame images.
One of the main fundamental tasks is feature point

(a) Events

(b) evFAST [39] (c) evHarris [61]

(d) Ours

Figure 1: (a) Stream of events generated by an event-based
camera moving in front of a checkerboard pattern. Black
dots represents events with a negative polarity, white dots
events with a positive polarity. (b-c) Standard event-based
corner detectors [39, 61] are not robust to direction changes
of the camera, and the corners cannot be reliably tracked
over time without a very complex tracking scheme. (d) By
training a classifier to detect corners from event-based data,
our method can reliably detect corners under even abrupt
changes of direction. A simple nearest neighbor tracker produces continuous trajectories of the corners over time.
detection, which is important for applications with very
strong dynamics such as UAV navigation, where motion
blur makes classical frame-based approaches less robust,
or visual odometry in High Dynamic Range (HDR) conditions, among others. Inspired by the vast literature on
frame-based feature point detection, some works adapted
frame-based corner detector to event-based data. Typically,
a local spatial descriptor is built around an event, for example by cumulating events in a given time window [61], or by
considering the times of arrival of the events [39]. Then, a
110245

