Assessment of Faster R-CNN in Man-Machine collaborative search
Amit Surana

Miguel P. Eckstein

Dynamical Neuroscience

United Technologies Corporation

Psychological and Brain Sciences

UC Santa Barbara

United Technologies Research Center

UC Santa Barbara

deza@dyns.ucsb.edu

suranaa@utrc.utc.com

eckstein@psych.ucsb.edu

Arturo Deza

Abstract
With the advent of modern expert systems driven
by deep learning that supplement human experts (e.g.
radiologists, dermatologists, surveillance scanners), we
analyze how and when do such expert systems enhance
human performance in a fine-grained small target visual
search task. We set up a 2 session factorial experimental design in which humans visually search for a
target with and without a Deep Learning (DL) expert
system. We evaluate human changes of target detection
performance and eye-movements in the presence of the
DL system. We find that performance improvements
with the DL system (computed via a Faster R-CNN with
a VGG16) interacts with observer’s perceptual abilities
(e.g., sensitivity). The main results include: 1) The DL
system reduces the False Alarm rate per Image on average across observer groups of both high/low sensitivity;
2) Only human observers with high sensitivity perform
better than the DL system, while the low sensitivity
group does not surpass individual DL system performance, even when aided with the DL system itself; 3)
Increases in number of trials and decrease in viewing
time were mainly driven by the DL system only for the
low sensitivity group. 4) The DL system aids the human
observer to fixate at a target by the 3rd fixation, potentially explaining boosts in performance. These results
provide insights of the benefits and limitations of deep
learning systems that are collaborative or competitive
with humans.

1. Introduction
Visual search is an ubiquitous activity that humans
engage in every day for a multitude of tasks. Some
of these search scenarios are explicit such as: searching for our keys on our desk; while other are implicit
such as looking for pedestrians on the street while driving [13]. Visual search may also be trivial as in the
previous example or may require stronger degrees of

expertise accumulated even over many years such as
radiologists searching for tumours in mammograms, as
well as military surveillance operators, or TSA agents
who must go over a high collection of images in the
shortest amount of time. Indeed the successes of Deep
Learning Systems have already been shown to compete
with Dermatologists in [17] as well as Radiologists [35]
for cancerous tumor detections.
Most of the expert systems work has been explored in
the medical imaging domain, more specifically in radiology. Litjens et al. [29] compiled an overview of 300 Deep
Learning papers applied to medical imaging. In the
work of Kooi et al., CNN’s and other Computer Aided
Detection and Diagnosis (CAD) classifiers are compared
to each other as automatic diagnosis agents [27]. They
find that deep learning systems rival expert radiologists,
as is the recent paper of Rajpurkar et al. when having
radiologists diagnosing pneumonia [35]. Arevalo et al.
benchmark CNN’s to classical computer vision models
such as HOG and explore the learned representations by
such deep networks in the first convolutional layer [3].
The majority of studies have evaluated automated intelligent agents via classical computer vision or endto-end deep learning architectures v.s. humans. See
Litjens et al. [29] for an overview of 300 Deep Learning
papers applied to medical imaging.
Other bodies of work regarding collaborative humanmachine scenarios in computer vision tasks include:
image annotation [39], machine teaching [40, 25], visual
conversational agents [6], cognitive optimization [12],
and fined-grained categorization [4]. Conversely, there
has also been a recent trend comparing humans against
machines in certain tasks with the goal of finding potential biological constraints that are missing in deep
networks. These comparisons have been done in object
recognition [20, 14, 34], perceptual discrimination [16]
and visual attention [10].
In many applications, mixed DL and human teams
are a likely next step prior to replacement of the human
expert by the expert system [26, 17, 12, 42, 33]. Given

3185

