IGE-Net: Inverse Graphics Energy Networks
for Human Pose Estimation and Single-View Reconstruction
Dominic Jack1

Frederic Maire1

Sareh Shirazi1

Anders Eriksson2

d1.jack@qut.edu.au

f.maire@qut.edu.au

s.shirazi@qut.edu.au

a.eriksson@uq.edu.au

1 School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology
2 School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, University of Queensland

Abstract

2. Main Contributions
Our main contributions are as follows.

Inferring 3D scene information from 2D observations
is an open problem in computer vision. We propose using a deep-learning based energy minimization framework
to learn a consistency measure between 2D observations
and a proposed world model, and demonstrate that this
framework can be trained end-to-end to produce consistent and realistic inferences. We evaluate the framework
on human pose estimation and voxel-based object reconstruction benchmarks and show competitive results can be
achieved with relatively shallow networks with drastically
fewer learned parameters and floating point operations
than conventional deep-learning approaches.

1. We propose simple parameterized energy functions
that capture both consistency and feasibility for the
problems of human pose estimation and object reconstruction based on 2D features and well-understood
computer-graphics principles.
2. For the case of human pose estimation, we show the
proposed energy function can be used to lift 2D pose
inferences to 3D at competitive accuracies with significantly fewer learned parameters and computational
requirements.
3. For object reconstruction, we demonstrate the framework can produce high-resolution voxel grids from
single images on standard desktop GPUs without the
need for 3D convolutions or deconvolutions, outperforming state-of-the-art high-resolution methods in
terms of accuracy.

1. Introduction
Computer graphics involves reducing 3D scene information to 2D using well-understood physics-based arguments
and mathematical operations like frame transformations and
projections. Computer vision can be thought of as the inverse problem – inferring 3D scene information from some
2D representation.
Unlike graphics, computer vision is inherently ill-posed.
While it is straight-forward enough to obtain an inference
which is consistent with a given 2D representation using
standard graphics and optimization techniques, there is no
guarantee this inference will be realistic. To resolve this, we
propose using simple optimization techniques on a learned
energy function which combines graphics operations with a
learned realism component.
We learn this energy function itself using deep-learning
optimization techniques, resulting in a multi-level optimization framework which can be trained end-to-end. We apply
our framework to two common problems: 3D human pose
estimation, and single-view voxel-based object reconstruction.

3. Prior Work
3.1. Multi-Level Optimization
Many problems in machine learning involve inferring
values of unknown variables from observations. Energybased models describe relationships between sets of variables by mapping each combination to a scalar energy
value, where realistic combinations correspond to lower energies than their less viable counterparts. Inferences are
made by fixing values of known variables and seeking unknown values which minimize the energy [27].
Energy-based models have been combined with deep
learning in the past. Zheng et al. [59] formulated conditional random fields (CRFs) as a recurrent neural network
layer, which combined with a standard convolutional neural
network (CNN) achieved state-of-the-art results for image
17075

