PartNet: A Large-scale Benchmark for Fine-grained and
Hierarchical Part-level 3D Object Understanding
Kaichun Mo1 Shilin Zhu2 Angel X. Chang3 Li Yi1 Subarna Tripathi4 Leonidas J. Guibas1,5 Hao Su2
1

Stanford University 2 UC San Diego 3 Simon Fraser University 4 Intel AI Lab 5 Facebook AI Research
https://cs.stanford.edu/~kaichun/partnet/
Coarse

Abstract
We present PartNet: a consistent, large-scale dataset of
3D objects annotated with fine-grained, instance-level, and
hierarchical 3D part information. Our dataset consists of
573,585 part instances over 26,671 3D models covering 24
object categories. This dataset enables and serves as a catalyst for many tasks such as shape analysis, dynamic 3D
scene modeling and simulation, affordance analysis, and
others. Using our dataset, we establish three benchmarking
tasks for evaluating 3D part recognition: fine-grained semantic segmentation, hierarchical semantic segmentation,
and instance segmentation. We benchmark four state-ofthe-art 3D deep learning algorithms for fine-grained semantic segmentation and three baseline methods for hierarchical semantic segmentation. We also propose a baseline
method for part instance segmentation and demonstrate its
superior performance over existing methods.

1. Introduction
Being able to parse objects into parts is critical for humans to understand and interact with the world. People
recognize, categorize, and organize objects based on the
knowledge of their parts [10]. Many actions that people
take in the real world require detection of parts and reasoning over parts. For instance, we open doors using doorknobs
and pull out drawers by grasping their handles. Teaching
machines to analyze parts is thus essential for many vision,
graphics, and robotics applications, such as predicting object functionality [13, 14], human-object interactions [18],
shape editing [28, 16], and shape generation [25, 41].
To enable part-level object understanding by learning approaches, 3D data with part annotations are in high demand.
Many cutting-edge learning algorithms, especially for 3D
understanding [45, 44, 30, 8], intuitive physics [27], and reinforcement learning [48, 29], require such data to train the
networks and benchmark the performances. Researchers
are also increasingly interested in synthesizing dynamic

Fine-grained

Fine-grained
Semantic
Segmentation
Coarse

PartNet Dataset

Instance
Segmentation
Fine-grained

Hierarchical Semantic
Segmentation

Figure 1. PartNet dataset and three benchmarking tasks.

data through physical simulation engines [20, 43, 29]. Creation of large-scale animatable scenes will require a large
amount of 3D data with affordances and mobility information. Object parts serve as a critical stepping stone to access
this information. Thus it is necessary to have a large 3D
object dataset with part annotation.
With the availability of the existing 3D shape datasets
with part annotations [5, 3, 45], we witness increasing research interests and advances in 3D part-level object understanding. Recently, a variety of learning methods have been
proposed to push the state-of-the-art for 3D shape segmentation [30, 31, 46, 19, 35, 24, 9, 39, 40, 42, 33, 7, 26, 23].
However, existing datasets only provide part annotations
on relatively small numbers of object instances [5], or on
coarse yet non-hierarchical part annotations [45], restricting
the applications that involves understanding fine-grained
and hierarchical shape segmentation.
In this paper, we introduce PartNet: a consistent, largescale dataset on top of ShapeNet [3] with fine-grained, hierarchical, instance-level 3D part information. Collecting
such fine-grained and hierarchical segmentation is challenging. The boundary between fine-grained part concepts are
more obscure than defining coarse parts. Thus, we define a
common set of part concepts by carefully examining the 3D
objects to annotate, balancing over several criteria: well-

909

