Semi-supervised Learning with Graph Learning-Convolutional Networks
Bo Jiang, Ziyan Zhang, Doudou Lin, Jin Tang∗ and Bin Luo
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, China
jiangbo@ahu.edu.cn,{zhangziyanahu,ahu lindd}@163.com,ahhftang@gmail.com,luobin@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Neural Networks (graph CNNs)
have been widely used for graph data representation and
semi-supervised learning tasks. However, existing graph
CNNs generally use a fixed graph which may not be optimal for semi-supervised learning tasks. In this paper, we
propose a novel Graph Learning-Convolutional Network
(GLCN) for graph data representation and semi-supervised
learning. The aim of GLCN is to learn an optimal graph
structure that best serves graph CNNs for semi-supervised
learning by integrating both graph learning and graph
convolution in a unified network architecture. The main
advantage is that in GLCN both given labels and the estimated labels are incorporated and thus can provide useful ‘weakly’ supervised information to refine (or learn) the
graph construction and also to facilitate the graph convolution operation for unknown label estimation. Experimental
results on seven benchmarks demonstrate that GLCN significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art traditional fixed
structure based graph CNNs.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been widely used in many
computer vision and pattern recognition tasks. Recently,
many methods have been proposed to generalize the convolution operation on arbitrary graphs to address graph structure data [5, 1, 15, 11, 19, 21]. Overall, these methods can
be categorized into spatial convolution and spectral convolution methods [22]. For spatial methods, they generally
define graph convolution operation directly by defining an
operation on node groups of neighbors. For example, Duvenaud et al. [5] propose a convolutional neural network that
operates directly on graphs and provide an end-to-end feature learning for graph data. Atwood and Towsley [1] propose Diffusion-Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs)
by employing a graph diffusion process to incorporate the
contextual information of node in graph node classification.
∗ Corresponding author

Monti et al. [15] present mixture model CNNs (MoNet)
and provide a unified generalization of CNN architectures
on graphs. By designing an attention layer, Veličković et
al. [21] present Graph Attention Networks (GAT) for semisupervised learning. For spectral methods, they generally
define graph convolution operation based on spectral representation of graphs. For example, Bruna et al. [3] propose
to define graph convolution in the Fourier domain based on
eigen-decomposition of graph Laplacian matrix. Defferrard
et al. [4] propose to approximate the spectral filters based on
Chebyshev expansion of graph Laplacian to avoid the high
computational complexity of eigen-decomposition. Kipf et
al. [11] propose a more simple Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) for semi-supervised learning.
The above graph CNNs have been widely used for supervised or semi-supervised learning tasks. In this paper, we
focus on semi-supervised learning. One important aspect of
graph CNNs is the graph structure representation of data.
In general, the data we provide to graph CNNs either has
a known intrinsic graph structure, such as social networks,
or we construct a human established graph for it, such as
k-nearest neighbor graph with Gaussian kernel. However,
it is difficult to evaluate whether the graphs obtained from
domain knowledge (e.g., social network) or established by
human are optimal for semi-supervised learning in graph CNNs. Henaff et al. [7] propose to learn a supervised graph
with a fully connected network. However, the learned graph
is obtained from a separate network which is also not guaranteed to best serve the graph CNNs. Li et al. [19] propose optimal graph CNNs, in which the graph is learned
adaptively by using a distance metric learning. However, it
use an approximate algorithm to estimate graph Laplacian
which may lead to weak local optimal solution.
In this paper, we propose a novel Graph LearningConvolutional Network (GLCN) for semi-supervised learning problem. The main idea of GLCN is to learn an optimal
graph representation that best serves graph CNNs for semisupervised learning by integrating both graph learning and
graph convolution simultaneously in a unified network architecture. The main advantages of the proposed GLCN for
semi-supervised learning are summarized as follows.
111313

