Which Way Are You Going? Imitative Decision Learning for Path Forecasting in
Dynamic Scenes
Yuke Li
York University, Toronto, Canada
AutoNavi, Alibaba Group, Beijing, China
ykleewh@yorku.ca

Possibility 1

Abstract
Path forecasting is a pivotal step toward understanding
dynamic scenes, and it is an emerging topic in the computer
vision field. This task is challenging due to the multimodal
nature of the future, namely, there is more than one plausible prediction given histories. Yet, the state-of-the-art methods do not seem to be adequately responsive to this innate
variability. Hence, how to better foresee the forthcoming
trajectories in dynamic scenes has to be more thoroughly
pursued. To this end, we propose a novel Imitative Decision
Learning (IDL) approach. It delves deeper into the key that
inherently characterizes the multimodality – the latent decision. The proposed IDL first infers the distribution of such
latent decisions by learning from moving histories. A policy
is then generated by taking the sampled latent decision into
account to predict the future. Different plausible upcoming
paths correspond to each sampled latent decision. This approach significantly differs from the mainstream literature
that relies on a predefined latent variable to extrapolate
diverse predictions. In order to augment the understanding of the latent decision and resultant multimodal future,
we investigate their connection through mutual information
optimization. Moreover, the proposed IDL integrates spatial and temporal dependencies into one single framework,
in contrast to handling them with two-step settings. As a
result, our approach enables simultaneous anticipating the
paths of all pedestrians in the scene. We assess our proposal on the large-scale Stanford Aerial Pedestrian (SAP),
ETH and UCY datasets. The experiments show that IDL introduces considerable marginal improvements with respect
to recent leading studies.

1. Introduction
Path forecasting in dynamic scenes has surged as an intriguing topic because of the rising demands of emerging
applications of artificial intelligence. For instance, robots
and autonomous vehicles are required to react ``smartly´´as

Possibility 2

Possibility 3

Figure 1. The multimodal nature of future paths in a dynamic
scene: There are multiple plausible forthcoming paths (the dash
red and cyan lines) based on identical historical moving records
(the solid red and cyan lines). In this figure, we display three possibilities as an example.

humans to their fast evolving environments. Thus, equipping them with the capability to forecast what will happen
in the near future is imperative.
Forecasting a future path refers to discerning an unknown upcoming trajectory by accessing records of prior
movements. It entails effectively and efficiently processing the complex spatial dependencies (interactions among
persons) and temporal dependencies (evolving motion patterns). Therefore, path forecasting is regarded as a multifaceted and complicated endeavor.
One issue that has been challenging for the task of path
forecasting in dynamic scenes is the multimodal nature of
the future: Given a set of historical observations, there
will be more than one probable future (see Fig.1). Despite
tremendous accomplishments that has been made to foresee
a deterministic future[1, 44, 26, 45, 25], the majority of the
existing studies fail to consider the multiple possibilities of
future.
To date, state-of-the-art research has attempted to alleviate the issue of modeling this multimodality based on a
predefined latent variable z ∼ N (0, 1). For instance, Social GAN [11] takes z as a part of the inputs. It encourages
a diverse set of predictions by using a random sampled z
for each forward pass. Lee et al. present the DESIRE [16]
that approximates the distribution of future trajectories to
the distribution of z. Nevertheless, to predefine z on the
basis of N (0, 1) is probably not able to fully assimilate the
various factors affect the human trajectories within the dynamic scenes, such as the spatial and temporal dependen1294

