In Defense of Pre-trained ImageNet Architectures
for Real-time Semantic Segmentation of Road-driving Images
Marin Oršić∗
Ivan Krešo∗
Petra Bevandić
Siniša Šegvić
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing
University of Zagreb, Croatia
name.surname@fer.hr

Abstract
Recent success of semantic segmentation approaches on
demanding road driving datasets has spurred interest in
many related application fields. Many of these applications
involve real-time prediction on mobile platforms such as
cars, drones and various kinds of robots. Real-time setup is
challenging due to extraordinary computational complexity involved. Many previous works address the challenge
with custom lightweight architectures which decrease computational complexity by reducing depth, width and layer
capacity with respect to general purpose architectures. We
propose an alternative approach which achieves a significantly better performance across a wide range of computing budgets. First, we rely on a light-weight general purpose architecture as the main recognition engine. Then, we
leverage light-weight upsampling with lateral connections
as the most cost-effective solution to restore the prediction
resolution. Finally, we propose to enlarge the receptive
field by fusing shared features at multiple resolutions in a
novel fashion. Experiments on several road driving datasets
show a substantial advantage of the proposed approach,
either with ImageNet pre-trained parameters or when we
learn from scratch. Our Cityscapes test submission entitled
SwiftNetRN-18 delivers 75.5% MIoU and achieves 39.9 Hz
on 1024×2048 images on GTX1080Ti.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is an important dense prediction
task in which the inference targets posterior distribution
over a known set of classes in each image pixel [6, 20, 3].
Currently, the best results are achieved with deep fully convolutional models which require extraordinary computational resources. Many important applications such as autonomous navigation or driver assistance require inference
on very large images in order to cover a wide field of view
∗ equal contribution

Figure 1. Speed-accuracy trade-off for different semantic semantic
segmentation approaches on Cityscapes test on GTX1080Ti (except for DG2s which reports only validation performance). Red
dots represent our method. Other methods are displayed in green,
whereas blue dots show estimated frame rates of the corresponding methods on our GPU (please refer to subsection 4.2 for details). Our submissions achieve the best accuracy and the best
speed among all approaches aiming at real-time operation.

and perceive pedestrians at distances of over 200m. At the
same time, these applications require a very low latency in
order to be able to bring real-time decisions. The resulting
requirements intensify computational strain and make realtime implementations a challenging research objective.
Many real-time semantic segmentation approaches [28,
40, 24, 32] address this goal by introducing custom
lightweight architectures which are not suited for largescale visual recognition. Most of these approaches initialize
training from scratch, and thus miss a huge regularization

12607

