A variational EM framework with adaptive edge selection for blind motion
deblurring
Liuge Yang and Hui Ji
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 119076
yang liuge@u.nus.edu and matjh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Blind motion deblurring is an important problem that
receives enduring attention in last decade. Based on the
observation that a good intermediate estimate of latent image for estimating motion-blur kernel is not necessarily the
one closest to latent image, edge selection has proven itself a very powerful technique for achieving state-of-theart performance in blind deblurring. This paper presented
an interpretation of edge selection/reweighting in terms
of variational Bayes inference, and therefore developed a
novel variational expectation maximization (VEM) algorithm with built-in adaptive edge selection for blind deblurring. Together with a restart strategy for avoiding undesired
local convergence, the proposed VEM method not only has
a solid mathematical foundation but also noticeably outperformed the state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets.

clear image, k denotes the unknown blur kernel determined
by the motion, and n denotes noise.
Uniform motion deblurring is then about estimating the
pair (k, f ) from (1), which is an ill-posed problem with
many solutions fitting(1) well. For instance, the trivial solution (δ, g) where δ denotes Delta function. To resolve such
ambiguities, one has to impose certain priors on both kernel
and latent image to constrain the space of feasible solutions.
Such prior can be invoked either in the form of regularized
variational models or in Bayesian framework, and they often come to the same solution. For example, an Maximum
a posteriori (MAP) estimator is to find the maximum of
p(f, k|g) ∝ p(g|f, k)p(f )p(k),
where p(g|f, k) is likelihood function, and p(f ), p(k) are
statistical priors of f and p. After applying a negative log,
such an MAP estimator is equivalent to minimize the following regularized variational model:
min Φ(g − f ⊗ k) + Ψ1 (f ) + Ψ2 (k).

1. Introduction

f,k

Motion blurring is a often-often type of image degradations. When there is a relative motion between the camera
and the scene during exposure time, the resulting image will
look blurry, known as motion blurring in digital photography. For example, one common cause of motion blurring
is camera shake during exposure time. The so-called blind
motion deblurring is then about recovering a clear image
with sharp details from an input motion-blurred image.
This paper focuses on uniform motion blurring, i.e., the
motion is nearly constant over the image. Uniform motion
blurring happens when camera translates along image plane
and the scene depth has small variations. Such blurring is
often seen when taking a picture on targeted static object using mobile phone with 4X zoom or more. Uniform motion
blurring can be modeled as a convolution process:
g = k ⊗ f + n,

(1)

where the operator ⊗ denotes the discrete convolution operator, g denotes the given blurred image, f denotes the latent

(2)

where Φ(·) is fidelity term, and Ψ1 (·), Ψ2 (·) regularize
clear image and kernel. For example, one empirical statistics of natural images models image gradients as the samples drawn from i.i.d. Laplacian distribution. Then, an
MAP estimator from such statistical prior is the same as
the total variation, Ψ1 (f ) = k∇f k1 , based regularization.

1.1. Discussions
The MAP estimator or the solution from variational
model (2) usually takes an iterative procedure that alternatively updates f (or ∇f ) and k. The main challenge in such
an iterative procedure is how to prevent the sequence converges to suboptimal undesired local minimum or degenerate trivial solution (k ≈ δ). There have been an enduring
research effort along this line, and many recent works are
based on the following observation: the intermediate estimation of f (or ∇f ) is for helping more accurate estimation
of the kernel k, not the one as close to the truth. Once the

10167

