Transfer Learning via Unsupervised Task Discovery
for Visual Question Answering
Hyeonwoo Noh1,3
Taehoon Kim2∗
1
2
Computer Vision Lab.
OpenAI
POSTECH, Korea
USA
1

3

{shgusdngogo,jonghwan.mun}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We study how to leverage off-the-shelf visual and linguistic data to cope with out-of-vocabulary answers in
visual question answering task. Existing large-scale visual datasets with annotations such as image class labels,
bounding boxes and region descriptions are good sources
for learning rich and diverse visual concepts. However, it
is not straightforward how the visual concepts can be captured and transferred to visual question answering models
due to missing link between question dependent answering
models and visual data without question. We tackle this
problem in two steps: 1) learning a task conditional visual classifier, which is capable of solving diverse questionspecific visual recognition tasks, based on unsupervised
task discovery and 2) transferring the task conditional visual classifier to visual question answering models. Specifically, we employ linguistic knowledge sources such as
structured lexical database (e.g. WordNet) and visual descriptions for unsupervised task discovery, and transfer a
learned task conditional visual classifier as an answering
unit in a visual question answering model. We empirically
show that the proposed algorithm generalizes to out-ofvocabulary answers successfully using the knowledge transferred from the visual dataset.

1. Introduction
Human sees and understands a visual scene based on diverse visual concepts. For example, from a single image of
a chair, human effortlessly recognizes diverse visual concepts such as its color, material, style, usage, and so on.
Such diverse visual concepts may be associated with different questions in natural languages defining a recognition
task for each of the visual concepts (e.g., what color is the
chair?). Recently visual question answering (VQA) [5] is
proposed as an effort to learn deep neural network models
∗ This work is performed while at Devsisters.

Jonghwan Mun1,3
Bohyung Han3
Computer Vision Lab., ECE & ASRI
Seoul National University, Korea
2

carpedm20@gmail.com

3

bhhan@snu.ac.kr

with capability to perform diverse visual recognition tasks
defined adaptively by questions.
Approaches to VQA rely on a large-scale dataset of image, question and answer triples, and train a classifier taking an image and a question as inputs and producing an answer. Despite recent remarkable progress [3, 12, 43], this
direction has a critical limitation that image, question and
answer triples in datasets are the only source for learning
visual concepts. Such drawback may result in lack of scalability because the triplets may be collected artificially by human annotators with limited quality control and have weak
diversity in visual concepts. In fact, VQA datasets [1, 13]
suffer from inherent bias, which hinders learning true visual
concepts from the datasets.
On the contrary, human answers a question based on visual concepts learned from diverse sources such as books,
pictures, videos, and personal experience that are not necessarily associated with target questions. Even for machines,
there exist more natural and scalable sources for learning visual concepts: image class labels, bounding boxes and image descriptions. Such information is already available in
large-scale [9, 24, 22] and can scale further with reasonable
cost [31, 32]. This observation brings a natural question;
can we learn visual concepts without question annotations
and transfer them for VQA?
To address this question, we introduce a VQA problem
with out-of-vocabulary answers, which is illustrated in Figure 1. External visual dataset provides a set of labels A and
only a subset of these labels B ⊂ A appears in VQA training set as answers. The goal of this task is to handle out-ofvocabulary answers a ∈ A − B successfully by exploiting
visual concepts learned from external visual dataset.
This paper studies how to learn visual concepts without questions and how to transfer the learned concepts to
VQA models. To learn transferable visual concepts, we
train a task conditional visual classifier, whose task is defined by a task feature. The classifier is used as an answering unit, where a task feature is inferred from a question. To train the task conditional visual classifier without
18385

