Self-critical n-step Training for Image Captioning
Junlong Gao1 , Shiqi Wang4 , Shanshe Wang∗2,3 , Siwei Ma2,3 , and Wen Gao2,3
1

Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
Institute of Digital Media, Peking University 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
2

Abstract
Existing methods for image captioning are usually
trained by cross entropy loss, which leads to exposure bias
and the inconsistency between the optimizing function and
evaluation metrics. Recently it has been shown that these
two issues can be addressed by incorporating techniques
from reinforcement learning, where one of the popular techniques is the advantage actor-critic algorithm that calculates per-token advantage by estimating state value with a
parametrized estimator at the cost of introducing estimation bias. In this paper, we estimate state value without
using a parametrized value estimator. With the properties
of image captioning, namely, the deterministic state transition function and the sparse reward, state value is equivalent to its preceding state-action value, and we reformulate
advantage function by simply replacing the former with the
latter. Moreover, the reformulated advantage is extended to
n-step, which can generally increase the absolute value of
the mean of reformulated advantage while lowering variance. Then two kinds of rollout are adopted to estimate
state-action value, which we call self-critical n-step training. Empirically we find that our method can obtain better
performance compared to the state-of-the-art methods that
use the sequence level advantage and parametrized estimator respectively on the widely used MSCOCO benchmark.

1. Introduction
Image captioning aims at generating natural captions automatically for images, which is of great significance in
scene understanding. It is a very challenging task, which
requires to recognize important objects in the image, as
well as their attributes and relationships between each other,
such that they can be finally described properly in natural
∗ Corresponding author

language. The ability of the machine to mimic human in
expressing rich information in natural language with correct
grammar is important since it can be applied to human-robot
interaction and blind users guiding.
Inspired by the recently introduced encoder-decoder
framework for machine translation in [6], most recent works
in image captioning have adopted this paradigm to generate captions for images [24]. In general, an encoder, e.g.
convolutional neural network (CNN), encode images to visual features, while a decoder, e.g. long short term memory
(LSTM) [10], decodes the visual features to generate captions. These methods are trained in an end-to-end manner
to minimize cross entropy loss, i.e. maximize the likelihood
of each ground-truth word given the preceding ground-truth
word, which is also known as “Teacher Forcing” [14].
The first problem of cross entropy loss is that it will lead
to “exposure bias”, since in the training stage, the model is
only fed with ground-truth word at each time step, while in
the testing stage, the model is fed with the previously predicted word. This discrepancy between training and testing
easily results in error accumulation during generation, as
the model is not exposed to its predictions during training
and difficult to handle the errors which never occur in the
training stage. In order to handle exposure bias, Bengio et
al. [4] feed back the model own predictions as input with
scheduled sampling, while Lamb et al. [14] proposed the “
Professor Forcing” on top of the “Teacher Forcing”.
The second problem of cross entropy loss is that the generated sentences are evaluated in the testing stage by nondifferentiable metrics, such as BLEU 1-2-3-4 [20], ROUGE
[15], METEOR [3], CIDEr [23], SPICE [1], while during training the model is trained to minimize cross entropy
loss, which is the inconsistency between the optimizing
function and evaluation metrics. The methods proposed
in [4, 14] cannot address this inconsistency. Recently, it
has shown that policy gradient algorithm in reinforcement
learning (RL) can be trained to avoid exposure bias and directly optimize such non-differentiable evaluation metrics

6300

