Enhanced Pix2pix Dehazing Network
Yanyun Qu1∗ Yizi Chen1∗ Jingying Huang1 Yuan Xie2,3†
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City,
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
2
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
Institute of Advanced Artificial Intelligence in Nanjing, Horizon Robotic, Nanjing, China
yyqu@xmu.edu.cn, atavism@msn.cn, jyhuang33@outlook.com, yxie@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we reduce the image dehazing problem to
an image-to-image translation problem, and propose Enhanced Pix2pix Dehazing Network (EPDN), which generates a haze-free image without relying on the physical scattering model. EPDN is embedded by a generative adversarial network, which is followed by a well-designed enhancer.
Inspired by visual perception global-first [5] theory, the discriminator guides the generator to create a pseudo realistic
image on a coarse scale, while the enhancer following the
generator is required to produce a realistic dehazing image on the fine scale. The enhancer contains two enhancing
blocks based on the receptive field model, which reinforces
the dehazing effect in both color and details. The embedded
GAN is jointly trained with the enhancer. Extensive experiment results on synthetic datasets and real-world datasets
show that the proposed EPDN is superior to the state-ofthe-art methods in terms of PSNR, SSIM, PI, and subjective
visual effect.

1. Introduction
Haze is a typical atmospheric phenomenon, and it causes
color distortion, blurring and low contrast for the photographed image, which results in the difficulties of subsequent tasks, such as object recognition and image understanding. Thus, more and more attentions are attracted to
image dehazing.
Most of the successful approaches depend on the physical scattering model [12] [14], which is formulated as
I(z) = J(z)t(z) + A(z)(1 − t(z)),
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

(1)

(a) Haze

(b) GFN

(c) DCPDN

(d) Ours

Figure 1. A single image haze removal example. Our method produces a haze-free image with faithful color and rich details compared with GFN [16] and DCPDN [21].

where I is the observed hazy image, J is the scene radiance, t is the transmission map, A is the atmospheric light
and z is the pixel location. The solution of the haze-free image depends on the estimation of the atmospheric light and
the transmission map. Early dehazing methods are mostly
prior-based methods, e.g. DCP [7], which estimates the
transmission map by investigating the dark channel prior.
These prior-based methods can achieve good dehazing effect to a certain extent. However, the prior may be easily
violated in practice, which leads to an inaccurate estimation of transmission map so that the quality of the dehazing
image is not desirable. With the rising up of deep learning, the estimations of the transmission map or the atmospheric light are estimated by the convolutional neural network rather than relying on priors. Some methods utilize
the deep convolutional neural network to estimate the transmission map [3] [15], some employ the deep convolutional
neural network to jointly estimate the atmospheric light and

8160

