Bridging Stereo Matching and Optical Flow via Spatiotemporal Correspondence
Hsueh-Ying Lai1 Yi-Hsuan Tsai2 Wei-Chen Chiu1
1
2
National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
NEC Laboratories America

Abstract
Stereo matching and flow estimation are two essential
tasks for scene understanding, spatially in 3D and temporally in motion. Existing approaches have been focused
on the unsupervised setting due to the limited resource to
obtain the large-scale ground truth data. To construct a
self-learnable objective, co-related tasks are often linked
together to form a joint framework. However, the prior
work usually utilizes independent networks for each task,
thus not allowing to learn shared feature representations
across models. In this paper, we propose a single and principled network to jointly learn spatiotemporal correspondence for stereo matching and flow estimation, with a newly
designed geometric connection as the unsupervised signal
for temporally adjacent stereo pairs. We show that our
method performs favorably against several state-of-the-art
baselines for both unsupervised depth and flow estimation
on the KITTI benchmark dataset.

Figure 1. Using temporally adjacent stereo pairs as input, our
model can estimate the correspondence maps of each pair via geometric connections, thus bridging stereo matching and optical flow
through multiple reconstruction, forming a cycle.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D motion from the real-world visual
data has long been a fundamental problem in computer vision and is substantial for numerous applications such as
robotics, virtual/augmented reality, and autonomous driving. Among the tasks of understanding 3D motion, two of
the most commonly studied scenarios are optical flow estimation and stereo matching for depth estimation. Generally,
the motion in 3D after projection into the image plane of a
camera stands for the optical flow between two consecutive
frames in a video, while the 3D structure captured by two
horizontally displaced cameras builds the stereo rig as the
binocular vision system of human eyes. Thus, the estimation of optical flow and stereo matching, which discover the
pixel displacement across temporally adjacent frames and
stereo pairs, provide crucial access to the 3D information.
Recently, deep learning-based approaches have shown
tremendous improvement for both optical flow estimation
and stereo matching in the supervised learning setting
[2, 13, 14, 3, 11, 6, 10, 19]. However, these methods usually rely on large-scale datasets with ground truths, but such

annotating efforts are significantly expensive, especially in
forms of pixel-wise displacement for optical flow and stereo
matching. For eliminating limitation of datasets and potential issues such as poor model generalization across various
scenes, several approaches are proposed recently to explore
the unsupervised learning frameworks [31, 17, 9].
In the unsupervised learning setting, a common practice is to relate different tasks (e.g., optical flow, depth
estimation, or camera pose estimation) and utilize photometric consistency to measure the pixel correspondences
across frames [20, 27, 28, 31, 33]. Nevertheless, existing
approaches utilize separate networks for each task, and thus
the feature representations are not effectively shared across
tasks. In this paper, we argue that there should exist a principled model, which is capable of learning joint representations for tasks that are highly co-related.
Although the properties of pixel correspondence used in
stereo matching and optical flow estimation are slightly different, as the former considers the horizontal offset while
the later has movement in both horizontal and vertical di11890

