Learning Metrics from Teachers: Compact Networks for Image Embedding
Lu Yu1,2 , Vacit Oguz Yazici2,3 , Xialei Liu2 , Joost van de Weijer2 , Yongmei Cheng1 , Arnau Ramisa3
1
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
2
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
3
Wide-Eyes Technologies, Barcelona, Spain
{luyu,voyazici,xialei,joost}@cvc.uab.es, chengym@nwpu.edu.cn, aramisa@wide-eyes.it

Abstract
Metric learning networks are used to compute image embeddings, which are widely used in many applications such
as image retrieval and face recognition. In this paper, we
propose to use network distillation to efficiently compute
image embeddings with small networks. Network distillation has been successfully applied to improve image classification, but has hardly been explored for metric learning.
To do so, we propose two new loss functions that model the
communication of a deep teacher network to a small student network. We evaluate our system in several datasets,
including CUB-200-2011, Cars-196, Stanford Online Products and show that embeddings computed using small student networks perform significantly better than those computed using standard networks of similar size. Results on
a very compact network (MobileNet-0.25), which can be
used on mobile devices, show that the proposed method
can greatly improve Recall@1 results from 27.5% to 44.6%.
Furthermore, we investigate various aspects of distillation
for embeddings, including hint and attention layers, semisupervised learning and cross quality distillation. 1

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks obtain impressive performance for
many computer vision applications, some of which have
subsequently been turned into products for the general population. However, the applicability of these techniques is
often limited by their high computational cost. To reduce
network traffic and server costs, as well as for scalability, it
is desirable to place as much of the computation as possible on the end-user side of the application. However, this
is often a mobile device with limited computing power and
battery life, and thus cannot compute large networks in realtime. This creates a strong demand for methods that trans1 Code is available at https://github.com/yulu0724/
EmbeddingDistillation.

fer the knowledge from large networks to smaller ones, but
without a significant drop in performance.
One important class of deep networks learns feature embeddings. To be successful, feature embeddings must preserve semantic similarity, i.e. items deemed similar by users
must be close in the embedding space, despite significant
visual differences such as point of view, illumination, or
image quality. To bridge this gap between the semantic
and visual domains, pairs or triplets of related and unrelated
items are used to teach the network how to organize the output embedding space [5, 35, 12]. Embeddings were found
efficient on the tasks of out-of-distribution detection [19]
and transfer learning [26]. Furthermore, embedding networks are essential for computer vision, as evidenced by
the large variety of tasks in which they are used, including
feature-based object retrieval [9], face recognition [25], feature matching [6], domain adaptation [27], weakly supervised learning [36], ranking [35], or zero-shot learning [32].
Large networks are known to provide excellent feature
embeddings [23, 25], but are often impractical for real-life
applications, as mentioned before. To obtain efficient neural networks, research has focused on two main research
directions: network compression and network distillation.
Network compremossion reduces the number of parameters
in the network [17, 10], while network distillation uses a
teacher-student setup in which a, typically large, teacher
network is used to guide a small student network [2, 11].
This is done by using a loss function that minimizes crossentropy between the outputs of the student and teacher network for classification. The main idea underlying network
distillation is that uncertainty in the estimates of the teacher
network, e.g. about whether an image contains a cat and
dog, provides relevant information for the student. There
are several differences between network compression and
knowledge distillation. First of all, the underlying assumption of network compression is that the knowledge of the
network is in the weights, whereas knowledge distillation
assumes that the knowledge of the network is in the activations which arise from particular data. A second impor12907

