LVIS: A Dataset for Large Vocabulary Instance Segmentation
Agrim Gupta

Piotr Dollár

Ross Girshick

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Abstract
Progress on object detection is enabled by datasets that
focus the research community’s attention on open challenges. This process led us from simple images to complex
scenes and from bounding boxes to segmentation masks. In
this work, we introduce LVIS (pronounced ‘el-vis’): a new
dataset for Large Vocabulary Instance Segmentation. We
plan to collect 2.2 million high-quality instance segmentation masks for over 1000 entry-level object categories in
164k images. Due to the Zipfian distribution of categories
in natural images, LVIS naturally has a long tail of categories with few training samples. Given that state-of-the-art
deep learning methods for object detection perform poorly
in the low-sample regime, we believe that our dataset poses
an important and exciting new scientific challenge. LVIS is
available at http://www.lvisdataset.org.

1. Introduction
A central goal of computer vision is to endow algorithms
with the ability to intelligently describe images. Object
detection is a canonical image description task; it is intuitively appealing, useful in applications, and straightforward to benchmark in existing settings. The accuracy of
object detectors has improved dramatically and new capabilities, such as predicting segmentation masks and 3D representations, have been developed. There are now exciting
opportunities to push these methods towards new goals.
Today, rigorous evaluation of general purpose object detectors is mostly performed in the few category regime (e.g.
80) or when there are a large number of training examples
per category (e.g. 100 to 1000+). There is now an opportunity to enable research in the setting where there are a large
number of categories and where per-category data is sometimes scarce. The long tail of rare categories is inescapable;
annotating more images simply uncovers previously unseen,
rare categories (see Fig. 9 and [29, 25, 24, 27]). Efficiently
learning from few examples is a significant open problem in
machine learning and computer vision, making this opportunity one of the most exciting from a scientific and practical perspective. But to open this area to empirical study, a
suitable, high-quality dataset and benchmark are required.

Figure 1. Example annotations. We present LVIS, a new dataset
for benchmarking Large Vocabulary Instance Segmentation in the
1000+ category regime with a challenging long tail of rare objects.

We aim to enable this kind of research by designing and
collecting LVIS (pronounced ‘el-vis’)—a new benchmark
dataset for research on Large Vocabulary Instance Segmentation. We are collecting instance segmentation masks for
more than 1000 entry-level object categories (see Fig. 1).
When completed, we plan for our dataset to contain 164k
images and 2.2 million high-quality instance masks.1 Our
annotation pipeline starts from a set of images that were collected without prior knowledge of the categories that will
be labeled in them. We engage annotators in an iterative
object spotting process that uncovers the long tail of categories that naturally appears in the images and avoids using
machine learning algorithms to automate data labeling.
We designed a crowdsourced annotation pipeline that enables the collection of our large-scale dataset while also
yielding high-quality segmentation masks. Quality is important for future research because relatively coarse masks,
such as those in the COCO dataset [18], limit the ability
to differentiate algorithm-predicted mask quality beyond a
certain, coarse point. When compared to expert annotators,
our segmentation masks have higher overlap and boundary
1 We plan to annotate the 164k images in COCO 2017 (we have permission to label test2017). 2.2M is a projection from current data.

5356

