Learning the Depths of Moving People by Watching Frozen People
Zhengqi Li
Tali Dekel
Noah Snavely

Forrester Cole
Richard Tucker
Ce Liu
William T. Freeman

Google Research
Train

MannequinChallenge (MC) Dataset
Static scene, moving camera

Human
Mask

Initial depth
from flow

RGB Image

Inference

MVS Depth

Moving people, moving camera

(supervison)

Predicted depth

Our depth predictions

Figure 1. Our model predicts dense depth when both an ordinary camera and people in the scene are freely moving (right). We train our
model on our new MannequinChallenge dataset—a collection of Internet videos of people imitating mannequins, i.e., freezing in diverse,
natural poses, while a camera tours the scene (left). Because people are stationary, geometric constraints hold; this allows us to use
multi-view stereo to estimate depth which serves as supervision during training.2

Abstract
We present a method for predicting dense depth in scenarios where both a monocular camera and people in the scene
are freely moving. Existing methods for recovering depth for
dynamic, non-rigid objects from monocular video impose
strong assumptions on the objects’ motion and may only
recover sparse depth. In this paper, we take a data-driven
approach and learn human depth priors from a new source
of data: thousands of Internet videos of people imitating
mannequins, i.e., freezing in diverse, natural poses, while
a hand-held camera tours the scene. Because people are
stationary, training data can be generated using multi-view
stereo reconstruction. At inference time, our method uses
motion parallax cues from the static areas of the scenes to
guide the depth prediction. We demonstrate our method on
real-world sequences of complex human actions captured by
a moving hand-held camera, show improvement over stateof-the-art monocular depth prediction methods, and show
various 3D effects produced using our predicted depth.

1. Introduction
A hand-held camera viewing a dynamic scene is a common scenario in modern photography. Recovering dense
geometry in this case is a challenging task: moving objects
violate the epipolar constraint used in 3D vision, and are
often treated as noise or outliers in existing Structure-fromMotion (SfM) and Multi-view Stereo (MVS) methods. Our
human depth perception, however, is not easily fooled by

object motion–rather, we maintain a feasible interpretation
of the objects’ geometry and depth ordering even if both
objects and the observer are moving, and even when the
scene is observed with just one eye [11]. In this work, we
take a step towards achieving this ability computationally.
We focus on the task of predicting accurate, dense depth
from ordinary videos where both the camera and people
in the scene are naturally moving. We focus on humans
for two reasons: i) in many applications (e.g., augmented
reality), humans constitute the salient objects in the scene,
and ii) human motion is articulated and difficult to model. By
taking a data-driven approach, we avoid the need to explicitly
impose assumptions on the shape or deformation of people,
but rather learn these priors from data.
Where do we get data to train such a method? Generating
high-quality synthetic data in which both the camera and the
people in the scene are naturally moving is very challenging.
Depth sensors (e.g., Kinect) can provide useful data, however
such data is typically limited to indoor environments and
requires significant manual work in capture and process.
Furthermore, it is difficult to gather people of different ages
and genders with diverse poses at scale. Instead, we derive
data from a surprising source: YouTube videos in which
people imitate mannequins, i.e., freeze in elaborate, natural
poses, while a hand-held camera tours the scene (Fig. 2).
These videos comprise our new MannequinChallenge (MC)
dataset, which we plan to release for the research community.
2 In all figures, we use inverse depth maps for visualization purposes,
and refer to them as depth maps.

4521

