A Variational Auto-Encoder Model for Stochastic Point Processes
Nazanin Mehrasa1,3 , Akash Abdu Jyothi1,3 , Thibaut Durand1,3 , Jiawei He1,3 , Leonid Sigal2,3 , Greg Mori1,3
1
2
3
Simon Fraser University
University of British Columbia
Borealis AI
{nmehrasa, aabdujyo, tdurand, jha203}@sfu.ca

lsigal@cs.ubc.ca

mori@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract
We propose a novel probabilistic generative model for
action sequences. The model is termed the Action Point
Process VAE (APP-VAE), a variational auto-encoder that
can capture the distribution over the times and categories
of action sequences. Modeling the variety of possible action
sequences is a challenge, which we show can be addressed
via the APP-VAE’s use of latent representations and nonlinear functions to parameterize distributions over which
event is likely to occur next in a sequence and at what time.
We empirically validate the efficacy of APP-VAE for modeling action sequences on the MultiTHUMOS and Breakfast
datasets.

Figure 1. It is difficult to make predictions, especially about the future. Given a history of past actions, multiple actions are possible
in the future. We focus on the problem of learning a distribution
over the future actions – what are the possible action categories
and when will they start.

1. Introduction
Anticipatory reasoning to model the evolution of action
sequences over time is a fundamental challenge in human
activity understanding. The crux of the problem in making
predictions about the future is the fact that for interesting
domains, the future is uncertain – given a history of actions
such as those depicted in Fig. 1, the distribution over future
actions has substantial entropy.
In this work, we propose a powerful generative approach
that can effectively model the categorical and temporal variability comprising action sequences. Much of the work in
this domain has focused on taking frame level data of video
as input in order to predict the actions or activities that may
occur in the immediate future. There has also been recent
interest on the task of predicting the sequence of actions that
occur farther into the future [6, 32, 1].
Time series data often involves regularly spaced data
points with interesting events occurring sparsely across
time. This is true in case of videos where we have a regular frame rate but events of interest are present only in
some frames that are infrequent. We hypothesize that in
order to model future events in such a scenario, it is beneficial to consider the history of sparse events (action categories and their temporal occurrence in the above example)
alone, instead of regularly spaced frame data. While the

history of frames contains rich information over and above
the sparse event history, we can possibly create a model for
future events occurring farther into the future by choosing
to only model the sparse sequence of events. This approach
also allows us to model high-level semantic meaning in the
time series data that can be difficult to discern from lowlevel data points that are regular across time.
Our model is formulated in the variational auto-encoder
(VAE) [15] paradigm, a powerful class of probabilistic
models that facilitate generation and the ability to model
complex distributions. We present a novel form of VAE
for action sequences under a point process approach. This
approach has a number of advantages, including a probabilistic treatment of action sequences to allow for likelihood
evaluation, generation, and anomaly detection.
Contribution. The contributions of this work center
around the APP-VAE (Action Point Process VAE), a novel
generative model for asynchronous time action sequences.
The contributions of this paper include:
• A novel formulation for modeling point process data
within the variational auto-encoder paradigm.
• Conditional prior models for encoding asynchronous
time data.

3165

