Out-of-Distribution Detection for Generalized Zero-Shot Action Recognition
Devraj Mandal*1 , Sanath Narayan*2 , Saikumar Dwivedi3 , Vikram Gupta3 , Shuaib Ahmed3 ,
Fahad Shahbaz Khan2 , and Ling Shao2
1
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 2 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
3
Mercedes-Benz R&D India, Bangalore
1

devrajm@iisc.ac.in
3

2

firstname.lastname@inceptioniai.org

firstname.lastname@daimler.com

Abstract
Generalized zero-shot action recognition is a challenging problem, where the task is to recognize new action categories that are unavailable during the training stage, in
addition to the seen action categories. Existing approaches
suffer from the inherent bias of the learned classifier towards the seen action categories. As a consequence, unseen category samples are incorrectly classified as belonging to one of the seen action categories. In this paper, we set
out to tackle this issue by arguing for a separate treatment
of seen and unseen action categories in generalized zeroshot action recognition. We introduce an out-of-distribution
detector that determines whether the video features belong
to a seen or unseen action category. To train our out-ofdistribution detector, video features for unseen action categories are synthesized using generative adversarial networks trained on seen action category features. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose an outof-distribution detector based GZSL framework for action
recognition in videos. Experiments are performed on three
action recognition datasets: Olympic Sports, HMDB51 and
UCF101. For generalized zero-shot action recognition, our
proposed approach outperforms the baseline [33] with absolute gains (in classification accuracy) of 7.0%, 3.4%, and
4.9%, respectively, on these datasets.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is a challenging problem,
where the task is to classify images or videos into new categories that are unavailable during the training stage. Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL), introduced in [34], differs from ZSL in that the test samples can belong to the
seen or unseen categories. The task of GZSL is therefore
∗Equal Contribution. [Code at https://github.com/naraysa/gzsl-od]
1 Work done partially during internship at Mercedes-Benz R&D India.

harder than ZSL due to the inherent bias of the learned classifier towards the seen categories. In this paper, we focus
on the problem of generalized zero-shot action recognition
in videos and treat ZSL as a special case of GZSL.
Most existing approaches [14, 12, 31, 6] tackle the problem of action recognition in videos in a fully-supervised setting. In such a setting, all the action categories that occur
during testing are known a priori, and instances from all
action categories are available during training. However,
the fully-supervised problem setting is unrealistic for many
real-world applications (e.g., automatic tagging of actions
in web videos), where information regarding some action
categories is not available during training. Therefore, in
this work we tackle the problem of action recognition under zero-shot settings.
Contrary to action recognition in videos, extensive research efforts have been dedicated to zero-shot image classification. Most earlier ZSL approaches are based on attribute mapping [2, 15]. On the other hand, a few recent
works [10, 18] tackle the problem in a transductive manner, by assuming access to the full set of unlabelled testing
data. This helps in decreasing the domain shift problem, in
ZSL, caused due to disjoint categories in training and testing. Similar transductive strategies have also been explored
for action recognition in videos [36, 24] to reduce the bias
towards seen action categories. However, these approaches
require unlabelled testing data for fine-tuning the parameters. Further, the bias still exists due to the similar treatment
of both seen and unseen categories (see Fig. 1(a)). Instead,
we propose a GZSL framework to separate the classification step for the seen and unseen action classes by introducing an out-of-distribution (OD) detector. As a result, the
inherently-learned bias towards the seen classes in the action classifier is reduced (see Fig. 1(b)).
In our approach, the out-of-distribution (OD) detector
is learned to produce a non-uniform distribution with an
emphasis (peaks) for seen categories and a uniformly distributed output for the unseen categories. This is achieived

9985

