Embodied Question Answering in
Photorealistic Environments with Point Cloud Perception
Erik Wijmans1† , Samyak Datta1† , Oleksandr Maksymets2† , Abhishek Das1 ,
Georgia Gkioxari2 , Stefan Lee1 , Irfan Essa1 , Devi Parikh1,2 , Dhruv Batra1,2
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Facebook AI Research
1

{etw, samyak, abhshkdz, steflee, irfan, parikh, dbatra}@gatech.edu
2

{maksymets, gkioxari}@fb.com

Abstract
To help bridge the gap between internet vision-style
problems and the goal of vision for embodied perception we
instantiate a large-scale navigation task – Embodied Question Answering [1] in photo-realistic environments (Matterport 3D). We thoroughly study navigation policies that
utilize 3D point clouds, RGB images, or their combination. Our analysis of these models reveals several key findings. We find that two seemingly naive navigation baselines, forward-only and random, are strong navigators and
challenging to outperform, due to the specific choice of the
evaluation setting presented by [1]. We find a novel lossweighting scheme we call Inflection Weighting to be important when training recurrent models for navigation with behavior cloning and are able to out perform the baselines
with this technique. We find that point clouds provide a
richer signal than RGB images for learning obstacle avoidance, motivating the use (and continued study) of 3D deep
learning models for embodied navigation.

1. Introduction
Imagine asking a home robot ‘Hey - can you go check
if my laptop is on my desk? And if so, bring it to me.’ In
order to be successful, such an agent would need a range
of artificial intelligence (AI) skills – visual perception (to
recognize objects, scenes, obstacles), language understanding (to translate questions and instructions into actions), and
navigation of potentially novel environments (to move and
find things in a changing world). Much of the recent success in these areas is due to large neural networks trained on
massive human-annotated datasets collected from the web.
However, this static paradigm of ‘internet vision’ is poorly
suited for training embodied agents. By their nature, these
† denotes equal contribution

Figure 1: We extend EmbodiedQA [1] to photorealstic environments, our agent is spawned in a perceptually and semantically novel environment and tasked with answering a
question about that environment. We examine the agent’s
ability to navigate the environment and answer the question
by perceiving its environment through point clouds, RGB
images, or a combination of the two.
agents engage in active perception – observing the world
and then performing actions that in turn dynamically change
what the agent perceives. What are needed then are richly
annotated, photo-realistic environments where agents may
learn about the consequence of their actions on future perceptions while performing high-level goals.
To this end, a number of recent works have proposed
goal-driven, perception-based tasks situated in simulated
environments to develop such agents [1–10]. While these
tasks are set in semantically realistic environments (i.e.
having realistic layouts and object occurrences), most are
based in synthetic environments (on SUNCG [11] or Unity
3D models [12]) that are perceptually quite different from
what agents embodied in the real world might experience.
Firstly, these environments lack visual realism both in terms
of the fidelity of textures, lighting, and object geometries
but also with respect to the rich in-class variation of ob-

6659

