Progressive Ensemble Networks for Zero-Shot Recognition
Meng Ye
Computer and Information Sciences
Temple University, Philadelphia, USA

Yuhong Guo
School of Computer Science
Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada

meng.ye@temple.edu

yuhong.guo@carleton.ca

Abstract
Despite the advancement of supervised image recognition
algorithms, their dependence on the availability of labeled
data and the rapid expansion of image categories raise the
significant challenge of zero-shot learning. Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to transfer knowledge from labeled classes
into unlabeled classes to reduce human labeling effort. In
this paper, we propose a novel progressive ensemble network
model with multiple projected label embeddings to address
zero-shot image recognition. The ensemble network is built
by learning multiple image classification functions with a
shared feature extraction network but different label embedding representations, which enhance the diversity of the
classifiers and facilitate information transfer to unlabeled
classes. A progressive training framework is then deployed
to gradually label the most confident images in each unlabeled class with predicted pseudo-labels and update the
ensemble network with the training data augmented by the
pseudo-labels. The proposed model performs training on
both labeled and unlabeled data. It can naturally bridge
the domain shift problem in visual appearances and be extended to the generalized zero-shot learning scenario. We
conduct experiments on multiple ZSL datasets and the empirical results demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed model.

1. Introduction
Despite the effectiveness of deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) on supervised image classification problems, zero shot learning (ZSL) remains a challenging and
fundamental problem due to the rapid expansion of image
categories and the lacking in labeled training data. As a
special unsupervised domain adaptation, ZSL aims to transfer information from the source domain, a set of training
classes with labeled data, to make predictions in the target
domain, a set of test classes with only unlabeled data. Different from standard domain adaptation, in ZSL the labeled
training classes and unlabeled test classes have no overlaps

– they are entirely disjoint. Based on the visibility of the
instance labels, the training classes and the test classes are
usually referred to as seen and unseen classes respectively.
Existing zero-shot image recognitions have centered on
deploying label embeddings in a common semantic space,
e.g., in terms of high level visual attributes, to bridge the
domain gap between seen and unseen classes. For example,
animals share some common characteristics such as ‘black’,
‘yellow’, ‘spots’, ‘stripes’ and so on. Thus each animal class,
either seen or unseen, can be represented as a binary vector in
the semantic attribute space, with each element denoting the
appearance/absence of certain attribute. Much ZSL effort in
this direction has focused on developing effective mapping
models from the input visual feature space to the semantic
label embedding space [24, 10, 6, 19], or learning suitable
compatibility functions between the two spaces [2, 27, 33],
to facilitate prediction information transfer from the seen
classes to the unseen classes. However, these methods identify visual-semantic mappings only on the labeled seen class
data, which poses a fundamental domain shift problem due
to the appearance variations of visual attributes across seen
and unseen classes, and has negative impact on cross-class
generalization (i.e., ZSL performance) [11, 18].
In this paper, we propose a novel ZSL framework with an
progressive ensemble network to address the domain shift
problem and improve the generalization ability of ZSL. Existing ZSL works rely on a single set of label embeddings
to build inter-class label relations for knowledge transfer,
which can hardly to be suitable for all the unseen classes. Instead we construct a deep ensemble network that consists of
multiple image classification functions with a shared feature
extraction convolutional neural network and different label
embedding representations. Each label embedding representation facilitates information transfer from the seen classes
to a subset of unseen classes, while enhancing the diversity
of the multiple classifiers. By exploiting multiple classifiers
in an ensemble manner, we expect the ensemble network can
overcome the prediction noise and class bias in the original
label embeddings to gain robust zero-shot predictions. Moreover, we exploit the unlabeled data from unseen classes in
111728

