Bayesian Hierarchical Dynamic Model for Human Action Recognition
Rui Zhao1 , Wanru Xu2 , Hui Su1,3 , Qiang Ji1
1
RPI, 2 Beijing Jiaotong University, 3 IBM Research
{zhaorui.zju,bjtuxuwanru}@gmail.com, huisuibmres@us.ibm.com, qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Human action recognition remains as a challenging task
partially due to the presence of large variations in the execution of an action. To address this issue, we propose
a probabilistic model called Hierarchical Dynamic Model
(HDM). Leveraging on Bayesian framework, the model parameters are allowed to vary across different sequences of
data, which increase the capacity of the model to adapt to
intra-class variations on both spatial and temporal extent
of actions. Meanwhile, the generative learning process allows the model to preserve the distinctive dynamic pattern
for each action class. Through Bayesian inference, we are
able to quantify the uncertainty of the classification, providing insight during the decision process. Compared to stateof-the-art methods, our method not only achieves competitive recognition performance within individual dataset but
also shows better generalization capability across different
datasets. Experiments conducted on data with missing values also show the robustness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Being able to recognize human action is crucial for understanding the intention of human. Over the past decades,
numerous methods have been proposed to recognize human actions from visual inputs [53]. More recently, action recognition from 3D data becomes popular [1] with
the availability of low-cost 3D sensing equipment and realtime 3D pose estimation technique [41, 30, 13]. Despite the
significant progress made in this area, action recognition
remains as one of the most challenging problems in computer vision partially due to significant variations caused by
subject behavior, view change, occlusion, camera motion,
cluttered background, etc. In particular, the difference of
people’s behavior in performing an action results in spatial
and temporal intra-class variations. Even the same person
may perform the same action differently. Such significant
intra-class variation makes the inter-class difference vague.
In this paper, we address the issue of intra-class spatiotemporal variations for better action recognition. In addi-

tion, we provide a way of quantizing the uncertainty associated with classification, leveraging on Bayesian inference.
We focus on the variations mainly caused by behavior difference rather than camera motion or occlusion and adopt
the definition for such variations similar to [12]. The spatial
variation is defined as body pose and appearance change
when presenting a particular gesture. The temporal variation involves three factors: speed, duration and transition.
Speed refers to the pace of executing an action. Duration
represents the time spent in completing different phases of
an action. Transition controls the change and order among
different sub-actions. As an example, Figure 1 (left) shows
skeleton joints of different subjects performing bowling action, which can be roughly divided into four phases including standing still, stepping forward, arm extending backward and leaning forward with arm extending forward. For
spatial variation, different subjects stretch their arms and
legs differently in both extent and orientation. For temporal
variation, different subjects perform action using different
orders of phases and spend different amount of time therein.
Our specific contributions are as follows. First of all, we
propose the Hierarchical Dynamic Model (HDM), which
is constructed to model different aspects of variations in a
principled way. The temporal variation is handled in two aspects. First, we incorporate a probabilistic duration mechanism to allow flexible speed at each phase of an action.
Second, the transitions among different phases of an action
are modeled by transition probabilities among different hidden states. The spatial variation is modeled by probability
distribution on observations at each individual frame. To
further improve the capability of handling intra-class variation, we extend the model following Bayesian framework
by allowing the parameters to vary across data, yielding
a hierarchical structure. Secondly, we develop a learning
algorithm to estimate the hyperparameters, which are usually treated as fixed in existing literatures. Furthermore,
leveraging on Bayesian inference techniques, we propose
a measure to quantize the uncertainty of the classification
results. Finally, we conduct experiments on a variety of
benchmark datasets to show the benefit of modeling variations and quantifying uncertainty for action recognition.
17733

