Customizable Architecture Search for Semantic Segmentation∗
Yiheng Zhang † , Zhaofan Qiu † , Jingen Liu§ , Ting Yao ‡ , Dong Liu † , and Tao Mei ‡
†
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
‡
§
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
JD AI Research, Mountain View, USA
{yihengzhang.chn, zhaofanqiu, jingenliu, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com
dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn, tmei@live.com

Constraints

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Customizable Architecture
Search (CAS) approach to automatically generate a network architecture for semantic image segmentation. The
generated network consists of a sequence of stacked computation cells. A computation cell is represented as a directed
acyclic graph, in which each node is a hidden representation (i.e., feature map) and each edge is associated with an
operation (e.g., convolution and pooling), which transforms
data to a new layer. During the training, the CAS algorithm explores the search space for an optimized computation
cell to build a network. The cells of the same type share one
architecture but with different weights. In real applications,
however, an optimization may need to be conducted under
some constraints such as GPU time and model size. To this
end, a cost corresponding to the constraint will be assigned
to each operation. When an operation is selected during the
search, its associated cost will be added to the objective. As
a result, our CAS is able to search an optimized architecture with customized constraints. The approach has been
thoroughly evaluated on Cityscapes and CamVid datasets,
and demonstrates superior performance over several stateof-the-art techniques. More remarkably, our CAS achieves
72.3% mIoU on the Cityscapes dataset with speed of 108
FPS on an Nvidia TitanXp GPU.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which aims at assigning semantic labels to every pixel of an image, is a fundamental topic in computer vision. Leveraging the strong capability of
CNNs, which have been widely and successfully applied
to image classification [12, 13, 28, 29, 30], most state-ofthe-art works have made significant progress on semantic
segmentation [4, 6, 19, 21]. To tackle the challenges (e.g.,
reduced feature resolution and objects at multiple scales) in
∗ This work was performed at JD AI Research.

GPU Time
CPU Time
Num of MAC
Num of Params

Customizable
Architecture Search
Automatically
Design

Initial
conv

Normal Cells
Reduction Cells

Multi-Scale
Cell

Figure 1. Our proposed Customizable Architecture Search (CAS)
for semantic image segmentation. Given some constraints such
as GPU/CPU time and number of parameters, our CAS is able to
automatically generate an optimized network which consists of a
sequence of stacked computation cells.

CNN based semantic segmentation, researchers have proposed various network architectures, such as the application of dilated convolutions [4, 34] to capture larger contextual information without losing the spatial resolution, and
multi-scale prediction ensemble [32]. Although these methods achieve promising high accuracy, they generally require
long inference time due to the complicated networks, which
carry huge numbers of operations and parameters.
With the increasing need of semantic segmentation on
some real-time applications like augmented reality wearables and autonomous driving, there is a high demand for
fast semantic segmentation without sacrificing much accuracy, even on a low-power mobile device. Accordingly, some researchers attempt to make a real-time inference
by various manually designed strategies including resizing
or cropping the input [36], pruning the network channels [1], dropping some stages of the model [20], multiple scales feature integration [36] and spatial-context decoupling
[33]. These designs usually require significant engineering
effort of human experts. In addition, they have less flexibility to adjust the inference speed according to the actual
dataset and hardware configurations. In other words, it is
difficult to find a tradeoff between speed and performance
for a specific task. To deal with these issues, we propose
a Customizable Architecture Search approach to automatically generate a lightweight network with customized con-

11641

