Interactive Full Image Segmentation by Considering All Regions Jointly
Eirikur Agustsson
Google Research

Jasper R. R. Uijlings
Google Research

Vittorio Ferrari
Google Research

eirikur@google.com

jrru@google.com

vittoferrari@google.com

I) Input image with extreme
points provided by annotator

II) Machine predictions from
extreme points

III) corrective scribbles
provided by annotator

IV) Machine predictions from
extreme points and corrective
scribbles

Figure 1. Illustration of our interactive full image segmentation workflow. First (I) the annotator marks extreme points. Then (II) our
model (Sec. 3) uses them to generate a segmentation. This is presented to the annotator, after which we iterate: (III) the annotator makes
corrections using scribbles (Sec. 4), and (IV) our model uses them to update the predicted segmentation (Sec. 3).

Abstract
We address interactive full image annotation, where the
goal is to accurately segment all object and stuff regions in
an image. We propose an interactive, scribble-based annotation framework which operates on the whole image to
produce segmentations for all regions. This enables sharing scribble corrections across regions, and allows the annotator to focus on the largest errors made by the machine
across the whole image. To realize this, we adapt MaskRCNN [22] into a fast interactive segmentation framework
and introduce an instance-aware loss measured at the pixellevel in the full image canvas, which lets predictions for
nearby regions properly compete for space. Finally, we
compare to interactive single object segmentation on the
COCO panoptic dataset [11, 27, 34]. We demonstrate that
our interactive full image segmentation approach leads to a
5% IoU gain, reaching 90% IoU at a budget of four extreme
clicks and four corrective scribbles per region.

1. Introduction
We address the task of interactive full image segmentation, where the goal is to obtain accurate segmentations
for all object and stuff regions in the image. Full image annotations are important for many applications such
as self-driving cars [17, 19], navigation assistance for the

blind [51], and automatic image captioning [25, 56]. However, creating such datasets requires large amounts of human labor. For example, annotating a single image took
1.5 hours for Cityscapes [17]. For COCO+stuff [11, 34],
annotating one image took 19 minutes (80 seconds per object [34] plus 3 minutes for stuff regions [11]), which totals
39k hours for the 123k images. So there is a clear need for
faster annotation tools.
This paper proposes an efficient interactive framework
for full image segmentation (Fig. 1 and 2). Given an image,
an annotator first marks extreme points [41] on all object
and stuff regions. These provide a tight bounding box with
four boundary points for each region, and can be efficiently
collected (7s per region [41]). Next, the machine predicts
an initial segmentation for the full image based on these
extreme points. Afterwards we present the whole image
with the predicted segmentation to the annotator and iterate
between (A) the annotator providing scribbles on the errors
of the current segmentation, and (B) the machine updating
the predicted segmentation accordingly (Fig. 1).
Our approach of full image segmentation brings several
advantages over modern interactive single object segmentation methods [24, 30, 31, 32, 36, 37, 60]: (I) It enables the
annotator to focus on the largest errors in the whole image,
rather than on the largest error of one given object. (II) It
shares annotations across multiple object and stuff regions.
In our approach, a single scribble correction specifies the
extension of one region and the shrinkage of neighboring re-

11622

