Learning Instance Activation Maps
for Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation
Yi Zhu1 , Yanzhao Zhou1 , Huijuan Xu2 , Qixiang Ye1 , David Doermann3 , Jianbin Jiao1
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 University of California, Berkeley 3 University at Buffalo
{zhuyi215,zhouyanzhao215}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
{jiaojb,qxye}@ucas.ac.cn

huijuan@berkeley.edu

doermann@buffalo.edu

Pseudo GT Sampling

Abstract
Discriminative region responses residing inside an object instance can be extracted from networks trained with
image-level label supervision. However, learning the full
extent of pixel-level instance response in a weakly supervised manner remains unexplored. In this work, we tackle
this challenging problem by using a novel instance extent
filling approach. We first design a process to selectively collect pseudo supervision from noisy segment proposals obtained with previously published techniques. The pseudo
supervision is used to learn a differentiable filling module
that predicts a class-agnostic activation map for each instance given the image and an incomplete region response.
We refer to the above maps as Instance Activation Maps
(IAMs), which provide a fine-grained instance-level representation and allow instance masks to be extracted by
lightweight CRF. Extensive experiments on the PASCAL
VOC12 dataset show that our approach beats the stateof-the-art weakly supervised instance segmentation methods by a significant margin and increases the inference
speed by an order of magnitude. Our method also generalizes well across domains and to unseen object categories. Without fine-tuning for the specific tasks, our model
trained on VOC12 dataset (20 classes) obtains top performance for weakly supervised object localization on the
CUB dataset (200 classes) and achieves competitive results
on three widely used salient object detection benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Powered by the recent advances of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs), instance segmentation
has made remarkable progress [13, 6, 25]. Deep learning approaches, however, typically require large amounts of
data for training and rely on detailed ground truth (GT) in
the form of instance masks which often requires extensive

GT Mask
(Not used)

Image

PRM

Instance Extent Filling

IAM(Ours)

Figure 1: Peak Response Maps [43] from classification networks can only identify the discriminative parts of each instance. Our approach collects pseudo ground-truth masks
from noisy segment proposals obtained with off-the-shelf
techniques and learns an extent filling module. The resulting Instance Activation Maps (IAMs) effectively localize
instance-level spatial extent.
human effort. For example, in the CityScapes dataset [9],
fine-detailed pixel-level annotation typically requires more
than 1.5 hours for a single image. In contrast, image-level
labels, i.e., the presence or absence of object categories in
an image, are much easier to define and can even be automatically collected from the Internet.
Learning instance segmentation with image-level labels
is a challenging task as the annotation does not inform the
location or spatial extent of objects in an image. Zhou et
al. [43] took the first step in addressing this task by extracting instance-aware visual cues from classification networks.
They produce response maps for each object category, i.e.,
Class Activation Maps (CAMs) [42], to indicate essential
receptive fields used by the network when identifying the
object class. The peaks, i.e., local maximas, of CAMs are
stimulated and back-propagated to generate Peak Response
Maps (PRMs) that highlight informative regions residing
inside each object instance. PRMs could identify discriminative parts of each object yet failed to localize other regions. As shown in Fig. 2, PRMs highlight the dog head
13116

