Unsupervised Image Captioning
Yang Feng♯∗
Lin Ma♮†
Wei Liu♮
Jiebo Luo♯
♮
Tencent AI Lab ♯ University of Rochester
{yfeng23,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu

forest.linma@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks have achieved great successes on
the image captioning task. However, most of the existing
models depend heavily on paired image-sentence datasets,
which are very expensive to acquire. In this paper, we make
the first attempt to train an image captioning model in an
unsupervised manner. Instead of relying on manually labeled image-sentence pairs, our proposed model merely requires an image set, a sentence corpus, and an existing visual concept detector. The sentence corpus is used to teach
the captioning model how to generate plausible sentences.
Meanwhile, the knowledge in the visual concept detector is
distilled into the captioning model to guide the model to recognize the visual concepts in an image. In order to further
encourage the generated captions to be semantically consistent with the image, the image and caption are projected
into a common latent space so that they can reconstruct
each other. Given that the existing sentence corpora are
mainly designed for linguistic research and are thus with
little reference to image contents, we crawl a large-scale image description corpus of two million natural sentences to
facilitate the unsupervised image captioning scenario. Experimental results show that our proposed model is able to
produce quite promising results without any caption annotations.

1. Introduction
The research on image captioning has made an impressive progress in the past few years. Most of the proposed
methods learn a deep neural network model to generate captions conditioned on an input image [7, 10, 13, 20, 21, 40,
41, 42]. These models are trained in a supervised learning
manner based on manually labeled image-sentence pairs, as
illustrated in Figure 1 (a). However, the acquisition of these
paired image-sentence data is a labor intensive process. The
scales of existing image captioning datasets, such as Mi∗ This work was done while Yang Feng was a Research Intern with Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding author.

wl2223@columbia.edu

(b)

(a)

images

visual
concept

images

captions

captions

(d)

(c)

images

images

captions

(f)

(e)

images

captions

corpus

Chinese

Chinese

English

visual
concept
detector

images

corpus

Figure 1. Conceptual differences between the existing captioning
methods: (a) supervised captioning [40], (b) novel object captioning [2, 3], (c) cross-domain captioning [8, 43], (d) pivot captioning [15], (e) semi-supervised captioning [9], and (f) our proposed
unsupervised captioning.

crosoft COCO [30], are relatively small compared with image recognition datasets, such as ImageNet [34] and OpenImages [25]. The image and sentence varieties within these
image captioning datasets are limited to be under 100 object
categories. As a result, it is difficult for the captioning models trained on such paired image-sentence data to generalize
to images in the wild [37]. Therefore, how to relieve the dependency on the paired captioning datasets and make use
of other available data annotations to well generalize image
captioning models is becoming increasingly important, and
thus warrants deep investigations.
Recently, there have been several attempts at relaxing the
reliance on paired image-sentence data for image captioning training. As shown in Figure 1 (b), Hendricks et al. [3]
proposed to generate captions for novel objects, which are
not present in the paired image-caption training data but exist in image recognition datasets, e.g., ImageNet. As such,
novel object information can be introduced into the gener-

4125

