Fast Object Class Labelling via Speech
Michael Gygli

Vittorio Ferrari

gyglim@google.com

vittoferrari@google.com

Google Research
Abstract
Object class labelling is the task of annotating images
with labels on the presence or absence of objects from a
given class vocabulary. Simply asking one yes/no question
per class, however, has a cost that is linear in the vocabulary size and is thus inefficient for large vocabularies. Modern approaches rely on a hierarchical organization of the
vocabulary to reduce annotation time, but remain expensive
(several minutes per image for the 200 classes in ILSVRC).
Instead, we propose a new interface where classes are annotated via speech. Speaking is fast and allows for direct
access to the class name, without searching through a list
or hierarchy. As additional advantages, annotators can simultaneously speak and scan the image for objects, the interface can be kept extremely simple, and using it requires
less mouse movement. As annotators using our interface
should only say words from a given class vocabulary, we
propose a dedicated task that trains them to do so. Through
experiments on COCO and ILSVRC, we show our method
yields high-quality annotations at 2.3× − 14.9× less annotation time than existing methods.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks need millions of training examples to obtain high performance. Therefore, large and diverse datasets such as ILSVRC [6], COCO [16] or Open
Images [14] lie at the heart of the breakthrough and ongoing advances in visual recognition.
Datasets for recognition are typically annotated in two
stages [6, 14, 16, 30] (Fig. 1): (i) determining the presence
or absence of object classes in each image, and (ii) providing bounding boxes or segmentation masks for all classes
present. Our work focuses on the former, which we call object class labelling. As marking a class as present requires
finding at least one object of that class, we also ask annotators to click on it (as also done for the COCO dataset [16]).
This task is not only natural, it also helps the subsequent
annotation stages [16], and can be used as input to weaklysupervised methods [1, 18, 19, 25].
Object class labelling has traditionally been time-

Figure 1: Illustration of common stages of image annotation: typically annotators first provide object class labels at the imagelevel [6, 14] (red), sometimes associated to a specific object via
a click as in [16] and our approach (green). Following stages then
annotate the spatial extent of objects, e.g. with bounding boxes or
segmentations (yellow).

consuming for annotators. A naı̈ve approach is to ask a separate yes/no question for each class of a given vocabulary.
Such a protocol is rooted on the vocabulary, not the image
content. It scales linearly in the size of the vocabulary, even
when only few of the classes are present in the image (which
is the typical case). Thus, it becomes very inefficient when
the vocabulary is large. Let’s take the ILSVRC dataset as
an example: getting labels for the 200 object classes in the
vocabulary would take close to 6 minutes per image [13],
despite each image containing only 1.6 classes on average.
Previous methods have attempted to improve on this by using a hierarchical representation of the class vocabulary to
quickly reject certain groups of labels [7, 16]. This reduces
the annotation complexity to sub-linear in the vocabulary
size. But even with these sophisticated methods, object
class labelling remains time consuming. Using the hierarchical method of [7] to label the 200 classes of ILSVRC
still takes 3 minutes per image [29]. The COCO dataset has
fewer classes (80) and was labelled using the more efficient
hierarchical method of [16]. Even so, it still took half a
minute per image.
In this paper, we improve upon these approaches by us15365

