Gotta Adapt ’Em All: Joint Pixel and Feature-Level
Domain Adaptation for Recognition in the Wild
Luan Tran1∗ Kihyuk Sohn2 Xiang Yu2 Xiaoming Liu1 Manmohan Chandraker2,3
1
Michigan State University 2 NEC Labs America 3 UC San Diego

Abstract

vision
insight

pixel

Recent developments in deep domain adaptation have
allowed knowledge transfer from a labeled source domain
to an unlabeled target domain at the level of intermediate
features or input pixels. We propose that advantages may be
derived by combining them, in the form of different insights
that lead to a novel design and complementary properties
that result in better performance. At the feature level, inspired by insights from semi-supervised learning, we propose
a classification-aware domain adversarial neural network
that brings target examples into more classifiable regions of
source domain. Next, we posit that computer vision insights
are more amenable to injection at the pixel level. In particular, we use 3D geometry and image synthesis based on a
generalized appearance flow to preserve identity across pose
transformations, while using an attribute-conditioned CycleGAN to translate a single source into multiple target images
that differ in lower-level properties such as lighting. Besides
standard UDA benchmark, we validate on a novel and apt
problem of car recognition in unlabeled surveillance images
using labeled images from the web, handling explicitly specified, nameable factors of variation through pixel-level and
implicit, unspecified factors through feature-level adaptation.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has made an enormous impact on many applications in computer vision such as generic object recognition [22, 44, 48, 17], fine-grained categorization [59, 21, 41],
object detection [26, 27, 28, 36, 37], semantic segmentation [6, 42] and 3D reconstruction [53, 52]. Much of its
success is attributed to the availability of large-scale labeled
training data [8, 15]. However, this is hardly true in many
practical scenarios: since annotation is expensive, most data
remains unlabeled. Consider car recognition problem from
surveillance images, where factors such as camera angle,
distance, lighting or weather condition are different across
locations. It is not feasible to exhaustively annotate all these
images. Meanwhile, there exists abundant labeled data from
∗ This work is done when L. Tran was an intern at NEC Labs America.

source
≠ target

source

Pixel
Feature
–
DANN
DANN-CA (ours)

source
≈ target
semi-supervised
learning insight

feature

pixel

target

feature

–

CycleGAN

MKF+AC-CGAN
(ours)

55.0
60.4
75.8

64.3
64.8
77.7

79.7
78.0
84.2

Table 1: Our framework for unsupervised domain adaptation at
multiple semantic levels: at feature-level, we bring insights from
semi-supervised learning to obtain highly discriminative domaininvariant representations; at pixel-level, we leverage complementary
domain-specific vision insights e.g., geometry and attributes. Our
joint pixel and feature-level DA demonstrates significant improvement over individual adaptation counterparts as well as other competing methods such as CyCADA (CycleGAN+DANN) [18] on car
recognition in surveillance domain under UDA setting. Please see
Section 5 for complete experimental analysis.

web domain [21, 62, 12], but with very different image characteristics that precludes direct transfer of discriminative
CNN-based classifiers. For instance, web images might
be from catalog magazines with professional lighting and
ground-level camera poses, while surveillance images can
originate from cameras atop traffic lights with challenging
lighting and weather conditions.
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is a promising
tool to overcome the lack of labeled training data problem in
target domains. Several approaches aim to match distributions between source and target domains at different levels
of representations, such as feature [57, 56, 11, 45, 31] or
pixel levels [49, 43, 66, 3]. Certain adaptation challenges are
better handled in the feature space, but feature-level DA is
a black-box algorithm for which adding domain-specific insights during adaptation is more difficult than in pixel space.
On the contrary, pixel space is much higher-dimensional
and the optimization problem is under-determined. How to
12672

