RePr: Improved Training of Convolutional Filters
Aaditya Prakash
Brandeis University

James Storer
Brandeis University

Dinei Florencio, Cha Zhang
Microsoft Research

aprakash@brandeis.edu

storer@brandeis.edu

{dinei,chazhang}@microsoft.com

A well-trained Convolutional Neural Network can easily
be pruned without significant loss of performance. This is
because of unnecessary overlap in the features captured by
the network’s filters. Innovations in network architecture
such as skip/dense connections and Inception units have
mitigated this problem to some extent, but these improvements come with increased computation and memory requirements at run-time. We attempt to address this problem
from another angle - not by changing the network structure
but by altering the training method. We show that by temporarily pruning and then restoring a subset of the model’s
filters, and repeating this process cyclically, overlap in the
learned features is reduced, producing improved generalization. We show that the existing model-pruning criteria
are not optimal for selecting filters to prune in this context and introduce inter-filter orthogonality as the ranking
criteria to determine under-expressive filters. Our method
is applicable both to vanilla convolutional networks and
more complex modern architectures, and improves the performance across a variety of tasks, especially when applied
to smaller networks.

1.0

1.0

Train - RePr
Train - Standard

Test - RePr
Test - Standard

E

0.9

B

F

D

A

0.8

0.9

0.8

C

Accuracy

Abstract

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5
0

20

40

Epoch

60

80

100

20

40

60

80

.5
100

Epoch

Figure 1: Performance of a three layer ConvNet with 32 filters
each over 100 epochs using standard scheme and our method RePr on CIFAR-10. The shaded regions denote periods when only
part of the network is trained. Left: Training Accuracy, Right: Test
Accuracy. Annotations [A-F] are discussed in Section 4.

1. Introduction

pruning filters [7, 8, 6, 9, 10, 11], rather than individual
parameters [12], to achieve model compression. Most of
these pruning methods are able to drop a significant number of filters with only a marginal loss in the performance
of the model. However, a model with fewer filters cannot be trained from scratch to achieve the performance of
a large model that has been pruned to be roughly the same
size [6, 11, 13]. Standard training procedures tend to learn
models with extraneous and prunable filters, even for architectures without any excess capacity. This suggests that
there is room for improvement in the training of Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets).

Convolutional Neural Networks have achieved state-ofthe-art results in various computer vision tasks [1, 2]. Much
of this success is due to innovations of a novel, taskspecific network architectures [3, 4]. Despite variation in
network design, the same core optimization techniques are
used across tasks. These techniques consider each individual weight as its own entity and update them independently. Limited progress has been made towards developing
a training process specifically designed for convolutional
networks, in which filters are the fundamental unit of the
network. A filter is not a single weight parameter but a stack
of spatial kernels.
Because models are typically over-parameterized, a
trained convolutional network will contain redundant filters [5, 6]. This is evident from the common practice of

To this end, we propose a training scheme in which,
after some number of iterations of standard training, we
select a subset of the model’s filters to be temporarily
dropped. After additional training of the reduced network,
we reintroduce the previously dropped filters, initialized
with new weights, and continue standard training. We observe that following the reintroduction of the dropped filters, the model is able to achieve higher performance than
was obtained before the drop. Repeated application of this
process obtains models which outperform those obtained by
standard training as seen in Figure 1 and discussed in Section 4. We observe this improvement across various tasks
and over various types of convolutional networks. This
training procedure is able to produce improved performance
across a range of possible criteria for choosing which filters

10666

