PPGNet: Learning Point-Pair Graph for Line Segment Detection
Ziheng Zhang∗ Zhengxin Li∗ Ning Bi Jia Zheng Jinlei Wang
Weixin Luo Yanyu Xu Shenghua Gao†

Kun Huang

ShanghaiTech University
{zhangzh, lizhx, bining, zhengjia, wangjinlei, huangkun, luowx, xuyy2, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel framework to detect line
segments in man-made environments. Specifically, we propose to describe junctions, line segments and relationships
between them with a simple graph, which is more structured
and informative than end-point representation used in existing line segment detection methods. In order to extract
a line segment graph from an image, we further introduce
the PPGNet, a convolutional neural network that directly
infers a graph from an image. We evaluate our method on
published benchmarks including York Urban and Wireframe
datasets. The results demonstrate that our method achieves
satisfactory performance and generalizes well on all the
benchmarks. The source code of our work is available at
https://github.com/svip-lab/PPGNet.

1. Introduction
Retrieving 3D information from 2D images has long been
a fundamental problem in computer vision. The feasibility
of conventional methods based on local feature detection,
matching and tracking (e.g., corners, edges, SIFT features,
and patches) has been proved. However, modern applications,
which involve interaction between autonomous agents and
man-made physical environments, have presented more complex challenges. On the one hand, man-made environments
often contain abundant homogeneous surfaces and highly
repeated patterns, which introduces difficulties for feature
matching and tracking. On the other hand, for some applications (e.g., visual odometry), of which the performance
highly depends on the geometric primitives presenting in different views, the choice of such primitives (e.g., points, lines
segments, or other structures) becomes critical: different
primitives provide distinct sets of geometric information.
The prior assumption about a spacial structure like Manhattan World [7, 11, 38] or room topology [24, 57, 60] could
∗ Contributed equally
† Corresponding author

significantly benefit the 3D reconstruction, but they are often
violated in real man-made environments. Instead, common
junctions and line segments are capable of delivering important geometric information without dependency to any prior
assumption. For extensive tasks relevant to 3D vision, such
as camera calibration [10,43,56], matching across views [44]
and 3D reconstruction [20, 37, 56] , edges have demonstrated
more robustness to lighting changes and preserve more information than points. Several recent works [22, 55, 60] show
that line segments could largely facilitate 3D modeling of
indoor scenes.
Traditional line segment detection algorithms [1,2,27,49]
generally start from edge detection, followed by merging
procedure and optionally some refinement techniques. However, such approaches are usually sensitive to changes in
scale and illumination, since they merely depend on the local
features. Additionally, some geometrically informative lines,
such as intersections between two homochromatic walls, often have low local edge responses, thus tend to be ignored
by such methods. On contrast, a human can easily recognize
such visually obscure intersections through global semantic
inference.
The recent success of deep learning has shown the desirable capability of image understanding, such as image
classification [19, 23, 47, 48], object detection [13, 14, 17, 40],
and semantic segmentation [26, 41]. On the other hand, deep
architectures are also effective in low-level tasks, such as
contour detection [45] and super-resolution [9]. [21] is a
pioneer work of extracting wireframe in man-made scenes
with a deep architecture, for human-level perception of scene
geometry. Their proposed network outputs pixel-wise junction confidence and directions together with a line heatmap,
followed by a post-processing algorithm merging them to
generate a parameterized presentation of line segments. As
introduced in the literature, the conception of the wireframe
is a small subset of common line segments and junctions,
which is practically defined by their dataset annotation. Considering that line segments outside the wireframe subset also
contain strong geometrical information, and line segment
detection itself is still a challenging problem in computer

7105

