The Visual Centrifuge: Model-Free Layered Video Representations
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac1∗

João Carreira1∗

Andrew Zisserman1,2

jalayrac@google.com

joaoluis@google.com

zisserman@google.com

1

DeepMind

2

VGG, Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Abstract
True video understanding requires making sense of nonlambertian scenes where the color of light arriving at the
camera sensor encodes information about not just the last
object it collided with, but about multiple mediums – colored windows, dirty mirrors, smoke or rain. Layered video
representations have the potential of accurately modelling
realistic scenes but have so far required stringent assumptions on motion, lighting and shape. Here we propose a
learning-based approach for multi-layered video representation: we introduce novel uncertainty-capturing 3D convolutional architectures and train them to separate blended
videos. We show that these models then generalize to single
videos, where they exhibit interesting abilities: color constancy, factoring out shadows and separating reflections.
We present quantitative and qualitative results on real world
videos.
Figure 1:

1. Introduction
Vision could be easy and require little more than mathematical modelling: the brightness constancy constraint for
optical flow, sobel-filtering and perspective equations for
3D object recognition, or lambertian reflectance for shapefrom-shading. However, the messiness of the real world
has long proved the assumptions made by these models inadequate: even simple natural scenes are riddled with shadows, reflections and colored lights that bounce off surfaces
of different materials and mix in complex ways. Robust systems for scene understanding that can be safely deployed in
the wild (e.g. robots, self-driving cars) will probably require
not just tolerance to these factors, as current deep learning
based systems have; they will require factoring out these
variables in their visual representations, such that they do
not get rattled by giant (reflected) trees growing out of potholes in the road, or even their own shadow or reflection.
A natural framework for handling these factors is to
model them as layers that compose into an overall video.
∗ Equal contribution.

Top, input video showing someone driving a car
through the country side, with trees reflecting in its windscreen.
Bottom, two videos output by our visual centrifuge1 . In this paper
we learn models that can, in the spirit of a centrifuge, separate a
single video into multiple layers, e.g. to consider the interior of the
car or the shapes of the reflected trees in isolation. We do so using
few assumptions, by simply training models to separate multiple
blended videos – a task for which training data can be obtained in
abundance.

Layered models trace back to the foundations of computer
vision [42] but assumed particular models of motion [26],
scene shapes or illumination. Layered models are also often
tailored to particular goals – such as shadow or specularity
removal, or reflection separation [39] and rarely accomodate for non-rigidity other than for very specialized domains
(e.g. faces [31]).
In this paper we aim to learn a video representation that
teases apart a video into layers in a more general data-driven
way that does away with explicit assumptions about shape,
1 See https://youtu.be/u8QwiSa6L0Q for a video version of
the figure.

12457

