MSCap: Multi-Style Image Captioning with Unpaired Stylized Text

Longteng Guo
1

1,4

Jing Liu∗

1

Peng Yao

2

Jiangwei Li

3

Hanqing Lu

1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Science and Technology Beijing 3 Multimedia Department, Huawei Devices
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{longteng.guo,jliu,luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,S20180598@xs.ustb.edu.cn,lijiangwei1@huawei.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an adversarial learning network for the task of multi-style image captioning (MSCap)
with a standard factual image caption dataset and a multistylized language corpus without paired images. How to
learn a single model for multi-stylized image captioning
with unpaired data is a challenging and necessary task,
whereas rarely studied in previous works. The proposed
framework mainly includes four contributive modules following a typical image encoder. First, a style dependent
caption generator to output a sentence conditioned on an
encoded image and a specified style. Second, a caption discriminator is presented to distinguish the input sentence to
be real or not. The discriminator and the generator are
trained in an adversarial manner to enable more natural
and human-like captions. Third, a style classifier is employed to discriminate the specific style of the input sentence. Besides, a back-translation module is designed to
enforce the generated stylized captions are visually grounded, with the intuition of the cycle consistency for factual
caption and stylized caption. We enable an end-to-end optimization of the whole model with differentiable softmax approximation.At last, we conduct comprehensive experiments
using a combined dataset containing four caption styles to
demonstrate the outstanding performance of our proposed
method.

1. Introduction
Automatically generating human-like captions for images, namely image captioning, has emerged as a prominent interdisciplinary research problem at the intersection of computer vision and natural language processing
[36, 33, 40]. It has many important industrial applications,
∗ Corresponding Author

style

Captioner

Factual:
A brown dog drinks from a body of water.
Humorous:
A dog putting his legs into a pond, but scared of the water.
Romantic:
A brown dog steps into murky water,
careful to swim back to his master.
Positive:
A cuddly dog is drinking from a body of tranquil water.
Negative:
A black ugly dog drinks from a body of dirty water.

Figure 1. Example results of our multi-style image-captioning
model. Given an image, our model learns to generate attractive
image captions with various styles, which could be controlled by
assigning style labels. Sentences under each colored words, i.e.
the style name, are the generated caption corresponding to that
style.

such as visual intelligence in chatting robots, photo sharing
on social media, and assistive facilities for visually impaired
people. To generate true human-like image captions, an image captioning system is required to understand the visual
content and write captions with proper linguistic properties.
However, most existing image captioning systems focus on
the vision side that describes the visual content in an objective, neutral manner (factual captions), while the language
side, e.g. linguistic style, is often neglected.
In fact, linguistic style [4] is an essential factor in human
language that reflects personality, emotion, and sentiment. Style typically refers to linguistic aspects other than the

4204

