Cross-Classification Clustering: An Efficient Multi-Object Tracking Technique
for 3-D Instance Segmentation in Connectomics
Yaron Meirovitch1,2∗, Lu Mi1∗, Hayk Saribekyan1 , Alexander Matveev3 , David Rolnick1 , Nir Shavit1,4
1
MIT, 2 Harvard University, 3 Neural Magic Inc., 4 Tel-Aviv University

Abstract
Pixel-accurate tracking of objects is a key element in
many computer vision applications, often solved by iterated individual object tracking or instance segmentation
followed by object matching. Here we introduce crossclassification clustering (3C), a technique that simultaneously tracks complex, interrelated objects in an image stack.
The key idea in cross-classification is to efficiently turn a
clustering problem into a classification problem by running a logarithmic number of independent classifications
per image, letting the cross-labeling of these classifications
uniquely classify each pixel to the object labels. We apply the 3C mechanism to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy
in connectomics – the nanoscale mapping of neural tissue
from electron microscopy volumes. Our reconstruction system increases scalability by an order of magnitude over existing single-object tracking methods (such as flood-filling
networks). This scalability is important for the deployment
of connectomics pipelines, since currently the best performing techniques require computing infrastructures that are
beyond the reach of most laboratories. Our algorithm may
offer benefits in other domains that require pixel-accurate
tracking of multiple objects, such as segmentation of videos
and medical imagery.

1. Introduction
Object tracking is an important and extensively studied
component in many computer vision applications [1, 13,
14, 16, 23, 54, 57, 59]. It occurs both in video segmentation and in 3-D object reconstruction based on 2-D images.
Less attention has been given to efficient algorithms performing simultaneous tracking of multiple interrelated objects [14] in order to eliminate the redundancies of tracking
multiple objects via repeated use of single-object tracking.
This problem is relevant to applications in medical imaging
[10, 11, 22, 29, 30, 38] as well as videos [12, 43, 55, 58].
∗ These authors equally contributed to this work
{yaronm,lumi}@mit.edu

Figure 1. (a) Single-object tracking using flood-filling networks [21], (b) Multiple-object tracking using our crossclassification clustering (3C) algorithm, (c) The combinatorial encoding of an instance segmentation by 3C. One segmented image
with 10 objects is encoded using three images, each with 4 object
classes.

The field of connectomics, the mapping of neural tissue
at the level of individual neurons and the synapses between
them, offers one of the most challenging settings for testing
algorithms to track multiple complex objects. Such synaptic level maps can be made only from high-resolution images taken by electron microscopes, where the sheer volume of data that needs to be processed (petabyte-size im4321
8425

