Object Discovery in Videos as Foreground Motion Clustering
Christopher Xie1∗ Yu Xiang2 Zaid Harchaoui1 Dieter Fox2,1
1
University of Washington 2 NVIDIA
chrisxie@cs.washington.edu

{yux,dieterf}@nvidia.com

zaid@uw.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of providing dense segmentation masks for object discovery in videos. We formulate the
object discovery problem as foreground motion clustering,
where the goal is to cluster foreground pixels in videos into
different objects. We introduce a novel pixel-trajectory recurrent neural network that learns feature embeddings of foreground pixel trajectories linked across time. By clustering
the pixel trajectories using the learned feature embeddings,
our method establishes correspondences between foreground
object masks across video frames. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework for object discovery, we conduct
experiments on commonly used datasets for motion segmentation, where we achieve state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Discovering objects from videos is an important capability that an intelligent system needs to have. Imagine
deploying a robot to a new environment. If the robot can
discover and recognize unknown objects in the environment
by observing, it would enable the robot to better understand
its work space. In the interactive perception setting [8], the
robot can even interact with the environment to discover
objects by touching or pushing objects. To tackle the object
discovery problem, we need to answer the question: what defines an object? In this work, we consider an entity that can
move or be moved to be an object, which includes various
rigid, deformable and articulated objects. We utilize motion
and appearance cues to discover objects in videos.
Motion-based video understanding has been studied in
computer vision for decades. In low-level vision, different
methods have been proposed to find correspondences between pixels across video frames, which is known as optical
flow estimation [18, 3]. Both camera motion and object motion can result in optical flow. Since the correspondences
are estimated at a pixel level, these methods are not aware of
the objects in the scene, in the sense that they do not know
which pixels belong to which objects. In high-level vision,
∗ Work partially done while an intern at NVIDIA.

RGB
Pixel Trajectory
Trajectory
Recurrent Neural Network Embeddings
Flow

Discovered Objects

Figure 1: Overview of our framework. RGB images and
optical flow are fed into a recurrent neural network, which
computes embeddings of pixel trajectories. These embeddings are clustered into different foreground objects.
object detection and object tracking in videos has been wellstudied [1, 22, 16, 50, 4, 48]. These methods train models
for specific object categories using annotated data. As a
result, they are not able to detect nor track unknown objects
that have not been seen in the training data. In other words,
these methods cannot discover new objects from videos. In
contrast, motion segmentation methods [9, 24, 5, 34] aim at
segmenting moving objects in videos, which can be utilized
to discover new objects based on their motion.
In this work, we formulate the object discovery problem
as foreground motion clustering, where the goal is to cluster
pixels in a video into different objects based on their motion.
There are two main challenges in tackling this problem. First,
how can foreground objects be differentiated from background? Based on the assumption that moving foreground
objects have different motion as the background, we design
a novel encoder-decoder network that takes video frames
and optical flow as inputs and learns a feature embedding
for each pixel, where these feature embeddings are used in
the network to classify pixels into foreground or background.
Compared to traditional foreground/background segmentation methods [10, 19], our network automatically learns a
powerful feature representation that combines appearance
and motion cues from images.
Secondly, how can we consistently segment foreground
objects across video frames? We would like to segment
individual objects in each video frame and establish correspondences of the same object across video frames. Inspired
19994

