DeepCaps: Going Deeper with Capsule Networks
Jathushan Rajasegaran1

Vinoj Jayasundara1
Sandaru Jayasekara1
Hirunima Jayasekara1
Suranga Seneviratne2
Ranga Rodrigo1
1
Department of Electronic and Telecommunication Engineering, University of Moratuwa
2
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney
{brjathu, vinojjayasundara, sandaruamashan, nhirunima}@gmail.com
suranga.seneviratne@sydney.edu.au, ranga@uom.lk

Abstract
Capsule Network is a promising concept in deep learning, yet its true potential is not fully realized thus far, providing sub-par performance on several key benchmark datasets
with complex data. Drawing intuition from the success
achieved by Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) by going deeper, we introduce DeepCaps1 , a deep capsule network architecture which uses a novel 3D convolution based
dynamic routing algorithm. With DeepCaps, we surpass
the state-of-the-art results in the capsule network domain
on CIFAR10, SVHN and Fashion MNIST, while achieving
a 68% reduction in the number of parameters. Further,
we propose a class-independent decoder network, which
strengthens the use of reconstruction loss as a regularization term. This leads to an interesting property of the decoder, which allows us to identify and control the physical
attributes of the images represented by the instantiation parameters.

1. Introduction
In the last few years, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) made breakthroughs in many computer vision
tasks, and significantly outperformed many conventional
curated feature driven models. Two common themes of increasing the performance of CNNs are to increase the depth
and the width of the network (e.g., the number of levels
of the network and the number of units at each level) and
to use as much training data as possible. Although CNNs
have been successful, they have few limitations such as the
invariance caused by pooling and the inability to understand spatial relationship between features. To address these
limitations, Sabour et al. proposed Capsule Networks [19]
which have shown promising comparable results to CNNs
in several standard datasets. Intuitively, attempting to go
deeper with capsule networks is a step in the right direction
to further enhance their performance.
1 https://github.com/brjathu/deepcaps

The capsule network (CapsNet) model proposed by
Sabour et al. [19] comprises only one convolution layer
and one fully-connected capsule layer. The proposed architecture works well with the MNIST [16] dataset, nonetheless the performance on datasets with more complex objects
such as CIFAR10 [14] is not on par with the CNNs, due to
the nature of complex shapes in CIFAR10 in comparison to
MNIST.
A naive attempt of creating a deep CapsNet by simply
stacking such fully-connected capsule layers will result in
an architecture similar to a MLP model which has several
limitations. First, dynamic routing used in capsule networks
is an extremely computationally expensive procedure, and
having multiple routing layers incur higher costs of training
and inference time. Second, it has been recently shown that
stacking fully connected capsule layers on top of each other
will result in poor learning in the middle layers [24]. This
is due to the fact that when there are too many capsules,
the coupling coefficients tend to be too small, consequently
dampening the gradient flow and inhibiting learning. Third,
it has been shown that, especially in the lower layers, correlated units tend to concentrate in local regions [21]. Although localized routing can conspicuously take advantage
of this observation, such localized routing cannot be implemented in fully connected capsules.
In order to address these limitations caused by stacking
capsule layers, we propose the following solutions. To reduce the computational complexity introduced by multiple
layers needing dynamic routing, several avenues are possible: Reducing the number of routing iterations in the initial
layers that are larger in size reduces the complexity while
not affecting the features as they need not be complex in
nature. In addition, using 3D-convolution-inspired routing
in the middle layers –due to parameter sharing– reduces
the number of parameters. We can address the problem of
poor learning in the middle layers due to naive stacking by
improving the gradient flow, that involve skip connections
coupled with convolutions. Moreover, while reducing the
110725

