Looking for the Devil in the Details: Learning Trilinear Attention Sampling
Network for Fine-grained Image Recognition
Heliang Zheng1∗, Jianlong Fu2 , Zheng-Jun Zha1†, Jiebo Luo3
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
3

1

Microsoft Research, Beijing, China

University of Rochester, Rochester, NY

zhenghl@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn, 2 jianf@microsoft.com, 3 jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
Learning subtle yet discriminative features (e.g., beak
and eyes for a bird) plays a significant role in fine-grained
image recognition. Existing attention-based approaches localize and amplify significant parts to learn fine-grained
details, which often suffer from a limited number of parts
and heavy computational cost. In this paper, we propose
to learn such fine-grained features from hundreds of part
proposals by Trilinear Attention Sampling Network (TASN)
in an efficient teacher-student manner. Specifically, TASN
consists of 1) a trilinear attention module, which generates
attention maps by modeling the inter-channel relationships, 2) an attention-based sampler which highlights attended
parts with high resolution, and 3) a feature distiller, which
distills part features into an object-level feature by weight
sharing and feature preserving strategies. Extensive experiments verify that TASN yields the best performance under
the same settings with the most competitive approaches, in
iNaturalist-2017, CUB-Bird, and Stanford-Cars datasets.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) focuses on
distinguishing subtle visual differences within a basic-level
category (e.g., bird [1, 34] and car [13, 20, 36]). Although the techniques of convolutional neural network (CNN) [8, 15, 25] for general image recognition [14, 23] have
become increasingly practical, FGVC is still a challenging
task where discriminative details are too subtle to be wellrepresented by traditional CNN. Thus the majority of efforts in the fine-grained community focuses on learning better
representation for such subtle yet discriminative details.
Existing attention/part-based methods [2, 7, 33, 40] try
to solve this problem by learning part detectors, cropping
∗ This work was performed when Heliang Zheng was visiting Microsoft
Research as a research intern.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. An illustration of learning discriminative details by TASN for a “bule jay.” As shown in (b), TASN learns such subtle
details by up-sampling each detail into high-resolution. And the
white concentric circles in (c) indicates fine-grained details.

and amplifying the attended parts, and concatenating part
features for recognition. Although promising performance
has been achieved, there are several critical issues in such
a pipeline. Specifically, 1) the number of attention is limited and pre-defined, which restricts the effectiveness and
flexibility of the model. 2) Without part annotations, it is
difficult to learn multiple consistent (i.e., attending on the
same part for each sample) attention maps. Although a
well-designed initialization [7, 16, 40] can benefit the model training, it is not robust and cannot handle the cases with
uncommon poses. Moreover, 3) training CNNs for each
part is not efficient. Such problems evolve as bottlenecks
for the study on attention-based methods.
To address the above challenges, we propose a trilinear attention sampling network (TASN) which learns finegrained details from hundreds of part proposals and efficiently distills the learned features into a single convolu-

5012

