Max-Sliced Wasserstein Distance and its use for GANs
Ishan Deshpande, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ruoyu Sun, Ayis Pyrros† , Nasir Siddiqui† ,
Sanmi Koyejo, Zhizhen Zhao, David Forsyth, Alexander Schwing
†
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Dupage Medical Group
ishan.sd@gmail.com, {ythu2, ruoyus}@illinois.edu, ayis@ayis.org, nsiddiqui@gmail.com,
{sanmi, zhizhenz, daf, aschwing}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Generative adversarial nets (GANs) and variational
auto-encoders have significantly improved our distribution
modeling capabilities, showing promise for dataset augmentation, image-to-image translation and feature learning. However, to model high-dimensional distributions, sequential training and stacked architectures are common, increasing the number of tunable hyper-parameters as well as
the training time. Nonetheless, the sample complexity of the
distance metrics remains one of the factors affecting GAN
training. We first show that the recently proposed sliced
Wasserstein distance has compelling sample complexity
properties when compared to the Wasserstein distance. To
further improve the sliced Wasserstein distance we then analyze its ‘projection complexity’ and develop the max-sliced
Wasserstein distance which enjoys compelling sample complexity while reducing projection complexity, albeit necessitating a max estimation. We finally illustrate that the proposed distance trains GANs on high-dimensional images up
to a resolution of 256x256 easily.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling capabilities have improved tremendously in the last few years, especially since the advent of
deep learning-based models like generative adversarial nets
(GANs) [11] and variational auto-encoders (VAEs) [17].
Instead of sampling from a high-dimensional distribution,
GANs and VAEs transform a sample obtained from a simple distribution using deep nets. These models have found
use in dataset augmentation [31], image-to-image translation [15, 37, 21, 14, 24, 29, 35, 38], and even feature learning for inference related tasks [9].
GANs and many of their variants formulate generative
modeling as a two player game. A ‘generator’ creates samples that resemble the ground truth data. A ‘discriminator’
tries to distinguish between ‘artificial’ and ‘real’ samples.

Both, the generator and discriminator, are parametrized using deep nets and trained via stochastic gradient descent.
In its original formulation [11], a GAN minimizes the
Jenson-Shannon divergence between the data distribution
and the probability distribution induced in the data space
by the generator. Many other variants have been proposed,
which use either some divergence or the integral probability metric to measure the distance between the distributions [2, 22, 12, 20, 8, 7, 27, 4, 26, 23, 13, 30]. When
carefully trained, GANs are able to produce high quality
samples [28, 16, 25, 16, 25]. Training GANs is, however,
difficult – especially on high dimensional datasets.
The scaling difficulty of GANs may be related to one
fundamental theoretical issue: the sample complexity. It
is shown in [3] that KL-divergence, Jenson-Shannon and
Wasserstein distance do not generalize, in the sense that the
population distance cannot be approximated by an empirical distance when there are only a polynomial number of
samples. To improve generalization, one popular method
is to limit the discriminator class [3, 10] and interpret the
training process as minimizing a neural-net distance [3].
In this work, we promote a different path that resolves
the sample complexity issue. A fundamental reason for the
exponential sample complexity of the Wasserstein distance
is the sparsity of points in a high dimensional space. Even if
two collections of points are randomly drawn from the same
ball, these two collections are far away from each other.
Our intuition is that projection onto a low-dimensional subspace, such as a line, mitigates the artificial distance effect
in high dimensions and the distance of the projected samples reflects the true distance.
We first apply this intuition to analyze the recently proposed sliced Wasserstein distance GAN, which is based on
the average Wasserstein distance of the projected versions
of two distributions along a few randomly picked directions [8, 20, 34]. We prove that the sliced Wasserstein distance is generalizable for Gaussian distributions (i.e., it has
polynomial sample complexity), while Wasserstein distance
is not, thus partially explaining why [8, 20, 34] may exhibit
110648

