Robustness Veriﬁcation of Classiﬁcation Deep Neural Networks via Linear
Programming
Wang Lin1,2,3 Zhengfeng Yang2∗ Xin Chen3∗ Qingye Zhao3 Xiangkun Li2 Zhiming Liu4 Jifeng He2
1
School of Information Science and Technology, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University
2
Shanghai Key Lab of Trustworthy Computing, East China Normal University
3
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
4
Center for Research and Innovation in Software Engineering, Southwest University
linwang@zstu.edu.cn, zfyang@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, chenxin@nju.edu.cn
qingyezhao@foxmail.com, xkli@stu.ecnu.cn, zhimingliu88@swu.edu.cn, jifeng@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
There is a pressing need to verify robustness of classification deep neural networks (CDNNs) as they are embedded in many safety-critical applications. Existing robustness verification approaches rely on computing the overapproximation of the output set, and can hardly scale up to
practical CDNNs, as the result of error accumulation accompanied with approximation. In this paper, we develop a
novel method for robustness verification of CDNNs with sigmoid activation functions. It converts the robustness verification problem into an equivalent problem of inspecting the
most suspected point in the input region which constitutes
a nonlinear optimization problem. To make it amenable, by
relaxing the nonlinear constraints into the linear inclusions, it is further refined as a linear programming problem. We
conduct comparison experiments on a few CDNNs trained
for classifying images in some state-of-the-art benchmarks, showing our advantages of precision and scalability that
enable effective verification of practical CDNNs.

1. Introduction
Classification deep neural networks (CDNNs) are a special kind of deep neural networks that take in complicated, high-dimensional input, transform it through multiple
layers of neurons and finally identify it as a specific output label or class. Acting as classifiers, they have been
∗ Corresponding authors. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program under Grant 2017YFB1001801, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61772203, 61602348, 61690204, 61632015, 61672435,
61732019, 61751210 and 61572441, in part by the Shanghai Natural Science Foundation under Grant 17ZR1408300, in part by the Collaborative
Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization,
and in part by Southwest University under Grant SU116007.

adopted in a variety of applications, such as adaptive control [31, 34], pattern recognition [28], image understanding [8, 18], cyber-security [29], speech and audio analysis
[14, 15] and self-driving [26]. It is a growing trend that embedding CDNNs in safety-critical systems to make judgements like human experts [19].
Unfortunately, it has been reported by many researchers
[3, 32] that CDNNs are unrobust with respect to perturbations. For example, applying minimal changes to the input
image, being imperceptible to the human eye, can make the
well-trained CDNN misclassify it.
The unrobust issue obviously raises potential safety issues for safety critical systems using neural networks and
calls for effective verification techniques that can check the
robustness of CDNNs [11, 17]. We state that a CDNN is robust when, given every possible input value within a specified region, its output is guaranteed to have the same classification label, which corresponds to the principal robust requirement of classification: minimal perturbations (restricted by a threshold) should not affect the classification result.
Given a CDNN, its robustness can be verified by estimating the range of the output set with respect to a given input
region. Some methods are proposed to compute the output range of CDNNs of particular types [2, 6, 12, 22]. The
method combining local gradient descent search with global
mixed integer linear programming can handle the CDNNs
with ReLU activation functions [9], which is further extended to treat a special class of perturbations [33]. The
ployhedra manipulating based method is able to compute
the exact output region of CDNNs with ReLU activation
functions and an union of ployhedra as its input set [35].
In general, the computation of output set is very difficult
since the theories to handle general activation functions are
undecidable. The methods that transform the verification
problem of CDNNs into programming receive most atten111418

