Progressive Image Deraining Networks: A Better and Simpler Baseline
Dongwei Ren1 , Wangmeng Zuo2 , Qinghua Hu∗1 , Pengfei Zhu1 , and Deyu Meng3
1

2

College of Computing and Intelligence, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China

Abstract
Along with the deraining performance improvement of
deep networks, their structures and learning become more
and more complicated and diverse, making it difficult to
analyze the contribution of various network modules when
developing new deraining networks. To handle this issue,
this paper provides a better and simpler baseline deraining network by considering network architecture, input and
output, and loss functions. Specifically, by repeatedly unfolding a shallow ResNet, progressive ResNet (PRN) is proposed to take advantage of recursive computation. A recurrent layer is further introduced to exploit the dependencies of deep features across stages, forming our progressive
recurrent network (PReNet). Furthermore, intra-stage recursive computation of ResNet can be adopted in PRN and
PReNet to notably reduce network parameters with unsubstantial degradation in deraining performance. For network
input and output, we take both stage-wise result and original rainy image as input to each ResNet and finally output
the prediction of residual image. As for loss functions, single MSE or negative SSIM losses are sufficient to train
PRN and PReNet. Experiments show that PRN and PReNet
perform favorably on both synthetic and real rainy images.
Considering its simplicity, efficiency and effectiveness, our
models are expected to serve as a suitable baseline in future deraining research. The source codes are available at
https://github.com/csdwren/PReNet.

1. Introduction
Rain is a common weather condition, and has severe adverse effect on not only human visual perception but also the performance of various high level vision tasks such
as image classification, object detection, and video surveillance [7,14]. Single image deraining aims at restoring clean
∗ Corresponding author

Rainy image

RESCAN [20]

t=1

t=2

t=4

t=6

Figure 1. Deraining results by RESCAN [20] and PReNet (T = 6)
at stage t = 1, 2, 4, 6, respectively.

background image from a rainy image, and has drawn considerable recent research attention. For example, several
traditional optimization based methods [1, 9, 21, 22] have
been suggested for modeling and separating rain streaks
from background clean image. However, due to the complex composition of rain and background layers, image deraining remains a challenging ill-posed problem.
Driven by the unprecedented success of deep learning in
low level vision [3, 15, 18, 28, 34], recent years have also
witnessed the rapid progress of deep convolutional neural
network (CNN) in image deraining. In [5], Fu et al. show

3937

