DrivingStereo: A Large-Scale Dataset for Stereo Matching
in Autonomous Driving Scenarios
Guorun Yang1⋆

Xiao Song2⋆ Chaoqin Huang2,3 Zhidong Deng1 Jianping Shi2 Bolei Zhou4
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University†
2
SenseTime Group Limited 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
1

{ygr13@mails, michael@mail}.tsinghua.edu.cn huangchaoqin@sjtu.edu.cn
{songxiao, shijianping}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Great progress has been made on estimating disparity maps from stereo images. However, with the limited
stereo data available in the existing datasets and unstable
ranging precision of current stereo methods, industry-level
stereo matching in autonomous driving remains challenging. In this paper, we construct a novel large-scale stereo
dataset named DrivingStereo. It contains over 180k images
covering a diverse set of driving scenarios, which is hundreds of times larger than the KITTI Stereo dataset. Highquality labels of disparity are produced by a model-guided
filtering strategy from multi-frame LiDAR points. For better evaluations, we present two new metrics for stereo
matching in the driving scenes, i.e. a distance-aware metric
and a semantic-aware metric. Extensive experiments show
that compared with the models trained on FlyingThings3D
or Cityscapes, the models trained on our DrivingStereo
achieve higher generalization accuracy in real-world driving scenes, while the proposed metrics better evaluate the
stereo methods on all-range distances and across different
classes. Our dataset and code are available at https:
//drivingstereo-dataset.github.io.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation is one of the critical topics in autonomous driving perception. Though LiDAR is commonly
used for the accurate depth and surrounding sensing, the
LiDAR point clouds acquired are usually sparse especially
for the objects in far range while the device itself is highpriced. Alternatively, the calibrated stereo camera system
⋆ indicates equal contribution.
† State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology,
and Center for Intelligent Connected Vehicles and Transportation.

bzhou@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

is able to provide the affordable dense depth estimation.
Recently deep learning methods greatly improve the performance of stereo matching, bringing in better and more
accurate depth estimation. As a result, on KITTI Stereo
2015 leaderboard [21], the bad pixels rate (D1 error) reduces from 6.38% [13] to 1.74% [6], which shows the rapid
progress of stereo matching in the driving scenes.
Though deep learning methods of stereo matching on existing driving benchmarks achieve good performance, they
still suffer from unreliable adaptation and insufficient precision when applied to the real-world driving scenarios. The
main issue lies in data and metric.
Training deep learning models requires massive labeled
data. The existing driving datasets only comprise hundreds
of images [11, 21], on which deep neural networks are
prone to overfit. Moreover, the large-scale synthetic stereo
datasets [20, 10] cannot reflect the real-world data distribution, so that the trained model is difficult to generalize.
Thus a large-scale stereo dataset containing a diverse set of
road scenarios is demanding. On the other hand, we find
that the performance metrics for stereo matching, such as
the end-point error (EPE) [2] and D1 error [21], are insufficient to evaluate capabilities of stereo matching algorithms
in complex driving scenes. In our statistics, more than 80%
valid pixels locate on short-range distances or background
regions, which heavily affects the final measures of EPE or
D1 error. In real-world driving, the different-distance regions as well as various moving objects such as the vehicles
and pedestrian, should also be considered. As a result, new
metrics tailored for driving scenarios are needed.
To address the issue of data and metric mentioned above,
we construct a large-scale stereo matching dataset DrivingStereo for driving scenes. We build the data acquisition platform and collect over 180K frames with LiDAR point clouds. As shown in Fig. 1, our dataset contains a diverse range of driving scenarios, including urban,
suburban, highway, elevated, and country roads, together

899

