Polysemous Visual-Semantic Embedding for Cross-Modal Retrieval
Yale Song
Microsoft Cloud & AI

Mohammad Soleymani
USC Institute for Creative Technologies

yalesong@microsoft.com

soleymani@ict.usc.edu

“My ex texts me at 2am”

Abstract
Visual-semantic embedding aims to find a shared latent
space where related visual and textual instances are close
to each other. Most current methods learn injective embedding functions that map an instance to a single point in the
shared space. Unfortunately, injective embedding cannot
effectively handle polysemous instances with multiple possible meanings; at best, it would find an average representation of different meanings. This hinders its use in real-world
scenarios where individual instances and their cross-modal
associations are often ambiguous. In this work, we introduce Polysemous Instance Embedding Networks (PIE-Nets)
that compute multiple and diverse representations of an instance by combining global context with locally-guided features via multi-head self-attention and residual learning. To
learn visual-semantic embedding, we tie-up two PIE-Nets
and optimize them jointly in the multiple instance learning
framework. Most existing work on cross-modal retrieval focus on image-text pairs of data. Here, we also tackle a more
challenging case of video-text retrieval. To facilitate further
research in video-text retrieval, we release a new dataset
of 50K video-sentence pairs collected from social media,
dubbed MRW (my reaction when). We demonstrate our approach on both image-text and video-text retrieval scenarios
using MS-COCO, TGIF, and our new MRW dataset.

1. Introduction
Visual-semantic embedding [9, 20] aims to find a joint
mapping of instances from visual and textual domains to
a shared embedding space so that related instances from
source domains are mapped to nearby places in the target
space. This has a variety of downstream applications in
computer vision including tagging [9], retrieval [11], captioning [20], visual question answering [19].
Formally, the goal of visual-semantic embedding is to
learn two mapping functions f : X → Z and g : Y → Z
jointly, where X and Y are visual and textual domains, respectively, and Z is a shared embedding space. The functions are often designed to be injective so that there is a one-

Ambiguous
Instance

…

Awkward

Surprised

Agitated

…

Sneaky

…

Partial Association
Ambiguous
Instance

…

Surprised

Suspicious

Figure 1. Cross-modal retrieval in the real-world could be challenging with ambiguous instances (each instance can have multiple meanings/concepts) and their partial associations (not all individual meanings/concepts may match). Addressing these two
challenges is the focus of this work.

to-one mapping from an instance x (or y) to a single point
z ∈ Rd in the embedding space. They are often optimized
to satisfy the following constraint:
d(f (xi ), g(yi )) < d(f (xi ), g(yj )),

∀i 6= j

(1)

where d(·, ·) is a certain distance measure, such as Euclidean and cosine distance. This simple and intuitive setup,
which we refer to as injective instance embedding, is currently the most popular approach in the literature [44].
Unfortunately, injective embedding can suffer when
there is ambiguity in individual instances. Consider an ambiguous instance with multiple meanings/senses, e.g., polysemy words and images containing multiple objects. Even
though each of the meanings/senses can map to different
points in the embedding space, injective embedding is always forced to find a single point, which could be an (inaccurate) weighted geometric mean of all the desirable points.
The issue gets intensified for videos and sentences because
the ambiguity in individual images and words can aggregate
and get compounded, severely limiting its use in real-world
applications such as text-to-video retrieval.
Another case where injective embedding could be prob-

1979

