Dense Intrinsic Appearance Flow for Human Pose Transfer
Yining Li1
Chen Huang2
Chen Change Loy3
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
ly015@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

chenh2@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
We present a novel approach for the task of human pose
transfer, which aims at synthesizing a new image of a person
from an input image of that person and a target pose. Unlike
existing methods, we propose to estimate dense and intrinsic 3D appearance flow to better guide the transfer of pixels between poses. In particular, we wish to generate the 3D
flow from just the reference and target poses. Training a network for this purpose is non-trivial, especially when the annotations for 3D appearance flow are scarce by nature. We
address this problem through a flow synthesis stage. This is
achieved by fitting a 3D model to the given pose pair and
project them back to the 2D plane to compute the dense appearance flow for training. The synthesized ground-truths
are then used to train a feedforward network for efficient
mapping from the input and target skeleton poses to the
3D appearance flow. With the appearance flow, we perform feature warping on the input image and generate a
photorealistic image of the target pose. Extensive results
on DeepFashion and Market-1501 datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach over existing methods. Our
code is available at http://mmlab.ie.cuhk.edu.
hk/projects/pose-transfer/

1. Introduction
The ability to predict what an object will look like from a
new viewpoint is fundamental to intelligence. Human pose
transfer [26] is an important instantiation of such view synthesis task. Given a single view/pose of one person, the goal
is to synthesize an image of that person in arbitrary poses.
This task is of great value to a wide range of applications in
computer vision and graphics. Examples include video synthesis and editing and data augmentation for problems like
person re-identification where it is hard to acquire enough
same-person images from different cameras.
Despite the rapid progress in deep generative models
like Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [6] and Varia-

ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

tional Auto Encoders (VAE) [17], human image generation
between poses is still exceedingly difficult. The main challenge is to model the large variations in 2D appearance due
to the change in 3D pose. This is further compounded by
human body self-occlusion that induces ambiguities in inferring unobserved pixels for the target pose. In general,
successful human pose transfer requires a good representation or disentangling of human pose and appearance, which
is non-trivial to learn from data. The ability to infer invisible
parts is also necessary. Moreover, the image visual quality
largely depends on whether the high frequency details can
be preserved, e.g. in cloth or face regions.
Most existing methods for human pose transfer [1, 5, 18,
23, 24, 27, 28, 47] employ an encoder-decoder architecture
to learn the appearance transformation from an input image, guided by the input and target 2D pose encoded with
some keypoints of the human-body joints. However, such
keypoint-based representation is only able to capture rough
spatial deformations, but not fine-grained ones. As a result, distortions or unrealistic details are often produced,
especially in the presence of large pose change with nonrigid body deformations. Recent advances either decompose the overall deformation by a set of local affine transformations [34], or use a more detailed pose representation
than the keypoint-based one. The latter is to enable ‘dense
appearance flow’ computation that more accurately specifies how to move pixels from the input pose. Neverova et
al. [26] showed that the surface-based pose representation
via DensePose [7] serves as a better alternative. Zanfir et
al. [44] turned to fit a 3D model to both input and target
images, and then perform appearance transfer between the
corresponding vertices. The resulting appearance flow with
3D geometry supervision is more ideal, but the 3D model
fitting would incur too much burden at inference time.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to human
pose transfer that integrates implicit reasoning about 3D geometry from 2D representations only. This allows us to
share the benefits of using 3D geometry for accurate pose
transfer but at much faster speed. Our key idea is to recover

3693

