Motion estimation of non-holonomic ground vehicles
from a single feature correspondence measured over n views
Kun Huang
ShanghaiTech University

Yifu Wang
The Australian National University

huangkun1@shanghaitech.edu.cn

u5434194@anu.edu.au

Laurent Kneip
ShanghaiTech University
lkneip@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
The planar motion of ground vehicles is often nonholonomic, which enables a solution of the two-view relative pose problem from a single point feature correspondence. Man-made environments such as underground parking lots are however dominated by line features. Inspired
by the planar tri-focal tensor and its ability to handle lines,
we establish an n-linear constraint on the locally circular
motion of non-holonomic vehicles able to handle an arbitrarily large and dense window of views. We prove that
this stays a uni-variate problem under the assumption of locally constant vehicle speed, and it can transparently handle both point and vertical line correspondences. In particular, we prove that an application of Viète’s formulas
for extrapolating trigonometric functions of angle multiples
and the Weierstrass substitution casts the problem as one
that merely seeks the roots of a uni-variate polynomial. We
present the complete theory of this novel solver, and test it
on both simulated and real data. Our results prove that it
successfully handles a variety of relevant scenarios, eventually outperforming the 1-point two-view solver.

1. Introduction
Autonomous vehicles promise to be a future disrupting technology on the market. The topic is currently investigated intensively across both industry and academia,
and any successful outcome depends heavily on a reliable, online solution to the interdependent problems of selflocalisation and environment mapping. While the most
powerful solutions rely on a multitude of sensors including
lidars and cameras, the community maintains a high interest in developing vision-only alternatives, too. Cameras are
economic close-to-market sensors that may unlock lower-

level autonomy in more controlled and less critical scenarios, even in the absence of other exteroceptive sensors [6].
While direct sparse [2], semi-dense [3], and dense methods [26] have already been presented, the more traditional
way of sparse feature correspondence-based localization
and mapping continues to be of high importance. Besides
outstanding computational efficiency, it also produces valuable information for place recognition and enables seamless
integration into global optimization objectives [25]. A particularly interesting case is given by the estimation with a
single, forward-looking camera, as such sensors can already
be found in today’s vehicles on the market. The present
paper focuses on the related fundamental problem of relative pose estimation with a single camera mounted on a car.
The solution to this problem is required at the initialization
stage, when no prior information about either the motion
of the vehicle or the environment is available. Sequential
application furthermore enables a straightforward solution
of the visual odometry problem [28], thus enabling online
relative self-localization of the vehicle.
The classical solution to the calibrated relative pose
problem with a single camera requires at least five pointfeature correspondences. However, as shown in [31], the
non-holonomic motion of ground vehicles has fewer degrees of freedom, which reduces the number of required
correspondences. The motion of ground vehicles can be approximated by the Ackermann model, which forces the local trajectory to be a circular arc in the plane, and the heading of the vehicle to remain tangential to the arc. The model
depends on only two parameters, which are the radius of the
circle and the inscribed angle of the arc. Furthermore, using only a single camera renders scale unobservable, and
the latter affects only the radius of the circle. As outlined in
[31], this fact permits the resolution of the relative rotation
angle from only a single feature correspondence.
Draw-backs of the 1-point solver presented in [31] are a
112706

