Distraction-aware Shadow Detection
Quanlong Zheng
Xiaotian Qiao
Ying Cao
Rynson W.H. Lau
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Shadow detection is an important and challenging task
for scene understanding. Despite promising results from
recent deep learning based methods. Existing works still
struggle with ambiguous cases where the visual appearances of shadow and non-shadow regions are similar (referred to as distraction in our context). In this paper,
we propose a Distraction-aware Shadow Detection Network (DSDNet) by explicitly learning and integrating the
semantics of visual distraction regions in an end-to-end
framework. At the core of our framework is a novel standalone, differentiable Distraction-aware Shadow (DS) module, which allows us to learn distraction-aware, discriminative features for robust shadow detection, by explicitly
predicting false positives and false negatives. We conduct extensive experiments on three public shadow detection datasets, SBU, UCF and ISTD, to evaluate our method.
Experimental results demonstrate that our model can boost
shadow detection performance, by effectively suppressing
the detection of false positives and false negatives, achieving state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Shadow is a common illumination phenomenon, caused
by the occlusion of light by some occluders, resulting in
color and intensity changes in the local surfaces. Hence,
detecting shadows allows us to infer, for example, the light
source position [19, 26], scene geometry [16, 25, 15], and
camera parameters [37]. On the other hand, shadows can
impede many vision tasks, e.g., visual tracking [2], object detection [23], and semantic segmentation [6]. Hence,
shadow detection has been long-time studied and is a significant computer vision problem.
Early shadow detection methods are mostly physical
models mainly based on color chromaticity or illumination
invariant assumptions and use hand-craft features e.g., illumination cues [3, 27, 7], color [4, 30], and others [14, 41].
With the success in applying deep learning on vision tasks,
Ying Cao is the corresponding author. This work was led by Rynson Lau.

(a) Input Image

(c) BDRAR [42]

(d) ADNet [21]

(e) DSC [12]

(f) Ours

(b) GT

Figure 1. Shadow detection with distraction. Existing methods [42, 21, 12] wrongly detect a non-shadow region in the input
image that appears like shadow (pointed to by a red arrow in (a)
top row) as shadow ((b-d) top row), and also wrongly consider a
shadow region that appears like a non-shadow pattern (pointed to
by a green arrow in (a) bottom row) as non-shadow ((b-d) bottom row). Our distraction-aware model can detect shadow regions
favorably in both cases. Best view in color.

recent data-driven models [17, 32, 28, 24, 42] learn to detect shadows using CNNs. They achieve significant performance improvements over the traditional ones. The mainstream methods mainly take two strategies, i.e., enlarging
the training data [21] or combining global context information [24, 34, 42].
In natural images, there are often non-shadow regions in
the image that appear like shadows (e.g., Figure 1(a) top
row) and hence are wrongly detected as shadows (e.g., Figure 1(b-d) top row), and there are also shadow regions that
appear like non-shadow patterns (e.g., Figure 1(a) bottom
row) and hence are wrongly considered as non-shadows
(e.g., Figure 1(b-d) bottom row). In this paper, we refer to these ambiguous regions as distraction, and consider two types of distractions: false positive distraction
(FPD) - shadow-like non-shadow regions, and false negative distraction (FND) - shadow regions with non-shadow
patterns. State-of-the-art methods [42, 21] tend to misdetect these ambiguous regions, partially because their models treat all the cases equally, thereby requiring significant
amounts of data to learn to resolve such challenging ambiguities. Hence, limited availability of labeled shadow detection data [32] hinders the performance of these models.
We note that humans can often detect shadows very accurately, without being affected by distractions. Our obser-

5167

