SPM-Tracker: Series-Parallel Matching for Real-Time Visual Object Tracking
Guangting Wang∗1

Chong Luo2

Zhiwei Xiong1

University of Science and Technology of China1
flylight@mail.ustc.edu.cn

cluo@microsoft.com

Wenjun Zeng2

Microsoft Research Asia2

zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn wezeng@microsoft.com

The greatest challenge facing visual object tracking is
the simultaneous requirements on robustness and discrimination power. In this paper, we propose a SiamFC-based
tracker, named SPM-Tracker, to tackle this challenge. The
basic idea is to address the two requirements in two separate matching stages. Robustness is strengthened in the
coarse matching (CM) stage through generalized training
while discrimination power is enhanced in the fine matching (FM) stage through a distance learning network. The
two stages are connected in series as the input proposals of
the FM stage are generated by the CM stage. They are also
connected in parallel as the matching scores and box location refinements are fused to generate the final results. This
innovative series-parallel structure takes advantage of both
stages and results in superior performance. The proposed
SPM-Tracker, running at 120fps on GPU, achieves an AUC
of 0.687 on OTB-100 and an EAO of 0.434 on VOT-16, exceeding other real-time trackers by a notable margin.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is one of the fundamental research
problems in computer vision and video analytics. Given the
bounding box of a target object in the first frame of a video,
a tracker is expected to locate the target object in all subsequent frames. The greatest challenge of visual tracking can
be attributed to the simultaneous requirements on robustness and discrimination power. The robustness requirement
demands a tracker not to lose tracking when the appearance
of the target changes due to illumination, motion, view angle, or object deformation. Meanwhile, a tracker is required
to have the power to discriminate the target object from cluttered background or similar surrounding objects. These two
requirements are sometimes contradictory and hard to be
fulfilled at the same time.
Intuitively, both requirements need to be handled
∗ This work is done when Guangting Wang is an intern in MSRA.

Image
Pair

CNN

Abstract
Coarse
Matching

+
Fine
Matching

Figure 1. The series-parallel structure which connects coarse
matching and fine matching stages in the proposed SPM-Tracker.

through online training. A tracker keeps collecting positive and negative samples along the tracking process. For
generative trackers, positive samples help to model the appearance variation of the target. For discriminative trackers, more positive and negative samples help to find a more
precise decision boundary that separates the target from the
background. For quite a long time, online training has been
an indispensable part in tracker design. Recently, with the
advancement of deep learning and convolutional neural networks, deep features have been widely adopted in object
trackers [34, 9, 39, 15, 7, 30]. However, online training
with deep features is extremely time consuming. Without
much surprise, the deep version of many high-performance
trackers [9, 7, 3, 39, 34, 48, 53] cannot run in real-time any
more, even on modern GPUs.
While the excessive volume of deep features brings
speed issues to online training, their strong representational
power also opens up a possibility to completely give up online training. The idea is, under a given distance measure,
to learn an embedding space, through offline training, that
can maximize the interclass inertia between different objects and minimize the intraclass inertia for the same object [58]. Note that maximizing the interclass inertia corresponds to the discrimination power and minimizing the intraclass inertia corresponds to the robustness. The pioneering
work along this research line is SiamFC [2]. In addition
to the offline training, SiamFC uses cross-correlation operation to efficiently measure the distance between the target
patch and all surrounding patches. As a result, SiamFC can
operate at 86fps on GPU.
By design, the SiamFC framework faces challenges in
balancing the robustness and the discrimination power of

3643

