Two-Stream Adaptive Graph Convolutional Networks for Skeleton-Based Action
Recognition

1

Lei Shi1,2
Yifan Zhang1,2 *
Jian Cheng1,2,3
Hanqing Lu1,2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{lei.shi, yfzhang, jcheng, luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
In skeleton-based action recognition, graph convolutional networks (GCNs), which model the human body
skeletons as spatiotemporal graphs, have achieved remarkable performance. However, in existing GCN-based methods, the topology of the graph is set manually, and it is fixed
over all layers and input samples. This may not be optimal for the hierarchical GCN and diverse samples in action
recognition tasks. In addition, the second-order information (the lengths and directions of bones) of the skeleton
data, which is naturally more informative and discriminative for action recognition, is rarely investigated in existing
methods. In this work, we propose a novel two-stream adaptive graph convolutional network (2s-AGCN) for skeletonbased action recognition. The topology of the graph in our
model can be either uniformly or individually learned by the
BP algorithm in an end-to-end manner. This data-driven
method increases the flexibility of the model for graph construction and brings more generality to adapt to various
data samples. Moreover, a two-stream framework is proposed to model both the first-order and the second-order
information simultaneously, which shows notable improvement for the recognition accuracy. Extensive experiments
on the two large-scale datasets, NTU-RGBD and KineticsSkeleton, demonstrate that the performance of our model
exceeds the state-of-the-art with a significant margin.

1. Introduction
Action recognition methods based on skeleton data have
been widely investigated and attracted considerable attention due to their strong adaptability to the dynamic circumstance and complicated background [31, 8, 6, 27, 22, 29,
33, 19, 20, 21, 14, 13, 23, 18, 17, 32, 30, 34]. Conventional
* Corresponding Author

deep-learning-based methods manually structure the skeleton as a sequence of joint-coordinate vectors [6, 27, 22, 29,
33, 19, 20] or as a pseudo-image [21, 14, 13, 23, 18, 17],
which is fed into RNNs or CNNs to generate the prediction. However, representing the skeleton data as a vector
sequence or a 2D grid cannot fully express the dependency
between correlated joints. The skeleton is naturally structured as a graph in a non-Euclidean space with the joints as
vertexes and their natural connections in the human body
as edges. The previous methods cannot exploit the graph
structure of the skeleton data and are difficult to generalize to skeletons with arbitrary forms. Recently, graph convolutional networks (GCNs), which generalize convolution
from image to graph, have been successfully adopted in
many applications[16, 7, 25, 1, 9, 24, 15]. For the skeletonbased action recognition task, Yan et al. [32] first apply
GCNs to model the skeleton data. They construct a spatial
graph based on the natural connections of joints in the human body and add the temporal edges between corresponding joints in consecutive frames. A distance-based sampling
function is proposed for constructing the graph convolutional layer, which is then employed as a basic module to
build the final spatiotemporal graph convolutional network
(ST-GCN).
However, there are three disadvantages for the process
of the graph construction in ST-GCN [32]: (1) The skeleton
graph employed in ST-GCN is heuristically predefined and
represents only the physical structure of the human body.
Thus it is not guaranteed to be optimal for the action recognition task. For example, the relationship between the two
hands is important for recognizing classes such as “clapping” and “reading.” However, it is difficult for ST-GCN
to capture the dependency between the two hands since
they are located far away from each other in the predefined
human-body-based graphs. (2) The structure of GCNs is hierarchical where different layers contain multilevel semantic information. However, the topology of the graph ap-

12026

