DynTypo: Example-based Dynamic Text Effects Transfer
Yifang Men, Zhouhui Lian∗, Yingmin Tang, Jianguo Xiao
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, China

Figure 1: The dynamic text effects from an exemplar video (far left) can be transferred to a target text image (bottom) using
our method. Exemplar video: c Thirdmenson via YouTube.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel approach for dynamic
text effects transfer by using example-based texture synthesis. In contrast to previous works that require an input video
of the target to provide motion guidance, we aim to animate
a still image of the target text by transferring the desired
dynamic effects from an observed exemplar. Due to the simplicity of target guidance and complexity of realistic effects,
it is prone to producing temporal artifacts such as flickers
and pulsations. To address the problem, our core idea is
to find a common Nearest-neighbor Field (NNF) that would
optimize the textural coherence across all keyframes simultaneously. With the static NNF for video sequences, we
implicitly transfer motion properties from source to target.
We also introduce a guided NNF search by employing the
distance-based weight map and Simulated Annealing (SA)
for deep direction-guided propagation to allow intense dynamic effects to be completely transferred with no semantic
guidance provided. Experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness and superiority of our method in dynamic text
effects transfer through extensive comparisons with stateof-the-art algorithms. We also show the potentiality of our
method via multiple experiments for various application domains.

1. Introduction
Dynamic typography is an essential visual element in a
variety of media such as films, advertisements and video
* Corresponding author. E-mail: lianzhouhui@pku.edu.cn

clips. Using typographies with fantastic dynamic effects can markedly enhance the atmosphere of the scene and
make it be more attractive to viewers. However, creating
a dynamic text requires a series of complicated operations
with editing software like Adobe After Effects and typically takes several hours even for skilled designers. Moreover,
restructuring different texts with an existing dynamic effect
can be painstaking, as huge amounts of repetitive operations
are involved. It is already a labor-intensive work to generate a dynamic typography with the same effect for 26 letters
in the English alphabet, let alone large-scale font libraries
(e.g., Chinese fonts) with huge amounts of characters.
To solve the aforementioned problem, we introduce
“DynTypo”, a brand-new system that automatically transfers various dynamic effects such as burning flame, flowing
water and billowing smoke from the source exemplar to the
target plain texts. The input to our system includes a source
text image, a source stylized video with dynamic effects and
a target text image. With DynTypo the target stylized video
with the same dynamic text effects in source can be generated (see Figure 1). Our system allows users to transfer
an observed instance of dynamic typography to a new text
and even non-experts can quickly and easily produce sophisticated dynamic texts in their own projects. Compared
to LiveType [30], the earliest model to generate dynamic typography via simple shape deformations, this paper has the
completely different motivation mentioned below.
Creating a dynamic typography with the chosen style
from an exemplar poses several challenges. First, we use
only a single image of the target text as input to animate and
15870

