Self-supervised Representation Learning from Videos
for Facial Action Unit Detection
Yong Li1,2 , Jiabei Zeng1 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3,4 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, 200031, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China
yong.li@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {jiabei.zeng, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

Facial actions convey varied and nuanced meanings, including a person’s intentions, affective and physical states.
To study the facial actions comprehensively, Ekman and
Friesen developed the Facial Action Coding System (FACS)
which deﬁnes a unique set of about 40 atomic nonoverlapping facial muscle actions called Action Units (AUs)
[8]. AU detection has drawn signiﬁcant interest from computer scientists and psychologists over recent decades, as
it holds promise to an abundance of applications, such as
affect analysis, mental health assessment, and human com-

AU
feature

AU-related
movements
AU-changed

ɿ
target image

source image

ɿ

1. Introduction

re-generate

ɿ

In this paper, we aim to learn discriminative representation for facial action unit (AU) detection from large amount
of videos without manual annotations. Inspired by the
fact that facial actions are the movements of facial muscles, we depict the movements as the transformation between two face images in different frames and use it as the
self-supervisory signal to learn the representations. However, under the uncontrolled condition, the transformation
is caused by both facial actions and head motions. To remove the influence by head motions, we propose a TwinCycle Autoencoder (TCAE) that can disentangle the facial
action related movements and the head motion related ones.
Speciﬁcally, TCAE is trained to respectively change the facial actions and head poses of the source face to those of
the target face. Our experiments validate TCAE’s capability of decoupling the movements. Experimental results
also demonstrate that the learned representation is discriminative for AU detection, where TCAE outperforms or is
comparable with the state-of-the-art self-supervised learning methods and supervised AU detection methods.

pose-changed
pose-related
movements

re-generate

Figure 1. Main idea of the proposed self-supervised learning
framework Twin-Cycle Autoencoder (TCAE). TCAE learns AU
discriminative features by predicting the disentangled movements
that change the AUs and head poses respectively. TCAE ensures
the quality of the discovered movements by transforming the AUchanged and pose-changed faces back to the source.

puter interaction.
Recently, the development of AU detection is facilitated
by the progress in deep learning [47, 22, 21, 32]. However,
it is data starved to make full use of these supervised methods, because labelling AUs is time consuming, error prone,
and confusing. It takes 30 minutes or more for an FACS
expert to manually code an AU for a one-minute video [46].
To alleviate the demand for adequate and accurate annotations, we exploit the practically inﬁnite amount of unlabelled videos to learn discriminative AU representations in
a self-supervised manner. Considering that AUs appear as
the local movements within the face and the movements are
easy be to detected without manual annotations, we propose
to use the movements as the supervisory signals in learning
the AU representations. However, the detected movements

10924

