Combinatorial persistency criteria for multicut and max-cut
Jan-Hendrik Lange

Bjoern Andres

Paul Swoboda

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Saarland University

Bosch Center for AI
University of Tübingen

Abstract
In combinatorial optimization, partial variable assignments are called persistent if they agree with some optimal
solution. We propose persistency criteria for the multicut
and max-cut problem as well as fast combinatorial routines
to verify them. The criteria that we derive are based on
mappings that improve feasible multicuts, respectively cuts.
Our elementary criteria can be checked enumeratively. The
more advanced ones rely on fast algorithms for upper and
lower bounds for the respective cut problems and max-flow
techniques for auxiliary min-cut problems. Our methods can
be used as a preprocessing technique for reducing problem
sizes or for computing partial optimality guarantees for solutions output by heuristic solvers. We show the efficacy of
our methods on instances of both problems from computer
vision, biomedical image analysis and statistical physics.

1. Introduction
Partitioning graphs into meaningful clusters is a fundamental problem in combinatorial optimization with numerous applications in computer vision, biomedical image analysis, machine learning, data mining and beyond. The MUL TICUT problem (a.k.a. correlation clustering) and MAX - CUT
problem are arguably among the most well-known combinatorial optimization problems for partitioning graphs. They
enable graph clustering purely based on costs between pairs
of nodes and are thus commonly employed to model image
processing and segmentation tasks occurring in computer
vision [34, 3, 22, 18, 5]. The following factors contribute to
the significance of the MULTICUT and MAX - CUT problem:
The former allows for a graph clustering formulation that
determines the number of clusters as part of the optimization process. The latter is essentially equivalent to binary
quadratic programming, which has a variety of applications
in image processing. However, as computer vision models are typically large-scale, standard solution techniques
based on solving LP-relaxations do not scale well enough
and are thus inapplicable. Even more so, finding globally

optimal solutions with branch-and-cut is infeasible with offthe-shelf commercial solvers. Hence, the need arises for
developing specialized heuristic solvers that output highquality solutions for real-world problems, despite the worstcase NP-hardness of the MULTICUT and MAX - CUT problem.
Unfortunately, although heuristic solvers often achieve a
good empirical performance, they usually come without any
optimality guarantees. Specifically, even if large parts of
the variable assignments computed by a heuristic agree with
globally optimal solutions, such optimality is not recognized.
In this work we consider combinatorial techniques for the
MULTICUT and MAX - CUT problem by which we can efficiently find persistency (a.k.a. partial optimality). Persistent
variable assignments come with a certificate that proves their
agreement with a globally optimal solution. The potential
benefits are twofold: (i) After running a primal heuristic,
we can compute certificates which show that some variables
are persistent. (ii) Even before running a heuristic, we may
determine in a preprocessing step persistent variable assignments. In either case, the problem size can be reduced. In
the first case, a subsequent optimization with exact solvers
is accelerated. In the second case, possibly also the runtime
of a heuristic algorithm is reduced and the solution quality
improved.
A joint treatment of the MULTICUT and MAX - CUT problem seems instructive, since many criteria have a similar
formulation and are based on analogous arguments. For the
MAX - CUT problem we offer, to our knowledge, a novel approach for computing persistent variable assignments. For
the MULTICUT problem our empirical evidence suggests that
our method offers substantial improvement over prior work
on persistency. Our empirical results are most significant
for very large scale problems which current heuristics can
barely handle, e.g. in biomedical image segmentation [5]. By
reducing problem size via persistency, our method enables
high quality solutions in such cases.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review
the related work. In Section 3 we introduce the MULTICUT
and MAX - CUT problem mathematically in a shared compact
formulation. In Section 4 we recap the concept of improving
16093

