Collaborative Global-Local Networks for Memory-Efficient Segmentation of
Ultra-High Resolution Images
Wuyang Chen∗1 , Ziyu Jiang∗1 , Zhangyang Wang1 , Kexin Cui1 and Xiaoning Qian2
{wuyang.chen, jiangziyu, atlaswang, ckx9411sx, xqian}@tamu.edu
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University
https://github.com/chenwydj/ultra_high_resolution_segmentation
Mobile memory capacity

Mobile memory capacity

(a) Best performance achievable

Mobile memory capacity

(b) Performance trained on global image

(c) Performance trained on local patches

Figure 1: Inference memory and mean intersection over union (mIoU) accuracy on the DeepGlobe dataset [1]. (a): Comparison of best
achievable mIoU v.s. memory for different segmentation methods. (b): mIoU/memory with different global image sizes (downsampling
rate shown in scale annotations). (c): mIoU/memory with different local patch sizes (normalized patch size shown in scale annotations).
GLNet (red dots) integrates both global and local information in a compact way, contributing to a well-balanced trade-off between accuracy
and memory usage. See Section 4 for experiment details. Methods studied: ICNet [2], DeepLabv3+ [3], FPN [4], FCN-8s [5], UNet [6],
PSPNet [7], SegNet [8], and the proposed GLNet.

Abstract
Segmentation of ultra-high resolution images is increasingly demanded, yet poses significant challenges for algorithm efficiency, in particular considering the (GPU) memory limits. Current approaches either downsample an ultrahigh resolution image or crop it into small patches for
separate processing. In either way, the loss of local fine
details or global contextual information results in limited
segmentation accuracy. We propose collaborative GlobalLocal Networks (GLNet) to effectively preserve both global
and local information in a highly memory-efficient manner.
GLNet is composed of a global branch and a local branch,
taking the downsampled entire image and its cropped local patches as respective inputs. For segmentation, GLNet
deeply fuses feature maps from two branches, capturing
both the high-resolution fine structures from zoomed-in local patches and the contextual dependency from the downsampled input. To further resolve the potential class imbalance problem between background and foreground regions,
we present a coarse-to-fine variant of GLNet, also being
∗ The first two authors contributed equally.

memory-efficient. Extensive experiments and analyses have
been performed on three real-world ultra-high aerial and
medical image datasets (resolution up to 30 million pixels). With only one single 1080Ti GPU and less than 2GB
memory used, our GLNet yields high-quality segmentation results and achieves much more competitive accuracymemory usage trade-offs compared to state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
With the advancement of photography and sensor technologies, the accessibility to ultra-high resolution images
has opened new horizons to the computer vision community and increased demands for effective analyses. Currently, an image with at least 2048×1080 (∼2.2M) pixels
are regarded as 2K high resolution media [16]. An images with at least 3840×1080 (∼4.1M) pixels reaches the
bare minimum bar of 4K resolution [17], and 4K ultra-high
definition media usually refers to a minimum resolution of
3840×2160 (∼8.3M) [18]. Such images come from a wide
range of scientific imaging applications, such as geospatial and histopathological images. Semantic segmentation
allows better understanding and automatic annotations for

8924

