Relational Action Forecasting
Chen Sun1 , Abhinav Shrivastava2 , Carl Vondrick1 ,
Rahul Sukthankar1 , Kevin Murphy1 , and Cordelia Schmid1
1

2

Google Research
University of Maryland

Abstract
This paper focuses on multi-person action forecasting
in videos. More precisely, given a history of H previous
frames, the goal is to detect actors and to predict their future actions for the next T frames. Our approach jointly
models temporal and spatial interactions among different
actors by constructing a recurrent graph, using actor proposals obtained with Faster R-CNN as nodes. Our method
learns to select a subset of discriminative relations without requiring explicit supervision, thus enabling us to tackle
challenging visual data. We refer to our model as Discriminative Relational Recurrent Network (DR2 N). Evaluation of
action prediction on AVA demonstrates the effectiveness of
our proposed method compared to simpler baselines. Furthermore, we significantly improve performance on the task
of early action classification on J-HMDB, from the previous
SOTA of 48% to 60%.

Figure 1: Action prediction from a single frame (middle)
is ambiguous, but requires temporal context for the actors
and their interactions. It only becomes apparent that the
lady will get off the horse, if we know that she was riding
towards the man, and the man is holding the horse.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the task of forecasting what
high level actions people will perform in the future, given
noisy visual evidence. For example, consider Figure 1:
given the current video frame, and a sequence of past
frames, we would like to detect (localize) the people (man
and woman), and classify their current actions (woman rides
horse, man and woman are talking), as well as predict future
plausible action sequences for each person (woman will get
off horse, man will hold horse reigns).
More formally, our task is to compute the probability
−H:0
p(N, b01:N , a0:T
), where V t is the frame at time t
1:N |V
(where t = 0 is the present), V = V −H:0 is the visual history of H previous frames, N is the number of predicted
actors, b0n is the predicted location (bounding box) of actor
n at time 0, and atn is the predicted action label for actor
n at time t, which we compute for t = 0 : T , where T

is the maximum forecasting horizon. This formulation is
closely related to but different than prior work. In particular,
video classification focuses on computing a single global
label in the offline scenario, p(c|V 0:T ); spatio-temporal action detection focuses on multi-agent localization and clas0:T
0:T
sification, but in the offline scenario, p(a0:T
);
1:N , b1:N |V
action anticipation focuses on the future, but for a single
class label, p(c0:T |V −H:0 ); and trajectory forecasting focuses on multiple agents in the future, but generally focuses on locations, not actions, and assumes that the past
locations (and hence the number of agents) is observed:
−H:0 −H:0
p(b1:T
, b1:N , N ). By contrast, we only observe
1:N |V
past frames, and want to predict future high level actions of
agents. This could be useful for self-driving cars, humanrobot interaction, etc. See Section 2 for a more detailed
discussion of related work.
1273

