Meta-SR: A Magnification-Arbitrary Network for Super-Resolution
Xuecai Hu∗1,2 , Haoyuan Mu∗ 4 , Xiangyu Zhang3 , Zilei Wang1 , Tieniu Tan1,2 , Jian Sun3
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, NLPR, CASIA
3
Megvii Inc (Face++) 4 Tsinghua University
huxc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, muhy17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{zhangxiangyu, sunjian}@megvii.com, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn, tnt@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Recent research on super-resolution has achieved great
success due to the development of deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs). However, super-resolution of arbitrary scale factor has been ignored for a long time. Most
previous researchers regard super-resolution of different
scale factors as independent tasks. They train a specific
model for each scale factor which is inefficient in computing, and prior work only take the super-resolution of several integer scale factors into consideration. In this work,
we propose a novel method called Meta-SR to firstly solve
super-resolution of arbitrary scale factor (including noninteger scale factors) with a single model. In our Meta-SR,
the Meta-Upscale Module is proposed to replace the traditional upscale module. For arbitrary scale factor, the MetaUpscale Module dynamically predicts the weights of the upscale filters by taking the scale factor as input and use these
weights to generate the HR image of arbitrary size. For any
low-resolution image, our Meta-SR can continuously zoom
in it with arbitrary scale factor by only using a single model.
We evaluated the proposed method through extensive experiments on widely used benchmark datasets on single image
super-resolution. The experimental results show the superiority of our Meta-Upscale.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to reconstruct
a visually natural high-resolution image from its degraded
low-resolution (LR) image. And it has very wide application on security and surveillance imaging [8, 37], medical
imaging [23], as well as satellite and aerial imaging [32]. In
real-world scenarios, it is very common and necessary for
SISR to zoom in the LR image with the user-customized
∗ This work is conducted during Xuecai Hu’s and Haoyuan Mu’s internship at Megvii Inc, two authors contributed equally to this work.

scale factor. As with the common image viewer, the user
can arbitrarily zoom in the viewed image by rolling the
mouse wheel to see the local details of the viewed image.
The customized scale factor for super-resolution also can
be any positive number. And it should not be fixed to some
certain integers. Thus, a method to solve super-resolution of
arbitrary scale factor is important for putting the SISR into
more practical use. If we train a specific model for each positive scale factor, it is impossible to store all these models
and it is inefficient in computing. Thus, the more important
thing is that whether we can solve the super-resolution of
arbitrary scale factor with a single model.
However, as we all known, the most existing SISR methods only consider super-resolution of some certain integer
scale factors (X2, X3, X4). And these methods treat superresolution of different scale factors as independent tasks.
Few previous work has discussed how to implement superresolution of arbitrary scale factor. As for the state-of-theart SISR methods, such as ESPCNN [22], EDSR [18], RDN
[36] and RCAN [35], these methods zoom in the feature
maps at the end of networks with the sub-pixel convolution
[18]. Unfortunately, these methods have to design a specific upscale module for each scale factor. Each upscale
module can only zoom in the image with the fixed integer
scale factor. And the sub-pixel convolution only works for
the integer scale factors. These disadvantages limit the use
of SISR to real-world scenarios. Although, we could implement super-resolution of non-integer scale factors by properly upscaling the input image. However, the repeated computation and the upscaled input make these methods very
time-consuming and hard to put into pratical use.
To solve these drawbacks and put SISR into more practical use, an efficient and novel method for super-resolution
of arbitrary scale factor with a single model is necessary.
If we want to solve the super-resolution of arbitrary scale
factor with a single model, a group of weights for upscale
filters is necessary for each scale factor. Inspired by the
meta-learning, we propose a network to dynamically pre-

1575

