Disentangling Latent Hands for Image Synthesis and Pose Estimation
Linlin Yang
University of Bonn, Germany

Angela Yao
National University of Singapore, Singapore

yangl@cs.uni-bonn.de

ayao@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Hand image synthesis and pose estimation from RGB images are both highly challenging tasks due to the large discrepancy between factors of variation ranging from image
background content to camera viewpoint. To better analyze these factors of variation, we propose the use of disentangled representations and a disentangled variational
autoencoder (dVAE) that allows for specific sampling and
inference of these factors. The derived objective from the
variational lower bound as well as the proposed training
strategy are highly flexible, allowing us to handle crossmodal encoders and decoders as well as semi-supervised
learning scenarios. Experiments show that our dVAE can
synthesize highly realistic images of the hand specifiable by
both pose and image background content and also estimate
3D hand poses from RGB images with accuracy competitive
with state-of-the-art on two public benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Vision-based hand pose estimation has progressed very
rapidly in the past years [27, 38], driven in part by its potential for use in human-computer interaction applications.
Advancements are largely due to the widespread availability
of commodity depth sensors as well as the strong learning
capabilities of deep neural networks. As a result, the majority of state-of-the-art methods apply deep learning methods
to depth images [5, 6, 7, 8, 14, 18, 19, 32, 33]. Estimating
3D hand pose from single RGB images, however, is a lessstudied and more difficult problem which has only recently
gained some attention [3, 16, 21, 25, 40].
Unlike depth, which is a 2.5D source of information,
RGB inputs have significantly more ambiguities. These
ambiguities arise from the 3D to 2D projection and diverse backgrounds which are otherwise less pronounced in
depth images. As such, methods which tackle the problem
of monocular RGB hand pose estimation rely on learning
from large datasets [40]. However, given the difficulties
of accurately labelling hand poses in 3D, large-scale RGB
datasets collected to date are synthesized [16, 40]. Real

Figure 1: Illustration of dVAE. The red lines denote variational
approximations while the black lines denote the generative model.
With the help of labelled factors of variations (e.g. pose, viewpoint
and image content), we learn a disentangled and specifiable representation for RGB hand images in a VAE framework.

recorded datasets are much smaller, with only tens of sequences [30, 39]. This presents significant challenges when
it comes to learning and motivates the need for strong kinematic and or image priors.
Even though straight-forward discriminative approaches
have shown great success in accurately estimating hand
poses, there has also been growing interest in the use
of deep generative models such as adversarial networks
(GANs) [16, 32] and variational autoencoders (VAEs) [25].
Generative models can approximate and sample from the
underlying distribution of hand poses as well as the associated images, and depending on the model formulation, may
enable semi-supervised learning. This is particularly appealing for hand pose estimation, for which data with accurate ground truth can be difficult to obtain. One caveat, however, is that in their standard formulation, GANs and VAEs
learn only black-box latent representations. Such representations offer little control for conditioning upon humaninterpretable factors. Of the deep generative works presented to date [16, 25, 32], the latent representations are
specifiable only by hand pose. Consequently it is possible
to sample only a single (average) image per pose.

9877

