Classification-Reconstruction Learning for Open-Set Recognition
Ryota Yoshihashi1
Shaodi You2
1
The University of Tokyo

Rei Kawakami1
Takeshi Naemura1
2
Data61-CSIRO

Wen Shao1
Makoto Iida1

{yoshi,shao,rei,naemura}@nae-lab.org, Shaodi.You@data61.csiro.au, iida@ilab.eco.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Open-set classiﬁcation is a problem of handling ‘unknown’ classes that are not contained in the training
dataset, whereas traditional classiﬁers assume that only
known classes appear in the test environment. Existing open-set classiﬁers rely on deep networks trained in
a supervised manner on known classes in the training
set; this causes specialization of learned representations
to known classes and makes it hard to distinguish unknowns from knowns. In contrast, we train networks
for joint classiﬁcation and reconstruction of input data.
This enhances the learned representation so as to preserve information useful for separating unknowns from
knowns, as well as to discriminate classes of knowns. Our
novel Classiﬁcation-Reconstruction learning for Open-Set
Recognition (CROSR) utilizes latent representations for reconstruction and enables robust unknown detection without
harming the known-class classiﬁcation accuracy. Extensive experiments reveal that the proposed method outperforms existing deep open-set classiﬁers in multiple standard
datasets and is robust to diverse outliers.

a) Existing deep open-set classifiers (Openmax, G-Openmax, DOC)
Deep net

‫ݔ‬

Input

‫ݕ‬

Prediction

Open-set
classifier
Unknown Closed-set
detector
classifier

N + 1 way
class
probabilities

b) Classification-Reconstruction learning
Deep net
for Open-Set Recognition (CROSR)
Input Reconstructed

‫ݔ‬
‫ݕ‬

Prediction

‫ݔ‬෤

‫ݖ‬

Open-set
classifier
Unknown Closed-set
detector
classifier

N + 1 way
class
probabilities

Latent vars.

Figure 1. Overview of existing and our deep open-set classiﬁcation
models. Existing models (a) utilize only their network’s ﬁnal prediction y for classiﬁcation and unknown detection. In contrast, in
CROSR (b), a deep net is trained to provide a prediction y and a latent representation for reconstruction z within known classes. An
open-set classiﬁer (right), which consists of an unknown detector
and a closed-set classiﬁer, exploits y for closed-set classiﬁcation,
and y and z for unknown detection.

1. Introduction
To be deployable to real applications, recognition systems need to be tolerant of unknown things and events that
were not anticipated during the training phase. However,
most of the existing learning methods are based on the
closed-world assumption, that is, the training datasets are
assumed to include all classes that appear in the environments where the system will be deployed. This assumption can be easily violated in real-world problems, where
covering all possible classes is almost impossible [25].
Closed-set classiﬁers are error-prone to samples of unknown classes, and this limits their usability [46, 43].
In contrast, open-set classiﬁers [36] can detect samples
that belong to none of the training classes. Typically, they
ﬁt a probability distribution to the training samples in some
feature space, and detect outliers as unknowns. For the
features to represent the samples, almost all existing deep
open-set classiﬁers rely on those acquired via fully supervised learning [3, 10, 40], as shown in Fig. 1 (a). How-

ever, they are for emphasizing the discriminative features of
known classes; they are not necessarily useful for representing unknowns or separating unknowns from knowns.
In this study, our goal is to learn efﬁcient feature representations that are able to classify known classes as well
as to detect unknowns as outliers. Regarding the representations of outliers that we cannot assume beforehand,
it is natural to add unsupervised learning as a regularizer
so that the learned representations acquire information that
are important in general but may not be useful for classifying given classes. Thus, we utilize unsupervised learning of reconstructions in addition to supervised learning
of classiﬁcations. Reconstruction of input samples from
low-dimensional latent representations inside the networks
is a general way of unsupervised learning [16]. The representation learned via reconstruction are useful in several
tasks [50]. Although there are previous successful examples of classiﬁcation-reconstruction learning, such as semi14016

