Target-Aware Deep Tracking
Xin Li1

Chao Ma2 Baoyuan Wu3 Zhenyu He1∗ Ming-Hsuan Yang4,5
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Tencent AI Lab 4 University of California, Merced 5 Google Cloud AI
xinlihitsz@gmail.com

chaoma@sjtu.edu.cn

zhenyuhe@hit.edu.cn

mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is one of the fundamental computer vision problems with a wide range of applications. Given a
target object specified by a bounding box in the first frame,
visual tracking aims to locate the target object in the subsequent frames. This is challenging as target objects often undergo significant appearance changes over time and
may temporally leave the field of the view. Conventional
trackers prior to the advances of deep learning mainly con∗ Corresponding author.

0.7

Success rate (OPE) v.s. Speed on the OTB-2015 dataset
VITAL

0.68

Success rate (AUC)

Existing deep trackers mainly use convolutional neural
networks pre-trained for the generic object recognition task
for representations. Despite demonstrated successes for numerous vision tasks, the contributions of using pre-trained
deep features for visual tracking are not as significant as
that for object recognition. The key issue is that in visual
tracking the targets of interest can be arbitrary object class
with arbitrary forms. As such, pre-trained deep features are
less effective in modeling these targets of arbitrary forms
for distinguishing them from the background. In this paper,
we propose a novel scheme to learn target-aware features,
which can better recognize the targets undergoing significant appearance variations than pre-trained deep features.
To this end, we develop a regression loss and a ranking loss
to guide the generation of target-active and scale-sensitive
features. We identify the importance of each convolutional
filter according to the back-propagated gradients and select the target-aware features based on activations for representing the targets. The target-aware features are integrated
with a Siamese matching network for visual tracking. Extensive experimental results show that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against the state-of-the-art methods in terms of accuracy and speed.

wubaoyuan1987@gmail.com

CCOT

0.66

ECO
STRCF

MetaSDNet
DAT
DSLT

Ours
MCCT-H

0.64

MCPF

ACT

CREST

0.62
0.6

DaSiamRPN
ECO-HC
BACF
TRACA
CFNet
SiamFC
Staple

DSiamM

0.58
-0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

Tracking Speed (10 x FPS)

2

2.5

Figure 1. Tracking accuracy vs. speed on the OTB-2015
dataset. The horizontal and vertical coordinates correspond to
tracking speed and AUC overlap ratio score, respectively. The
proposed algorithm achieves a favorable performance against the
state-of-the-art trackers.

sist of a feature extraction module and a decision-making
mechanism. The recent state-of-the-art deep trackers often use deep models pre-trained for the object recognition
task to extract features, while putting more emphasis on
designing effective decision-making modules. While various decision models, such as correlation filters [15], regressors [14, 35, 38, 37], and classifiers [16, 29, 32], are
extensively explored, considerably less attention is paid to
learning more discriminative deep features.
Despite the state-of-the-art performance of existing deep
trackers, we note that the contributions of pre-trained deep
features for visual tracking are not as significant as that for
object recognition. Numerous issues may arise when using
pre-trained deep features as target representation. First, a
target in visual tracking can be of arbitrary forms, e.g., an
object unseen in the training sets for the pre-trained models or one specific part, which does not contain the object-

1369

