Atlas of Digital Pathology: A Generalized Hierarchical Histological Tissue
Type-Annotated Database for Deep Learning
Mahdi S. Hosseini1,4 , Lyndon Chan 1 , Gabriel Tse 1 , Michael Tang 1 , Jun Deng 1 , Sajad Norouzi 1
Corwyn Rowsell 2,3 , Konstantinos N. Plataniotis 1 , and Savvas Damaskinos 4
1
The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Toronto
2
Division of Pathology, St. Michaels Hospital, Toronto, ON, M4N 1X3, Canada
3
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto
4
Huron Digital Pathology, St. Jacobs, ON, N0B 2N0, Canada
mahdi.hosseini@mail.utoronto.ca

Abstract
In recent years, computer vision techniques have made
large advances in image recognition and been applied
to aid radiological diagnosis. Computational pathology
aims to develop similar tools for aiding pathologists in diagnosing digitized histopathological slides, which would
improve diagnostic accuracy and productivity amidst increasing workloads. However, there is a lack of publiclyavailable databases of (1) localized patch-level images annotated with (2) a large range of Histological Tissue Type
(HTT). As a result, computational pathology research is
constrained to diagnosing specific diseases or classifying
tissues from specific organs, and cannot be readily generalized to handle unexpected diseases and organs.
In this paper, we propose a new digital pathology
database, the “Atlas of Digital Pathology” (or ADP), which
comprises of 17,668 patch images extracted from 100 slides
annotated with up to 57 hierarchical HTTs. Our data is
generalized to different tissue types across different organs
and aims to provide training data for supervised multi-label
learning of patch-level HTT in a digitized whole slide image. We demonstrate the quality of our image labels through
pathologist consultation and by training three state-of-theart neural networks on tissue type classification. Quantitative results support the visually consistency of our data and
we demonstrate a tissue type-based visual attention aid as
a sample tool that could be developed from our database.

1

Introduction

The field of computational pathology aims to develop
computer algorithms to assist the diagnosis of disease from
digital pathology images by pathologists [21]. Leveraging
the impressive advances of computer vision in solving difficult general image recognition problems (e.g. recognizing

dogs and cats) [9, 32, 16, 33, 12, 38], computational pathology promises to improve the diagnostic accuracy and productivity of pathologists, who face an increasingly heavy
workload [27, 41, 21, 15]. In fact, the use of computer vision algorithms in computer-aided diagnosis (CADx) has
already become widely accepted in the sister field of radiology [29, 40, 5]. But as there exist serious shortcomings
in publicly-available digital pathology databases, and most
state-of-the-art computer vision systems are trained by supervised learning, this constrains the development of useful
and generalizable computational pathology tools.
Most databases are either annotated with textual descriptions or annotated at the slide level with minimal localized information provided by drawn outlines [21]. This
is problematic because, unlike general image classification,
digital pathology slide images are very large compared to
the features of interest, where local patch-level (or even
pixel-level) information is essential. Furthermore, existing
databases are specially annotated with an incomplete set of
possible tissue conditions (i.e. healthy, disease #1, disease
#2, ..., disease #N) and hence cannot be generalized to classify unexpected diseases or unseen organs. Since only a
limited number of possible tissue types are observable, it
makes more sense to annotate tissue types. Some databases
do just that, but use only a few tissue types, which again
limits their application. This lack of (1) localized patchlevel images annotated with (2) a large range of Histological
Tissue Type (HTT) prevents computational pathology from
properly developing generalized clinically useful tools.
Inspired by this shortcoming in publicly available digital pathology databases, we introduce the Atlas of Digital
Pathology (ADP or Atlas, for short), a database of digital pathology image patches originating from a variety of
organs acquired by a whole slide imaging (WSI) scanner,
and each annotated with multiple HTTs (both morpholog4321
11747

