Latent Space Autoregression for Novelty Detection
Davide Abati

Angelo Porrello

Simone Calderara

Rita Cucchiara

University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
{name.surname}@unimore.it

Abstract
Novelty detection is commonly referred to as the discrimination of observations that do not conform to a learned
model of regularity. Despite its importance in different application settings, designing a novelty detector is utterly
complex due to the unpredictable nature of novelties and its
inaccessibility during the training procedure, factors which
expose the unsupervised nature of the problem. In our proposal, we design a general framework where we equip a
deep autoencoder with a parametric density estimator that
learns the probability distribution underlying its latent representations through an autoregressive procedure. We show
that a maximum likelihood objective, optimized in conjunction with the reconstruction of normal samples, effectively
acts as a regularizer for the task at hand, by minimizing
the differential entropy of the distribution spanned by latent
vectors. In addition to providing a very general formulation, extensive experiments of our model on publicly available datasets deliver on-par or superior performances if
compared to state-of-the-art methods in one-class and video
anomaly detection settings. Differently from prior works,
our proposal does not make any assumption about the nature of the novelties, making our work readily applicable to
diverse contexts.

1. Introduction
Novelty detection is defined as the identification of samples
which exhibit significantly different traits with respect to an
underlying model of regularity, built from a collection of
normal samples. The awareness of an autonomous system
to recognize unknown events enables applications in several domains, ranging from video surveillance [7, 11], to
defect detection [19] to medical imaging [35]. Moreover,
the surprise inducted by unseen events is emerging as a crucial aspect in reinforcement learning settings, as an enabling
factor in curiosity-driven exploration [31].
However, in this setting, the definition and labeling of
novel examples are not possible. Accordingly, the literature

agrees on approximating the ideal shape of the boundary
separating normal and novel samples by modeling the intrinsic characteristics of the former. Therefore, prior works
tackle such problem by following principles derived from
the unsupervised learning paradigm [9, 34, 11, 23, 27]. Due
to the lack of a supervision signal, the process of feature extraction and the rule for their normality assessment can only
be guided by a proxy objective, assuming the latter will define an appropriate boundary for the application at hand.
According to cognitive psychology [4], novelty can be expressed either in terms of capabilities to remember an event
or as a degree of surprisal [39] aroused by its observation.
The latter is mathematically modeled in terms of low probability to occur under an expected model, or by lowering
a variational free energy [15]. In this framework, prior
models take advantage of either parametric [46] or nonparametric [13] density estimators. Differently, remembering an event implies the adoption of a memory represented
either by a dictionary of normal prototypes - as in sparse
coding approaches [9] - or by a low dimensional representation of the input space, as in the self-organizing maps [18]
or, more recently, in deep autoencoders. Thus, in novelty
detection, the remembering capability for a given sample is
evaluated either by measuring reconstruction errors [11, 23]
or by performing discriminative in-distribution tests [34].
Our proposal contributes to the field by merging remembering and surprisal aspects into a unique framework: we design a generative unsupervised model (i.e., an autoencoder,
represented in Fig. 1i) that exploits end-to-end training in
order to maximize remembering effectiveness for normal
samples whilst minimizing the surprisal of their latent representation. This latter point is enabled by the maximization
of the likelihood of latent representations through an autoregressive density estimator, which is performed in conjunction with the reconstruction error minimization. We show
that, by optimizing both terms jointly, the model implicitly seeks for minimum entropy representations maintaining its remembering/reconstructive power. While entropy
minimization approaches have been adopted in deep neural
compression [3], to our knowledge this is the first proposal

1481

