Efficient Neural Network Compression
Hyeji Kim, Muhammad Umar Karim Khan, and Chong-Min Kyung
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Republic of Korea
{hyejikim89, umar, kyung}@kaist.ac.kr

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks have been consistently showing outstanding performance in a variety of applications, however, this performance comes at a high computational cost compared to past methods. The millions
of parameters of a typical neural network require immense
computational power and memory for storage. Thus, model
compression is required to reduce the number of parameters of the network. Our aim in this paper is to develop
a method that can optimize trained neural networks for reduction in computational power and memory usage while

O2 I3

O3

r3

)&BE

&RQY
r2

I3

)&

O1 I 2

O2

)&BD

r1

I2

&RQYBE

I1

O1

&RQYBD

Network compression reduces the computational complexity and memory consumption of deep neural networks
by reducing the number of parameters. In SVD-based network compression the right rank needs to be decided for
every layer of the network. In this paper we propose an efficient method for obtaining the rank configuration of the
whole network. Unlike previous methods which consider
each layer separately, our method considers the whole network to choose the right rank configuration. We propose
novel accuracy metrics to represent the accuracy and complexity relationship for a given neural network. We use
these metrics in a non-iterative fashion to obtain the right
rank configuration which satisfies the constraints on FLOPs
and memory while maintaining sufficient accuracy. Experiments show that our method provides better compromise
between accuracy and computational complexity/memory
consumption while performing compression at much higher
speed. For VGG-16 our network can reduce the FLOPs by
25% and improve accuracy by 0.7% compared to the baseline, while requiring only 3 minutes on a CPU to search
for the right rank configuration. Previously, similar results were achieved in 4 hours with 8 GPUs. The proposed
method can be used for lossless compression of a neural
network as well. The better accuracy and complexity compromise, as well as the extremely fast speed of our method
makes it suitable for neural network compression.

&RQYBD

I1

&RQYBE

&RQY

Abstract

O3

Figure 1. Convolutional and fully-connected layers and their decomposed counterparts. Each layer is split into two with low-rank
decomposition.

providing competitive accuracy.
Generally, filter pruning techniques have been used for
network compression. The aim of such approaches is to
develop pruning policies, which can satisfy the target constraints on FLOPs and memory. Layer wise search-based
heuristic methods [11, 18, 23], reinforcement learning [1, 4,
10], and genetic and evolutionary algorithms [22, 25] have
been used to define the pruning policy. A greedy selection method based on a heuristic metric has been proposed
in [5, 21] to prune multiple filters of the network together.
Another approach towards network compression is using
kernel decomposition over each filter in the network. Convolutional and fully connected layers can be represented as
matrix multiplications, and kernel decomposition can be applied to these matrices [2, 7, 12, 15, 28]. Kernel decomposition with singular value decomposition (SVD) automatically assigns importance (the singular values) to the decomposed kernels. This automatic sorting makes filter pruning
easier, as the decomposed kernels with the lower parameters
are the first to be pruned. Simply put, low-rank approximation of a layer decomposes it into two matrix multiplications
for network compression as shown in Fig. 1.
With kernel decomposition schemes, the problem boils
down to the choice of the optimal compression ratio for each
layer of the network. We need to find the right rank configuration (i.e. compression ratios) for the whole network
that satisfies constraints on speed, memory and accuracy.
This is different from past methods which use a solver to

12569

