SketchGAN: Joint Sketch Completion and Recognition with Generative
Adversarial Network
Fang Liu1,2 Xiaoming Deng1 Yu-Kun Lai3 Yong-Jin Liu4 ∗ Cuixia Ma1,2 ∗ Hongan Wang1,2 ∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science and Beijing Key Lab of Human-Computer Interaction,
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Cardiff University 4 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Hand-drawn sketch recognition is a fundamental problem in computer vision, widely used in sketch-based image
and video retrieval, editing, and reorganization. Previous
methods often assume that a complete sketch is used as input; however, hand-drawn sketches in common application
scenarios are often incomplete, which makes sketch recognition a challenging problem. In this paper, we propose
SketchGAN, a new generative adversarial network (GAN)
based approach that jointly completes and recognizes a
sketch, boosting the performance of both tasks. Specifically,
we use a cascade Encode-Decoder network to complete the
input sketch in an iterative manner, and employ an auxiliary
sketch recognition task to recognize the completed sketch.
Experiments on the Sketchy database benchmark demonstrate that our joint learning approach achieves competitive
sketch completion and recognition performance compared
with the state-of-the-art methods. Further experiments using several sketch-based applications also validate the performance of our method.

1. Introduction
Sketch is a natural symbol to express abstract ideas in a
straightforward way, which is widely used in computer vision [14, 27, 45], multimedia reorganization [7, 31] and human computer interactions [39]. Hand-drawn sketch recognition is a fundamental problem in many sketch-based applications. However, they are often incomplete, e.g., quick
interim sketches, and sketches of multiple overlapping objects where some objects are partially occluded. In this paper, we explore the sketch completion problem, which will
benefit related research such as sketch recognition, sketch
editing and sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR).
Sketch completion aims to infer reasonable lines to fill
in missing strokes in a sketch. An ideal sketch contains per∗ Corresponding authors

Figure 1. Illustration of our joint sketch completion and recognition pipeline. We use sketch completion as an intermediate
step for recognizing incomplete sketches. Experiments show that
the sketch recognition performance can be improved greatly with
completed sketch.

ceptually closure contour and uses a sparse set of lines to
capture main shape characteristics. Although sketch recognition [17] and classification [47, 54] have achieved much
progress in the last decade, little attention is paid to sketch
completion. Hand-drawn sketches lack texture and contextual information, and are generally known to be more ambiguous than natural images. Therefore, image completion
methods designed for color images do not work well for
sketches directly. Moreover, the sketches of the same object
may be drawn in diverse styles due to the nature of freehand
sketches, which makes sketch completion very challenging.
Sketch is closely related to contour, both of which are
visually closed outlines of objects using black and white
pixels. The major difference between sketch and contour is
that contour always keeps consistent with the corresponding real image, while sketch has more diversity [13] and abstraction levels [36] in appearance. A lot of effort has been
made on contour completion [34, 42, 50], aiming to either
extract perceptually-salient contours from images or to find
the boundaries of objects and surfaces in a scene. The contour completion methods cannot be applied to sketch completion directly since contour completion enforces accurate
alignment with object boundaries in original images, while
sketches are not associated with specific images.

5830

