Neuro-inspired Eye Tracking with Eye Movement Dynamics
Kang Wang
RPI

Hui Su
RPI and IBM

Qiang Ji
RPI

kangwang.kw@gmail.com

huisuibmres@us.ibm.com

qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Generalizing eye tracking to new subjects/environments
remains challenging for existing appearance-based methods. To address this issue, we propose to leverage on eye
movement dynamics inspired by neurological studies. Studies show that there exist several common eye movement
types, independent of viewing contents and subjects, such
as fixation, saccade, and smooth pursuits. Incorporating
generic eye movement dynamics can therefore improve the
generalization capabilities. In particular, we propose a novel Dynamic Gaze Transition Network (DGTN) to capture
the underlying eye movement dynamics and serve as the topdown gaze prior. Combined with the bottom-up gaze measurements from the deep convolutional neural network, our
method achieves better performance for both within-dataset
and cross-dataset evaluations compared to state-of-the-art.
In addition, a new DynamicGaze dataset is also constructed
to study eye movement dynamics and eye gaze estimation.

1. Introduction
Eye gaze is one of the most important approaches for
people to interact with each other and with the visual world.
Eye tracking has been applied to different fields, including
psychology study [1], social network [2, 3, 4, 5], web search
[6, 7, 8], marketing and advertising [9], human computer
interaction [10, 11, 12]. In addition, since neurological activities affect the way to process visual information (reflected
by eye movements), eye tracking, therefore becomes one of
the most effective tools to study neuroscience. The estimated eye movements, eye gaze patterns can help attentional
studies like object-search mechanisms [6], understand neurological functions during perceptual decision making [13],
and medical diagnosis like schizophrenia, post-concussive
syndrome, autism, Fragile X, etc. Despite the importance
of eye tracking to neuroscience studies, researchers ignored
that neurological studies on eyes can also benefit eye tracking. It is revealed that eye tracking is not a random process
but involves strong dynamics. There exist common eye

movement dynamics 1 that are independent of the viewing
content and subjects. Exploiting eye movement dynamics
can significantly improve the performance of eye tracking.
From neuroanatomy studies, there are several major types
of eye movements 2 : vergence, saccade, fixation and smooth
pursuit. Vergence movements are to fixate on objects at different distances where two eyes move in opposite direction.
As vergence is less common in natural viewing scenarios,
we mainly focus on fixation, saccade, and smooth pursuit
eye movements. Saccadic movement is rapid eye movement
from one fixation to another, its duration is short and the
amplitude is linearly correlated with the duration. There
are also study on microsaccade [14] which is not the focus
of this paper. Fixation is to fixate on the same object for a
period of time, eye movements are very small (miniature)
and can be considered as a stationary or random walk. Smooth pursuit is eye movement which smoothly tracks a
slowly moving object. It cannot be triggered voluntarily and
typically require a moving object.
Existing work (see [15] for a comprehensive survey) on
eye gaze estimation are static frame-based, without explicitly considering the underlying dynamics. Among them,
model-based methods [16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25]
estimate eye gaze based on a geometric 3D eye model. Eye
gaze can be estimated by detecting key points in the geometric 3D eye model. Differently, appearance-based methods
[26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31] directly learn a mapping function
from eye appearance to eye gaze.
Unlike traditional static frame-based methods, we propose to estimate eye gaze with the help of eye movement dynamics. Since eye movement dynamics can generalize across
subjects and environments, the proposed method therefore
achieves better generalization capabilities. The system is
illustrated in Fig. 1. For online eye tracking, the static gaze
estimation network first estimates the raw gaze xt from input
frame. Next, we combine top-down eye movement dynamics
with bottom-up image measurements (Alg. 1) to get a more
accurate prediction yt . In addition, yt is further fed back to
refine the static network so that we can better generalize to
1 In this work, eye movement refers to actual gaze movement on screens.
2 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK10991/

19831

