Few-shot Learning via Saliency-guided Hallucination of Samples
Hongguang Zhang1,2
Jing Zhang1,2
Piotr Koniusz2,1
1
Australian National University, 2 Data61/CSIRO
firstname.lastname@{anu.edu.au1 , data61.csiro.au2 }
Abstract
Learning new concepts from a few of samples is a standard challenge in computer vision. The main directions to
improve the learning ability of few-shot training models include (i) a robust similarity learning and (ii) generating or
hallucinating additional data from the limited existing samples. In this paper, we follow the latter direction and present
a novel data hallucination model. Currently, most datapoint generators contain a specialized network (i.e., GAN)
tasked with hallucinating new datapoints, thus requiring
large numbers of annotated data for their training in the
first place. In this paper, we propose a novel less-costly
hallucination method for few-shot learning which utilizes
saliency maps. To this end, we employ a saliency network to
obtain the foregrounds and backgrounds of available image
samples and feed the resulting maps into a two-stream network to hallucinate datapoints directly in the feature space
from viable foreground-background combinations. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to leverage saliency
maps for such a task and we demonstrate their usefulness
in hallucinating additional datapoints for few-shot learning. Our proposed network achieves the state of the art on
publicly available datasets.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have demonstrated their usefulness in numerous computer vision tasks
e.g., image classification and scene recognition. However,
training CNNs on these tasks requires large numbers of labeled data. In contrast to CNNs, human ability to learn
novel concepts from a few of samples remains unrivalled.
Inspired by this observation, researchers [8] proposed the
one- and few-shot learning tasks with the goal of training
algorithms with low numbers of datapoints.
Recently, the concept of learning relations with deep
learning has been explored in several papers [36, 33, 34, 32]
which can be viewed as a variant of metric learning [39,
21, 11] adapted to the few-shot learning scenario. In these
works, a neural network extracts convolutional descriptors,
and another learning mechanism (e.g., a relation network)

Figure 1: Illustration of saliency-based data generation for oneshot case. The foreground objects are combined with different
backgrounds in attempt to refine the classification boundaries.

captures relationship between descriptors. Most papers in
this category propose improvements to relationship modeling for the purpose of similarity learning. In contrast, [12]
employs a separate Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) to hallucinate additional image descriptors by modeling foregroundbackground relationships in feature space to obtain implicitly augmented new samples. To train the feature generator, MLP uses manually labelled features clustered into 100
clusters, which highlights the need for extra labelling. Another approach [38] generates data in a meta-learning scenario, which means the network has to be pre-trained on
several datasets, thus increasing the cost of training.
In this paper, we adopt the data hallucination strategy
and propose a saliency-guided data hallucination network
dubbed as Salient Network (SalNet). Figure 1 shows a simple motivation for our work. Compared with previous feature hallucinating approaches, we employ a readily available saliency network [46] pre-trained on MSRA Salient
Object Database (MSRA-B) [25] to segment foregrounds
and backgrounds from given images, followed by a twostream network which mixes foregrounds with backgrounds
(we call it the Mixing Network) in the feature space of an encoder (c.f . image space). As we obtain spatial feature maps
from this process, we embed mixed feature vectors into a
second-order representation which aggregates over the spatial dimension of feature maps. Then, we capture the similarity between final co-occurrence descriptors of a so-called
training query sample and hallucinated support matrices via

2770

