Volumetric Capture of Humans with a Single RGBD Camera via
Semi-Parametric Learning
Rohit Pandey, Anastasia Tkach, Shuoran Yang, Pavel Pidlypenskyi, Jonathan Taylor,
Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Andrea Tagliasacchi, George Papandreou, Philip Davidson,
Cem Keskin, Shahram Izadi, Sean Fanello
Google Inc.
Abstract
Volumetric (4D) performance capture is fundamental for
AR/VR content generation. Whereas previous work in 4D
performance capture has shown impressive results in studio
settings, the technology is still far from being accessible to
a typical consumer who, at best, might own a single RGBD
sensor. Thus, in this work, we propose a method to synthesize free viewpoint renderings using a single RGBD camera.
The key insight is to leverage previously seen “calibration”
images of a given user to extrapolate what should be rendered in a novel viewpoint from the data available in the
sensor. Given these past observations from multiple viewpoints, and the current RGBD image from a fixed view, we
propose an end-to-end framework that fuses both these data
sources to generate novel renderings of the performer. We
demonstrate that the method can produce high fidelity images, and handle extreme changes in subject pose and camera viewpoints. We also show that the system generalizes to
performers not seen in the training data. We run exhaustive
experiments demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed
semi-parametric model (i.e. calibration images available to
the neural network) compared to other state of the art machine learned solutions. Further, we compare the method
with more traditional pipelines that employ multi-view capture. We show that our framework is able to achieve compelling results, with substantially less infrastructure than
previously required.

1. Introduction
The rise of Virtual and Augmented Reality has increased the
demand for high quality 3D content to create compelling
user experiences where the real and virtual world seamlessly blend together. Object scanning techniques are already available for mobile devices [30], and they are already
integrated within AR experiences [20]. However, neither
the industrial nor the research community have yet been

Figure 1. We propose a novel formulation to synthesize volumetric renderings of human from arbitrary viewpoints. Our system
combines previously seen observations of the user (calibration images) with the current RGBD image. Given an arbitrary camera
position we can generate images of the performer handling different user poses and generalizing to unseen subjects.

able to devise practical solutions to generate high quality
volumetric renderings of humans.
At the cost of reduced photo-realism, the industry is currently overcoming the issue by leveraging “cartoon-like”
virtual avatars. On the other end of the spectrum, complex
capture rigs [7, 39, 3] can be used to generate very high
quality volumetric reconstructions. Some of these methods [8, 18] are well established, and lie at the foundation
of special effects in many Hollywood productions. Despite their success, these systems rely on high-end, costly
infrastructure to process the high volume of data that they
capture. The required computational time of several minutes per frame make them unsuitable for real-time applications. Another way to capture humans is to extend real-time
non-rigid fusion pipelines [35, 23, 44, 45, 22] to multi-view
capture setups [12, 36, 11]. However, the results still suffer from distorted geometry, poor texturing and inaccurate
lighting, making it difficult to reach the level of quality required in AR/VR applications [36]. Moreover, these methods rely on multi-view capture rigs that require several (≈
4-8) calibrated RGBD sensors.
19709

