Recurrent Neural Network for (Un-)supervised Learning of Monocular Video
Visual Odometry and Depth
Rui Wang, Stephen M. Pizer, Jan-Michael Frahm
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Abstract
Deep learning-based, single-view depth estimation
methods have recently shown highly promising results.
However, such methods ignore one of the most important
features for determining depth in the human vision system, which is motion. We propose a learning-based, multiview dense depth map and odometry estimation method that
uses Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and trains utilizing
multi-view image reprojection and forward-backward flowconsistency losses. Our model can be trained in a supervised or even unsupervised mode. It is designed for depth
and visual odometry estimation from video where the input frames are temporally correlated. However, it also generalizes to single-view depth estimation. Our method produces superior results to the state-of-the-art approaches for
single-view and multi-view learning-based depth estimation
on the KITTI driving dataset.

1. Introduction
The tasks of depth and odometry (also called egomotion) estimation are longstanding tasks in computer vision providing valuable information for a wide variety of
tasks, e.g. autonomous driving, AR/VR applications, and
virtual tourism.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNN) [20, 4,
8, 42, 32] have begun to produce results of comparable quality to traditional geometric computer vision methods for
depth estimation in measurable areas and achieve significantly more complete results for ambiguous areas through
the learned priors. However, in contrast to traditional methods, most CNN methods treat depth estimation as a single
view task and thus ignore the important temporal information in monocular or stereo videos. The underlying rationale of these single view depth estimation methods is the
possibility of human depth perception from a single image. However, they neglect the fact that motion is actually
more important for the human to infer distance [28]. We
are constantly exposed to moving scenes, and the speed of
things moving in the image is related to the combination of

Figure 1: Example results from our method. The first row shows
the source image. The second row illustrates the projection of the
source image into the target image. The third row shows the target
image. The fourth row illustrates the estimated depth map and the
last row illustrates the estimated optical flow.

their relative speed and effect inversely proportional to their
depth.
In this work, we propose a framework that simultaneously estimates the visual odometry and depth maps from a
video sequence taken by a monocular camera. To be more
specific, we use convolutional Long Short-Term Memory
(ConvLSTM) [35] units to carry temporal information from
previous views into the current frame’s depth and visual
odometry estimation. We have improved upon existing deep
single- and two-view stereo depth estimation methods by
interleaving ConvLSTM units with the convolutional layers
to effectively utilize multiple previous frames in each estimated depth maps. Since we utilize multiple views, the
image reprojection constraint between multiple views can
be incorporated into the loss, which shows significant improvements for both supervised and unsupervised depth and
camera pose estimation.
In addition to the image reprojection constraint, we further utilize a forward-backward flow-consistency constraint
[38]. Such a constraint provides additional supervision to
image areas where the image reprojection is ambiguous.
Moreover, it improves the robustness and generalizability
of the model. Together these two constraints can even al15555

