Object-centric Auto-encoders and Dummy Anomalies
for Abnormal Event Detection in Video
Radu Tudor Ionescu1,2,3 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan1 , Mariana-Iuliana Georgescu2,3 , Ling Shao1
1
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
2
University of Bucharest, 14 Academiei, Bucharest, Romania
3
SecurifAI, 21 Mircea Vodă, Bucharest, Romania
Abstract
Abnormal event detection in video is a challenging vision problem. Most existing approaches formulate abnormal event detection as an outlier detection task, due to the
scarcity of anomalous data during training. Because of
the lack of prior information regarding abnormal events,
these methods are not fully-equipped to differentiate between normal and abnormal events. In this work, we formalize abnormal event detection as a one-versus-rest binary classification problem. Our contribution is two-fold.
First, we introduce an unsupervised feature learning framework based on object-centric convolutional auto-encoders
to encode both motion and appearance information. Second, we propose a supervised classification approach based
on clustering the training samples into normality clusters. A
one-versus-rest abnormal event classifier is then employed
to separate each normality cluster from the rest. For the
purpose of training the classifier, the other clusters act as
dummy anomalies. During inference, an object is labeled
as abnormal if the highest classification score assigned by
the one-versus-rest classifiers is negative. Comprehensive
experiments are performed on four benchmarks: Avenue,
ShanghaiTech, UCSD and UMN. Our approach provides
superior results on all four data sets. On the large-scale
ShanghaiTech data set, our method provides an absolute
gain of 8.4% in terms of frame-level AUC compared to the
state-of-the-art method [34].

1. Introduction
Abnormal event detection in video has drawn a lot of attention in the past couple of years [7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 21,
22, 24, 27, 28, 31, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38], perhaps because it
is considered a challenging task due to the commonly accepted definition of abnormal events, which relies on context. An example that illustrates the importance of context
is a scenario in which a truck is being driven on the street
(normal event) versus a scenario in which a truck is being
driven in a pedestrian area (abnormal event). In addition to
the reliance on context, abnormal events rarely occur and
are generally dominated by more familiar (normal) events.

Therefore, it is difficult to obtain a sufficiently representative set of anomalies, making it hard to employ traditional
supervised learning methods.
Most existing anomaly detection approaches [2, 5, 15,
18, 23, 25, 26, 37, 39] are based on outlier detection and
learn a model of normality from training videos containing
only familiar events. During inference, events are labeled
as abnormal if they deviate from the normality model. Different from these approaches, we address abnormal event
detection by formulating the task as a multi-class classification problem instead of an outlier detection problem. Since
the training data contains only normal events, we first apply k-means clustering in order to find clusters representing
various types of normality (see Figure 1). Next, we train
a binary classifier following the one-versus-rest scheme in
order to separate each normality cluster from the others.
During training, normality clusters are treated as different
categories, leading to the synthetic generation of abnormal
training data. During inference, the highest classification
score corresponding to a given test sample represents the
normality score of the respective sample. If the score is
negative, the sample is labeled as abnormal (since it does
not belong to any normality class). To our knowledge, we
are the first to treat the abnormal event detection task as a
discriminative multi-class classification problem.
In general, existing abnormal event detection frameworks extract features at a local level [7, 9, 15, 22, 23, 24,
25, 31, 32, 38], global (frame) level [21, 26, 27, 28, 33], or
both [5, 6, 11]. All these approaches extract features without explicitly taking into account the objects of interest. In
this paper, we propose an object-centric approach by applying a fast yet powerful single-shot detector (SSD) [19] on
each frame, and learning deep unsupervised features using
convolutional auto-encoders (CAE) on top of the detected
objects, as shown in Figure 1. This enables us to explicity
focus only on the objects present in the scene. In addition, it
allows us to accurately localize the anomalies in each frame.
Although auto-encoders have been used before for abnormal event detection [11, 31, 37], to our knowledge, we are
the first to train object-centric auto-encoders.

7842

