Re-Identification with Consistent Attentive Siamese Networks
Meng Zheng1 , Srikrishna Karanam2 , Ziyan Wu2 , and Richard J. Radke1
1
Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy NY
2
Siemens Corporate Technology, Princeton NJ
zhengm3@rpi.edu,{first.last}@siemens.com,rjradke@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
We propose a new deep architecture for person reidentification (re-id). While re-id has seen much recent
progress, spatial localization and view-invariant representation learning for robust cross-view matching remain key,
unsolved problems. We address these questions by means
of a new attention-driven Siamese learning architecture,
called the Consistent Attentive Siamese Network. Our key
innovations compared to existing, competing methods include (a) a flexible framework design that produces attention with only identity labels as supervision, (b) explicit
mechanisms to enforce attention consistency among images
of the same person, and (c) a new Siamese framework that
integrates attention and attention consistency, producing
principled supervisory signals as well as the first mechanism that can explain the reasoning behind the Siamese
framework’s predictions. We conduct extensive evaluations
on the CUHK03-NP, DukeMTMC-ReID, and Market-1501
datasets and report competitive performance.

1. Introduction
Given an image or a set of images of a person of interest in a “probe” camera view, person re-identification (reid) attempts to retrieve this person of interest among a set
of “gallery” candidates in another camera view. Due to its
broad appeal in several video analytics applications such as
surveillance, re-id has seen explosive growth in the computer vision community [15, 44, 45].
While we have seen tremendous progress in re-id [4, 5,
28, 31, 32, 34, 36, 37], there are several problems that still
hinder the reliable, real-world use of person re-id. Probe
and gallery camera views in real-world applications typically have large viewpoint variations, causing substantial
view misalignment between probe and gallery images of
the same person. Illumination differences between the locations where the cameras are installed, as well as occlusions in the captured data, add to re-id’s challenges. Ideally,
we want a method that can reliably spatially localize the

Same
Person?

Re-Identification

Yes

Siamese
Attention

Explanation

Attention
Consistency

Consistency

Figure 1: We present the first framework for re-id that provides mechanisms to make attention and attention consistency end-to-end trainable in a Siamese learning architecture, resulting in a technique for robust cross-view matching as well as explaining the reasoning for why the model
predicts that the two images belong to the same person.
person of interest in the image, while also providing a robust representation of the localized part in order to match
accurately to the gallery of candidates. This suggests we
consider the spatial localization and feature representation
problems jointly and formulate the learning objective in a
way that can facilitate end-to-end learning.
Attention is a powerful concept for understanding and
interpreting neural network decisions [9, 25, 27, 49], providing ways to generate attentive regions given image-level
labels and trained models, and to perform spatial localization. Unlike its use as a weight matrix in some existing work
[2, 3, 35], here we refer to attention computed by means
of class-specific gradient backpropagation [27, 49]. Some
recent extensions [18] take this a step forward by training
models with attention providing end-to-end supervision, resulting in improved spatial localization. These methods
were not designed for the re-id problem and consequently
did not have to consider localization and invariant representation learning jointly. While there have been some attempts
at joint learning with these two objectives [17, 21, 24, 38],
these methods do not explicitly enforce any sort of attention consistency between images of the same person. Intuitively, given same-person images from different views,

5735

