Parsing R-CNN for Instance-Level Human Analysis
Lu Yang1 , Qing Song1 , Zhihui Wang1 and Ming Jiang2
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 2 WiWide Inc.
{soeaver, wangzh}@bupt.edu.cn, songqing priv@163.com, ming@wiwide.com

Abstract
Instance-level human analysis is common in real-life scenarios and has multiple manifestations, such as human part
segmentation, dense pose estimation, human-object interactions, etc. Models need to distinguish different human
instances in the image panel and learn rich features to represent the details of each instance. In this paper, we present
an end-to-end pipeline for solving the instance-level human
analysis, named Parsing R-CNN. It processes a set of human
instances simultaneously through comprehensive considering the characteristics of region-based approach and the
appearance of a human, thus allowing representing the details of instances.
Parsing R-CNN is very flexible and efficient, which is
applicable to many issues in human instance analysis. Our
approach outperforms all state-of-the-art methods on CIHP
(Crowd Instance-level Human Parsing), MHP v2.0 (MultiHuman Parsing) and DensePose-COCO datasets. Based on
the proposed Parsing R-CNN, we reach the 1st place in the
COCO 2018 Challenge DensePose Estimation task. Code
and models are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Human part segmentation [14, 26, 29, 40, 49], dense pose
estimation [16] and human-object interactions [9, 13, 21]
are the most fundamental and critical tasks in analyzing
human in the wild. These tasks require human details at
the instance level, which involve several perceptual tasks
including detection, segmentation, estimation, i.e. There is
a commonality between them, which can be regarded as an
instance-level human analysis task.
Due to the successful development of convolutional neural networks [11, 23, 25, 37, 42, 45], great progress has been
made in instance-level human analysis, especially in human
part segmentation and dense pose estimation. Several related works [29, 49] follow the two stages pipeline, Mask
R-CNN [17], which detects human in the image panel and
1 https://github.com/soeaver/Parsing-R-CNN

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 1. Example tasks of instance-level human analysis. (a)
and (b) are samples for dense pose estimation. (c) and (d) are
samples for human part segmentation.

predicts a class-aware mask in parallel with several convolutional layers. This method has achieved great success and
wide application in instance segmentation [7, 17, 35, 47].
However, there are still several deficiencies in extending to
the instance-level human analysis. One of the most important problems is that the design of the mask branch is used to
predict a class-agnostic instance mask [17], but the instancelevel human analysis requires more detailed features, which
can not be well solved by existing methods. Besides, human
analysis needs to correlate geometric and semantic relations
between human parts / dense points, which is also missing.
Therefore, in order to solve these problems, we propose Parsing R-CNN, which provides a concise and effective scheme
for the instance-level human analysis tasks. This scheme can
be successfully applied to the human part segmentation and
dense pose estimation (Figure 1).
Our research explores the problem of instance-level human analysis from four aspects. First, to enhance feature
semantic information and maintain feature resolution, proposals separation sampling is adopted. Human instances
1364

