Multi-Level Context Ultra-Aggregation for Stereo Matching
Guang-Yu Nie1 Ming-Ming Cheng2 Yun Liu2 Zhengfa Liang3
Deng-Ping Fan2 Yue Liu1,4 ∗ Yongtian Wang1,4
2
1
Beijing Institute of Technology
TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University
3
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Blind Signal Processing
4
AICFVE, Beijing Film Academy
http://mmcheng.net/mcua/

Abstract
Exploiting multi-level context information to cost volume can improve the performance of learning-based stereo
matching methods. In recent years, 3-D Convolution Neural Networks (3-D CNNs) show the advantages in regularizing cost volume but are limited by unary features learning
in matching cost computation. However, existing methods
only use features from plain convolution layers or a simple aggregation of multi-level features to calculate cost volume, which is insufficient because stereo matching requires
discriminative features to identify corresponding pixels in
rectified stereo image pairs. In this paper, we propose a
unary features descriptor using multi-level context ultraaggregation (MCUA), which encapsulates all convolutional
features into a more discriminative representation by intraand inter-level features combination. Specifically, a child
module that takes low-resolution images as input captures
larger context information; the larger context information
from each layer is densely connected to the main branch of
the network. MCUA makes good usage of multi-level features with richer context and performs the image-to-image
prediction holistically. We introduce our MCUA scheme for
cost volume calculation and test it on PSM-Net. We also
evaluate our method on Scene Flow and KITTI 2012/2015
stereo datasets. Experimental results show that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a notable margin
and effectively improves the accuracy of stereo matching.

1. Introduction
Stereo matching, also known as disparity estimation,
aims to find corresponding points in a pair of rectified stereo
images. It serves as an essential subclass of computer vision
[26, 28]. Cost volume plays a vital role for Convolution
Neural Networks (CNNs) based stereo matching methods,
∗ Yue Liu (liuyue@bit.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

which has been validated by [28]. Traditional 1-D correlation along the disparity line enables to generate a 3-D stereo
cost volume [14, 15], but it loses lots of information due to
its multiplicative approximation to the volume. As an improvement, a simple concatenation, instead of 1-D correlation, is implemented to combine the unary features from
left and right inputs across each disparity level to generate
a 4-D cost volume, and then 3-D CNNs are incorporated in
the context to regularize this 4-D cost volume [9]. 4-D cost
volume based methods [9, 2] usually outperform 3-D cost
volume [14, 11] based methods, because 4-D cost volume
can preserve the feature dimensions.
Skip connection [7, 17] in CNNs encourages the integration of hierarchical representations, and may also contribute to stereo matching for the improvement of the cost
volume [29, 4]. Stereo matching is a regression problem
which aims to achieve pixel-wise dense prediction, but it
usually generates discontinuity in the occluded areas, and it
suffers from aperture problem in texture-less regions such
as sky or other flat areas [9], so it is more concerned with
the merge of multi-level context information. In DenseNets
[8] and DLA [25], large receptive fields are achieved at deep
stages of a network, but they only refer to intra-level combination of features and enable not to obtain large receptive
field at shallow stages. Therefore, it lacks enough global information for more context information when using dense
connection or DLA scheme on the matching cost calculation in the stereo matching task. This problem makes these
two architectures be limited when learning context information.
To solve this problem, we improve the discriminative
ability of unary features for matching cost calculation by introducing Multi-level Context Ultra-Aggregation (MCUA)
scheme which combines the features at the shallowest,
smallest scale and deeper, larger scales using just “shallow”
skip connections. Except for intra-level combination inspired by DenseNets [8] and DLA [25], MCUA contains an
independent child module which introduces the inter-level

3283

