Surface Reconstruction from Normals: A Robust DGP-based Discontinuity
Preservation Approach
Wuyuan Xie 1 , Miaohui Wang 2, , Mingqiang Wei3 , Jianmin Jiang1 , Jing Qin4
1
2

College of Computer and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University (SZU), P. R. China

Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, College of Information Engineering, SZU, P. R. China
3

School of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, P. R. China
4

School of Nursing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, P. R. China

{wyxie, mhwang, jianmin.jiang}@szu.edu.cn, mqwei@nuaa.edu.cn, harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
In 3D surface reconstruction from normals, discontinuity preservation is an important but challenging task. However, existing studies fail to address the discontinuous normal maps by enforcing the surface integrability in the continuous domain. This paper introduces a robust approach
to preserve the surface discontinuity in the discrete geometry way. Firstly, we design two representative normal incompatibility features and propose an efficient discontinuity
detection scheme to determine the splitting pattern for a discrete mesh. Secondly, we model the discontinuity preservation problem as a light-weight energy optimization framework by jointly considering the discontinuity detection and
the overall reconstruction error. Lastly, we further shrink
the feasible solution space to reduce the complexity based
on the prior knowledge. Experiments show that the proposed method achieves the best performance on an extensive 3D dataset compared with the state-of-the-arts in terms
of mean angular error and computational complexity.

1. Introduction
Surface reconstruction from normals is driven by several computer vision tasks, such as shape from shading
(SfS), deﬂectometry, and photometric stereo (PS). Given a
static scene captured by a camera with ﬁxed viewpoint, PS
[15, 16, 20, 21] is widely used to obtain the surface normal orientations. To reconstruct a surface from the estimated normals, the most common way [1, 3, 8, 11, 17] is to
 Corresponding author: Miaohui Wang (wang.miaohui@gmail.com).
The work described in this paper was supported in part by NSFC
61701310, in part by Hong Kong Research Grants Council (Project no.
PolyU 152035/17E), and in part by Inlife-Handnet Open Fund 2018 and
Start-up Fund of Shenzhen University 2018080. We would like to give
thanks to NVIDIA for their generous GPU support.

Figure 1. Reconstruction surfaces from a saddle normal map
padded with the orientation vectors of [0, 0, 1]T . (Left): Xie et
al. [24]; (Right): Proposed.

conduct integration on the depth gradients which are transformed from the normal orientations. However, the normal
map produced by PS may not be uniformly integrable, due
to occlusion boundary, sharp surface changes, or computation error. To reconstruct a surface from such a discontinuous and noisy normal map, Terzopoulos et al. [18] provided a compact framework to compute the depth ﬁeld and
surface discontinuity simultaneously, where a rough depth
map was needed for initialization. Approaches in [6, 7, 9]
used binary weights to indicate the presence of surface discontinuities, so that the integrability constraint can be applied partially. Although these methods can reconstruct surfaces from discontinuous and noisy normals, none of them
satisfactorily preserves the discontinuity, where the reconstructed surfaces are somewhat distorted. One key reason is
that forming a discontinuity between two adjacent patches
requires breaking their connection. The aforementioned approaches assume that the number of total reconstructed vertexes is equal to the number of normal orientations, which
means every patch is connected, and distortion in the local
shape is propagated to the whole surface. Fig. 1 shows an
example of reconstructing the boundary vertexes of the Saddle model, the object surface is split and can be separately
to form a more accurate shape.
In this paper, we concentrate on addressing the preservation of the discontinuity feature in surface reconstruction

5328

