Cross-task weakly supervised learning from instructional videos
Dimitri Zhukov1,2

Jean-Baptiste Alayrac1,3

Ramazan Gokberk Cinbis4

Ivan Laptev1,2

Abstract
In this paper we investigate learning visual models for
the steps of ordinary tasks using weak supervision via instructional narrations and an ordered list of steps instead
of strong supervision via temporal annotations. At the
heart of our approach is the observation that weakly supervised learning may be easier if a model shares components while learning different steps: “pour egg” should
be trained jointly with other tasks involving “pour” and
“egg”. We formalize this in a component model for recognizing steps and a weakly supervised learning framework
that can learn this model under temporal constraints from
narration and the list of steps. Past data does not permit
systematic studying of sharing and so we also gather a new
dataset, CrossTask, aimed at assessing cross-task sharing.
Our experiments demonstrate that sharing across tasks improves performance, especially when done at the component level and that our component model can parse previously unseen tasks by virtue of its compositionality.

1. Introduction
Suppose you buy a fancy new coffee machine and you
would like to make a latte. How might you do this? After
skimming the instructions, you may start watching instructional videos on YouTube to figure out what each step entails: how to press the coffee, steam the milk, and so on. In
the process, you would obtain a good visual model of what
each step, and thus the entire task, looks like. Moreover,
you could use parts of this visual model of making lattes
to help understand videos of a new task, e.g., making filter coffee, since various nouns and verbs are shared. The
goal of this paper is to build automated systems that can
1 Inria, France
2 Département d’informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL
Research University, Paris, France
3 Now at DeepMind
4 Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
5 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
6 CIIRC – Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at
the Czech Technical University in Prague

David Fouhey5

Josef Sivic1,2,6

Making Meringue
Pour egg
Add sugar
Whisk mixture
Making Pancakes
Pour mixture

…

Making Lemonade
Pour water

Figure 1. Our method begins with a collection of tasks, each consisting of an ordered list of steps and a set of instructional videos
from YouTube. It automatically discovers both where the steps occur and what they look like. To do this, it uses the order, narration
and commonalities in appearance across tasks (e.g., the appearance of pour in both making pancakes and making meringue).

similarly learn visual models from instructional videos and
in particular, make use of shared information across tasks
(e.g., making lattes and making filter coffee).
The conventional approach for building visual models
of how to do things [8, 30, 31] is to first annotate each
step of each task in time and then train a supervised classifier for each. Obtaining strong supervision in the form
of temporal step annotations is time-consuming, unscalable and, as demonstrated by humans’ ability to learn from
demonstrations, unnecessary. Ideally, the method should be
weakly supervised (i.e., like [1, 18, 22, 29]) and jointly learn
when steps occur and what they look like. Unfortunately,
any weakly supervised approach faces two large challenges.
Temporally localizing steps in the input videos for each task
is hard as there is a combinatorial set of options for the step
locations; and, even if the steps were localized, each visual
model learns from limited data and may work poorly.
We show how to overcome these challenges by sharing
across tasks and using weaker and naturally occurring forms
of supervision. The related tasks let us learn better visual
models by exploiting commonality across steps as illustrated in Figure 1. For example, while learning about pour
water in making latte, the model for pour also depends on
pour milk in making pancakes and the model for water also
13537

