Learning Binary Code for Personalized Fashion Recommendation
Zhi Lu† , Yang Hu§ ,* Yunchao Jiang† , Yan Chen§ , Bing Zeng§
School of Information and Communication Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
†

{zhilu,jiangyunchao}@std.uestc.edu.cn, § {yanghu,eecyan,eezeng}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
With the rapid growth of fashion-focused social networks
and online shopping, intelligent fashion recommendation is
now in great needs. Recommending fashion outﬁts, each
of which is composed of multiple interacted clothing and
accessories, is relatively new to the ﬁeld. The problem becomes even more interesting and challenging when considering users’ personalized fashion style. Another challenge
in a large-scale fashion outﬁt recommendation system is the
efﬁciency issue of item/outﬁt search and storage. In this paper, we propose to learn binary code for efﬁcient personalized fashion outﬁts recommendation. Our system consists
of three components, a feature network for content extraction, a set of type-dependent hashing modules to learn binary codes, and a matching block that conducts pairwise
matching. The whole framework is trained in an end-toend manner. We collect outﬁt data together with user label
information from a fashion-focused social website for the
personalized recommendation task. Extensive experiments
on our datasets show that the proposed framework outperforms the state-of-the-art methods signiﬁcantly even with a
simple backbone.

1. Introduction
Fashion-focused social networks have become a vibrant
realm where millions of individuals share and post daily
fashion-related activities. A huge amount of fashion outﬁts
have been created by users in these communities. Mining
desirable fashion outﬁts from this massive data set is very
challenging but critical to the development of these online
fashion communities. Therefore, there is a great need for
intelligent fashion recommendation techniques. The number of possible outﬁts grows exponentially with the number
of items in each garment category. The storage complexity
and the retrieval efﬁciency of the outﬁts are essential for the
* The corresponding author is Yang Hu. This work was supported by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61602090) and the 111
Project (B17008).

Figure 1. Examples of recommended outﬁts for three users, where
the outﬁts in red boxes are user-created ones.

deployment of a fashion recommendation system in practice, which however have not been well addressed before.
Existing related works can be loosely classiﬁed into two
types based on the way they evaluate how compatible the
items in an outﬁt are. The ﬁrst type of approaches model
pairwise compatibilities between fashion items. Veit et
al. [28] propose to use a Siamese network to learn the distance between paired items. Hu et al. [7] learn a functional
factorization and compute the compatibility based on pairwise inner product. Vasileva et al. [27] learn type-aware
embedding for fashion items and use a fully-connected
layer as a generalized distance function for compatibility
prediction. The second type of approaches seek to model
high order relations among the items of an outﬁt. Li et
al. [12] use a recurrent neural network to predict set compatibility. Han et al. [3] treat outﬁts as a sequence of items
and compute the compatibility score through LSTM.
The number of items in a fashion inventory is usually
very large and the number of outﬁts that can be composed
by these items is orders of magnitude larger. To deploy
a practical fashion recommendation system, efﬁciency be-

10562

