Graph Convolutional Tracking
Junyu Gao1,2,3 , Tianzhu Zhang1,2,4 and Changsheng Xu1,2,3
1
National Lab of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, ShenZhen, China
4
University of Science and Technology of China
{junyu.gao, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, tzzhang10@gmail.com

Abstract
Tracking by siamese networks has achieved favorable
performance in recent years. However, most of existing
siamese methods do not take full advantage of spatialtemporal target appearance modeling under different contextual situations. In fact, the spatial-temporal information can provide diverse features to enhance the target representation, and the context information is important for
online adaption of target localization. To comprehensively leverage the spatial-temporal structure of historical target exemplars and get benefit from the context information, in this work, we present a novel Graph Convolutional
Tracking (GCT) method for high-performance visual tracking. Specifically, the GCT jointly incorporates two types
of Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) into a siamese
framework for target appearance modeling. Here, we adopt
a spatial-temporal GCN to model the structured representation of historical target exemplars. Furthermore, a context
GCN is designed to utilize the context of the current frame
to learn adaptive features for target localization. Extensive
results on 4 challenging benchmarks show that our GCT
method performs favorably against state-of-the-art trackers
while running around 50 frames per second.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is a fundamental task in computer vision community, where the target object is localized in a
changing video sequence automatically. It has various applications such as intelligent video surveillance, humancomputer interaction, robotics, and autonomous driving, to
name a few [71, 33, 13, 24, 74, 42, 17]. Despite much
progress has been achieved in recent years [38, 3, 45, 9,
66, 36, 20, 82, 22], visual tracking remains difficult due to
tremendous challenges such as occlusion, background clutter, illumination variation, scale variation, motion blur, fast
motion, and deformation.

#0015

#0034

#0056

#0011

#0060

#0124

GCT

SiamFC

TRACA

ECO-HC

Figure 1. Comparison of our proposed tracker with the popular
SiamFC tracker [2] and other two state-of-the-art methods.

Recently, tracking by siamese networks has attracted
an increasing attention in the tracking community, which
learns a similarity metric between the target object and candidate patches of the current search image in an end-to-end
framework [60, 2, 63, 23, 66, 36, 25, 84]. With the powerful deep network and large-scale labeled video frames
for offline training, siamese based trackers achieve favorable performance and efficiency. One notable example is
the SiamFC tracker [2] which learns a matching function in
an embedding space and wins the VOT2017 real-time challenge [33, 32]. However, based on the results in existing
tracking benchmarks [70, 71], SiamFC does not achieve a
better accuracy than many other types of trackers, such as
ECO-HC [10] and TRACA [5]. Figure 1 also shows that
SiamFC encounters difficulties when the target object has
significant appearance change [25]. To improve the robustness of siamese based methods, various strategies have been
proposed such as attention learning [66], dynamic updating [23] and structured modeling [84], which have obtained
promising performance.
Despite the above significant progress, most siamese
based tracking methods do not take full advantage of
spatial-temporal target appearance modeling under different contextual situations : (1) Many siamese trackers use the
initial target template from the first frame to match candidate patches [60, 2, 36]. However, since visual tracking is a

4649

