DistillHash: Unsupervised Deep Hashing by Distilling Data Pairs
Erkun Yang1,2 , Tongliang Liu2 , Cheng Deng1∗, Wei Liu3∗ , Dacheng Tao2
1
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xian 710071, China
2
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, FEIT, University of Sydney,
Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia, 3 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
ekyang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au, chdeng.xd@gmail.com,
wl2223@columbia.edu, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Due to the high storage and search efficiency, hashing
has become prevalent for large-scale similarity search. Particularly, deep hashing methods have greatly improved the
search performance under supervised scenarios. In contrast, unsupervised deep hashing models can hardly achieve
satisfactory performance due to the lack of reliable supervisory similarity signals. To address this issue, we propose
a novel deep unsupervised hashing model, dubbed DistillHash, which can learn a distilled data set consisted of data
pairs, which have confidence similarity signals. Specifically, we investigate the relationship between the initial
noisy similarity signals learned from local structures and
the semantic similarity labels assigned by a Bayes optimal
classifier. We show that under a mild assumption, some
data pairs, of which labels are consistent with those assigned by the Bayes optimal classifier, can be potentially
distilled. Inspired by this fact, we design a simple yet effective strategy to distill data pairs automatically and further
adopt a Bayesian learning framework to learn hash functions from the distilled data set. Extensive experimental results on three widely used benchmark datasets show that the
proposed DistillHash consistently accomplishes the stateof-the-art search performance.

1. Introduction
The explosive growth of visual data (e.g., photos and
videos) has led to renewed interest in efficient indexing
and searching algorithms [6, 9, 19, 44, 48, 53, 57, 58, 65–67],
among which, hashing-based approximate nearest neighbor
(ANN) searching, which balances retrieval quality and computational cost, has attracted increasing attention.
Generally, hashing methods can be divided into supervised and unsupervised models. The supervised hashing
∗ Corresponding author

models [7, 35, 40, 62], which aim to learn hash functions
with semantic labels, have shown remarkable performance.
However, existing supervised hashing methods, especially
deep hashing rely on massive labeled data examples to train
their models. Thus, when there exist no enough training
examples, their performance may be dramatically degraded
caused by over-fitting to those training examples.
To address this challenge, unsupervised hashing methods usually adopt learning frameworks without requiring
any supervised information. Traditional unsupervised hashing methods [3,21,25,39] with hand-crafted features cannot
well preserve the similarities of real-world data samples due
to the low model capacity and the separated representation
and binary codes optimization processes. To take advantages of the recent progress of deep learning [31,56,68], unsupervised deep hashing methods [11, 15, 17, 30, 36], which
adopt neural networks as hash functions, have also been
proposed. These deep hashing models are usually trained by
minimizing either the quantization loss or data reconstruction loss. However, since these objectives fail to exploit the
semantic similarities between data points, they can hardly
achieve satisfactory results.
In this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised deep
hashing model, dubbed DistillHash, which addresses the
absence of supervisory signals by distilling data pairs with
confident semantic similarity relationships. In particular,
we first exploit the local structure of training data points
to assign an initial similarity label for each data pair. If
we treat the semantic similarity labels as true labels, these
initial similarity labels then contain label- and instancedependent label noise, because many of them fail to represent semantic similarities. By assuming that we know the
probability of a semantic similarity label given a pair of the
data points, the Bayes optimal classifier will assign the semantic similarity label to the data pair which has a higher
probability (or has a probability greater than 0.5). Based on
these results, we give strict analysis on the relationship between the noisy labels and the labels assigned by the Bayes
12946

