Fast Neural Architecture Search of Compact Semantic Segmentation Models
via Auxiliary Cells
Vladimir Nekrasov∗ Hao Chen∗ Chunhua Shen
The University of Adelaide, Australia

Ian Reid

E-mail: {vladimir.nekrasov, hao.chen01, chunhua.shen, ian.reid}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Automated design of neural network architectures tailored for a specific task is an extremely promising, albeit
inherently difficult, avenue to explore. While most results
in this domain have been achieved on image classification
and language modelling problems, here we concentrate on
dense per-pixel tasks, in particular, semantic image segmentation using fully convolutional networks. In contrast to
the aforementioned areas, the design choices of a fully convolutional network require several changes, ranging from
the sort of operations that need to be used—e.g., dilated
convolutions—to a solving of a more difficult optimisation
problem. In this work, we are particularly interested in
searching for high-performance compact segmentation architectures, able to run in real-time using limited resources.
To achieve that, we intentionally over-parameterise the architecture during the training time via a set of auxiliary
cells that provide an intermediate supervisory signal and
can be omitted during the evaluation phase. The design of
the auxiliary cell is emitted by a controller, a neural network with the fixed structure trained using reinforcement
learning. More crucially, we demonstrate how to efficiently
search for these architectures within limited time and computational budgets. In particular, we rely on a progressive strategy that terminates non-promising architectures
from being further trained, and on Polyak averaging coupled with knowledge distillation to speed-up the convergence. Quantitatively, in 8 GPU-days our approach discovers a set of architectures performing on-par with stateof-the-art among compact models on the semantic segmentation, pose estimation and depth prediction tasks. Code
will be made available here: https://github.com/
drsleep/nas-segm-pytorch

1. Introduction
For years, the design of neural network architectures was
thought to be solely a duty of a human expert - it was
∗ Equal contribution.

her responsibility to specify which type of architecture to
use, how many layers should there be, how many channels
should convolutional layers have and etc. This is no longer
the case as the automated neural architecture search - a way
of predicting the neural network structure via a non-human
expert (an algorithm) - is fast-growing. Potentially, this may
well mean that instead of manually adapting a single stateof-the-art architecture for a new task at hand, the algorithm
would discover a set of best-suited and high-performing architectures on given data.
Few decades ago, such an algorithm was based on evolutionary programming strategies where best seen so far architectures underwent mutations and their most promising
off-springs were bound to continue evolving [2]. Now, we
have reached the stage where a secondary neural network,
oftentimes called controller, replaces a human in the loop,
by iteratively searching among possible architecture candidates and maximising the expected score on the held-out
set [47]. While there is a lack of theoretical work behind this
latter approach, several promising empirical breakthroughs
have already been achieved [3, 48].
At this point, it is important to emphasise the fact that
such accomplishments required an excessive amount of
computational resources—more than 20, 000 GPU-days for
the work of Zoph and Le [47] and 2, 000 for Zoph et al. [48].
Although a few works have reduced those to single digit
numbers on image classification and language processing
tasks [21, 28], we consider more challenging dense perpixel tasks that produce an output for each pixel in the input
image and for which no efficient training regimes have been
previously presented. Although here we concentrate only
on semantic image segmentation, our proposed methodology can immediately be applied to other per-pixel prediction tasks, such as depth estimation and pose estimation. In
our experiments, we demonstrate the transferability of the
discovered segmentation architecture to the latter problems.
Notably, all of them play an important role in computer vision and robotic applications and so far have been relying
on manually designed accurate low-latency models for realworld scenarios.
19126

