Nesti-Net: Normal Estimation for Unstructured 3D Point Clouds
using Convolutional Neural Networks
Yizhak Ben-Shabat
Mechanical Engineering
Techion IIT
Haifa, Israel

Michael Lindenbaum
Computer Science
Techion IIT
Haifa, Israel

Anath Fischer
Mechanical Engineering
Techion IIT
Haifa, Israel

sitzikbs@gmail.com

mic@cs.technion.ac.il

meranath@technion.ac.il

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a normal estimation
method for unstructured 3D point clouds. This method,
called Nesti-Net, builds on a new local point cloud representation which consists of multi-scale point statistics (MuPS), estimated on a local coarse Gaussian grid.
This representation is a suitable input to a CNN architecture. The normals are estimated using a mixtureof-experts (MoE) architecture, which relies on a datadriven approach for selecting the optimal scale around
each point and encourages sub-network specialization.
Interesting insights into the network’s resource distribution are provided. The scale prediction significantly improves robustness to different noise levels,
point density variations and different levels of detail.
We achieve state-of-the-art results on a benchmark synthetic dataset and present qualitative results on real
scanned scenes.

1. Introduction
Commodity 3D sensors are rapidly becoming an integral part of autonomous systems. These sensors, e.g.
RGB-D cameras or LiDAR, provide a 3D point cloud
representing the geometry of the scanned objects and
surroundings. This raw representation is challenging
to process since it lacks connectivity information or
structure, and is often incomplete, noisy and contains
point density variations. In particular, processing it by
means of the highly effective convolutional neural networks (CNNs) is problematic because CNNs require
structured, grid-like data as input.
When available, additional local geometric information, such as the surface normals at each point, induces
a partial local structure and improves performance of
different tasks such as over-segmentation [3], classifica-

tion [21] and surface reconstruction [11].
Estimating the normals from a raw, point-only,
cloud, is a challenging task due to difficulties associated with sampling density, noise, outliers, and detail level. The common approach is to specify a local
neighborhood around a point and to fit a local basic
geometric surface (e.g. a plane) to the points in this
neighborhood. Then the normal is estimated from the
fitted geometric entity. The chosen size (or scale) of
the neighborhood introduces an unavoidable tradeoff
between robustness to noise and accuracy of fine details. A large-scale neighborhood over-smoothes sharp
corners and small details but is otherwise robust to
noise. A small neighborhood, on the other hand, may
reproduce the normals more accurately around small
details but is more sensitive to noise. Thus it seems
that an adaptive, data-driven scale may improve estimation performance.
We propose a normal estimation method for unstructured 3D point clouds. It features a mixtureof-experts network for scale prediction, which significantly increases its robustness to different noise levels, outliers, and varying levels of detail. In addition,
this method overcomes the challenge of feeding point
clouds into CNNs by extending the recently proposed
3D modified Fischer Vector (3DmFV) representation
[4] to encode local geometry on a coarse multi-scale
grid. It outperforms state-of-the-art methods for normal vector estimation.
The main contributions of this paper are:
• A new normal estimation method for unstructured
3D point clouds based on mixture of experts and
scale prediction.
• A local point representation which can be used as
input to a CNN.
110112

