Focus Is All You Need: Loss Functions For Event-based Vision
Guillermo Gallego †

Parameters θ
Warping along
point trajectories

time [s]

X [pix]

Davide Scaramuzza †

Warped Events

Focus score
Measure
event alignment

Y [pix]

Y [pix]

Input Events

Mathias Gehrig †

X [pix]

I(x; θ)

θ

Figure 1: Motion Compensation Framework. Events in a space-time window are warped according to point trajectories
described by motion parameters θ, resulting in an image of warped events (IWE) I(x; θ). Then, a focus loss function of I
measures how well events are aligned along the point trajectories. This work proposes multiple focus loss functions for event
alignment (last block in the figure and Table 1) for tasks such as rotational motion, depth and optical flow estimation.

Abstract
Event cameras are novel vision sensors that output pixellevel brightness changes (“events”) instead of traditional
video frames. These asynchronous sensors offer several advantages over traditional cameras, such as, high temporal
resolution, very high dynamic range, and no motion blur. To
unlock the potential of such sensors, motion compensation
methods have been recently proposed. We present a collection and taxonomy of twenty two objective functions to analyze event alignment in motion compensation approaches
(Fig. 1). We call them focus loss functions since they have
strong connections with functions used in traditional shapefrom-focus applications. The proposed loss functions allow
bringing mature computer vision tools to the realm of event
cameras. We compare the accuracy and runtime performance of all loss functions on a publicly available dataset,
and conclude that the variance, the gradient and the Laplacian magnitudes are among the best loss functions. The applicability of the loss functions is shown on multiple tasks:
rotational motion, depth and optical flow estimation. The
proposed focus loss functions allow to unlock the outstanding properties of event cameras.

1. Introduction
Event cameras are bio-inspired sensors that work radically different from traditional cameras. Instead of capturing brightness images at a fixed rate, they measure bright† Dept. Informatics, Univ. of Zurich and Dept. Neuroinformatics,
Univ. of Zurich and ETH Zurich

ness changes asynchronously. This results in a stream
of events, which encode the time, location and polarity
(sign) of the brightness changes. Event cameras, such as
the Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS) [1] posses outstanding
properties compared to traditional cameras: very high dynamic range (140 dB vs. 60 dB), high temporal resolution (in the order of µs), and do not suffer from motion
blur. Hence, event cameras have a large potential to tackle
challenging scenarios for standard cameras (such as high
speed and high dynamic range) in tracking [2–9], depth
estimation [10–19], Simultaneous Localization and Mapping [20–27], and recognition [28–32], among other applications. However, novel methods are required to process
the unconventional output of these sensors in order to unlock their potential.
Motion compensation approaches [15, 19, 33–42] have
been recently introduced for processing the visual information acquired by event cameras. They have proven successful for the estimation of motion (optical flow) [34–
36, 38, 39], camera motion [33, 35], depth (3D reconstruction) [15, 19, 38, 39] as well as segmentation [36, 40, 41].
The main idea of such methods consists of searching for
point trajectories on the image plane that maximize event
alignment [33, 35] (Fig. 1, right), which is measured using some loss function of the events warped according to
such trajectories. The best trajectories produce sharp, motion compensated images that reveal the brightness patterns
causing the events (Fig. 1, middle).
In this work, we build upon the motion compensation
framework [35] and extend it to include twenty more loss
functions for applications such as ego-motion, depth and

12280

