Stereo R-CNN based 3D Object Detection for Autonomous Driving
Peiliang Li1 , Xiaozhi Chen2 , and Shaojie Shen1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 DJI
pliap@connect.ust.hk, cxz.thu@gmail.com, eeshaojie@ust.hk

Abstract
We propose a 3D object detection method for autonomous driving by fully exploiting the sparse and dense,
semantic and geometry information in stereo imagery. Our
method, called Stereo R-CNN, extends Faster R-CNN for
stereo inputs to simultaneously detect and associate object in left and right images. We add extra branches after
stereo Region Proposal Network (RPN) to predict sparse
keypoints, viewpoints, and object dimensions, which are
combined with 2D left-right boxes to calculate a coarse1
3D object bounding box. We then recover the accurate
3D bounding box by a region-based photometric alignment
using left and right RoIs. Our method does not require
depth input and 3D position supervision, however, outperforms all existing fully supervised image-based methods.
Experiments on the challenging KITTI dataset show that
our method outperforms the state-of-the-art stereo-based
method by around 30% AP on both 3D detection and 3D
localization tasks. Code will be made publicly available.

1. Introduction
3D object detection serves as an essential basis of visual perception, motion prediction, and planning for autonomous driving. Currently, most of the 3D object detection methods [5, 23, 31, 13, 18] heavily rely on LiDAR data
for providing accurate depth information in autonomous
driving scenarios. However, LiDAR has the disadvantage of
high cost, relatively short perception range (∼100 m), and
sparse information (32, 64 lines comparing to >720p images). On the other hand, monocular camera provides alternative low-cost solutions[3, 21, 27] for 3D object detection.
The depth information can be predicted by semantic properties in scenes and object size, etc. However, the inferred
depth cannot guarantee the accuracy, especially for unseen
scenes. To this end, we propose a stereo-vision based 3D
object detection method. Comparing with monocular camera, stereo camera provides more precise depth information
1 We use the coarse 3D box to represent one with accurate 2D projection
but not necessarily with accurate 3D position.

by left-right photometric alignment. Comparing with LiDAR, stereo camera is low-cost while achieving comparable depth accuracy for objects with non-trivial disparities.
The perception range of stereo camera depends on the focal length and the baseline. Therefore, stereo vision has the
potential ability to provide larger-range perception by combining different stereo modules with different focal length
and baselines.
In this work, we study the sparse and dense constraints
for 3D objects by fully exploiting the semantic and geometry information in stereo imagery and propose an accurate Stereo R-CNN based 3D object detection method. Our
method simultaneously detects and associates objects for
left and right images using the proposed Stereo R-CNN.
The network architecture can be overviewed in Fig.1, which
can be divided into three main parts. The first one is a Stereo
RPN module (Sect. 3.1) which outputs corresponding left
and right RoI proposals. After applying RoIAlign [8] on
left and right feature maps respectively, we concatenate leftright RoI features to classify object categories and regress
accurate 2D stereo boxes, viewpoint, and dimensions in the
stereo regression (Sect. 3.2) branch. A keypoint (Sect. 3.2)
branch is employed to predict object keypoints using only
left RoI feature. These outputs form the sparse constraints
(2D boxes, keypoints) for the 3D box estimation (Sect. 4),
where we formulate the projection relations between 3D
box corners with 2D left-right boxes and keypoints.
The crucial component that ensures our 3D localization
performance is the dense 3D box alignment (Sect. 5). We
consider 3D object localization as a learning-aided geometry problem rather than an end-to-end regression problem. Instead of directly using the depth input [4, 27] which
does not explicitly utilize the object property, we treat the
object RoI as an entirety rather than independent pixels.
For regular-shaped objects, the depth relation between each
pixel and the 3D center can be inferred given the coarse
3D bounding box. We warp dense pixels in the left RoI
to the right image according to their depth relations with
the 3D object center to find the best center depth that minimizes the entire photometric error. The entire object RoI
thereby forms the dense constraint for 3D object depth esti-

7644

