Meta-learning Convolutional Neural Architectures for Multi-target Concrete
Defect Classification with the COncrete DEfect BRidge IMage Dataset
Martin Mundt1∗ , Sagnik Majumder1 , Sreenivas Murali1∗ , Panagiotis Panetsos2 , Visvanathan Ramesh1∗
1. Goethe University 2. Egnatia Odos A. E.
{mmundt, vramesh}@em.uni-frankfurt.de

{majumder, murali}@ccc.cs.uni-frankfurt.de

ppane@egnatia.gr

Abstract
Recognition of defects in concrete infrastructure, especially in bridges, is a costly and time consuming crucial first
step in the assessment of the structural integrity. Large variation in appearance of the concrete material, changing illumination and weather conditions, a variety of possible surface markings as well as the possibility for different types of
defects to overlap, make it a challenging real-world task. In
this work we introduce the novel COncrete DEfect BRidge
IMage dataset (CODEBRIM) for multi-target classification
of five commonly appearing concrete defects. We investigate and compare two reinforcement learning based metalearning approaches, MetaQNN and efficient neural architecture search, to find suitable convolutional neural network
architectures for this challenging multi-class multi-target
task. We show that learned architectures have fewer overall
parameters in addition to yielding better multi-target accuracy in comparison to popular neural architectures from the
literature evaluated in the context of our application.

1. Introduction
To assess a concrete bridge’s structural safety, it is desirable to determine the level of degradation by accurately
recognizing all defect types. Defects tend to be small with
respect to bridge elements and often occur simultaneously
with overlap of defect categories. Although one could
imagine treating each defect category independently, overlapping defects are more severe with respect to the structural safety. The requirement to recognize these multi-class
multi-target defects forms the basis for a challenging realworld task that is further complicated by a variety of environmental factors. Concrete, as a composite material, has
a wide range of variation in surface reflectance, roughness,
color and, in some cases, applied surface coatings. Changing lighting conditions, weather dependent wetness of the
* work conducted while at Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies

surface and a diverse set of safety irrelevant surface alterations like small holes, markings, stains or graffiti, add to
the factors of variation. This necessitates computer vision
techniques that are capable of addressing such rich appearance spaces.
Deep learning techniques in conjunction with labelled
datasets have turned out to be ideal candidates for recognition tasks of similar complexity. Especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [21, 32, 1, 37, 16] have been
shown to excel at object and material recognition benchmarks [29, 10, 35, 3]. Unfortunately, defect recognition in
concrete bridges is largely yet to benefit from deep learning
approaches. Due to the necessity of expert knowledge in the
annotation process along with tedious image acquisition,
the task is traditionally focused on cracks with algorithms
based on domain specific modelling or manual inspection
by a human. Recently, datasets [31, 36, 26] and corresponding deep learning applications [36, 23, 18, 8] have presented
significant efforts towards data-driven approaches in this
domain. Their work focuses on cracks as only a subset of
structurally relevant defects and concentrates on CNNs proposed in the object recognition literature, that might not be
the best choice for material defect recognition.
In this work we address two crucial open aspects of concrete defect recognition: the establishment of a labelled
multi-target dataset with overlapping defect categories for
use in machine learning and the design of deep neural networks that are tailored to the task. For this purpose we introduce our novel COncrete DEfect BRidge IMage (CODEBRIM) dataset and employ meta-learning of CNN architectures specific to multi-class multi-target defect classification. CODEBRIM features six mutually non-exclusive
classes: crack, spallation, efflorescence, exposed bars, corrosion (stains) and non-defective background. Our images
were acquired at high-resolution, partially using an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) to gain close-range access,
and feature varying scale and context. We evaluate a variety of best-practice CNN architectures [21, 32, 1, 37, 16]
in the literature on the CODEBRIM’s multi-target defect
111196

