Towards High-fidelity Nonlinear 3D Face Morphable Model
Luan Tran, Feng Liu, Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{tranluan, liufeng6, liuxm}@msu.edu
Input

Reconstruction

Albedo

Shape

Our
Tewari et al. [39]
Figure 1: With novel enhancements in both learning objective as well as the network architecture, our proposed nonlinear 3D
morphable model enables, for the first time, regressing high-fidelity facial shape (geometry) and albedo (skin reflectence) by
directly estimating model latent representations.

Abstract
Embedding 3 D morphable basis functions into deep
neural networks opens great potential for models with better representation power. However, to faithfully learn those
models from an image collection, it requires strong regularization to overcome ambiguities involved in the learning
process. This critically prevents us from learning high fidelity face models which are needed to represent face images in high level of details. To address this problem, this
paper presents a novel approach to learn additional proxies as means to side-step strong regularizations, as well as,
leverages to promote detailed shape/albedo. To ease the
learning, we also propose to use a dual-pathway network,
a carefully-designed architecture that brings a balance between global and local-based models. By improving the
nonlinear 3 D morphable model in both learning objective
and network architecture, we present a model which is superior in capturing higher level of details than the linear
or its precedent nonlinear counterparts. As a result, our
model achieves state-of-the-art performance on 3 D face reconstruction by solely optimizing latent representations.
Project website: http://cvlab.cse.msu.edu/
project-nonlinear-3dmm.html

1. Introduction
Computer vision and computer graphics fields have had
much interest in the longstanding problem of 3D face reconstruction — creating a detailed 3D model of a person’s face
from a collection or a single photograph. The problem is
important with many applications, including but not limited
to face recognition [1, 26, 50], video editing [12, 41], avatar
puppeteering [8, 10, 51] or virtual make-up [13, 24].
Recently, an incredible amount of attention is drawn into
the simplest but most challenging form of this problem:
monocular face reconstruction. Inferring a 3D face mesh
from a single 2D photo is arduous and ill-posed since the
image formation process blends multiple facial components
(shape, albedo) as well as environment (lighting) into a
single color for each pixel. To better handle the ambiguity, one must rely on additional prior assumptions, such as
constraining faces to lie in a restricted subspace, e.g., 3D
Morphable Models (3DMM) [6] learned from a small 3D
scans collection. Many state-of-the-art approaches, either
learning-based [33, 34] or optimization-based face reconstruction [5,14], heavily rely on such priors. While yielding
impressive results, these algorithms do not generalize well
beyond the underlying model’s restricted low-dimensional
subspace. As a consequence, the reconstructed 3D face may
11126

