Hierarchical Disentanglement of Discriminative Latent Features for Zero-shot
Learning

Bin Tong ∗ † Chao Wang ∗ ‡ Martin Klinkigt †
Yoshiyuki Kobayashi † Yuuichi Nonaka †
†
R&D Group, Hitachi, Ltd., Japan
‡
Ocean University of China
{bin.tong.hh, martin.klinkigt.ut}@hitachi.com, chaowangplus@gmail.com
{yoshiyuki.kobayashi.gp, yuichi.nonaka.zy}@hitachi.com
Abstract
Most studies in zero-shot learning model the relationship, in the form of a classifier or mapping, between features
from images of seen classes and their attributes. Therefore,
the degree of a model’s generalization ability for recognizing unseen images is highly constrained by that of image features and attributes. In this paper, we discuss two
questions about generalization that are seldom discussed.
Are image features trained with samples of seen classes
expressive enough to capture the discriminative information for both seen and unseen classes? Is the relationship
learned from seen image features and attributes sufficiently
generalized to recognize unseen classes. To answer these
two questions, we propose a model to learn discriminative
and generalizable representations from image features under an auto-encoder framework. The discriminative latent
features are learned through a group-wise disentanglement
over feature groups with a hierarchical structure. On popular benchmark data sets, a significant improvement over
state-of-the-art methods in tasks of typical and generalized
zero-shot learning verifies the generalization ability of latent features for recognizing unseen images.

1. Introduction
The significant performance improvement of deep neural
networks in recent years is partly due to the wide availability of large labeled datasets. However, for some uncommon
objects, only a limited number of samples can be provided,
and new categories of objects may even emerge dynamically. In such a situation, problems may arise regarding
∗ contribute equally to this paper. Chao Wang did this work during the
internship at Hitachi.

state-of-the-art methods recognizing new categories. Zeroshot learning [27, 45, 47, 15, 32, 16, 7, 6, 48] addresses
the problem of recognizing objects of unseen classes by
transferring knowledge from seen classes via mid-level descriptors, such as attributes [27], which bridge semantically
low-level image features and high-level concepts such as
class labels. For transferring such knowledge, most studies in zero-shot learning model the relationship, in the form
of a mapping or classifier, between visual features and attributes. However, this relationship has a limited capability
for recognizing unseen images, and it even performs worse
for generalized zero-shot learning, in which both seen and
unseen classes have to be recognized. We argue that this
incapability boils down to the following limitations that are
however seldom discussed in previous studies.
For convolutional neural network (CNN) features trained
with seen images, seen classes are well separated in the
feature space. However, these features are less capable
of discriminating seen and unseen classes, which may hurt
the performance of generalized zero-shot learning. Figure
1(a) shows that seen classes unnecessarily overlap unseen
classes if image features are trained with classifying seen
classes only. Figure 1(b) shows that the degree of discrimination in both seen and unseen classes significantly decreases, compared to that in seen classes. Figure 1(c) shows
how unseen classes separate from seen classes when the dimensions of features are ranked by variances in descending order. We observed that not all dimensions of features
contribute to the discrimination between seen and unseen
classes. Features with low variances even hurt the discrimination between seen and unseen classes. The above observations explain part of the reason why state-of-the-art methods behave poorly in recognizing both seen and unseen images in more realistic settings such as generalized zero-shot
learning.

11467

