FEELVOS: Fast End-to-End Embedding Learning for Video Object
Segmentation
Paul Voigtlaender1,∗ , Yuning Chai2,† , Florian Schroff2 , Hartwig Adam2 ,
Bastian Leibe1 , Liang-Chieh Chen2
RWTH Aachen University1 , Google Inc.2
voigtlaender@vision.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract
Many of the recent successful methods for video object
segmentation (VOS) are overly complicated, heavily rely
on fine-tuning on the first frame, and/or are slow, and are
hence of limited practical use. In this work, we propose
FEELVOS as a simple and fast method which does not rely
on fine-tuning. In order to segment a video, for each frame
FEELVOS uses a semantic pixel-wise embedding together
with a global and a local matching mechanism to transfer information from the first frame and from the previous frame of the video to the current frame. In contrast
to previous work, our embedding is only used as an internal guidance of a convolutional network. Our novel dynamic segmentation head allows us to train the network,
including the embedding, end-to-end for the multiple object
segmentation task with a cross entropy loss. We achieve
a new state of the art in video object segmentation without fine-tuning with a J &F measure of 71.5% on the
DAVIS 2017 validation set. We make our code and models
available at https://github.com/tensorflow/
models/tree/master/research/feelvos.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) is a fundamental task
in computer vision, with important applications including
video editing, robotics, and self-driving cars. In this work,
we focus on the semi-supervised VOS setup in which the
ground truth segmentation masks of one or multiple objects
are given for the first frame in a video. The task is then to
automatically estimate the segmentation masks of the given
objects for the rest of the video. With the recent advances
in deep learning and the introduction of the DAVIS datasets
[29, 31], there has been tremendous progress in tackling the
semi-supervised VOS task. However, many of the most suc-

PML [6]
OSMN [40]
FAVOS [7]
VideoMatch [17]
RGMP [37]
FEELVOS (ours)
PReMVOS [26]
OnAVOS [35]

Simple

Fast

✓
✓
✓
✓

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

✓

End-to-end

Strong

✓
✓

✓
✓
✓

✓

Table 1. Design goals overview. The table shows which of our
design goals (described in more detail in the text) are achieved
by recent methods. Our method is the only one which fulfills all
design goals.

cessful methods rely on fine-tuning of the model using the
first-frame annotations and have very high runtimes which
are not suitable for most practical applications. Additionally, several successful methods rely on extensive engineering, resulting in a high system complexity with many components. For example, the 2018 DAVIS challenge was won
by PReMVOS [26, 24, 25] which employs four different
neural networks together with fine-tuning and a merging algorithm resulting in a total runtime of around 38 seconds
per video frame. While it delivered impressive results, the
practical usability of such algorithms is limited.
Design Goals. In order to ensure maximum practical usability, in this work, we develop a method for video object segmentation with the following design goals: A VOS
method should be
• Simple: Only a single neural network and no simulated
data is used.
• Fast: The whole system is fast for deployment. In
particular, the model does not rely on first-frame finetuning.
• End-to-end: The multi-object segmentation problem,
where each video contains a different number of objects, is tackled in an end-to-end way.

∗ Work done during an internship at Google Inc.

† Now at Waymo LLC.

9481

