Beyond Tracking:
Selecting Memory and Refining Poses for Deep Visual Odometry
Fei Xue1,3 , Xin Wang1,3 , Shunkai Li1,3 , Qiuyuan Wang1,3 , Junqiu Wang2 , and Hongbin Zha1,3
1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
2
Beijing Changcheng Aviation Measurement and Control Institute, AVIC
3
PKU-SenseTime Machine Vision Joint Lab
{feixue, xinwang cis, lishunkai, wangqiuyuan}@pku.edu.cn
jerywangjq@foxmail.com, zha@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Most previous learning-based visual odometry (VO)
methods take VO as a pure tracking problem. In contrast,
we present a VO framework by incorporating two additional
components called Memory and Refining. The Memory
component preserves global information by employing an
adaptive and efficient selection strategy. The Refining component ameliorates previous results with the contexts stored
in the Memory by adopting a spatial-temporal attention
mechanism for feature distilling. Experiments on the KITTI
and TUM-RGBD benchmark datasets demonstrate that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art learning-based methods by a large margin and produces competitive results
against classic monocular VO approaches. Especially, our
model achieves outstanding performance in challenging
scenarios such as texture-less regions and abrupt motions,
where classic VO algorithms tend to fail.

1. Introduction
Visual Odometry (VO) and Visual Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (V-SLAM) estimate camera poses
from image sequences by exploiting the consistency between consecutive frames. As an essential task in autonomous driving and robotics, VO has been studied for
decades and many outstanding algorithms have been developed [7, 8, 10, 20, 30]. Recently, as Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
achieve impressive performance in many computer vision
tasks [4,6,12,34], a number of end-to-end models have been
proposed for VO estimation. These methods either learn
depth and ego-motion jointly with CNNs [16,19,36,37,39],
or leverage RNNs to introduce temporal information [14,

0
2

t-1

,

, −

t

Figure 1. Overview of our framework. Compared with existing
learning-based methods which formulate VO task as a pure tracking problem, we introduce two useful components called Memory
and Refining. The Memory module preserves longer time information by adopting an adaptive context selection strategy. The Refining module ameliorates previous outputs by employing a spatialtemporal feature reorganization mechanism.

22, 31–33]. Due to the high dimensionality of depth maps,
the number of frames is commonly limited to no more than
5. Although temporal information is aggregated through recurrent units, RNNs are incapable of remembering previous
observations for long time [27], leading to the limited usage
of historical information. Besides, the above methods pay
little attention to the significance of incoming observations
for refining previous results, which is crucial for VO tasks.
Direct estimation of camera motions from image snippets is prone to large errors due to the geometric uncertainty
caused by small baselines (especially for handheld devices).
Consequently, error accumulation is getting increasingly severe over time, as global poses are integrated from framewise poses. In classic VO/SLAM systems [20], a local map
18575

