K-Nearest Neighbors Hashing
Xiangyu He1,2 , Peisong Wang1 , Jian Cheng1,2,3
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
1

{xiangyu.he, peisong.wang, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Hashing based approximate nearest neighbor search embeds high dimensional data to compact binary codes, which
enables efficient similarity search and storage. However,
the non-isometry sign(·) function makes it hard to project
the nearest neighbors in continuous data space into the
closest codewords in discrete Hamming space. In this work,
we revisit the sign(·) function from the perspective of space partitioning. In specific, we bridge the gap between
k-nearest neighbors and binary hashing codes with Shannon entropy. We further propose a novel K-Nearest Neighbors Hashing (KNNH) method to learn binary representations from KNN within the subspaces generated by sign(·).
Theoretical and experimental results show that the KNN relation is of central importance to neighbor preserving embeddings, and the proposed method outperforms the stateof-the-arts on benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Similarity search is a fundamental problem in machine
learning applications, such as clustering, matching, and
classification. With the explosive growth of data size, traditional methods such as exhaustive search and Kd-tree,
find themselves constrained by the huge size and high dimensionality. These problems lead to the boom of hashing
based approximate nearest neighbor search [7, 28, 29, 20].
Hashing methods encode high dimensional data into vertices of binary hypercube while preserving the similarity in
original data space. Due to its low computational cost and
storage efficiency, the learning of similarity preserving binary codes has attracted much attention.
Traditional hashing methods consist of data independent and data dependent approaches. The classic data independent schemes include locality sensitive hashing (LSH)
family [1, 6, 26, 8], using random projections to construct hashing functions. There is no doubt that LSH attains

the preponderant influence in the context of extremely highdimensional information retrieval. Nonetheless, LSH is still
an inefficient learning strategy. Without considering the input data, the efficacy of LSH heavily relies on the coding
length. In contrast with the limitations of data independent hashing, data dependent methods exploit the structure of
data or semantic information to learn the compact binary
representations.
Existing data dependent approaches can be further categorized into supervised and unsupervised schemes. Labelbased hashing, such as supervised hashing with kernels
[34], binary reconstruction embedding [25], supervised discrete hashing [39] and order preserving hashing [42] utilize
semantic labels to optimize the binary hash codes or Hamming distances between clusters. Recently, deep learning
has dramatically advanced the state-of-art [44, 46, 4, 45, 31,
30]. Both semantic representation and label information are
used in deep neural networks to learn hash codes. However,
high performance has been coupled with high computational and storage overhead. As pointed out in [12], hashing algorithms for learning binary codes and for encoding a new
test image should be efficient and scalable.
Label-free hashing methods focus on the natural structure of data with no requirement on labels. Representative works include iterative quantization [12], anchor graph
hashing [35], spectral hashing [43], spherical hashing [18],
k-means hashing [17] and binary autoencoder [5]. Due to
the redundancy of input features, a common initial technique in hashing schemes is principal component analysis
(PCA) [43, 13, 22]. To deal with the variance (i.e., information) imbalance among different PCA directions, ITQ [12]
utilizes an orthogonal rotation based on minimizing the
quantization error. Although ITQ is still the seminal method
in hashing, it is still unclear whether distortion minimization leads to optimal binary codes.
In this paper, we demonstrate that learning hashing function only from quantization error minimization may remain
suboptimal. Inspired by Shannon entropy, we propose the

2839

