Semantically Tied Paired Cycle Consistency for
Zero-Shot Sketch-based Image Retrieval
Anjan Dutta
Computer Vision Center
Autonomous University of Barcelona

Zeynep Akata
Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab
University of Amsterdam

adutta@cvc.uab.es

z.akata@uva.nl

Abstract
Zero-shot sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) is an
emerging task in computer vision, allowing to retrieve natural images relevant to sketch queries that might not been
seen in the training phase. Existing works either require
aligned sketch-image pairs or inefficient memory fusion
layer for mapping the visual information to a semantic
space. In this work, we propose a semantically aligned
paired cycle-consistent generative (SEM-PCYC) model for
zero-shot SBIR, where each branch maps the visual information to a common semantic space via an adversarial
training. Each of these branches maintains a cycle consistency that only requires supervision at category levels,
and avoids the need of highly-priced aligned sketch-image
pairs. A classification criteria on the generators’ outputs
ensures the visual to semantic space mapping to be discriminating. Furthermore, we propose to combine textual and
hierarchical side information via a feature selection autoencoder that selects discriminating side information within
a same end-to-end model. Our results demonstrate a significant boost in zero-shot SBIR performance over the state-ofthe-art on the challenging Sketchy and TU-Berlin datasets.

1. Introduction
Matching natural images with free-hand sketches, i.e.
sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) [60, 58, 27, 33, 47, 43,
63, 7, 23] has received a lot of attention. Since sketches can
effectively express shape, pose and fine-grained details of
the target images, SBIR serves a favorable scenario complementary to the conventional text-image cross-modal retrieval or the classical content based image retrieval protocol. This is also because in some situations it may be hard
to provide a textual description or a suitable image of the
desired query, whereas, an user can easily draw a sketch of
the desired object spontaneously on a touch screen.

seen class
image

unseen class
sketch

...
beetle

ZS-SBIR

unseen class
images

...
seen class
sketch

unseen class
sketch

Figure 1. The proposed SEM-PCYC model learns to map visual
information from sketch and image to a semantic space through an
adversarial training based on the seen classes. During the testing
phase the learned mappings are used for generating embeddings
on the unseen classes for zero-shot SBIR.

As the visual information from all the classes gets explored by the system during training, with overlapping
training and test classes, existing SBIR methods perform
well [63]. Since in practice there is no guarantee that the
training data would include all possible queries, a more realistic setting is zero-shot SBIR [43, 23] which combines
zero-shot learning (ZSL) [25, 54] and SBIR as a single task,
where the aim is an accurate class prediction and a competent retrieval performance. However, zero-shot SBIR is extremely challenging as it simultaneously deals with a significant domain gap, intra-class variability and limited knowledge about the unseen classes.
One of the major shortcomings of the prior work on
ZS-SBIR is that sketch-image is retrieved after learning a
mapping from an input sketch to an output image using a
training set of labelled aligned pairs [23]. The supervision
of paired correspondence is to enhance the correlation of
multi-modal data (here, sketch-image) so that learning can
be guided by semantics. However, for many realistic scenarios, obtaining paired (aligned) training data is either unavailable or very expensive. Furthermore, often a joint representation of two or more modalities is obtained by using a
memory fusion layer [43], such as, tensor fusion [19], bilinear pooling [62] etc. These fusion layers are often expensive

5089

