TAFE-Net: Task-Aware Feature Embeddings for Low Shot Learning
Xin Wang Fisher Yu

Ruth Wang Trevor Darrell
UC Berkeley

Abstract

1. Introduction
Feature embeddings are central to computer vision. By
mapping images into semantically rich vector spaces, feature
embeddings extract key information that can be used for
a wide range of prediction tasks. However, learning good
feature embeddings typically requires substantial amounts of
training data and computation. As a consequence, a common
practice [8, 14, 53] is to re-use existing feature embeddings
from convolutional networks (e.g., ResNet [18], VGG [37])
trained on large-scale labeled training datasets (e.g., ImageNet [36]); to achieve maximum accuracy, these generic
feature embedding are often fine-tuned [8, 14, 53] or transformed [19] using additional task specific training data.
In many settings, the training data are insufficient to learn
or even adapt generic feature embeddings to a given task.
For example, in zero-shot and few-shot prediction tasks, the
1 Pronounced taffy-nets

Task embedding: Dog

Task embedding: Cat
Positive

Dog

Cat

Negative

Learning good feature embeddings for images often requires substantial training data. As a consequence, in settings where training data is limited (e.g., few-shot and zeroshot learning), we are typically forced to use a generic feature embedding across various tasks. Ideally, we want to
construct feature embeddings that are tuned for the given
task. In this work, we propose Task-Aware Feature Embedding Networks (TAFE-Nets1 ) to learn how to adapt the image
representation to a new task in a meta learning fashion. Our
network is composed of a meta learner and a prediction
network. Based on a task input, the meta learner generates
parameters for the feature layers in the prediction network
so that the feature embedding can be accurately adjusted for
that task. We show that TAFE-Net is highly effective in generalizing to new tasks or concepts and evaluate the TAFE-Net
on a range of benchmarks in zero-shot and few-shot learning.
Our model matches or exceeds the state-of-the-art on all
tasks. In particular, our approach improves the prediction
accuracy of unseen attribute-object pairs by 4 to 15 points
on the challenging visual attribute-object composition task.

Joseph E. Gonzalez

Figure 1: A cartoon illustration of Task-aware Feature Embeddings (TAFEs). In this case there are two binary prediction tasks: hasCat and hasDog. Task-aware feature
embeddings mean that the same image can have different
embeddings for each task. As a consequence, we can adopt a
single task independent classification boundary for all tasks.
scarcity of training data forces the use of generic feature embeddings [26, 49, 55]. As a consequence, in these situations,
much of the research instead focuses on the design of joint
task and data embeddings [4, 12, 55] that can be generalized
to unseen tasks or tasks with fewer examples. Some have proposed treating the task embedding as linear separators and
learning to generate them for new tasks [42, 29]. Others have
proposed hallucinating additional training data [50, 17, 45].
However, in all cases, a common image embedding is shared
across tasks. Therefore, the common image embedding may
be out of the domain or sub-optimal for any individual prediction task and may be even worse for completely new tasks.
This problem is exacerbated in settings where the number
and diversity of training tasks is relatively small [11].
In this work, we explore the idea of dynamic feature representation by introducing the task-aware feature embedding
network (TAFE-Net) with a meta-learning based parameter
generator to transform generic image features to task-aware
feature embeddings (TAFEs). As illustrated in Figure 1, the
representation of TAFEs is adaptive to the given semantic
task description, and thus able to accommodate the need
of new tasks at testing time. The feature transformation is
realized with a task-aware meta learner, which generates the
parameters of feature embedding layers within the classi11831

