Representation Similarity Analysis
for Efficient Task taxonomy & Transfer Learning
Kshitij Dwivedi
Gemma Roig
Singapore University of Technology and Design
kshitij dwivedi@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, gemma roig@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Transfer learning is widely used in deep neural network
models when there are few labeled examples available. The
common approach is to take a pre-trained network in a similar task and finetune the model parameters. This is usually done blindly without a pre-selection from a set of pretrained models, or by finetuning a set of models trained
on different tasks and selecting the best performing one
by cross-validation. We address this problem by proposing an approach to assess the relationship between visual
tasks and their task-specific models. Our method uses Representation Similarity Analysis (RSA), which is commonly
used to find a correlation between neuronal responses from
brain data and models. With RSA we obtain a similarity score among tasks by computing correlations between
models trained on different tasks. Our method is efficient
as it requires only pre-trained models, and a few images
with no further training. We demonstrate the effectiveness
and efficiency of our method for generating task taxonomy
on Taskonomy dataset. We next evaluate the relationship
of RSA with the transfer learning performance on Taskonomy tasks and a new task: Pascal VOC semantic segmentation. Our results reveal that models trained on tasks with
higher similarity score show higher transfer learning performance. Surprisingly, the best transfer learning result for
Pascal VOC semantic segmentation is not obtained from the
pre-trained model on semantic segmentation, probably due
to the domain differences, and our method successfully selects the high performing models.

1. Introduction
For an artificial agent to perform multiple tasks and learn
in a life-long manner, it should be able to re-utilize information acquired in previously learned tasks and transfer it
to learn new tasks from a few examples. A solution to the
aforementioned setting is to use transfer learning. Transfer
learning allows to leverage representations learned from one

a)

b)
Figure 1. Aims of this paper: a) Deploy a strategy for model
selection in transfer learning by b) Finding relationship between
visual tasks.

task to facilitate learning of other tasks, even when labeled
data is expensive or difficult to obtain. [30, 3, 23, 10].
With the recent success of deep neural networks (DNN),
these have become the ipso facto models for almost all visual tasks [20, 32, 14, 35, 13, 34]. The deployment of
DNN has become possible mostly due to a large amount
of available labeled data, as well as advances in computing resources [20, 32, 14]. The need for data is a limitation that researchers have overcome by introducing transfer
learning techniques. Transfer learning in DNN commonly
consists of taking a pre-trained model in a similar task or

12387

