DeepFlux for Skeletons in the Wild
Yukang Wang1 , Yongchao Xu1∗, Stavros Tsogkas2,3,4†, Xiang Bai1 , Sven Dickinson2,3,4† , Kaleem Siddiqi5
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 University of Toronto
3
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence 4 Samsung Toronto AI Research Center
5
School of Computer Science and Centre for Intelligent Machines, McGill University
{wangyk,yongchaoxu,xbai}@hust.edu.cn, {tsogkas,sven}@cs.toronto.edu, siddiqi@cim.mcgill.ca

Abstract
4

2

Computing object skeletons in natural images is challenging, owing to large variations in object appearance
and scale, and the complexity of handling background clutter. Many recent methods frame object skeleton detection
as a binary pixel classification problem, which is similar
in spirit to learning-based edge detection, as well as to semantic segmentation methods. In the present article, we depart from this strategy by training a CNN to predict a twodimensional vector field, which maps each scene point to
a candidate skeleton pixel, in the spirit of flux-based skeletonization algorithms. This “image context flux” representation has two major advantages over previous approaches.
First, it explicitly encodes the relative position of skeletal
pixels to semantically meaningful entities, such as the image points in their spatial context, and hence also the implied object boundaries. Second, since the skeleton detection context is a region-based vector field, it is better able
to cope with object parts of large width. We evaluate the
proposed method on three benchmark datasets for skeleton
detection and two for symmetry detection, achieving consistently superior performance over state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at https://github.com/
YukangWang/DeepFlux.

1. Introduction
The shape skeleton, or medial axis [3], is a structurebased object descriptor that reveals local symmetry as well
as connectivity between object parts [31, 10]. Modeling objects via their axes of symmetry, and in particular, using skeletons, has a long history in computer vision. Skeletonization algorithms provide a concise and ef∗ Corresponding author
† Sven Dickinson and Stavros Tsogkas contributed to this article in their personal
capacity as Professor and Postdoc, respectively, at the University of Toronto. The
views expressed (or the conclusions reached) are their own and do not necessarily
represent the views of Samsung Research America, Inc.

3

1

shallow

deep

1

2

3

4

NMS

Edge
Detection

Skeleton
Detection

(a) Previous CNN-based skeleton detections rely on NMS.

(b) Flux provides an alternative way for accurately detecting skeletons.

Figure 1. (a) Previous CNN-based methods treat skeleton detection
as binary pixel classification, followed by non-maximum suppression (NMS). This can result in poor localization as well as poor
connectedness. (b) The proposed DeepFlux method models skeleton context via a novel flux representation (left). The flux vector
field encodes skeleton position in the context of the associated image pixels, and hence also the implied object boundaries. This
allows one to associate skeletal pixels with sinks, where flux is
absorbed, in the spirit of flux-based skeletonization methods [39].
Red: ground truth skeleton; Green: detected skeleton.

fective representation of deformable objects, while supporting many applications, including object recognition and retrieval [54, 14, 2, 45], pose estimation [15, 38, 48], hand
gesture recognition [34], shape matching [41], scene text
detection [52], and road detection in aerial scenes [44].
Early algorithms for computing skeletons directly from

5287

