Learning to Cluster Faces on an Affinity Graph
Lei Yang,1 Xiaohang Zhan,1 Dapeng Chen,2 Junjie Yan,2 Chen Change Loy,3 Dahua Lin,1
1
CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Group Limited, 3 Nanyang Technological University
{yl016, zx017, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, {chendapeng, yanjunjie}@sensetime.com, ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Face recognition sees remarkable progress in recent
years, and its performance has reached a very high level.
Taking it to a next level requires substantially larger data,
which would involve prohibitive annotation cost. Hence,
exploiting unlabeled data becomes an appealing alternative. Recent works have shown that clustering unlabeled
faces is a promising approach, often leading to notable performance gains. Yet, how to effectively cluster, especially
on a large-scale (i.e. million-level or above) dataset, remains an open question. A key challenge lies in the complex variations of cluster patterns, which make it difficult for
conventional clustering methods to meet the needed accuracy. This work explores a novel approach, namely, learning to cluster instead of relying on hand-crafted criteria.
Specifically, we propose a framework based on graph convolutional network, which combines a detection and a segmentation module to pinpoint face clusters. Experiments
show that our method yields significantly more accurate
face clusters, which, as a result, also lead to further performance gain in face recognition.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the advances in deep learning techniques,
the performance of face recognition has been remarkably
boosted [25, 22, 27, 3, 31]. However, it should be noted
that the high accuracy of modern face recognition systems
relies heavily on the availability of large-scale annotated
training data. While one can easily collect a vast quantity
of facial images from the Internet, annotating them is prohibitively expensive. Therefore, exploiting unlabeled data,
e.g. through unsupervised or semi-supervised learning, becomes a compelling option and has attracted lots of interest
from both academia and industry [30, 1].
A natural idea to exploit unlabeled data is to cluster them
into “pseudo classes”, such that they can be used like labeled data and fed to a supervised learning pipeline. Recent
works [30] have shown that this approach can bring perfor-

Previous methods

0.75
0.91
0.82
0.88

Our method
0.83

Figure 1: A case to demonstrate the difference between existing
methods and our approach. The blue vertices and orange vertices
represent two classes respectively. Previous unsupervised methods
relying on specific clustering policies may not be able to handle the
orange cluster with complex intra-structures. While our approach,
through learning from the structures, is able to evaluate different
combinations of cluster proposals (green boxes) and output the
clusters with high scores.

mance gains. Yet, current implementations of this approach
still leave a lot to be desired. Particularly, they often resort
to unsupervised methods, such as K-means [19], spectral
clustering [11], hierarchical clustering [32], and approximate rank-order [1], to group unlabeled faces. These methods rely on simplistic assumptions, e.g., K-means implicitly
assumes that the samples in each cluster are around a single
center; spectral clustering requires that the cluster sizes are
relatively balanced, etc. Consequently, they lack the capability of coping with complicated cluster structures, thus often giving rise to noisy clusters, especially when applied to
large-scale datasets collected from real-world settings. This
problem seriously limits the performance improvement.
Hence, to effectively exploit unlabeled face data, we
need to develop an effective clustering algorithm that is able
to cope with the complicated cluster structures arising fre-

2298

