Factor Graph Attention
Idan Schwartz1 , Seunghak Yu2,* , Tamir Hazan1 , Alexander Schwing3
1
2
3
Technion
MIT CSAIL
UIUC
idansc@cs.technion.ac.il, seunghak@csail.mit.edu, tamir.hazan@technion.ac.il, aschwing@illinois.edu

Abstract

Question
History

Dialog is an effective way to exchange information, but
subtle details and nuances are extremely important. While
significant progress has paved a path to address visual dialog with algorithms, details and nuances remain a challenge.
Attention mechanisms have demonstrated compelling results
to extract details in visual question answering and also provide a convincing framework for visual dialog due to their
interpretability and effectiveness. However, the many data
utilities that accompany visual dialog challenge existing attention techniques. We address this issue and develop a
general attention mechanism for visual dialog which operates on any number of data utilities. To this end, we design
a factor graph based attention mechanism which combines
any number of utility representations. We illustrate the applicability of the proposed approach on the challenging and
recently introduced VisDial datasets, outperforming recent
state-of-the-art methods by 1.1% for VisDial0.9 and by 2%
for VisDial1.0 on MRR. Our ensemble model improved the
MRR score on VisDial1.0 by more than 6%.

1. Introduction
Dialog is an effective way for humans to exchange information. Due to this effectiveness it is an important research
goal to develop artificial intelligence based agents for humancomputer conversation. However, when humans talk to each
other, subtle details and nuances are often very important.
This importance of subtle details and nuances makes development of agents for visual dialog a challenging endeavor.
Recent efforts to facilitate human-computer conversation
about images focus on image captioning, visual question answering, visual question generation and very recently also visual dialog. To this end, Das et al. [10] collected, curated and
provided to the general public an impressive dataset, which
allows to design virtual assistants that can converse. Different from image captioning datasets, such as MSCOCO [29],
or visual question answering datasets, such as VQA [5], the
visual dialog dataset contains short dialogs about a scene
between two people. To direct the dialog, the dataset was
collected by showing a caption to the first person (‘questioner’) which attempts to inquire more about the hidden
image. The second person (‘answerer’) could see both the
* Work conducted while the author was at Samsung Research.

Question

does cake have candles ?

are kids wearing hats ?
Q: how many kids ?
A: 5
Q: is this birthday party?
A: yes
Q: any adults ?
A: lady lighting candle
Q: is this outdoors ?
A: not very sure
Q: is table round ?
A: no

Image

Answers

History
Q:how many kids ?
A: 5
Q: is this birthday party ?
A: yes
Q: any adults ?
A: lady lighting candle
Q: is this outdoors ?
A: not very sure
Q: is table round ?
A: no
Q: are kids wearing hats ?
A: 0 of them wearing hats

Image

Answers

Caption
Caption
a group of kids around a table with a cake . a group of kids around a table with a cake .

Figure 1: Illustration of our factor graph attention. We show two
consecutive questions in a dialog. The image attention correlates
well with the question. Attention over history interactions allows
our model to attend to subtle nuances. The caption focuses on the
last word due to given potential priors. Attention over the answers
focuses on specific options. The attended options usually correlate
with the correct answer. Note: for readability, we chose to display
only the top-10 answers out of 100 possible ones.

image and its caption to provide answers to these questions.
Beyond releasing the Visual Dialog dataset, to ensure a fair
comparison, Das et al. [10] propose a particular task that can
be evaluated precisely. It asks the AI system to predict the
next answer given the image, the question, and a history of
question-answer pairs. A variety of discriminative and generative techniques have been discussed, ranging from deep
nets with Long-Short-Term-Memory (LSTM) units [18] to
more involved ones with memory nets [51] and hierarchical
LSTM architectures [45].
One of the successful techniques to improve visual question answering is the attention mechanism [33]. Due to the
similarity of visual question answering and visual dialog,
we envision similar improvements to be realizable. In fact,
some approaches point in this direction and use a subset of
the available data utilities to direct question answering [32].
However, in visual dialog many more “data parts,” i.e., the
image, the question, the history and the caption are involved
and have been referred to as ‘modalities.’ To avoid confusion with the original convention/sense of the word modality,
we coin the term “utilities” to refer to different parts of the
available data. Taking all utilities into account makes it
computationally and conceptually much more challenging
to develop an effective attention mechanism. While ignoring
utilities when computing attention is always an option, we
argue that subtle details and nuances can only be captured
12039

