Modeling Point Clouds with Self-Attention and Gumbel Subset Sampling
Jiancheng Yang1,2

Qiang Zhang1,2

Bingbing Ni1∗

{jekyll4168, zhangqiang2016, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn

Linguo Li1,2

Jinxian Liu1,2

Mengdie Zhou1,2
Qi Tian3
{LLG440982,liujinxian,dandanzmd}@sjtu.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Huawei Noahs Ark Lab

Abstract

1. Introduction
We live in a 3D world. Geometric data have raised increasing research concerns thanks to the popularity of 3D
sensors, e.g., LiDAR and RGB-D cameras. In particular,
we are interested in analyzing 3D point clouds with end-toend deep learning, which theoretically requires the neural
networks to consume 1) size-varying and 2) permutation∗ Corresponding author.

Outlier

Attention Weights

Geometric deep learning is increasingly important
thanks to the popularity of 3D sensors. Inspired by
the recent advances in NLP domain, the self-attention
transformer is introduced to consume the point clouds.
We develop Point Attention Transformers (PATs), using a
parameter-efficient Group Shuffle Attention (GSA) to replace the costly Multi-Head Attention. We demonstrate its
ability to process size-varying inputs, and prove its permutation equivariance. Besides, prior work uses heuristics dependence on the input data (e.g., Furthest Point Sampling)
to hierarchically select subsets of input points. Thereby, we
for the first time propose an end-to-end learnable and taskagnostic sampling operation, named Gumbel Subset Sampling (GSS), to select a representative subset of input points.
Equipped with Gumbel-Softmax, it produces a ”soft” continuous subset in training phase, and a ”hard” discrete subset in test phase. By selecting representative subsets in a
hierarchical fashion, the networks learn a stronger representation of the input sets with lower computation cost. Experiments on classification and segmentation benchmarks
show the effectiveness and efficiency of our methods. Furthermore, we propose a novel application, to process event
camera stream as point clouds, and achieve a state-of-theart performance on DVS128 Gesture Dataset.

Furthest Point Sampling

Group Shuffle Attention

Gumbel Subset Sampling

Figure 1. Illustration of Point Attention Transformers (PATs).
The core operations of PATs are Group Shuffle Attention (GSA)
and Gumbel Subset Sampling (GSS). GSA is a parameter-efficient
self-attention operation on learning relations between points. GSS
serves as a differentiable alternative to Furthest Point Sampling
(FPS) in point cloud reasoning. Several flaws hinder the performance of FPS: it is dependent on the initial sampling point
(i.e., permutation-variant), and it samples from low-dimension Euclidean space, making it sensitive to outliers. Instead, GSS is
permutation-invariant, task-agnostic and differentiable, which enables end-to-end learning on high-dimension representations. It is
trained smoothly with Gumbel reparameterization trick, and produces hard and discrete sampling in test phase by annealing.

invariant sets. PointNets [30] and DeepSets [51] pioneer
directly processing the point sets. Several studies push this
research direction by proposing either structural [19, 32, 42]
or componential [23, 34] improvements.
We argue the relations between points are critical to represent a point cloud: a single point is non-informative without other points in the same set; in other words, it is simply represented by relations between other points. Inspired
by the recent advances in NLP domain [39, 10], we introduce Point Attention Transformers (PATs), based on self-

3323

