Unprocessing Images for Learned Raw Denoising
Tim Brooks1
Ben Mildenhall2
Tianfan Xue1
Jiawen Chen1
Dillon Sharlet1
Jonathan T. Barron1
1
2
Google Research
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Machine learning techniques work best when the data
used for training resembles the data used for evaluation.
This holds true for learned single-image denoising algorithms, which are applied to real raw camera sensor readings but, due to practical constraints, are often trained on
synthetic image data. Though it is understood that generalizing from synthetic to real images requires careful consideration of the noise properties of camera sensors, the other
aspects of an image processing pipeline (such as gain, color
correction, and tone mapping) are often overlooked, despite
their significant effect on how raw measurements are transformed into finished images. To address this, we present a
technique to “unprocess” images by inverting each step of
an image processing pipeline, thereby allowing us to synthesize realistic raw sensor measurements from commonly
available Internet photos. We additionally model the relevant components of an image processing pipeline when
evaluating our loss function, which allows training to be
aware of all relevant photometric processing that will occur after denoising. By unprocessing and processing training data and model outputs in this way, we are able to train
a simple convolutional neural network that has 14%-38%
lower error rates and is 9×-18× faster than the previous
state of the art on the Darmstadt Noise Dataset [31], and
generalizes to sensors outside of that dataset as well.

1. Introduction
Traditional single-image denoising algorithms often analytically model properties of images and the noise they are
designed to remove. In contrast, modern denoising methods often employ neural networks to learn a mapping from
noisy images to noise-free images. Deep learning is capable
of representing complex properties of images and noise, but
training these models requires large paired datasets. As a result, most learning-based denoising techniques rely on synthetic training data. Despite significant work on designing
neural networks for denoising, recent benchmarks [3, 31]

(a) Noisy Input, PSNR = 18.76

(b) Ground Truth

(c) N3Net [32], PSNR = 32.42

(d) Our Model, PSNR = 35.35

Figure 1. An image from the Darmstadt Noise Dataset [31], where
we present (a) the noisy input image, (b) the ground truth noisefree image, (c) the output of the previous state-of-the-art algorithm, and (d) the output of our model. All four images were converted from raw Bayer space to sRGB for visualization. Alongside
each result are three cropped sub-images, rendered with nearestneighbor interpolation. See the supplement for additional results.

reveal that deep learning models are often outperformed by
traditional, hand-engineered algorithms when evaluated on
real noisy raw images.
111036

