Building Detail-Sensitive Semantic Segmentation Networks
with Polynomial Pooling
Zhen Wei∗2,3 , Jingyi Zhang∗ 1,3 , Li Liu3 , Fan Zhu3 , Fumin Shen† 1 , Yi Zhou3 , Si Liu4
Yao Sun2 , Ling Shao3
1. Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2. Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3. Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
4. Beijing Key Laboratory of Digital Media,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{weizhen, sunyao}@iie.ac.cn, {jingyi.zhang1995, liuli1213, fanzhu1987, fumin.shen}@gmail.com,
yi.zhou@inceptioniai.org, liusi@buaa.edu.cn, ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
Semantic segmentation is an important computer vision
task, which aims to allocate a semantic label to each pixel
in an image. When training a segmentation model, it is common to fine-tune a classification network pre-trained on a
large-scale dataset. However, as an intrinsic property of
the classification model, invariance to spatial perturbation
resulting from the lose of detail-sensitivity prevents segmentation networks from achieving high performance. The use of
standard poolings is one of the key factors for this invariance.
The most common standard poolings are max and average
pooling. Max pooling can increase both the invariance to
spatial perturbations and the non-linearity of the networks.
Average pooling, on the other hand, is sensitive to spatial
perturbations, but is a linear function. For semantic segmentation, we prefer both the preservation of detailed cues
within a local feature region and non-linearity that increases
a network’s functional complexity. In this work, we propose a
polynomial pooling (P-pooling) function that finds an intermediate form between max and average pooling to provide
an optimally balanced and self-adjusted pooling strategy for
semantic segmentation. The P-pooling is differentiable and
can be applied into a variety of pre-trained networks. Extensive studies on the PASCAL VOC, Cityscapes and ADE20k
datasets demonstrate the superiority of P-pooling over other
poolings. Experiments on various network architectures and
state-of-the-art training strategies also show that models
with P-pooling layers consistently outperform those directly
∗ the authors contribute equally
† corresponding author

fine-tuned using pre-trained classification models.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a critically important and highly
challenging computer vision task, which has a wide range of
practical industrial use cases, such as medical imaging and
autonomous driving. Benefiting from advancements in deep
learning, deep segmentation networks have enabled dramatic
improvement in performance for this task. The essence of
semantic segmentation is to perform pixel-wise classification
for an input image. For this purpose a deep segmentation
network needs to be detail-sensitive. Additionally, for a
segmentation network to be both a robust feature extractor
and classifier, it must be highly non-linear and complex.
Compared to image-level labels, pixel-wise annotations
require much more human effort and, as such, the amount
of pixel-wise annotated data is limited. Thus, to obtain
improved performance, it is common to fine-tune classification networks that have been pre-trained on large-scale
datasets. However, classification and segmentation networks are designed with contradicting purposes, where the
former requires the pre-trained models to be invariant to
small spatial perturbations on input images (e.g., small translations, scalings or rotations), and the latter requires the
network to be aware of detailed variance within local regions. Previous approaches tackled this contradiction mainly
with new network components [3, 37, 22, 1, 27], modified
convolutions [33, 30, 4, 9], different network architectures
[23, 24, 21, 11, 25, 36] or learned optimal receptive fields
[32, 35, 9, 6, 34].
However, improving pre-trained classification models by
17115

