Multi-Scale Geometric Consistency Guided Multi-View Stereo
Qingshan Xu and Wenbing Tao∗
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing
School of Artifical Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{qingshanxu, wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an efficient multi-scale geometric consistency guided multi-view stereo method for accurate and complete depth map estimation. We first present
our basic multi-view stereo method with Adaptive Checkerboard sampling and Multi-Hypothesis joint view selection
(ACMH). It leverages structured region information to sample better candidate hypotheses for propagation and infer
the aggregation view subset at each pixel. For the depth estimation of low-textured areas, we further propose to combine ACMH with multi-scale geometric consistency guidance (ACMM) to obtain the reliable depth estimates for lowtextured areas at coarser scales and guarantee that they can
be propagated to finer scales. To correct the erroneous estimates propagated from the coarser scales, we present a novel detail restorer. Experiments on extensive datasets show
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance, recovering the depth estimation not only in low-textured areas but
also in details.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) has traditionally been a topic
of interest in computer vision for decades. It aims at establishing dense correspondence from multiple calibrated
images, which results in a dense 3D reconstruction. Over
the last few years, much effort has been put into improving the quality of dense 3D reconstructions and some works
have achieved impressive results [7, 8, 9, 23, 24, 25, 36, 19].
However, with the large-scale data, low texture, occlusions,
repetitive patterns and reflective surface, it is still a challenging problem to perform efficient and accurate multiview stereo in computer vision domain.
Recently, PatchMatch Stereo methods [1, 36, 8, 19] show
great power in depth map estimation with their fast global
search for the best match in other images [2]. These methods follow a popular four-step pipeline, including random
∗ Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Propagation scheme. (a) Sequential propagation. (b)
Symmetric checkerboard propagation. (c) Adaptive checkerboard
propagation. The light red areas in (c) show sampling regions. The
solid yellow circles in (b) and (c) show the sampled points.

initialization, propagation, view selection and refinement.
In this pipeline, propagation and view selection are two key
steps to PatchMatch Stereo methods. The former is important to efficiency while the latter is critical to accuracy.
For propagation, there generally exist two distinct types
of parallel schemes: sequential propagation [1, 36, 19] and
diffusion-like propagation [8]. The former traverses pixels
following parallel scanlines only in the vertical (or horizontal) direction (Figure 1(a)). In contrast, the later simultaneously updates the status of half of the pixels in an image
with a checkerboard pattern (Figure 1(b)). In terms of efficiency, the diffusion-like propagation achieves better algorithm parallelism. However, it is reported in [19, 21] that, its
reconstruction results are not competitive with the sequential propagation’s in some challenging cases. As pointed out
in [36], this mainly attributes to its less robust view selection
instead of propagation. For example, in the sequential propagation, [36, 19] construct a probabilistic graphical model
to perform pixelwise view selection. Unlike their elaborate view selection, the diffusion-like propagation adopts a
simple threshold truncation scheme to determine aggregation view subsets [8]. This leads to its biased view selection for different hypotheses. Then a motivating question
is, whether it is possible to design a more robust view selection based on the checkerboard pattern.
To this end, we first propose our basic MVS method with
Adaptive Checkerboard sampling and Multi-Hypothesis

5483

