Argoverse: 3D Tracking and Forecasting with Rich Maps
Ming-Fang Chang∗ 1,2 , John Lambert∗1,3 , Patsorn Sangkloy∗1,3 , Jagjeet Singh∗1 , Sławomir B ˛
ak1 ,
Andrew Hartnett1 , De Wang1 , Peter Carr1 , Simon Lucey1,2 , Deva Ramanan1,2 , and James Hays1,3
1

Argo AI, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 Georgia Institute of Technology

Figure 1: We introduce a dataset for 3D tracking and forecasting with rich maps for autonomous driving. Our dataset
contains sequences of LiDAR measurements, 360◦ RGB video, front-facing stereo (middle-right), and 6-dof localization.
All sequences are aligned with maps containing lane center lines (magenta), driveable region (orange), and ground height.
Sequences are annotated with 3D cuboid tracks (green). A wider map view is shown in the bottom-right.

Abstract
We present Argoverse, a dataset designed to support autonomous vehicle perception tasks including 3D tracking
and motion forecasting. Argoverse includes sensor data
collected by a fleet of autonomous vehicles in Pittsburgh
and Miami as well as 3D tracking annotations, 300k extracted interesting vehicle trajectories, and rich semantic
maps. The sensor data consists of 360◦ images from 7 cameras with overlapping fields of view, forward-facing stereo
imagery, 3D point clouds from long range LiDAR, and 6-dof
pose. Our 290km of mapped lanes contain rich geometric
and semantic metadata which are not currently available
in any public dataset. All data is released under a Creative Commons license at Argoverse.org. In baseline experiments, we use map information such as lane direction,
driveable area, and ground height to improve the accuracy
of 3D object tracking. We use 3D object tracking to “mine”
for more than 300k interesting vehicle trajectories to create a trajectory forecasting benchmark. Motion forecasting experiments ranging in complexity from classical methods (k-NN) to LSTMs demonstrate that using detailed “vector maps” with lane-level information substantially reduces
*Equal contribution

prediction error. Our tracking and forecasting experiments
represent only a superficial exploration of the potential of
rich maps in robotic perception. We hope that Argoverse
will enable the research community to explore these problems in greater depth.

1. Introduction
Datasets and benchmarks for a variety of perception
tasks in autonomous driving have been hugely influential
to the computer vision community over the last few years.
We are particularly inspired by the impact KITTI [10] has
had in opening new research directions. However, publicly available datasets for autonomous driving rarely include map data, even though detailed maps are critical to
the development real world autonomous systems. Publicly
available maps, e.g. OpenStreetMap, can be useful, but
have limited detail and accuracy.
Intuitively, 3D scene understanding would be easier if
maps directly told us which 3D points belong to the road,
which belong to static buildings, what lane a tracked object is in, what the speed limit for that lane is, how far it
is to the next intersection, etc. But since publicly available
datasets don’t contain such rich mapped attributes it is an
18748

