H+O: Unified Egocentric Recognition of 3D Hand-Object Poses and Interactions
Bugra Tekin1

Federica Bogo1
1

2

Microsoft

Marc Pollefeys1,2
ETH Zürich

Abstract
We present a unified framework for understanding 3D
hand and object interactions in raw image sequences from
egocentric RGB cameras. Given a single RGB image, our
model jointly estimates the 3D hand and object poses, models their interactions, and recognizes the object and action
classes with a single feed-forward pass through a neural
network. We propose a single architecture that does not
rely on external detection algorithms but rather is trained
end-to-end on single images. We further merge and propagate information in the temporal domain to infer interactions between hand and object trajectories and recognize
actions. The complete model takes as input a sequence of
frames and outputs per-frame 3D hand and object pose predictions along with the estimates of object and action categories for the entire sequence. We demonstrate state-of-theart performance of our algorithm even in comparison to the
approaches that work on depth data and ground-truth annotations.

1. Introduction
Human behavior can be characterized by the individual
actions a person takes in interaction with the surrounding
objects and the environment. A significant amount of research has focused on visual understanding of humans [8,
25, 36, 40, 59, 65, 70, 74] and objects [4, 28, 64, 66], in
isolation from each other. However, the problem of jointly
understanding humans and objects, although crucial for a
semantically meaningful interpretation of the visual scene,
has received far less attention. In this work, we propose,
for the first time, a unified method to jointly recognize 3D
hand and object poses, and their interactions from egocentric monocular color images. Our method jointly estimates
the hand and object poses in 3D, models their interactions
and recognizes the object and activity classes. An example
result is shown in Fig. 1. Our unified framework is highly
relevant for augmented and virtual reality [62], fine-grained
recognition of people’s actions, robotics and telepresence.

Figure 1: Unified reasoning on first-person views. Our method
takes as input color images and produces a comprehensive egocentric scene interpretation. We estimate simultaneously 3D hand
and object poses (shown as skeletons and 3D bounding boxes),
object class (e.g. juice bottle) and action category (e.g. pouring).

Capturing hands in action while taking into account the
objects in contact is an extremely challenging problem.
Jointly reasoning about hands and objects from moving,
egocentric cameras is even more challenging as this would
require understanding of the complex and often subtle interactions that take place in cluttered real-world scenes where
the hand is often occluded by the object or the viewpoint.
Recent research in computer vision has successfully addressed some of the challenges in joint understanding of
hands and objects for depth and multi-camera input. Sridhar et al. [60] have demonstrated that accounting jointly for
hands and objects helps predict the 3D pose more accurately than models that ignore interaction. Pioneering works
by [21, 37, 41, 68] have proposed ways to model handobject interactions to increase robustness and accuracy in
recovering the hand motion.
Most of these works, however, are limited by the following factors: Firstly, they either rely on active depth sensors
or multi-camera systems. Depth sensors are power hungry
and less prevalent than regular RGB cameras. On the other
hand, multi-camera systems are impractical due to the cost
and effort in setting up a calibrated and synchronous system
of sensors. Secondly, they do not reason about the action
the subject is performing. While estimating the 3D hand
pose is crucial for many applications in robotics and graphics, the sole knowledge of the pose lacks semantic meaning
about the actions of the subject. Thirdly, they focus mostly

4511

