Supervised Fitting of Geometric Primitives to 3D Point Clouds
Lingxiao Li*1

Minhyuk Sung*1
Anastasia Dubrovina1
Li Yi1
1
Stanford University 2 Facebook AI Research

Leonidas Guibas1,2

Abstract
Fitting geometric primitives to 3D point cloud data
bridges a gap between low-level digitized 3D data and highlevel structural information on the underlying 3D shapes.
As such, it enables many downstream applications in 3D
data processing. For a long time, RANSAC-based methods
have been the gold standard for such primitive fitting problems, but they require careful per-input parameter tuning
and thus do not scale well for large datasets with diverse
shapes. In this work, we introduce Supervised Primitive
Fitting Network (SPFN), an end-to-end neural network that
can robustly detect a varying number of primitives at different scales without any user control. The network is supervised using ground truth primitive surfaces and primitive
membership for the input points. Instead of directly predicting the primitives, our architecture first predicts per-point
properties and then uses a differential model estimation
module to compute the primitive type and parameters. We
evaluate our approach on a novel benchmark of ANSI 3D
mechanical component models and demonstrate a significant improvement over both the state-of-the-art RANSACbased methods and the direct neural prediction.

1. Introduction
Recent 3D scanning techniques and large-scale 3D
repositories have widened opportunities for 3D geometric
data processing. However, most of the scanned data and
the models in these repositories are represented as digitized
point clouds or meshes. Such low-level representations of
3D data limit our ability to geometrically manipulate them
due to the lack of structural information aligned with the
shape semantics. For example, when editing a shape built
from geometric primitives, the knowledge of the type and
parameters of each primitive can greatly aid the manipulation in producing a plausible result (Figure 1). To address
the absence of such structural information in digitized data,
in this work we consider the conversion problem of mapping a 3D point cloud to a number of geometric primitives
that best fit the underlying shape.
*equal contribution

SPFN

Editing

Figure 1: Our network SPFN generates a collection of geometric primitives that fit precisely to the input point cloud,
even for tiny segments. The predicted primitives can then
be used for structure understanding or shape editing.
Representing an object with a set of simple geometric
components is a long-standing problem in computer vision.
Since the 1970s [3, 19], the fundamental ideas for tackling
the problem have been revised by many researchers, even
until recently [31, 34, 9]. However, most of these previous
work aimed at solving perceptual learning tasks; the main
focus was on parsing shapes, or generating a rough abstraction of the geometry with bounding primitives. In contrast,
our goal is set at precisely fitting geometric primitives to the
shape surface, even with the presence of noise in the input.
For this primitive fitting problem, RANSAC-based
methods [28] remain the standard. The main drawback of
these approaches is the difficulty of finding suitable algorithm parameters. For example, if the threshold of fitting
residual for accepting a candidate primitive is smaller than
the noise level, over-segmentation may occur, whereas a too
large threshold will cause the algorithm to miss small pieces
primitives. This problem happens not only when processing noisy scanned data, but also when parsing meshes in 3D
repositories because the discretization of the original shape
into the mesh obscures the accurate local geometry of the
shape surface. The demand for careful user control prevents
RANSAC-based methods to scale up to a large number of
categories of diverse shapes.
Such drawback motivates us to consider a supervised
deep learning framework. The primitive fitting problem can

2652

