Exploring Context and Visual Pattern of Relationship for
Scene Graph Generation

1

Wenbin Wang1,2 , Ruiping Wang1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China
wenbin.wang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Relationship is the core of scene graph, but its prediction is far from satisfying because of its complex visual diversity. To alleviate this problem, we treat relationship as
an abstract object, exploring not only significative visual
pattern but contextual information for it, which are two key
aspects when considering object recognition. Our observation on current datasets reveals that there exists intimate
association among relationships. Therefore, inspired by the
successful application of context to object-oriented tasks,
we especially construct context for relationships where all
of them are gathered so that the recognition could benefit from their association. Moreover, accurate recognition
needs discriminative visual pattern for object, and so does
relationship. In order to discover effective pattern for relationship, traditional relationship feature extraction methods
such as using union region or combination of subject-object
feature pairs are replaced with our proposed intersection
region which focuses on more essential parts. Therefore, we
present our so-called Relationship Context - InterSeCtion
Region (CISC) method. Experiments for scene graph generation on Visual Genome dataset and visual relationship
prediction on VRD dataset indicate that both the relationship context and intersection region improve performances
and realize anticipated functions.

1. Introduction
Scene graph helps higher level scene understanding. Recently, a number of works [41, 20, 48, 42, 19, 27, 7, 18,
49, 21, 23, 51, 43], have focused on discovering relationships between objects or generating a graph representation
for a scene, which contains objects as nodes and their relationships as edges. Besides, scene graph has evolved as
a promising alternative for high-level intelligence vision

on

on
bottle

counter

glass

ear

face

has

cat has

head

has

has

has

paw
tail

Figure 1. Examples of scene graph. All the scene graphs
are generated from our baseline method [41] given ground
truth objects. Dotted arrow means that the model misses
this relationship, while solid one is detected correctly.
tasks, such as image captioning [24, 40, 45], image generation [13], and visual question answering [2, 38, 39, 40].
However, scene graph generation still remains a challenging
problem due to complexity of predicting pair-wise relationships even if object categories and locations are all given.
Although previous works have proposed a series of techniques to improve relationship prediction, visual pattern and
contextual information, two key aspects in object recognition, are still not considered profoundly for relationship.
Let’s firstly pay attention to contextual information,
which is never exploited for relationship. Why should we
consider it? In Fig.1, the relationships between glass and
counter, cat and face, as well as cat and head are missed.
In fact, a number of same relationships (e.g. bottle on
counter, cat has ear) nearby have been detected correctly.
In other words, while predicting a specific relationship, current methods only focus on the pair of regions with which
it relates, but ignore other relationships which may be helpful for reasoning itself. Once the corresponding object pairs
could not provide strong enough evidence for relationship
inference, the methods would fail.

8188

