Large Scale Incremental Learning
Yue Wu1

Yinpeng Chen2 Lijuan Wang2 Yuancheng Ye3
Zicheng Liu2 Yandong Guo2 Yun Fu1
1
Northeastern University 2 Microsoft Research 3 City University of New York
{yuewu,yunfu}@ece.neu.edu, yye@gradcenter.cuny.edu
{yiche,lijuanw,zliu}@microsoft.com, yandong.guo@live.com

Modern machine learning suffers from catastrophic forgetting when learning new classes incrementally. The performance dramatically degrades due to the missing data of
old classes. Incremental learning methods have been proposed to retain the knowledge acquired from the old classes,
by using knowledge distilling and keeping a few exemplars
from the old classes. However, these methods struggle to
scale up to a large number of classes. We believe this is
because of the combination of two factors: (a) the data imbalance between the old and new classes, and (b) the increasing number of visually similar classes. Distinguishing
between an increasing number of visually similar classes is
particularly challenging, when the training data is unbalanced. We propose a simple and effective method to address
this data imbalance issue. We found that the last fully connected layer has a strong bias towards the new classes, and
this bias can be corrected by a linear model. With two bias
parameters, our method performs remarkably well on two
large datasets: ImageNet (1000 classes) and MS-Celeb1M (10000 classes), outperforming the state-of-the-art algorithms by 11.1% and 13.2% respectively.

1. Introduction
Natural learning systems are inherently incremental
where new knowledge is continuously learned over time
while existing knowledge is maintained [19, 13]. Many
computer vision applications in the real world require incremental learning capabilities. For example, a face recognition system should be able to add new persons without forgetting the faces already learned. However, most
deep learning approaches suffer from catastrophic forgetting [15] - a significant performance degradation, when the
past data are not available.
The missing data for old classes introduce two challenges - (a) maintaining the classification performance on
old classes, and (b) balancing between old classes and new

Performance degradation (%)

Abstract

60
ImageNet-100
ImageNet-1000

50
40
30
20
10
0

iCaRL

EEIL

BiC(Ours)

Figure 1. Performance degradation of incremental learning algorithms on ImageNet-100 (100 classes) and ImageNet-1000 (1000
classes). Each dataset has 10 incremental steps. The degradation is
the gap between the accuracy of the final incremental step and the
accuracy of a non-incremental classifier, which is trained using all
data. When the scale goes up (from ImageNet-100 to ImageNet1000), the degradation for the state-of-the-art algorithms (iCaRL
[19] and EEIL [2]) increases. The degradation for our BiC method
is small for both scales. Although iCaRL has similar relative degratation with our method (increase by 50% from ImageNet-100
to ImageNet-1000), it performs poorly across the scales.

classes. Distillation [13, 19, 2] has been used to effectively
address the former challenge. Recent studies [19, 2] also
show that selecting a few exemplars from the old classes can
alleviate the imbalance problem. These methods perform
well on small datasets. However, they suffer from a significant performance degradation when the number of classes
becomes large (e.g. thousands of classes). Fig. 1 demonstrates the performance degradation of these state-of-the-art
algorithms, using a non-incremental classifier as the reference. When the number of classes increases from 100 to
1000, both iCaRL [19] and EEIL[2] have more degradation.
Why is it more challenging to handle a large number of
classes for incremental learning? We believe this is due to
the coupling of two factors. First, the training data are unbalanced. Secondly, as the number of classes increases, it
is more likely to have visually similar classes (e.g. multiple dog classes in ImageNet) across different incremental
steps. Under the incremental constraint with data imbal-

374

