When Color Constancy Goes Wrong:
Correcting Improperly White-Balanced Images
Mahmoud Afifi
York University

Brian Price
Adobe Research

Scott Cohen
Adobe Research

Michael S. Brown
York University

mafifi@eecs.yorku.ca

bprice@adobe.com

scohen@adobe.com

mbrown@eecs.yorku.ca

Abstract
This paper focuses on correcting a camera image that
has been improperly white-balanced. This situation occurs when a camera’s auto white balance fails or when the
wrong manual white-balance setting is used. Even after
decades of computational color constancy research, there
are no effective solutions to this problem. The challenge
lies not in identifying what the correct white balance should
have been, but in the fact that the in-camera white-balance
procedure is followed by several camera-specific nonlinear color manipulations that make it challenging to correct the image’s colors in post-processing. This paper introduces the first method to explicitly address this problem.
Our method is enabled by a dataset of over 65,000 pairs
of incorrectly white-balanced images and their corresponding correctly white-balanced images. Using this dataset,
we introduce a k-nearest neighbor strategy that is able to
compute a nonlinear color mapping function to correct the
image’s colors. We show our method is highly effective and
generalizes well to camera models not in the training set.

WB: Fluorescent

WB: Shade

Correction using
Images with
Correction using
“linearization” and
incorrect WB applied
diagonal
diagonal correction
correction

Our results

Ground truth
(correct camera WB)

Figure 1. Two incorrectly white-balanced images produced by different cameras and attempts to correct them using (1) a linear WB
correction, (2) correction by first applying a gamma linearization
( [3,17]), and (3) our results. Also shown is the ground truth image
produced by the camera using the correct WB.

1. Introduction
When taking a photograph, we expect our images to be
correctly white-balanced. Computer vision algorithms implicitly assume a correct white balance (WB) by expecting
their input image colors to be correct. What happens when
the WB is not correct? In such cases, the images have the
familiar bluish/reddish color casts that not only are undesirable from a photography standpoint but also can adversely
affect the performance of vision algorithms.
Correcting improperly white-balanced images is poorly
understood. Sources such as Matlab [1] purports misleading
solutions that suggest the problem is a matter of identifying
what the correct WB should have been and then applying
this as a post-correction. However, this solution is not effective and does not consider WB within the full context of
the in-camera processing pipeline.

WB is applied on board cameras to remove the color
cast in images caused by the scene’s illumination. WB falls
into the research area of computational color constancy that
aims to mimic the human visual system’s ability to perceive
scene colors similarly even when observed under different
illuminations [21]. WB correction is performed with a simple linear diagonal 3×3 matrix. The WB transform is applied to the camera’s raw-RGB image and is often one of the
first steps in the in-camera processing pipeline. After WB
is applied, several additional transforms are applied to convert the image values from a sensor-specific raw-RGB color
space to an output-referred color space–namely standard
RGB (sRGB). These additional transforms include cameraspecific nonlinear color manipulations that make up a camera’s photo-finishing routines (for more details, see [26]).
A simple model for the in-camera color manipulation from
11535

