Efficient Featurized Image Pyramid Network for Single Shot Detector
Yanwei Pang1∗, Tiancai Wang1∗ , Rao Muhammad Anwer2 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan2,3 , Ling Shao2
1

School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
3
Computer Vision Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University, Sweden
1

{pyw,wangtc}@tju.edu.cn, 2 {rao.anwer,fahad.khan,ling.shao}@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
Single-stage object detectors have recently gained popularity due to their combined advantage of high detection
accuracy and real-time speed. However, while promising
results have been achieved by these detectors on standardsized objects, their performance on small objects is far from
satisfactory. To detect very small/large objects, classical
pyramid representation can be exploited, where an image
pyramid is used to build a feature pyramid (featurized image
pyramid), enabling detection across a range of scales. Existing single-stage detectors avoid such a featurized image
pyramid representation due to its memory and time complexity. In this paper, we introduce a light-weight architecture to efficiently produce featurized image pyramid in a
single-stage detection framework. The resulting multi-scale
features are then injected into the prediction layers of the
detector using an attention module. The performance of our
detector is validated on two benchmarks: PASCAL VOC
and MS COCO. For a 300×300 input, our detector operates at 111 frames per second (FPS) on a Titan X GPU,
providing state-of-the-art detection accuracy on PASCAL
VOC 2007 testset. On the MS COCO testset, our detector achieves state-of-the-art results surpassing all existing
single-stage methods in the case of single-scale inference.

1. Introduction
Generic object detection is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision, with numerous real-world applications in robotics, autonomous driving and video surveillance. Recent advances in generic object detection have
been largely attributed to the successful deployment of
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in detection frameworks. Generally, deep object detection approaches can
∗ Equal contribution

be roughly divided into two categories: two-stage [13, 14,
16, 29] and single-stage detectors [19, 28, 5]. In two-stage
approaches, object proposals are first generated and later
classified and regressed. Single-stage approaches, on the
other hand, directly regress the default anchors into detection boxes by sampling grids on the input image. Singlestage object detectors are generally computationally efficient but inferior in detection accuracy compared to their
two-stage counterparts [18].
Among single-stage methods, the Single Shot Multibox
Detector (SSD) [28] has recently been shown to provide an
optimal tradeoff between speed and detection accuracy. The
standard SSD utilizes a VGG-16 architecture as the base
network and adds further convolutional (conv) feature layers to the end of the truncated base network. In SSD, independent predictions are made by layers of varying resolutions, where shallow or former layers contribute to predicting small objects while deep or later layers are devoted to
detecting large objects. Despite its success, SSD struggles
to handle large scale variations across object instances. In
particular, the detection performance of SSD on small objects is far from satisfactory [18], which is likely due to the
limited information in shallow or former layers.
Multiple solutions have been proposed in the literature to
alleviate the issues stemming from scale variations. Feature
pyramid is an essential component in many recognition systems, forming the basic ground for a standard solution [1].
Building feature pyramids from image pyramids (featurized
image pyramids) has long been pursued and employed in
many classical hand-crafted methods [11, 9]. Modern deep
object detectors also typically employ some forms of pyramid representation, even though the CNNs used in these
approaches are robust to scale variation.
For two-stage methods, earlier works [29, 13] advocated
the use of single scale features (see Fig. 1(c)). In contrast,
recent two-stage methods [24] have investigated feature
pyramid to obtain more accurate detection (see Fig. 1(b)).
17336

