Pedestrian Detection with Autoregressive Network Phases
Garrick Brazil, Xiaoming Liu
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
{brazilga, liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract

IM

We present an autoregressive pedestrian detection
framework with cascaded phases designed to progressively
improve precision. The proposed framework utilizes a novel
lightweight stackable decoder-encoder module which uses
convolutional re-sampling layers to improve features while
maintaining efficient memory and runtime cost. Unlike previous cascaded detection systems, our proposed framework
is designed within a region proposal network and thus retains greater context of nearby detections compared to independently processed RoI systems. We explicitly encourage
increasing levels of precision by assigning strict labeling
policies to each consecutive phase such that early phases
develop features primarily focused on achieving high recall
and later on accurate precision. In consequence, the final
feature maps form more peaky radial gradients emulating
from the centroids of unique pedestrians. Using our proposed autoregressive framework leads to new state-of-theart performance on the reasonable and occlusion settings
of the Caltech pedestrian dataset, and achieves competitive
state-of-the-art performance on the KITTI dataset.

C
N
N

1. Introduction
Detecting pedestrians in urban scenes remains to be
a challenge in computer vision despite recent rapid advances [1, 15, 21, 26, 32, 36, 40–42]. The use of ensemble [7, 34, 37] and recurrent [26, 33] networks has been successful in top-performing approaches of pedestrian / object
detection. Recurrent networks refine upon their own features while ensemble networks gather features through separate deep classifiers. Both techniques offer a way to obtain
stronger and more robust features, thus better detection.
However, the characteristics of ensemble and recurrent
networks are distinct. Ensemble networks assume that separate networks will learn diversified features which when
combined will become more robust. In contrast, recurrent
networks inherit previous features as input while further
sharing weights between successive networks. Hence, recurrent networks are more capable of refining than diversi-

Label Policy: IoU > 0.4

Decoder Pathway
Encoder Pathway

Label Policy: IoU > 0.5

Label Policy: IoU > 0.6

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed autoregressive framework
with sample phase (P1→3 ) classification prediction maps and box
visualizations under Caltech [5] dataset. Our method iteratively
re-scores predictions under incrementally more precise label policies, using a series of de-encoder modules comprised of decoder
and encoder pathways. Notice a heavy reduction in false positives
(red) as phases progress, while true positives (green) are retained.

fying. Intuitively, we expect that both feature diversification
and refinement are important components to pair together.
Therefore, we explore how to approximate an ensemble
of networks using a stackable lightweight decoder-encoder
module and incorporating an autoregressive1 flow to connect them, as illustrated in Fig. 1. We formulate our framework as a series of phases where each is a function of the
previous phase feature maps and classification predictions.
Our decoder-encoder module is made of bottom-up and topdown pathways similar to [16, 19, 20, 23]. However, rather
than using bilinear or nearest neighbor re-sampling followed by conventional convolution, we propose memoryefficient convolutional re-sampling layers to generate features and re-sample simultaneously in a single step.
1 We adopt naming distinction of autoregressive (vs. recurrent) as a

network conditioned on previous predictions without the constraint of repeated shared weights, inspired by terminology in WaveNet [35] which
uses casual convolution instead of conventional recurrence.

17231

