MFAS: Multimodal Fusion Architecture Search
Juan-Manuel Pérez-Rúa1,3∗
Valentin Vielzeuf1,2∗
1
Stéphane Pateux
Moez Baccouche1
Frederic Jurie2
1

Orange Labs, Cesson-Sévigné, France
2
Université Caen Normandie, France
3
Samsung AI Centre, Cambridge, UK

Abstract
We tackle the problem of finding good architectures for
multimodal classification problems. We propose a novel and
generic search space that spans a large number of possible fusion architectures. In order to find an optimal architecture for a given dataset in the proposed search space,
we leverage an efficient sequential model-based exploration
approach that is tailored for the problem. We demonstrate
the value of posing multimodal fusion as a neural architecture search problem by extensive experimentation on a toy
dataset and two other real multimodal datasets. We discover fusion architectures that exhibit state-of-the-art performance for problems with different domain and dataset
size, including the N TU RGB + D dataset, the largest multimodal action recognition dataset available.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated to be effective
models for solving a large variety of problems in several
domains, including image [22] and video [5] classification,
speech recognition [15], and machine translation [44], to
name a few. In a multimodal setting, it is very common
to transfer models trained on the individual modalities and
merge them at a single point. It can be at the deepest layers, known in the literature as late fusion, which is relatively
successful on a number of multimodal tasks [40]. However,
fusing modalities at their respective deepest features is not
necessarily the most optimal way to solve a given multimodal problem. We argue in this paper that considering
features extracted from all the hidden layers of independent
modalities could potentially increase performance with respect to only using a single combination of late (or early)
features. Thus, this work tackles the problem of finding
∗ Assert joint first authorship. This work was done while JMPR was
with Orange Labs.

good ways to combine multimodal features to better exploit
the information embedded at different layers in deep learning models for classification.
Our hypothesis is in line with a common interpretation
of deep neural models considering that features learned in
a convolutional neural network carry varying levels of semantic meanings. In vision, for example, lower layers are
known to serve as edge detectors with different orientations
and extent, while further layers capture more complex information such as semantic concepts, like faces, trees, animals,
etc. Evidently, it is difficult to determine by hand what is the
most optimal way of mixing features with varying levels of
semantic meaning when solving for multimodal classification problems. For example, learning to classify furry animals might require analysis of lower level visual features
that can be used to build up the concept of fur, whereas
classes like chirping birds or growling might require analysis of more complex audiovisual attributes. Indeed, features
from different layers at different modalities can give different insights from the input data. A similar idea is exploited
by unimodal ResNets [14], where features from different
depths are utilized by later layers through skip connections.
In this line of thought, a few recent works analyzed other
possible combinations from input modalities [38, 42]. However, those methods fall short, as the model designer needs
to choose empirically which intermediate features to consider. Evaluating all of the possibilities by hand would be
extremely intensive or simply intractable. Indeed, the more
modalities and the deeper they are, the more complicated it
is to choose a mixture. This is all the more true when enabling nested combinations of multimodal features. It is in
fact a large combinatorial problem.
In order to handle this issue, the aforementioned combinatorial problem has to be tackled by an efficient search
method. Luckily, the underlying structure of this problem makes it specially amenable to sequential search algorithms. We propose in this paper to rely on a sequential model-based optimization (SMBO) [19] scheme, which
16966

