Exploring the Bounds of the Utility of Context for Object Detection
Ehud Barnea and Ohad Ben-Shahar
Dept. of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University
Beer-Sheva, Israel
{barneaeh, ben-shahar}@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
The recurring context in which objects appear holds
valuable information that can be employed to predict their
existence. This intuitive observation indeed led many researchers to endow appearance-based detectors with explicit reasoning about context. The underlying thesis suggests that stronger contextual relations would facilitate
greater improvements in detection capacity. In practice,
however, the observed improvement in many cases is modest at best, and often only marginal. In this work we seek
to improve our understanding of this phenomenon, in part
by pursuing an opposite approach. Instead of attempting to
improve detection scores by employing context, we treat the
utility of context as an optimization problem: to what extent can detection scores be improved by considering context or any other kind of additional information? With this
approach we explore the bounds on improvement by using
contextual relations between objects and provide a tool for
identifying the most helpful ones. We show that simple cooccurrence relations can often provide large gains, while in
other cases a significant improvement is simply impossible
or impractical with either co-occurrence or more precise
spatial relations. To better understand these results we then
analyze the ability of context to handle different types of
false detections, revealing that tested contextual information cannot ameliorate localization errors, severely limiting
its gains. These and additional insights further our understanding on where and why utilization of context for object
detection succeeds and fails.

1. Introduction
Historically, object detection has been performed by
“sliding” a window over an image and deciding whether it
contains an object by reasoning about its appearance inside
the window [12, 7]. Naturally, this type of calculation only
takes the object’s local context into account, as more distant context falls outside of the window. Contemporary detectors based on convolutional neural networks are able to

expand their reasoning beyond local context since the receptive field of neurons grows with depth, eventually covering
the entire image. However, the extent to which such a network is able to incorporate context is still not entirely understood [23]. To improve both types of detectors, many works
have sought to explicitly combine their results with contextual reasoning to strengthen detections that appear in favorable context and to weaken detections that do not (among
others, see [9, 2, 20, 16, 25, 32, 31, 6, 24, 8, 30, 26, 18, 1]).
These approaches have shown significant gains in some
cases [24], but in many others the explicit application of
contextual information has shown negligible improvement
(or even diminished results) [35, 33]. This problem was
first discussed by Wolf and Bileschi [32], showing that context learned from low-level features can be used instead of
an appearance-based detector, but provides little aid when
combined with an appearance based detector. Attempting to
explain this behavior, they observed that only few samples
were highly confident while being out of context. However, we are still left with no insights as to when context
can be expected to improve and whether the lack of improvement observed in many cases should be attributed to
(1) the limited capacity of extracting contextual information, (2) the contextual relations employed, (3) the difficulty
of combining it with appearance-based confidence, or perhaps, (4) that contextual information is simply redundant
once appearance information has been accounted for.
To investigate this matter we suggest a novel approach
to compute an upper bound on the improvement that can
be obtained by combining detections’ base confidence with
different contextual relations or any other kind of additional
information. In this formulation a detection’s context can
be represented as a real number that indicates, for example,
the extent to which the context supports the existence of an
object. Alternatively, it may be binary, separating detections into those for which a contextual relation holds and
those for which it does not (e.g., the relation “is next to
a person” separates detections into two groups). Applying this method we are able to identify the contextual relations that have the largest improvement bounds, and so a
17412

