Unsupervised Person Re-identification by Soft Multilabel Learning
Hong-Xing Yu1 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,4∗ ,
Ancong Wu1 , Xiaowei Guo2 , Shaogang Gong3 , and Jian-Huang Lai1
1

Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
YouTu Lab, Tencent
Queen Mary University of London, UK
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
2

xKoven@gmail.com, wszheng@ieee.org, wuancong@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, scorpioguo@tencent.com,
s.gong@qmul.ac.uk, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Although unsupervised person re-identification (RE-ID)
has drawn increasing research attentions due to its potential
to address the scalability problem of supervised RE-ID models, it is very challenging to learn discriminative information
in the absence of pairwise labels across disjoint camera
views. To overcome this problem, we propose a deep model
for the soft multilabel learning for unsupervised RE-ID. The
idea is to learn a soft multilabel (real-valued label likelihood vector) for each unlabeled person by comparing the
unlabeled person with a set of known reference persons from
an auxiliary domain. We propose the soft multilabel-guided
hard negative mining to learn a discriminative embedding
for the unlabeled target domain by exploring the similarity
consistency of the visual features and the soft multilabels of unlabeled target pairs. Since most target pairs are
cross-view pairs, we develop the cross-view consistent soft
multilabel learning to achieve the learning goal that the
soft multilabels are consistently good across different camera views. To enable effecient soft multilabel learning, we
introduce the reference agent learning to represent each reference person by a reference agent in a joint embedding.
We evaluate our unified deep model on Market-1501 and
DukeMTMC-reID. Our model outperforms the state-of-theart unsupervised RE-ID methods by clear margins. Code is
available at https://github.com/KovenYu/MAR.

1. Introduction
Existing person re-identification (RE-ID) works mostly
focus on supervised learning [17, 20, 58, 63, 1, 45, 51, 43,
38, 41, 33]. However, they need substantial pairwise labeled
data across every pair of camera views, limiting the scalability to large-scale applications where only unlabeled data
∗ Corresponding author

Unlabeled
persons

Learninglabel
likelihood

Referencepersons
(auxiliarydataset)

Learned
soft
multilabel
ͲǤͺ

ͲǤͳ

ͲǤͳ

Howto
labelthem

ͲǤͳ

ͲǤͳ

ͲǤͺ

Figure 1. Illustration of our soft multilabel concept. We learn a soft
multilabel (real-valued label vector) for each unlabeled person by
comparing to a set of known auxiliary reference persons (thicker
arrowline indicates higher label likelihood). Best viewed in color.

is available due to the prohibitive manual efforts in exhaustively labeling the pairwise RE-ID data [49]. To address
the scalability problem, some recent works focus on unsupervised RE-ID by clustering on the target unlabelled data
[52, 53, 8] or transfering the knowledge from other labeled
source dataset [29, 48, 7, 62]. However, the performance is
still not satisfactory. The main reason is that, without the
pairwise label as learning guidence, it is very challenging
to discover the identity discriminative information due to
the drastic cross-view intra-person appearance variation [52]
and the high inter-person appearance similarity [60].
To address the problem of lacking pairwise label guidance
in unsupervised RE-ID, in this work we propose a novel soft
multilabel learning to mine the potential label information
in the unlabeled RE-ID data. The main idea is, for every
unlabeled person image in an unlabeled RE-ID dataset, we
learn a soft multilabel (i.e. a real-valued label likelihood
vector instead of a single pseudo label) by comparing this
unlabeled person with a set of reference persons from an
existing labeled auxiliary source dataset. Figure 1 illustrates
this soft multilabel concept.
Based on this soft multilabel learning concept, we propose to mine the potential discriminative information by the

2148

