AdaGraph: Unifying Predictive and Continuous
Domain Adaptation through Graphs
Massimiliano Mancini1,2 , Samuel Rota Bulò3 , Barbara Caputo4,5 , Elisa Ricci2,6
Sapienza University of Rome, 2 Fondazione Bruno Kessler, 3 Mapillary Research,
4
Politecnico di Torino,5 Italian Institute of Technology, 6 University of Trento
mancini@diag.uniroma1.it,samuel@mapillary.com,barbara.caputo@polito.it,eliricci@fbk.eu
1

Abstract
The ability to categorize is a cornerstone of visual intelligence, and a key functionality for artificial, autonomous
visual machines. This problem will never be solved without
algorithms able to adapt and generalize across visual domains. Within the context of domain adaptation and generalization, this paper focuses on the predictive domain adaptation scenario, namely the case where no target data are
available and the system has to learn to generalize from
annotated source images plus unlabeled samples with associated metadata from auxiliary domains. Our contribution
is the first deep architecture that tackles predictive domain
adaptation and is able to leverage information brought
by the auxiliary domains through a graph. Moreover, we
present a simple yet effective strategy that allows us to take
advantage of the incoming target data at test time, in a continuous domain adaptation scenario. Experiments on three
benchmark databases support the value of our approach.

1. Introduction
Over the past years, deep learning has enabled rapid
progress in many visual recognition tasks, even surpassing human performance [30]. While deep networks exhibit
excellent generalization capabilities, previous studies [8]
demonstrated that their performance drops when test data
significantly differ from training samples. In other words
deep models suffer from the domain shift problem, i.e. classifiers trained on source data do not perform well when
tested on samples in the target domain. In practice, domain
shift arises in many computer vision tasks, as many factors
(e.g. lighting changes, different view-points, etc.) determine
appearance variations in visual data.
To cope with this, several efforts focused on developing Domain Adaptation (DA) techniques [33], attempting
to reduce the mismatch between source and target data distributions to learn accurate prediction models for the target domain. In the challenging case of unsupervised DA,
only source data are labelled while no annotation is pro-

Labeled
Source Domain
Front-side view

Unlabeled
Auxiliar Domains

Target Metadata
“Rear view”

Target
Deep Model
Prediction

Target
Deep Model
Refinement

Front view

Rear-side view

...

...

Target Stream

Figure 1. Predictive Domain Adaptation. During training we have
access to a labeled source domain (yellow block) and a set of unlabeled auxiliary domains (blue blocks), all with associated metadata. At test time, given the metadata corresponding to the unknown target domain, we predict the parameters associated to
the target model. This predicted model is further refined during
test, while continuously receiving data of the target domain. Best
viewed in color.

vided for target samples. Although it might be reasonable
for some applications to have target samples available during training, it is hard to imagine that we can collect data
for every possible target. More realistically, we aim for prediction models which can generalize to new, previously unseen target domains. Following this idea, previous studies
proposed the Predictive Domain Adaptation (PDA) scenario
[36], where neither the data, nor the labels from the target
are available during training. Only annotated source samples are available, together with additional information from
a set of auxiliary domains, in form of unlabeled samples and
associated metadata (e.g. corresponding to the image timestamp or to camera pose, etc).
In this paper we introduce a deep architecture for PDA.
Following recent advances in DA [3, 20, 23], we propose
to learn a set of domain-specific models by considering
a common backbone network with domain-specific alignment layers embedded into it. We also propose to exploit metadata and auxiliary samples by building a graph
which explicitly describes the dependencies among do-

6568

