3D human pose estimation in video with temporal convolutions and
semi-supervised training
Dario Pavllo∗
ETH Zürich

Christoph Feichtenhofer
Facebook AI Research

David Grangier∗
Google Brain

Michael Auli
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
In this work, we demonstrate that 3D poses in video
can be effectively estimated with a fully convolutional
model based on dilated temporal convolutions over 2D keypoints. We also introduce back-projection, a simple and
effective semi-supervised training method that leverages
unlabeled video data. We start with predicted 2D keypoints for unlabeled video, then estimate 3D poses and
finally back-project to the input 2D keypoints. In the
supervised setting, our fully-convolutional model outperforms the previous best result from the literature by 6 mm
mean per-joint position error on Human3.6M, corresponding to an error reduction of 11%, and the model also
shows significant improvements on HumanEva-I. Moreover, experiments with back-projection show that it comfortably outperforms previous state-of-the-art results in semisupervised settings where labeled data is scarce. Code
and models are available at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/VideoPose3D

1. Introduction
Our work focuses on 3D human pose estimation in video.
We build on the approach of state-of-the-art methods which
formulate the problem as 2D keypoint detection followed by
3D pose estimation [41, 52, 34, 50, 10, 40, 58, 33]. While
splitting up the problem arguably reduces the difficulty of
the task, it is inherently ambiguous as multiple 3D poses
can map to the same 2D keypoints. Previous work tackled this ambiguity by modeling temporal information with
recurrent neural networks [16, 27]. On the other hand, convolutional networks have been very successful in modeling
temporal information in tasks that were traditionally tackled with RNNs, such as neural machine translation [11],
language modeling [7], speech generation [57], and speech
recognition [6]. Convolutional models enable parallel processing of multiple frames which is not possible with recurrent networks.
∗ Work done while at Facebook AI Research.

Figure 1: Our temporal convolutional model takes 2D keypoint sequences (bottom) as input and generates 3D pose
estimates as output (top). We employ dilated temporal convolutions to capture long-term information.

In this paper, we present a fully convolutional architecture that performs temporal convolutions over 2D keypoints
for accurate 3D pose prediction in video (see Figure 1). Our
approach is compatible with any 2D keypoint detector and
can effectively handle large contexts via dilated convolutions. Compared to approaches relying on RNNs [16, 27],
it provides higher accuracy, simplicity, as well as efficiency,
both in terms of computational complexity as well as the
number of parameters (§3).
Equipped with a highly accurate and efficient architecture, we turn to settings where labeled training data is scarce
and introduce a new scheme to leverage unlabeled video
data for semi-supervised training. Low resource settings are
particularly challenging for neural network models which
require large amounts of labeled training data and collecting labels for 3D human pose estimation requires an expensive motion capture setup as well as lengthy recording
sessions. Our method is inspired by cycle consistency in
unsupervised machine translation, where round-trip translation into an intermediate language and back into the original
language should be close to the identity function [46, 26, 9].
Specifically, we predict 2D keypoints for an unlabeled video
with an off the shelf 2D keypoint detector, predict 3D poses,
and then map these back to 2D space (§4).

7753

