Learning a Unified Classifier Incrementally via Rebalancing

1

Saihui Hou1∗ , Xinyu Pan2∗ , Chen Change Loy3 , Zilei Wang1 , Dahua Lin2
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
3
Nanyang Technological University
saihui@mail.ustc.edu.cn, px118@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, ccloy@ntu.edu.sg,
zlwang@ustc.edu.cn, dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Conventionally, deep neural networks are trained ofﬂine, relying on a large dataset prepared in advance. This
paradigm is often challenged in real-world applications,
e.g. online services that involve continuous streams of incoming data. Recently, incremental learning receives increasing attention, and is considered as a promising solution to the practical challenges mentioned above. However,
it has been observed that incremental learning is subject to
a fundamental difﬁculty – catastrophic forgetting, namely
adapting a model to new data often results in severe performance degradation on previous tasks or classes. Our study
reveals that the imbalance between previous and new data
is a crucial cause to this problem. In this work, we develop
a new framework for incrementally learning a uniﬁed classiﬁer, i.e. a classiﬁer that treats both old and new classes
uniformly. Speciﬁcally, we incorporate three components,
cosine normalization, less-forget constraint, and inter-class
separation, to mitigate the adverse effects of the imbalance.
Experiments show that the proposed method can effectively rebalance the training process, thus obtaining superior
performance compared to the existing methods. On CIFAR100 and ImageNet, our method can reduce the classiﬁcation
errors by more than 6% and 13% respectively, under the incremental setting of 10 phases.

1. Introduction
Incremental learning is a learning paradigm that allows
a model to be continually updated on new data, instead of
being trained once on a whole dataset. In recent years, incremental learning sees increasing demand from real-world
applications – many of them are exposed to continuous
streams of data during daily operation. A natural approach
to incremental learning is to simply ﬁnetune a pretrained
model on new data. This approach, however, faces a seri∗ indicates joint ﬁrst authorship.

new class
embeddings

old class
embeddings
Cosine Normalization

Imbalanced Magnitudes

previous
knowledge
Less-Forget Constraint

Deviation

Negative
new class
embeddings
old class
embeddings

Anchor

Positive
Ambiguities

Inter-Class Separation

Figure 1. Illustration of the adverse effects caused by the imbalance between old and new classes in multi-class incremental learning, and how our approach tackle them.

ous challenge – catastrophic forgetting [26]. To be more
speciﬁc, ﬁnetuning a model on new data usually results in
signiﬁcant performance drop on previous data.
Great efforts have been devoted to overcoming this difﬁculty, which generally follow two directions: (1) trying to
identify and preserve signiﬁcant parameters of the original
model [21, 37, 1], and (2) trying to preserve the knowledge
in the original model through methods like knowledge distillation [24, 2, 28, 29, 19, 15]. Whereas these methods, to
a certain extent, mitigate the effect of catastrophic forgetting, the overall performances remain signiﬁcantly inferior
to those obtained by joint training.
In this work, we aim to explore a more effective way
to incremental learning. Particularly, we focus on the multiclass setting, with an aim to learn a uniﬁed classiﬁer that can

831

