GCAN: Graph Convolutional Adversarial Network for Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation
Xinhong Ma1,2,3 , Tianzhu Zhang1,2,4 and Changsheng Xu1,2,3
1
National Lab of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, ShenZhen, China
4
University of Science and Technology of China
{xinhong.ma, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, tzzhang10@gmail.com

Abstract
To bridge source and target domains for domain adaptation, there are three important types of information including data structure, domain label, and class label. Most
existing domain adaptation approaches exploit only one or
two types of the above information and cannot make them
complement and enhance each other. Different from existing methods, we propose an end-to-end Graph Convolutional Adversarial Network (GCAN) for unsupervised domain
adaptation by jointly modeling data structure, domain label, and class label in a unified deep model. The proposed
GCAN model enjoys several merits. First, to the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work to model the three kinds
of information jointly in a deep model for unsupervised domain adaptation. Second, the proposed model has designed
three effective alignment mechanisms including structureaware alignment, domain alignment, and class centroid
alignment, which can learn domain-invariant and semantic
representations effectively to reduce the domain discrepancy for domain adaptation. Extensive experimental results
on five standard benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed
GCAN algorithm performs favorably against state-of-theart unsupervised domain adaptation methods.

1. Introduction
Deep learning approaches can learn discriminative representations and have significantly improved the state of the
arts for a wide variety of machine-learning tasks and computer vision applications [4, 10, 19, 33, 34, 43, 48, 83, 85,
87, 88, 3]. Unfortunately, the impressive performance gains
come only when massive amounts of labeled data are available for deep model training. In practice, manual labeling
of such sufficient training data is often prohibitive or impossible to collect, especially for a target task short of la-

Data Structure

Domain Label

Class Label

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. The data structure, domain
label and class label are three important types of information to
bridge source and target domains for domain adaptation.

beled data. Therefore, there is a strong motivation to build
effective learners that can leverage rich labeled data from
a different source domain [61]. However, due to the phenomenon known as dataset bias or domain shift, predictive
models trained on one large scale dataset do not generalize
well to new datasets and tasks [61]. As a result, this learning
paradigm suffers from the shift in data distributions across
different domains, which poses a huge obstacle for adapting
predictive models to the target task [69, 61].
Learning a discriminative classifier or other predictors
in the presence of the shift between training and test distributions is known as transfer learning or domain adaptation [61]. The main technical difficulty of domain adaptation is how to formally reduce the distribution discrepancy across different domains, usually labeled source data and unlabeled target data. To address this issue, a
variety of domain adaptation approaches have been proposed [15, 61, 76]. Generally, these methods can be categorized into three major categories including instance-

8266

