CollaGAN: Collaborative GAN for Missing Image Data Imputation
Dongwook Lee1 , Junyoung Kim1 , Won-Jin Moon2 , Jong Chul Ye1
1
: Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea
{dongwook.lee, junyoung.kim, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr
2

: Konkuk University Medical Center, Seoul, Korea
mdmoonwj@kuh.ac.kr

Figure 1: Image translation tasks using (a) cross-domain models, (b) StarGAN, and (c) the proposed collaborative GAN
(CollaGAN). Cross-domain model needs large number of generators to handle multi-class data. StarGAN and CollaGAN
use a single generator with one input and multiple inputs, respectively, to synthesize the target domain image.

Abstract
In many applications requiring multiple inputs to obtain
a desired output, if any of the input data is missing, it often introduces large amounts of bias. Although many techniques have been developed for imputing missing data, the
image imputation is still difficult due to complicated nature of natural images. To address this problem, here we
proposed a novel framework for missing image data imputation, called Collaborative Generative Adversarial Network (CollaGAN). CollaGAN convert the image imputation problem to a multi-domain images-to-image translation task so that a single generator and discriminator network can successfully estimate the missing data using the
remaining clean data set. We demonstrate that CollaGAN

produces the images with a higher visual quality compared
to the existing competing approaches in various image imputation tasks.

1. Introduction
In many image processing and computer vision applications, multiple set of input images are required to generate
the desired output. For example, in brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), MR images with T1, T2, or FLAIR
(FLuid-Attenuated Inversion Recovery) contrast are all required for accurate diagnosis and segmentation of cancer
margin [6]. In generating a 3-D volume from multiple view
camera images [5], most algorithms require the pre-defined
set of view angles. Unfortunately, the complete set of input
12487

