Object Counting and Instance Segmentation with Image-level Supervision
Hisham Cholakkal1∗

Guolei Sun1∗
Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,2
Ling Shao1
1
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
2
Computer Vision Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University, Sweden
{hisham.cholakkal, guolei.sun, fahad.khan, ling.shao}@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
Common object counting in a natural scene is a challenging problem in computer vision with numerous realworld applications. Existing image-level supervised common object counting approaches only predict the global object count and rely on additional instance-level supervision
to also determine object locations. We propose an imagelevel supervised approach that provides both the global object count and the spatial distribution of object instances
by constructing an object category density map. Motivated
by psychological studies, we further reduce image-level supervision using a limited object count information (up to
four). To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
propose image-level supervised density map estimation for
common object counting and demonstrate its effectiveness
in image-level supervised instance segmentation. Comprehensive experiments are performed on the PASCAL VOC
and COCO datasets. Our approach outperforms existing
methods, including those using instance-level supervision,
on both datasets for common object counting. Moreover,
our approach improves state-of-the-art image-level supervised instance segmentation [34] with a relative gain of
17.8% in terms of average best overlap, on the PASCAL
VOC 2012 dataset1 .

1. Introduction
Common object counting, also referred as generic object counting, is the task of accurately predicting the number of different object category instances present in natural
scenes (see Fig. 1). The common object categories in natural scenes can vary from fruits to animals and the counting
must be performed in both indoor and outdoor scenes (e.g.
COCO or PASCAL VOC datasets). Existing works employ
a localization-based strategy [13, 27] or utilize regressionbased models [4] directly optimized to predict object count,
∗ Equal contribution
1 Code is publicly available at github.com/GuoleiSun/CountSeg

person: 11 (11)
sports ball: 1 (1)

person: 3 (3) knife: 1 (1) chair: 1 (1)
cake: 2 (2) clock: 1 (1)
fork: 1 (1)
dinning table: 1 (1)

Figure 1. Object counting on COCO dataset. The ground-truth and
our predictions are shown in black and green, respectively. Despite
being trained using image-level object counts within the subitizing range [1-4], it accurately counts objects beyond the subitizing range (11 persons) under heavy occlusion (marked with blue
arrow to show two persons) in the left image and diverse object
categories in the right.

where the latter has been shown to provide superior results [15]. However, regression-based methods only predict the global object count without determining object locations. Beside global counts, the spatial distribution of objects in the form of a per-category density map is helpful
in other tasks, e.g., to delineate adjacent objects in instance
segmentation (see Fig. 2).
The problem of density map estimation to preserve the
spatial distribution of people is well studied in crowd counting [3,16,18,22,32]. Here, the global count for the image is
obtained by summing over the predicted density map. Standard crowd density map estimation methods are required to
predict large number of person counts in the presence of
occlusions, e.g., in surveillance applications. The key challenges of constructing a density map in natural scenes are
different to those in crowd density estimation, and include
large intra-class variations in generic objects, co-existence
of multiple instances of different objects in a scene (see
Fig. 1), and sparsity due to many objects having zero count
on multiple images.
Most methods for crowd density estimation use instancelevel (point-level or bounding box) supervision that requires manual annotation of each instance location. Image112397

