3D Point Capsule Networks
Yongheng Zhao ✝ ✥
✝

•

Tolga Birdal ✝ *

•

Haowen Deng ✝ *

Federico Tombari ✝

Technische Universität München, Germany ✥ University of Padova, Italy
*
Siemens AG, München, Germany

Abstract

1. Introduction
Fueled by recent developments in robotics, autonomous
driving and augmented/mixed reality, 3D sensing has become a major research trend in computer vision. Conversely
to RGB cameras, the sensors used for 3D capture provide
rich geometric structure, rather than high-fidelity appearance information. This is proved advantageous for those
applications where color and texture are insufficient to accomplish the given task, such as reconstruction/detection of
texture-less objects. Unlike the RGB camera case, 3D data
come in a variety of forms: range maps, fused RGB-D sequences, meshes and point clouds, volumetric data. Thanks
to their capability of representing a sparse 3D structure accurately while being agnostic to the sensing modality, point
clouds have been a widespread choice for 3D processing.
The proliferation of deep learning has recently leaped
into the 3D domain and architectures for consuming 3D
points have been proposed either for volumetric [28] or
sparse [26] 3D representations. These architectures overcame many challenges brought in by 3D data, such as orderinvariance, complexity due to the added data dimension and
local density variations. Unfortunately they often discard
• First two authors contributed equally to this work.

Source Shape

Target Shape

Our Replacement

Cut-and-Paste

Shape to Modify

Input Shape
with Desired Part

(a) Part Interpolation

Our Result

(b) Part Replacement

Ground Truth

In this paper, we propose 3D point-capsule networks, an
auto-encoder designed to process sparse 3D point clouds
while preserving spatial arrangements of the input data. 3D
capsule networks arise as a direct consequence of our unified formulation of the common 3D auto-encoders. The dynamic routing scheme [30] and the peculiar 2D latent space
deployed by our capsule networks bring in improvements
for several common point cloud-related tasks, such as object classification, object reconstruction and part segmentation as substantiated by our extensive evaluations. Moreover, it enables new applications such as part interpolation
and replacement.

(c) Part Segmentation with 1% of Training Data

Figure 1. Our 3D-PointCapsNet improves numerous 3D tasks
while enabling interesting applications such as latent space part
interpolation or complete part modification, an application where
a simple cut-and-paste results in inconsistent outputs.

spatial arrangements in data, hence falling short of respecting the parts-to-whole relationship, which is critical to explain and describe 3D shapes; maybe even more severe than
in the 2D domain due to the increased dimensionality [2].
In this work we first present a unified look to some
well known 3D point decoders. Within this view, and
based on the renowned 2D capsule networks (CN) [30], we
propose the unsupervised 3D point-capsule networks (3DPointCapsNet), an auto-encoder for generic representation
learning in unstructured 3D data. Powered by the built-in
routing-by-agreement algorithm [30], our network respects
the geometric relationships between the parts, showing better learning ability and generalization properties. We design
our 3D-PointCapsNet architecture to take into account the
sparsity of point clouds by employing PointNet-like input
layers [26]. Through an unsupervised dynamic routing, we
organize the outcome of multiple max-pooled feature maps
into a powerful latent representation. This intermediary latent space is parameterized by latent capsules - stacked latent activation vectors specifying the features of the shapes
and their likelihood.
Latent capsules obtained from point clouds alleviate the
restriction of parameterizing the latent space by a single,
11009

