Sea-thru: A Method For Removing Water From Underwater Images
Derya Akkaynak
Tali Treibitz
University of Haifa
derya.akkaynak@gmail.com, ttreibitz@univ.haifa.ac.il

Abstract
Robust recovery of lost colors in underwater images remains a challenging problem. We recently showed that
this was partly due to the prevalent use of an atmospheric
image formation model for underwater images and proposed a physically accurate model. The revised model
showed: 1) the attenuation coefficient of the signal is not
uniform across the scene but depends on object range and
reflectance, 2) the coefficient governing the increase in
backscatter with distance differs from the signal attenuation coefficient. Here, we present the first method that recovers color with our revised model, using RGBD images.
The Sea-thru method estimates backscatter using the dark
pixels and their known range information. Then, it uses
an estimate of the spatially varying illuminant to obtain
the range-dependent attenuation coefficient. Using more
than 1,100 images from two optically different water bodies, which we make available, we show that our method with
the revised model outperforms those using the atmospheric
model. Consistent removal of water will open up large underwater datasets to powerful computer vision and machine
learning algorithms, creating exciting opportunities for the
future of underwater exploration and conservation.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing colors in underwater images is a challenging task for which no robust algorithm currently exists. We recently showed that the commonly used image
formation model was partly to blame [1], because it was
derived for the atmosphere [48] and neglected the strong
wavelength dependency of light underwater. We proposed
a revised model that showed: 1) direct and backscattered
signals are governed by distinct coefficients (the old model
assumed them to be the same), and 2) each of these coefficients have dependencies on factors other than the optical properties of the water (the old model ignored them).
While the revised model is physically more accurate, it has
extra parameters making its application difficult. Here, we
present the Sea-thru method that outlines how to estimate
these parameters for better scene recovery.

Figure 1. The Sea-thru method removes water from underwater
images. Best viewed online for color and details.

Large image datasets like ImageNet [20] have been instrumental in igniting the artificial intelligence boom, which
fueled many important discoveries in science and industry in the last two decades [39]. The underwater domain,
which has no shortage of large image datasets, however,
has not benefited from the full power of computer vision
and machine learning methods which made these discoveries possible, partly because water masks many computationally valuable features of a scene. An underwater photo
is the equivalent of one taken in air, but covered in thick,
colored fog, subject to an illuminant whose white point and
intensity changes as a function of distance. It is difficult
to train learning-based methods for different optical conditions that represent the global ocean, because calibrated underwater datasets are expensive and logistically difficult to
11682

