Visual Question Answering as Reading Comprehension
Hui Li∗1 , Peng Wang∗2 , Chunhua Shen1 , Anton van den Hengel1
1
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, The University of Adelaide, Australia
2
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China

Abstract

Textual

Context: There is a cat and a dog
in the image. A cat is on the table.
A grey cat. A black dog. A dog is
next to the fen. A plant is next to
the cat. A green plant. The cat is
looking at the plant.
Question1: What color is the cat?

Question2: Which animal in this
image is able to climb trees?
(Extra Knowledge: Cat is able to
climb trees. )

Textual

Question2: Which animal in this
image is able to climb trees?
(Extra Knowledge: Cat is able to
climb trees. )

Answer1: grey

Textual

∗ The first two authors equally contributed to this work. C. Shen is the
corresponding author.

Textual

Visual Question Answering (VQA) is an emerging problem which requires the algorithm to answer arbitrary natural language questions about a given image. It attracts a
large amount of interests in both computer vision and Natural Language Processing (NLP) communities, because of its
numerous potential applications in autonomous agents and
virtual assistants.
To some extent, VQA is closely related to the task of
Textual Question Answering (TQA, also known as machine
reading comprehension), which asks the machine to answer
questions based on a given paragraph of text. However,

Textual Question Answering

Question1: What color is the cat?

Textual

1. Introduction

Visual

Visual question answering (VQA) demands simultaneous comprehension of both the image visual content and
natural language questions. In some cases, the reasoning needs the help of common sense or general knowledge
which usually appear in the form of text. Current methods
jointly embed both the visual information and the textual
feature into the same space. Nevertheless, how to model
the complex interactions between the two different modalities is not an easy work. In contrast to struggling on multimodal feature fusion, in this paper, we propose to unify all
the input information by natural language so as to convert
VQA into a machine reading comprehension problem. With
this transformation, our method not only can tackle VQA
datasets that focus on observation based questions, but can
also be naturally extended to handle knowledge-based VQA
which requires to explore large-scale external knowledge
base. It is a step towards being able to exploit large volumes of text and natural language processing techniques to
address VQA problem. Two types of models are proposed
to deal with open-ended VQA and multiple-choice VQA respectively. We evaluate our models on three VQA benchmarks. The comparable performance with the state-of-theart demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Visual Question Answering

Answer1: grey

Answer2: cat

Answer2: cat

Figure 1 – Comparison between VQA and TQA. Question1 is observation based, which can be inferred from the image itself. Question2 is
knowledge based, which has to refer knowledge beyond the image. Extra knowledge commonly appears in text, which is easier to be combined
to the context paragraph in TQA.

VQA seems to be more challenging because of the additional visual supporting information. As compared in Figure 1, the inputs in TQA are both pure text, while VQA
has to integrate the visual information from image with the
textual content from questions. On one hand, image has a
higher dimension than text and lacks the structure and grammatical rules of language, which increase the difficulty in
semantic analysis. On the other hand, the algorithm has to
jointly embed the visual and textual information that come
from two distinct modalities.
Most approaches in VQA adopt deep Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) to represent images and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to represent sentences or
phrases. The extracted visual and textual feature vectors
are then jointly embedded by concatenation, element-wise
sum or product to infer the answer. Fukui et al. [8] argued that such simple kinds of merging might not be expressive enough to fully capture the complex associations
between the two different modalities and they proposed a
Multimodal Compact Bilinear pooling method (MCB) for
VQA. It would be even complex if extra knowledge is required to be combined for reasoning. Li et al. [17] proposed
to embed knowledge in memory slots and incorporated external knowledge with image, question and answer features

6319

