VizWiz-Priv: A Dataset for Recognizing the Presence and Purpose of Private
Visual Information in Images Taken by Blind People
Danna Gurari1 , Qing Li2 , Chi Lin1 , Yinan Zhao1 , Anhong Guo3 , Abigale Stangl4 , Jeffrey P. Bigham3
1

University of Texas at Austin 2 University of California, Los Angeles 3 Carnegie Mellon University 4 University of Colorado Boulder

Abstract
We introduce the first visual privacy dataset originating
from people who are blind in order to better understand
their privacy disclosures and to encourage the development
of algorithms that can assist in preventing their unintended
disclosures. It includes 8,862 regions showing private content across 5,537 images taken by blind people. Of these,
1,403 are paired with questions and 62% of those directly
ask about the private content. Experiments demonstrate the
utility of this data for predicting whether an image shows
private information and whether a question asks about the
private content in an image. The dataset is publicly-shared
at http://vizwiz.org/data/.

1. Introduction
Mobile devices with built-in cameras have become ubiquitous. However, for people who are blind, using these devices to take and share pictures bares a grave risk of broadcasting private information [10, 12, 17, 44]. This is because blind people1 by definition cannot see what is around
them, and so cannot know what is in the field of view
of their cameras. Still, many blind people share pictures
they take in order to gain a transformative new ability to
receive assistance in learning about their visual surroundings [7, 14, 15, 16, 18, 28, 31, 45, 55]. Some blind people
also share their pictures on social media to socialize and express their creativity [8, 10, 26, 44]. And potentially many
more of the 285 million people worldwide with visual impairments [38] would take and share pictures if given assurance that they could avoid privacy leaks [11]. Protecting private information is necessary to avoid the potential adverse
social, professional, financial, and personal consequences to
photographers (and bystanders) inflicted by privacy leaks.
While a natural step towards empowering blind people to protect private visual information is for the com1 Currently, there is an international discussion on whether to use the

phrase “blind person” versus “person who is blind” [1]. At present, both
are accepted. For example, in the United States “person who is blind” is
often preferred while in the United Kingdom “blind person” is preferred.

puter vision community to design algorithms to assist, a
key obstacle is that none of the existing visual privacy
datasets [21, 37, 36, 41, 52] needed to train algorithms are
goal-oriented towards the images taken by and interests of
people who are blind. Yet, our analysis shows that privacy
leaks from this population are common; i.e., over 10% of
more than 40,000 of their images contain private visual information. Moreover, our analysis suggests that over 50%
of privacy leaks arise because people are explicitly compromising their privacy in exchange for assistance to learn
about private visual information that is inaccessible to them
(e.g., reading the number on a new credit card).
Our aim is to encourage the development of algorithms
that can empower blind photographers to avoid inadvertently sharing private visual information. We begin by introducing the first visual privacy dataset originating from
this population. The images were taken and shared by blind
users of a visual question answering service [14]. For each
image, we manually annotate private regions according to a
taxonomy that represents privacy concerns relevant to their
images, as summarized in Figure 1 (e.g., reading the results
to a pregnancy test). We also annotate whether the private
visual information is needed to answer the question asked
by the user. These annotations serve as a critical foundation
for designing algorithms that can decide (1) whether private information is in an image and (2) whether a question
about an image asks about the private content in the image (a novel problem posed by our work). We benchmark
numerous algorithms for both purposes. Our findings offer
encouraging results that it is possible to automatically make
both types of predictions while also demonstrating that the
datasets are challenging for modern vision algorithms.
More generally, our work offers a new dataset challenge
for training algorithms using large-scale, corrupted datasets.
That is because the solution we propose for creating a largescale, publicly-available visual privacy dataset is to remove
private regions while preserving the context. Our empirical analysis of obfuscating the private content through various inpainting methods highlights (in)effective strategies
for training algorithms using corrupted datasets.
1939

