Diverse Generation for Multi-agent Sports Games
Raymond A. Yeh

Alexander G. Schwing Jonathan Huang†
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
†
Google Research

Kevin Murphy†

yeh17@illinois.edu, aschwing@illinois.edu, jonathanhuang@google.com, kpmurphy@google.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new generative model for
multi-agent trajectory data, focusing on the case of multiplayer sports games. Our model leverages graph neural networks (GNNs) and variational recurrent neural networks (VRNNs) to achieve a permutation equivariant model
suitable for sports. On two challenging datasets (basketball
and soccer), we show that we are able to produce more accurate forecasts than previous methods. We assess accuracy
using various metrics, such as log-likelihood and “best of
N ” loss, based on N different samples of the future. We
also measure the distribution of statistics of interest, such
as player location or velocity, and show that the distribution induced by our generative model better matches the
empirical distribution of the test set. Finally, we show that
our model can perform conditional prediction, which lets
us answer counterfactual questions such as “how will the
players move if A passes the ball to B instead of C?”

1. Introduction
Multi-agent systems are widespread in the real world. In
many applications, we would like to learn a model of the
interaction between the agents, which we can use to predict
plausible future behaviors. The challenges involve modeling the interactions in a parsimonious way, and coping with
the inherent multi-modality of future prediction.
In this paper, we focus on the case of modeling trajectory data collected from multi-player sports games, namely
basketball [41] and soccer [23]. Our model uses graphstructured variational RNNs, which are based off methods
from graph neural networks (reviewed in [3]) with variational recurrent neural networks [7]. The use of a graph,
with one node per agent, ensures the model is permutation
equivariant, which is necessary since each game segment
corresponds to an unordered set of K trajectories, where
K is the number of players in the game. Previous works,
such as [10, 44], use various heuristics to assign players to
roles, thereby fixing an agent ordering across games, but

Ground truth
Possible futures for the blue player
Figure 1. Illustration of basketball (top) and soccer (bottom) data.
We visualize possible futures, predicted from our model, for the
blue player given ground truth locations of the other agents. The
black point indicates the starting position for each agent; the grayhighlight indicates which of the locations are given.

we show that our approach produces better results, since
roles can change dynamically. We also show that the use
of a variational RNN, as opposed to a deterministic RNN,
is helpful (at least in the case of basketball) since there is
often stochasticity in the latent dynamics of the players beyond the kind of short-term variation one can capture with
observation-level noise.
In addition to improving the basic model, we propose
a variety of metrics for evaluating the quality of generative
forecasting models (cf . [35]). In particular, beyond the standard use of log-likelihood and “best of K” loss [5, 26, 31],
we propose to evaluate the marginal distributions of features
of interest, such as the player locations and speeds, based
on ground truth trajectories as well as generated trajectories. We show that simple models, such as constant velocity, can outperform more complex models, such as RNNs,
when judged by the standard metrics, but not when judged
by these distributional similarity metrics.
Finally, we consider the case of conditional prediction, in
which some aspects of the future are observed (and potentially manipulated), and some are predicted. For example,
Fig. 1 shows the predicted trajectory of the blue player given
the other players, and Fig. 6 shows the predicted trajectories
of all the players if we “intervene” and modify the trajectory
of the ball. This is a step towards answering counter-factual
14610

