Knockoff Nets: Stealing Functionality of Black-Box Models
Tribhuvanesh Orekondy1
1

Bernt Schiele1

Mario Fritz2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics 2 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
Blackbox Classiﬁer

Abstract

1. Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) models and especially deep
neural networks are deployed to improve productivity or experience e.g., photo assistants in smartphones, image recognition APIs in cloud-based internet services, and for navigation and control in autonomous vehicles. Developing and
engineering such models for commercial use is a product
of intense time, money, and human effort – ranging from
collecting a massive annotated dataset to tuning the right
model for the task. The details of the dataset, exact model
architecture, and hyperparameters are naturally kept confidential to protect the models’ value. However, in order to
be monetized or simply serve a purpose, they are deployed
in various applications (e.g., home assistants) to function as

jay

vireo

ani

ﬁnch

API

Machine Learning (ML) models are increasingly deployed in the wild to perform a wide range of tasks. In this
work, we ask to what extent can an adversary steal functionality of such “victim” models based solely on blackbox interactions: image in, predictions out. In contrast to
prior work, we study complex victim blackbox models, and
an adversary lacking knowledge of train/test data used by
the model, its internals, and semantics over model outputs.
We formulate model functionality stealing as a two-step approach: (i) querying a set of input images to the blackbox
model to obtain predictions; and (ii) training a “knockoff”
with queried image-prediction pairs. We make multiple remarkable observations: (a) querying random images from
a different distribution than that of the blackbox training
data results in a well-performing knockoff; (b) this is possible even when the knockoff is represented using a different
architecture; and (c) our reinforcement learning approach
additionally improves query sample efficiency in certain settings and provides performance gains. We validate model
functionality stealing on a range of datasets and tasks, as
well as show that a reasonable knockoff of an image analysis API could be created for as little as $30.

Knockoff Classiﬁer

.01 .23 .01
.13 .04 .00
.42 .00 .00

tern

Train data

grebe

.
.
.

.
.
.

.07
.01
...

.01

.
.
.

.
.
.

.03 .33 .18

.05

Similar
functionality

Figure 1: An adversary can create a “knockoff” of a blackbox
model solely by interacting with its API: image in, prediction out.
The knockoff bypasses the monetary costs and intellectual effort
involved in creating the blackbox model.

blackboxes: input in, predictions out.
Large-scale deployments of deep learning models in the
wild has motivated the community to ask: can someone
abuse the model solely based on blackbox access? There
has been a series of “inference attacks” [9, 24, 29, 31] which
try to infer properties (e.g., training data [31], architecture
[24]) about the model within the blackbox. In this work,
we focus on model functionality stealing: can one create a
“knockoff” of the blackbox model solely based on observed
input-output pairs? In contrast to prior work [19, 25, 35],
we work towards purely stealing functionality of complex
blackbox models by making fewer assumptions.
We formulate model functionality stealing as follows
(shown in Figure 1). The adversary interacts with a blackbox “victim” CNN by providing it input images and obtaining respective predictions. The resulting image-prediction
pairs are used to train a “knockoff” model. The adversary’s intention is for the knockoff to compete with the victim model at the victim’s task. Note that knowledge transfer [4, 14] approaches are a special case within our formulation, where the task, train/test data, and white-box teacher
(victim) model are known to the adversary.
Within this formulation, we spell out questions answered
in our paper with an end-goal of model functionality stealing:
1. Can we train a knockoff on a random set of query images and corresponding blackbox predictions?
2. What makes for a good set of images to query?

4954

