On Learning Density Aware Embeddings
Soumyadeep Ghosh, Richa Singh, Mayank Vatsa
IIIT-Delhi, India
{soumyadeepg, rsingh, mayank}@iiitd.ac.in

Abstract

Class A

Deep metric learning algorithms have been utilized to
learn discriminative and generalizable models which are
effective for classifying unseen classes. In this paper, a
novel noise tolerant deep metric learning algorithm is proposed. The proposed method, termed as Density Aware
Metric Learning, enforces the model to learn embeddings
that are pulled towards the most dense region of the clusters for each class. It is achieved by iteratively shifting
the estimate of the center towards the dense region of the
cluster thereby leading to faster convergence and higher
generalizability. In addition to this, the approach is robust
to noisy samples in the training data, often present as outliers. Detailed experiments and analysis on two challenging cross-modal face recognition databases and two popular object recognition databases exhibit the efficacy of the
proposed approach. It has superior convergence, requires
lesser training time, and yields better accuracies than several popular deep metric learning methods.

1. Introduction
Classification models such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) utilize deep metric learning based loss function for learning discriminative embeddings. The loss
function attempts to bring the embeddings of the same
classes close to each other in the output manifold. In
this embedding space, a direct computation of the distance gives the dissimilarity score between the two images. Several different applications have investigated the
use of deep metric learning algorithms such as person reidentification [4, 13, 21], 3D object retrieval [12], biometric recognition [7, 20, 23, 24], robot perception [15], patch
matching [11, 31], and object recognition [18, 27].
In the literature, very efficient deep metric learning
methods have been proposed such as triplet loss [20] and
quadruplet loss [3]. However, a major limitation of these
loss functions is their heavy dependence on mining of
hard samples for training [13, 20, 21, 30]. In the triplet
Loss [20], for N training classes and K samples in each

Class B

(a)

Conventional Center based Metric Learning
Class A

Class B

(b)

Density Aware Deep Metric Learning

Figure 1: Illustrating the difference in the conventional and
proposed metric learning techniques. (a) Conventional center loss based deep metric learning algorithms pull the data
of a class towards the centroid of that class. (b) The proposed density aware deep metric learning algorithm pulls
the samples of every class towards the most dense region of
the respective clusters.
class, the total number of triplets for training can be as
high as N (N − 1)K 2 (K − 1), which increases the training
time on large datasets significantly. Another limitation of
these methods is slow convergence, this heavily depends on
the appropriate choice of the training curriculum. Further,
the presence of outliers (noisy/poor-quality samples) in the
training data, and their participation in triplets may hurt the
training process. To the best of our knowledge there has
been no study to understand the effect of outliers and density distribution of the training data on the performance of
deep metric learning algorithms.
As seen in Figure 1(a), conventional center loss based

4884

