Dance with Flow: Two-in-One Stream Action Detection
Jiaojiao Zhao and Cees G. M. Snoek
University of Amsterdam
Flow image

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to detect the spatio-temporal extent of an action. The two-stream detection network based
on RGB and flow provides state-of-the-art accuracy at the
expense of a large model-size and heavy computation. We
propose to embed RGB and optical-flow into a single twoin-one stream network with new layers. A motion condition layer extracts motion information from flow images,
which is leveraged by the motion modulation layer to generate transformation parameters for modulating the low-level
RGB features. The method is easily embedded in existing
appearance- or two-stream action detection networks, and
trained end-to-end. Experiments demonstrate that leveraging the motion condition to modulate RGB features improves detection accuracy. With only half the computation
and parameters of the state-of-the-art two-stream methods,
our two-in-one stream still achieves impressive results on
UCF101-24, UCFSports and J-HMDB.

stand up?

sit down?

Flow image

Figure 1: Two-in-one stream. We propose to embed RGB
and optical-flow into a single stream for spatio-temporal action detection. Besides efficiency gains, it helps recognizing whether the dancer in the current frame is standing up
or sitting down without considering the future. By utilizing
information from flow images, the dancer is given a moving
direction, up or down, better indicating the action.

1. Introduction
This paper strives for the spatio-temporal detection of
human actions in video, which is a crucial ability for selfdriving cars, autonomous care robots, and advanced video
search engines. The leading approach for this challenging
problem relies on fast detectors at the frame level [29, 37],
which are then linked [1, 13, 37] or tracked [48] over time.
Kalogeiton et al. [21] and Singh et al. [36] further showed
it is advantageous to stack the features from subsequent
frames before predicting action class scores and determining the enclosing tube. Most of the state-of-the-art action detectors exploit a two-stream architecture [35], one
for RGB and one for optical-flow, which are individually
trained before fusion. However, the double computation
and parameter demand of two-stream methods does not lead
to double accuracy compared to a single stream. We propose to embed RGB and optical-flow into a single stream
for action detection.
We are inspired by progress on feature normalization,
especially conditional normalization [8, 10, 18], which has
been successfully employed to visual question answer-

ing [5], visual reasoning [30], image style transfer [17]
and super-resolution [47]. Peretz et al. [30] propose a
feature-wise linear modulation layer which enables a recurrent neural network over an input question to influence convolutional neural network computation over an image. It
demonstrates that features are capable to be modulated via
a simple feature-wise affine transformation based on conditioning information. However, as their modulation layer is
agnostic to spatial location, it is unsuited for action detection. In [47], Wang et al. developed a spatial feature transform layer, which is conditioned on categorical semantic
probability maps, to modulate a super-resolution network.
Encouraged by these works, we propose a motion condition layer and a motion modulation layer to adjust an RGBstream for spatio-temporal action detection.
We make the following contributions in this paper. We
propose to embed RGB and optical-flow into a single stream
for spatio-temporal action detection. It reduces the computational costs of conventional two-stream detection networks by half while maintaining its high accuracy. We in-

9935

