Versatile Multiple Choice Learning and Its Application to Vision Computing
Kai Tian1 Yi Xu1 Shuigeng Zhou1,2∗ Jihong Guan3
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of
Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
2
Shanghai Institute of Intelligent Electronics & Systems, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
3
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China

Abstract
Most existing ensemble methods aim to train the underlying embedded models independently and simply aggregate their final outputs via averaging or weighted voting. As many prediction tasks contain uncertainty, most
of these ensemble methods just reduce variance of the predictions without considering the collaborations among the
ensembles. Different from these ensemble methods, multiple choice learning (MCL) methods exploit the cooperation among all the embedded models to generate multiple diverse hypotheses. In this paper, a new MCL method,
called vMCL (the abbreviation of versatile Multiple Choice
Learning), is developed to extend the application scenarios
of MCL methods by ensembling deep neural networks. Our
vMCL method keeps the advantage of existing MCL methods while overcoming their major drawback, thus achieves
better performance. The novelty of our vMCL lies in three
aspects: (1) a choice network is designed to learn the confidence level of each specialist which can provide the best
prediction base on multiple hypotheses; (2) a hinge loss
is introduced to alleviate the overconfidence issue in MCL
settings; (3) Easy to be implemented and can be trained
in an end-to-end manner, which is a very attractive feature
for many real-world applications. Experiments on image
classification and image segmentation task show that vMCL
outperforms the existing state-of-the-art MCL methods.

1. Introduction
Machine learning tasks are often accompanied with ambiguity in many application areas, such as computer vision [16, 24], language understanding [11, 21], and recommendation systems [10]. Human beings interact with the
world through various types of information flows. Sometimes it is hard to make a perceptron recognition in just
one view. Due to the ambiguity, we cannot expect to get
∗ Correspondence author.

predictions from one model that are accurate for all data.
Therefore, researchers suggested generating multiple plausible outputs [8]. This is important, especially for interactive intelligence systems, such as machine translation [1],
image classification and denoising [7]. Generating multiple
plausible predictions promotes the diversity of the solutions.
To generate multiple diverse predictions, two types of
methods were developed. One is to train a model and
generate multiple predictions during the inference process [2, 5, 12, 13]. Usually, graphical models are used to
generate structured outputs. By optimizing the dissimilarity
between different solutions, those methods can find a set of
m-best configurations. Another is to train multiple models
and aggregate their predictions to generate the final output.
Such methods focus on the design of the learning process.
Among the second type of approaches, some methods
ensemble many independent models and collect all the predictions into a candidate set. These methods, including
Bayesian averaging [18], boosting [23] and bagging [3], often perform better than using a single model in many machine learning tasks, especially classification. As ensemble
methods usually train all the embedded models independently, they may obtain low diversity in their predictions.
Thus, multiple choice learning (MCL) [9] was proposed to
overcome this defect by establishing cooperation among all
the embedded models, each of which is trained to be a specialist on one particular data subset. The oracle loss concept
was proposed, which focuses on one model that gives the
most accurate prediction for each sample. And the oracle
error rate was used to measure MCL performance, which
means the ratio that none of the predictions are correct for
the test examples.
Recently, Lee et al. [15] adopted deep neural networks
into MCL and proposed stochastic Multiple Choice Learning (sMCL) to train diverse deep ensemble models. By minimizing the oracle loss directly, each model focuses on a
subset of data to make high accuracy prediction. Although
sMCL achieves high oracle performance and outperforms
many existing baselines, it often fails to make satisfactory

6349

