Salient Object Detection with Pyramid Attention and Salient Edges
Wenguan Wang∗ 1 , Shuyang Zhao ∗ 2 , Jianbing Shen† 1,2 , Steven C. H. Hoi 3,4 , Ali Borji 5
1
3

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

Singapore Management University, Singapore

4

2

Beijing Institute of Technology, China

Salesforce Research Asia, Singapore

5

MarkableAI, USA

wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com, zsyprich@bit.edu.cn
shenjianbingcg@gmail.com, chhoi@smu.edu.sg, aliborji@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper presents a new method for detecting salient
objects in images using convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). The proposed network, named PAGE-Net, makes
two major novel contributions. The first is to devise an
essential pyramid attention structure for salient object detection, which enables the network to concentrate more on
salient regions while exploiting multi-scale saliency information. Such a stacked attention design offers a powerful way to efficiently enhance the representation ability of
the corresponding network layer with an enlarged receptive
field. The second contribution is to propose a salient edge
detection module, which lies in the emphasis on the importance of salient edge information since it offers a strong cue
to better segment salient objects and refine object boundaries. Such a salient edge detection module learns for precise salient boundary estimation, and thus encourages better edge-preserving salient object segmentation. Exhaustive experiments show that both of the proposed pyramid
attention and salient edges are effective for salient object
detection, and our PAGE-Net outperforms state-of-the-art
approaches on several popular benchmarks with a fast inference speed (25FPS on a single GPU).

1. Introduction
Salient Object Detection (SOD) refers to the problem of
locating and segmenting the most salient objects or regions
in an image. It can be widely applied for improving a variety of vision tasks, such as object proposal generation [2],
object segmentation [42, 44], photo cropping [45, 41], and
video object tracking [13], among others. SOD has been
extensively studied in computer vision. Traditional methods often design hand-crafted low-level features and make
heuristic hypothesizes [49, 17], which often fail to yield
satisfactory results for images with complex scenarios. Re∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen.

cently, deep learning approaches have emerged as an important trend for SOD and often reported significant improvements. Despite being studied actively, how to devise an effective yet efficient deep neural network model for SOD remains an open challenge.
In this paper, we propose a novel Pyramid Attentive and
salient edGE-aware saliency model, named PAGE-Net, for
saliency object detection, which is equipped with two key
modules: (1) a pyramid attention module that efficiently enhances saliency representations by accounting for the multiscale attention and enlarging receptive field of the saliency
model; and (2) a salient edge detection module that explicitly learns salient object boundaries to better locate and
sharpen salient objects. The design of the proposed PAGENet is motivated by the following two aspects.
First, feature representation is the crux of deep learning based saliency models, and it is always desirable to explore more efficient strategies for approaching scale-space
feature learning problem. As witnessed in many saliency
studies [34, 57, 14], multi-scale saliency features are crucial for SOD. As such, recent deep saliency models have
mainly focused on combining the outputs from intermediate network layers. Unlike the existing work, we propose
a novel pyramid attention model that inherits the featureenhancing ability of attention mechanisms, and explicitly
handles the problem of multi-scale saliency feature learning. Incorporating attention mechanisms into networks has
proven useful for selecting task-relevant features [33]. As
shown in Fig. 1, we extend attention mechanisms with hierarchical structures to enhance saliency computation. Such
a design is significant because it efficiently increases the
receptive field of the convolution layer (even for a shallow
layer). Our saliency model is encouraged to focus on important regions using multi-scale information (Fig. 1 (b)). With
pyramid attention, the background responses in the original features (Fig. 1 (c)) are successfully suppressed, leading
to more discriminative saliency representations (Fig. 1 (d))
and better results (Fig. 1 (g)). Such an attention module
also provides an additional dimension of interpretability by

1448

