A Robust Local Spectral Descriptor for Matching Non-Rigid Shapes with
Incompatible Shape Structures
Yiqun Wang1,2 , Jianwei Guo1,2∗, Dong-Ming Yan1,2∗ , Kai Wang3 , Xiaopeng Zhang1,2
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, GIPSA-lab

Abstract
Constructing a robust and discriminative local descriptor for 3D shapes is a key component of many computer
vision applications. Although existing learning-based approaches can achieve good performance in specific benchmarks, they usually fail to learn sufficient information from
shapes with different types and structures (e.g., spatial resolution, connectivity, and transformation).
To solve this issue, we present a more discriminative local descriptor for deformable 3D shapes with incompatible structures. Based on spectral embedding using the
Laplace–Beltrami framework on the surface, we construct
a novel local spectral feature that exhibits high resilience
to changes in mesh resolution, triangulation, and transformation. The multiscale local spectral features around each
vertex are then encoded into a geometry image called vertex spectral image in a compact manner. Such vertex spectral images can be efficiently trained to learn local descriptors using a triplet neural network. Then, we present a new
benchmark dataset for training and evaluation by extending the widely used FAUST dataset. We utilize a remeshing
approach to generate modified shapes with different structures. Furthermore, we evaluate the proposed approach
thoroughly and conduct an in-depth comparison to demonstrate that our approach outperforms recent state-of-the-art
methods on this benchmark.

1. Introduction
Obtaining detailed 3D shapes has become easy with the
advancement of 3D scanning devices and computer vision
reconstruction techniques. Accordingly, the importance of
3D shape analysis (e.g., shape matching, segmentation, correspondence, and retrieval) has increased remarkably. Designing local descriptors for surface points is a fundamental
problem in computer vision, computer graphics and robotic∗ Corresponding
ming@gmail.com

authors:

jianwei.guo@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,

yandong-

Figure 1. Shape matching results between the reference shape
(6890 points) and different shapes with high-resolution (12K
points) and other incompatible structures.

s, and it is a building block of various shape analysis and
geometry processing applications.
Many local shape descriptors, including hand-crafted
shape feature [13] and deep learning-based descriptors [8],
have been proposed for different scenarios. Compared with
hand-crafted methods that are usually limited by the representation power of hand-tuned parameters, deep learning methods innovatively apply deep convolution to nonEuclidean geometric data and exhibit better performance.
However, current popular datasets used for descriptor learning, such as FAUST [3], SCAPE [1], and TOSCA [7],
have a compatible shape structure, that is, mesh resolution
and connectivity are identical across all shapes. The acquired/reconstructed surface shapes usually have incompatible shape structures even when the same acquisition technique is used, and their resolution, triangulation, and transformation may differ. Constructing robust and informative
local descriptors for such shapes thus remains challenging.
Furthermore, existing deep learning methods have serious
limitations. First, training and testing usually require the
same number of vertices on the input shapes because of the
fixed network architecture. Second, if the features fed into
the network are sensitive to triangulation, ensuring that the
learned features are robust to triangulation cannot be guaranteed. Third, the model needs to be normalized to the same

6231

