RegularFace: Deep Face Recognition via Exclusive Regularization
Kai Zhao Jingyi Xu Ming-Ming Cheng ∗
TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University
kaiz.xyz@gmail.com cmm@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
We consider the face recognition task where facial images of the same identity (person) is expected to be closer
in the representation space, while different identities be
far apart. Several recent studies encourage the intra-class
compactness by developing loss functions that penalize the
variance of representations of the same identity. In this paper, we propose the ‘exclusive regularization’ that focuses
on the other aspect of discriminability – the inter-class separability, which is neglected in many recent approaches.
The proposed method, named RegularFace, explicitly distances identities by penalizing the angle between an identity and its nearest neighbor, resulting in discriminative face
representations. Our method has intuitive geometric interpretation and presents unique benefits that are absent in
previous works. Quantitative comparisons against prior
methods on several open benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our method. In addition, our method is easy to
implement and requires only a few lines of python code on
modern deep learning frameworks.

1. Introduction
Face recognition is one of the most widely studied topics in computer vision, and recently significant improvement has been made with the convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) becoming the workhorse. In general, there are two
sub-tasks in face recognition: 1) face identification that attributes a given facial image to a known identity, and 2) face
verification that determines whether a pair of facial images
belongs to the same identity. There are also two testing
protocols for face recognition: the open-set protocol and
closed-set protocol. In the open-set circumstance, testing
identities may not exist in the training set; while in close-set
setting, training images and testing images are drawn from
the same identities. The open-set face recognition is more
challenging and closer to real-world applications because
it’s infeasible to collect all identity faces for training.

It is widely accepted that learning discriminative feature
representation is the key to accurate open-set face recognition [3, 21, 28, 14]. The Intra-class compactness and interclass separability are two important factors to feature discriminability: representations belonging to the same identity are expected to be closer in the representation space;
while representations of different identities are expected to
be scattered away. Many recent works insist on designing
novel loss functions to improve the intra-class compactness
of deep features. Center loss [28] improves the intra-class
compactness by imposing extra loss term that penalizes the
Euclidean distance between samples and their representation centers. Then in SphereFace, Liu et al. proposed the
A-Softmax loss [14] that imposes an angular margin to concentrate the samples in a sphere manifold. Here ‘softmax
loss’ represents softmax normalization followed by cross
entropy loss. Similar to SphereFace, CosFace [27] and
ArcFace [4] also impose angular margins to the decision
boundaries of original softmax loss, leading to further performance improvement. These methods focus on the intraclass compactness by clamping representations of the same
identity, either in the Euclidean space (center loss) or in the
sphere space (SphereFace, CosFace, ArcFace).
In this paper we consider the other side of discriminability: inter-class separability. Apart from intra-class compactness that shortens the distance between representations of
the same identity, the inter-class separability, on the other
side, aims at distancing samples of different identity classes.
Specifically, we impose a regularization term, named exclusive regularization, to parameters of the classification
layer. The regularization term explicitly enlarges the angle between parametric vectors of different identity classes,
leading to ‘exclusive’ classification vectors. Consequently,
these regularized classification vectors will, in turn, scatter the samples of different identities in the representation
space. Our contributions are concluded as follows:
• First, we propose to quantitatively evaluate the interclass separability with angular distance between identity centers.
• Second, we present a novel exclusive regularization
term which explicitly enlarges the angular distance be-

∗ M.M. Cheng is the corresponding author.

11136

