Improving Few-Shot User-Specific Gaze Adaptation
via Gaze Redirection Synthesis
Yu Yu, Gang Liu, Jean-Marc Odobez
Idiap Research Institute, CH-1920, Martigny, Switzerland
EPFL, CH-1015, Lausanne, Switzerland
{yyu, gang.liu, odobez}@idiap.ch
Abstract
As an indicator of human attention gaze is a subtle
behavioral cue which can be exploited in many applications. However, inferring 3D gaze direction is challenging even for deep neural networks given the lack of large
amount of data (groundtruthing gaze is expensive and existing datasets use different setups) and the inherent presence of gaze biases due to person-specific difference. In this
work, we address the problem of person-specific gaze model
adaptation from only a few reference training samples. The
main and novel idea is to improve gaze adaptation by generating additional training samples through the synthesis
of gaze-redirected eye images from existing reference samples. In doing so, our contributions are threefold: (i) we
design our gaze redirection framework from synthetic data,
allowing us to benefit from aligned training sample pairs
to predict accurate inverse mapping fields; (ii) we proposed
a self-supervised approach for domain adaptation; (iii) we
exploit the gaze redirection to improve the performance of
person-specific gaze estimation. Extensive experiments on
two public datasets demonstrate the validity of our gaze retargeting and gaze estimation framework.

1. Introduction
Gaze, as a subtle non-verbal human behaviour, not only
indicates the visual content people perceive but also conveys information about the level of attention, mental state
or even higher level psychological constructs of human. As
a consequence, gaze cues have been exploited in many areas like social interaction analysis [10], stress analysis [8],
human robot interaction (HRI) [1, 20], the emerging Virtual
Reality industry [21, 24], and they are expected to find a
wide range of application in mobile interactions with smart
phones [9, 14, 30].
However, gaze extraction from non invasive visual sensors is challenging and has attracted an increased amount
of research in recent years. Approaches can be classified in
two general categories: geometric based methods (GBM)

Figure 1. Approach overview. A few reference eye images (with
gaze ground truth) from a user are used as input to a gaze redirection synthesis module to generate further training samples. The
latter (and reference samples) are used to fine-tune a generic gaze
estimator to obtain a user-specific gaze estimator.

and appearance based methods (ABM). The former ones
rely on a geometrical model of eyes whose parameters can
be inferred from localized eye landmarks like iris or eye
corners. Although they can be very accurate, they usually
require high resolution data to reliably extract eye features.
The latter ABM ones directly learn a mapping from the
eye images to the gaze directions and have been shown to
be more robust against low eye image resolution and other
variability factors (illumination, head pose, gaze range,...).
Nevertheless, in spite of recent progresses partly due to the
use of deep neural networks [2, 14, 16, 23, 44, 45], vision
based gaze estimation is still a challenging and open problem due to at least three main factors:
• Lack of data.
The sizes of benchmark gaze
datasets [3, 28, 44] are relatively small compared to
other vision tasks like image classification, since accurate gaze annotation is complex and expensive. To address the lack of data, domain adaptation methods [27]
have proposed to use synthetic images for training, but
completely eliminating the domain discrepancies between real and synthetic eye images is hard.
• Systematic bias. Existing gaze datasets usually
use different gaze coordinate systems and data preprocessing methods, in particular for geometric normalization (rectification) relying on different head
pose estimators. This introduces a between-dataset
111937

