Monocular Depth Estimation Using Relative Depth Maps
Jae-Han Lee
Korea University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

jaehanlee@mcl.korea.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

We propose a novel algorithm for monocular depth estimation using relative depth maps. First, using a convolutional neural network, we estimate relative depths between
pairs of regions, as well as ordinary depths, at various
scales. Second, we restore relative depth maps from selectively estimated data based on the rank-1 property of pairwise comparison matrices. Third, we decompose ordinary
and relative depth maps into components and recombine
them optimally to reconstruct a final depth map. Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm provides
the state-of-art depth estimation performance.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation is a fundamental problem of computer
vision to estimate depth information of a scene from one or
more images. Estimated depths give important geometric
clues in vision applications, such as image synthesis [8,44],
scene recognition [50, 56], pose estimation [60, 68], and
robotics [4, 34]. There are various techniques for inferring depths from multi-view images [48, 55] or video sequences [30, 62], which provide promising results. However, when only a single image is available, the problem is
challenging since it is ill-posed [12].
Early methods for monocular depth estimation made
assumptions about scenes: a space composed of box
blocks [16], a scene consisting of planar regions [54], a typical indoor room with a floor and walls [9, 32], and the dark
channel prior [17]. However, these methods become unreliable when the assumptions are invalid.
In recent years, monocular depth estimation methods
based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [6, 11–
13, 31, 33, 51] have been proposed, with the advance in
computing hardware and the availability of abundant training data [14, 57], improving the performance dramatically.
Some methods [20, 36, 39, 65, 66] combine CNNs with conditional random field (CRF) models to yield more edgeconforming depth maps. Also, attempts have been made
to estimate depths jointly with closely related data [27, 47,
61, 64, 69], such as surface normal and optical flow.

𝐑3

𝐃3

Abstract
Input image

Ordinary depth map

𝐃0
Optimal depth map

𝐅1

𝐑4

𝐑5

𝐑6

Multi-resolution relative depth maps

𝐅2

𝐅3

𝐅4

𝐅5

𝐅6

Depth map decomposition

Figure 1. An overview of the proposed algorithm. First, one ordinary depth map and four relative depth maps are obtained from an
image. Then, they are decomposed into depth components, which
are, in turn, combined to reconstruct an optimal depth map.

These CNN-based methods attempt to estimate absolute
depths directly. However, as noted in [12], monocular depth
estimation is ambiguous in scale: an object may appear the
same as another identically-shaped but smaller object in a
nearer distance. On the other hand, the ratio between depths
of two points, which is referred to as relative depth in this
work, is scale-invariant. It is easier even for a human being to choose the nearer one between two points than to
estimate the absolute depth of each point. In other words,
relative depths are easier to estimate than ordinary depths.
Based on these observations, we propose a novel monocular depth estimation algorithm using relative depth maps.
Figure 1 shows an overview of the proposed algorithm.
First, we develop a CNN in the encoder-decoder architecture, which includes multiple decoder blocks for estimating
relative depths, as well as ordinary depths, at various scales.
Second, we form a pairwise comparison matrix, which is
sparsely populated by the estimated relative depths. By exploiting the rank-1 property of the matrix, we restore the
entire matrix using the alternating least squares (ALS) algorithm [28], from which a relative depth map is obtained.
Third, each depth map is decomposed into components,
which are re-combined to reconstruct a final depth map
through a constrained optimization scheme. Experimental
results show that the proposed algorithm provides the stateof-the-art depth estimation performance.
We highlight main contributions of this work as follows:
• We propose the notion of relative depth and develop an

9729

