Fast Human Pose Estimation
Feng Zhang1

Xiatian Zhu2
Mao Ye1
1
{zhangfengwcy, cvlab.uestc}@gmail.com, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
eddy@visionsemantics.com, Vision Semantics Limited

Abstract
Existing human pose estimation approaches often only
consider how to improve the model generalisation performance, but putting aside the significant efficiency problem.
This leads to the development of heavy models with poor
scalability and cost-effectiveness in practical use. In this
work, we investigate the under-studied but practically critical pose model efficiency problem. To this end, we present
a new Fast Pose Distillation (FPD) model learning strategy. Specifically, the FPD trains a lightweight pose neural
network architecture capable of executing rapidly with low
computational cost. It is achieved by effectively transferring
the pose structure knowledge of a strong teacher network.
Extensive evaluations demonstrate the advantages of our
FPD method over a broad range of state-of-the-art pose estimation approaches in terms of model cost-effectiveness on
two standard benchmark datasets, MPII Human Pose and
Leeds Sports Pose.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation has gained remarkable progress
from the rapid development of various deep CNN models [30, 8, 10]. This is because deep neural networks are
strong at approximating complex and non-linear mapping
functions from arbitrary person images to the joint locations
even at the presence of unconstrained human body appearance, viewing conditions and background noises.
Nevertheless, the model performance advantages come
with the cost of training and deploying resource-intensive
networks with large depth and width. This causes inefficient
model inference, requiring per-image computing cost at
tens of FLoating point OPerations (FLOPs) therefore poor
scalability particularly on resource-limited devices such as
smart phones and robots. There is a recent attempt that binarises the network parameters for model execution speedup
[7], which however suffers significantly weak model generalisation capacity.
In this study, we consider the problem of improving

the pose estimation efficiency without model performance
degradation but preserving comparable accuracy results.
We observe that the basic CNN building blocks for state-ofthe-art human pose networks such as Hourglass [19] are not
cost-effective in establishing small networks due to a high
number of channels per layer and being more difficult to
train. To overcome these barriers, we design a lightweight
variant of Hourglass network and propose a more effective
training method of small pose networks in a knowledge distillation fashion [13]. We call the proposed method Fast
Pose Distillation (FPD). Compared with the top-performing
alternative pose approaches [32, 10], the proposed FPD approach enables much faster and more cost-effective model
inference with extremely smaller model size while simultaneously reaching the same level of human pose prediction
performance.
We summarise our contributions in follows:
(i) We investigate the under-studied human pose model
efficiency problem, opposite to the existing attempts
mostly focusing on improving the accuracy performance alone at high costs of model inference at deployment. This is a critical problem to be addressed
for scaling up the existing deep pose estimation methods to real applications.
(ii) We propose a Fast Pose Distillation (FPD) model
training method enabling to more effectively train extremely small human pose CNN networks. This is
based on an idea of knowledge distillation that have
been successfully exploited in inducing object image
categorisation deep models. In particular, we derive a pose knowledge distillation learning objective to
transfer the latent knowledge from a pre-trained larger
teacher model to a tiny target pose model (to be deployed in test time). This aims to pursue the best model
performance given very limited computational budgets
using only a small fraction (less than 20%) of cost required by similarly strong alternatives.
(iii) We design a lightweight Hourglass network capable of
constructing more cost-effective pose estimation CNN

3517

