Decoders Matter for Semantic Segmentation:
Data-Dependent Decoding Enables Flexible Feature Aggregation

1

Zhi Tian1
Tong He1
Chunhua Shen1∗ Youliang Yan2
2
The University of Adelaide, Australia
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies

Input image
513x513

Recent semantic segmentation methods exploit encoderdecoder architectures to produce the desired pixel-wise segmentation prediction. The last layer of the decoders is typically a bilinear upsampling procedure to recover the final
pixel-wise prediction. We empirically show that this oversimple and data-independent bilinear upsampling may lead
to sub-optimal results.
In this work, we propose a data-dependent upsampling
(DUpsampling) to replace bilinear, which takes advantages
of the redundancy in the label space of semantic segmentation and is able to recover the pixel-wise prediction from
low-resolution outputs of CNNs. The main advantage of
the new upsampling layer lies in that with a relatively
1
1
or 32
of the inlower-resolution feature map such as 16
put size, we can achieve even better segmentation accuracy, significantly reducing computation complexity. This
is made possible by 1) the new upsampling layer’s much
improved reconstruction capability; and more importantly
2) the DUpsampling based decoder’s flexibility in leveraging almost arbitrary combinations of the CNN encoders’
features. Experiments on PASCAL VOC demonstrate that
with much less computation complexity, our decoder outperforms the state-of-the-art decoder. Finally, without any
post-processing, the framework equipped with our proposed
decoder achieves new state-of-the-art performance on two
datasets: 88.1% mIOU on PASCAL VOC with 30% computation of the previously best model; and 52.5% mIOU on
PASCAL Context.

Root, stride 2
257x257

1. Introduction
Fully convolutional networks (FCNs) [21] have achieved
tremendous success in dense pixel prediction applications
such as semantic segmentation, for which the algorithm is
asked to predict a variable for each pixel of an input image and is a fundamental problem in computer vision. The
∗ First two authors equally contributed to this work. C. Shen is the corresponding author: chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au

Block1 , stride 2
129x129
Block2 , stride 2
65x65

Block3 , stride 2
33x33
Block4 , stride 1,
rate 2, 33x33

Prediction
513x513
Concat
129x129

Upsample
by 4 times

Conv3x3,
129x129
Conv3x3,
129x129
Conv3x3,
129x129

Bilinear by 4
times

Conv1x1,
33x33
Convolutional Decoder

Encoder

Argmax

Abstract

Upsampling

Decoder

Figure 1: An example of the encoder-decoder architecture used by
DeepLabv3+. Its decoder fuses low-level features of downsample ratio
= 4 and upsamples high-level features before merging them. Finally,
bilinear upsampling is applied to restore the full-resolution prediction.
“rate” denotes the atrous rate in atrous convolution.

great achievement of FCNs results from powerful features
extracted by CNNs. Importantly, the sharing convolutional
computation mechanism makes training and inference computationally very efficient.
In the original FCNs, several stages of strided convolutions and/or spatial pooling reduce the final image prediction typically by a factor of 32, thus losing fine image structure information and leading to inaccurate predictions, especially at the object boundaries. DeepLab [3] applies atrous (a.k.a dilation) convolutions, achieving large receptive fields while maintaining a higher-resolution feature
map. Alternatively the encoder-decoder architecture is often used to address this problem. The encoder-decoder architecture views the backbone CNN as an encoder, responsible for encoding a raw input image into lower-resolution
feature maps (e.g., 1r of the input image size with r = 8, 16,
or 32). Afterwards, a decoder is used to recover the pixelwise prediction from the lower-resolution feature maps. In
previous works [5, 17], a decoder consists of a few convolutional layers and a bilinear upsampling. The light-weight

3126

