Estimating 3D Motion and Forces of Person-Object Interactions
from Monocular Video
Zongmian Li1,2
Ivan Laptev1,2
1
2
DI ENS PSL
Inria

Jiri Sedlar3
Justin Carpentier1,2
Nicolas Mansard4
Josef Sivic1,2,3
3
4
CIIRC, CTU in Prague
LAAS-CNRS

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a method to automatically
reconstruct the 3D motion of a person interacting with an
object from a single RGB video. Our method estimates the
3D poses of the person and the object, contact positions,
and forces and torques actuated by the human limbs. The
main contributions of this work are three-fold. First, we introduce an approach to jointly estimate the motion and the
actuation forces of the person on the manipulated object by
modeling contacts and the dynamics of their interactions.
This is cast as a large-scale trajectory optimization problem. Second, we develop a method to automatically recognize from the input video the position and timing of contacts
between the person and the object or the ground, thereby
significantly simplifying the complexity of the optimization.
Third, we validate our approach on a recent MoCap dataset
with ground truth contact forces and demonstrate its performance on a new dataset of Internet videos showing people
manipulating a variety of tools in unconstrained environments.

1. Introduction
People can easily learn how to break concrete with a
sledgehammer or cut hay using a scythe by observing other
people performing such tasks in instructional videos, for example. They can also easily perform the same task in a different context. This involves advanced visual intelligence
capabilities such as recognizing and interpreting complex
person-object interactions that achieve a specific goal. Understanding such complex interactions is a key to building
autonomous machines that learn how to interact with the
physical world by observing people.
* Please see our project webpage [2] for trained models, data and code.
1 Département d’informatique de l’ENS, École normale supérieure,

CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France.
3 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the
Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic.

Figure 1: Our method automatically reconstructs in 3D the object
manipulation action captured by a single RGB video. Top: Frames
from the input video. Bottom: the output human and object 3D
motion including the recovered contact forces (yellow arrows) and
moments (white arrows).

This work makes a step in this direction and describes a
method to estimate the 3D motion and actuation forces of a
person manipulating an object given a single unconstrained
video as input, as shown in Figure 1. This is an extremely
challenging task. First, there are inherent ambiguities in the
2D-to-3D mapping from a single view: multiple 3D human
poses correspond to the same 2D input. Second, humanobject interactions often involve contacts, resulting in discontinuities in the motion of the object and the human body
part in contact. For example, one must place a hand on the
hammer handle before picking the hammer up. The contact
motion strongly depends on the physical quantities such as
the mass of the object and the contact forces exerted by the
hand, which renders modeling of contacts a very difficult
task. Finally, the tools we consider in this work, such as
hammer, scythe, or spade, are particularly difficult to recognize due to their thin structure, lack of texture, and frequent
occlusions by hands and other human parts.
To address these challenges, we propose a method to
jointly estimate the 3D trajectory of both the person and
the object by visually recognizing contacts in the video

8640

