Example-Guided Style-Consistent Image Synthesis from Semantic Labeling
Miao Wang1
Guo-Ye Yang2
Ruilong Li2
Run-Ze Liang2
Song-Hai Zhang2
Peter M. Hall3
Shi-Min Hu2,1
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing
3
University of Bath
Pose → Dance
Exemplars

Exemplars

Sketch → Face

Input label map

Synthetic results

Input label map

Synthetic results

Exemplars

Scene parsing → Street view

Input label map

Synthetic results

Figure 1: We present a generative adversarial framework for synthesizing images from semantic label maps as well as image
exemplars. Our synthetic results are photorealistic, semantically consistent to the label maps (facial expression, pose or scene
segmentation map) and style-consistent with corresponding exemplars.

Abstract
Example-guided image synthesis aims to synthesize an
image from a semantic label map and an exemplary image
indicating style. We use the term “style” in this problem
to refer to implicit characteristics of images, for example:
in portraits “style” includes gender, racial identity, age,
hairstyle; in full body pictures it includes clothing; in street
scenes it refers to weather and time of day and such like. A
semantic label map in these cases indicates facial expression, full body pose, or scene segmentation. We propose a
solution to the example-guided image synthesis problem using conditional generative adversarial networks with style
consistency. Our key contributions are (i) a novel style con-

sistency discriminator to determine whether a pair of images are consistent in style; (ii) an adaptive semantic consistency loss; and (iii) a training data sampling strategy,
for synthesizing style-consistent results to the exemplar. We
demonstrate the efficiency of our method on face, dance and
street view synthesis tasks.

1. Introduction
In image-to-image translation tasks, mappings between
two visual domains are learnt. Various computer vision
and graphics problems are addressed and formulated using the image-to-image translation framework, including
super-resolution [30, 28], colorization [29, 49], inpainting
[38, 21], style transfer [23, 34] and photorealistic image
11495

