Mask-Guided Portrait Editing with Conditional GANs
Shuyang Gu1
Jianmin Bao1
Hao Yang2
Dong Chen2
Fang Wen2
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Microsoft Research
{gsy777,jmbao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Lu Yuan2

{haya,doch,fangwen,luyuan}@microsoft.com

(b) Component editing
(a) Mask2image
(c) Component transfer
Figure 1: We propose a framework based on conditional GANs for mask-guided portrait editing. (a) Our framework can generate diverse
and realistic faces using one input target mask (lower left corner in the first image). (b) Our framework allows us to edit the mask to change
the shape of face components, i.e. mouth, eyes, hair. (c) Our framework also allows us to transfer the appearance of each component for a
portrait, including hair color.

Abstract
Portrait editing is a popular subject in photo manipulation. The Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) advances
the generating of realistic faces and allows more face editing. In this paper, we argue about three issues in existing
techniques: diversity, quality, and controllability for portrait synthesis and editing. To address these issues, we propose a novel end-to-end learning framework that leverages
conditional GANs guided by provided face masks for generating faces. The framework learns feature embeddings for
every face component (e.g., mouth, hair, eye), separately,
contributing to better correspondences for image translation, and local face editing. With the mask, our network is
available to many applications, like face synthesis driven
by mask, face Swap+ (including hair in swapping), and local manipulation. It can also boost the performance of face
parsing a bit as an option of data augmentation.

1. Introduction
Portrait editing is of great interest in the vision and
graphics community due to its potential applications in
movies, gaming, photo manipulation and sharing, etc. Peo-

ple enjoy the magic that makes faces look more interesting,
funny, and beautiful, which appear in an amount of popular
apps, such as Snapchat, Facetune, etc.
Recently, advances in Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [16] have made tremendous progress in synthesizing realistic faces [1, 29, 25, 12], like face aging [46], pose
changing [44, 21] and attribute modifying [4]. However,
these existing approaches still suffer from some quality issues, like lack of fine details in skin, difficulty in dealing
with hair and background blurring. Such artifacts cause
generated faces to look unrealistic.
To address these issues, one possible solution is to use
the facial mask to guide generation. On one hand, a face
mask provides a good geometric constraint, which helps
synthesize realistic faces. On the other hand, an accurate
contour for each facial component (e.g., eye, mouth, hair,
etc.) is necessary for local editing. Based on the face mask,
some works [40, 14] achieve very promising results in portrait stylization. However, these methods focus on transferring the visual style (e.g., B&W, color, painting) from the
reference face to the target face. It seems to be unavailable
for synthesizing different faces, or changing face components.
Some kinds of GAN models begin to integrate the face
mask/skeleton for better image-to-image translation, for

3436

