Joint Representative Selection and Feature Learning:
A Semi-Supervised Approach

1

Suchen Wang1
Jingjing Meng2
Junsong Yuan2
Yap-Peng Tan1
2
Nanyang Technological University
State University of New York at Buffalo
{wang.sc, eyptan}@ntu.edu.sg, {jmeng2, jsyuan}@buffalo.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a semi-supervised approach for
representative selection, which finds a small set of representatives that can well summarize a large data collection.
Given labeled source data and big unlabeled target data,
we aim to find representatives in the target data, which can
not only represent and associate data points belonging to
each labeled category, but also discover novel categories in
the target data, if any. To leverage labeled source data, we
guide representative selection from labeled source to unlabeled target. We propose a joint optimization framework
which alternately optimizes (1) representative selection in
the target data and (2) discriminative feature learning from
both the source and the target for better representative selection. Experiments on image and video datasets demonstrate that our proposed approach not only finds better representatives, but also can discover novel categories in the
target data that are not in the source.

1. Introduction
Representative selection aims to find a small subset of
data points that can well represent a big data collection. It
has attracted much interest in recent years due to the increasing need of analyzing massive visual data and the limited capacity of our computing and storage resources.
Although the problem of representative selection has
been well studied in the literature [12, 38, 20, 9, 13, 29, 28,
7], most previous works apply unsupervised approaches.
That is, finding a set of items from the given target data
without supervision. However, in many applications, we
are not only interested in finding representative items (i.e.,
which data points are exemplars), but also interested in
knowing what they are (i.e., recognizing their categories).
In other words, although we can find representatives and
associate remaining data samples with them based on the
similarity, we do not know the exact category of each representative unless labels are provided.

Figure 1. Framework overview. We leverage labeled source data to
find representatives from unlabeled target data. Once representatives are found, labels can be naturally transferred from the source
to the target. Then we update features for better representative
selection. These two steps will alternate until termination.

Recently, Elhamifar et al. [8, 7] introduce an additional
source set of known items and propose to select source
items to represent the target. In this way, target items can
be easily recognized by passing category labels of source
representatives. Unfortunately, this scheme operates in a
closed world assumption, i.e., the source set knows every
category that may appear in the target. However, it may not
be the case in many real world applications.
In this paper, we take a semi-supervised approach by
likewise introducing a source set, but leverage it to find representative items from the target set rather than the source
set. More importantly, we do not assume that the source set
has covered all categories in the target data. We formulate
the representative selection as the facility location problem.
We incorporate labeled source data into the objective function such that they can guide the selection for new target
data. In the end, connections between the source and the
target can be formed via selected representatives, so that
we can transfer the labels from the source to the target. As
shown in Figure 1(c), we can transfer the labels of “cat”,
“dog” and “horse” to corresponding groups.
As feature representation plays a critical role in representative selection, we devise a joint optimization framework
which alternates between two steps: (1) representative se-

6005

