DLOW: Domain Flow for Adaptation and Generalization
Rui Gong1 Wen Li1∗ Yuhua Chen1 Luc Van Gool1,2
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich 2 VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven
gongr@student.ethz.ch {liwen, yuhua.chen, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
In this work, we present a domain flow generation(DLOW) model to bridge two different domains by generating a continuous sequence of intermediate domains
flowing from one domain to the other. The benefits of our
DLOW model are two-fold. First, it is able to transfer
source images into different styles in the intermediate domains. The transferred images smoothly bridge the gap between source and target domains, thus easing the domain
adaptation task. Second, when multiple target domains are
provided for training, our DLOW model is also able to generate new styles of images that are unseen in the training
data. We implement our DLOW model based on CycleGAN.
A domainness variable is introduced to guide the model to
generate the desired intermediate domain images. In the
inference phase, a flow of various styles of images can be
obtained by varying the domainness variable. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our model for both cross-domain
semantic segmentation and the style generalization tasks on
benchmark datasets. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/ETHRuiGong/DLOW .

1. Introduction
The domain shift problem is drawing increasing attention in recent years [21, 64, 54, 52, 15, 8]. In particular,
there are two tasks that are of interest in computer vision
community. One is the domain adaptation problem, where
the goal is to learn a model for a given task from a labelrich data domain (i.e., source domain) to perform well in
a label-scarce data domain (i.e., target domain). The other
one is the image translation problem, where the goal is to
transfer images in the source domain to mimic the image
style in the target domain.
Generally, most existing works focus on the target domain only. They aim to learn models that well fit the target
data distribution, e.g., achieving good classification accuracy in the target domain, or transferring source images into
∗ The corresponding author.

Figure 1: Illustration of data flow generation. Traditional
image translation methods directly map the image from
the source domain to the target domain, while our DLOW
model is able to produce a sequence of intermediate domains shifting from the source domain to the target domain.

the target style. In this work, we instead are interested in the
intermediate domains between source and target domains.
We present a new domain flow generation (DLOW) model,
which is able to translate images from the source domain
into an arbitrary intermediate domain between source and
target domains. As shown in Fig 1, by translating a source
image along the domain flow from the source domain to the
target domain, we obtain a sequence of images that naturally characterize the distribution shift from the source domain to the target domain.
The benefits of our DLOW model are two-fold. First,
those intermediate domains are helpful to bridge the distribution gap between two domains. By translating images
into intermediate domains, those translated images can be
used to ease the domain adaptation task. We show that the
traditional domain adaptation methods can be boosted to
achieve better performance in target domain with intermediate domain images. Moreover, the obtained models also
exhibit good generalization ability on new datasets that are
not seen in the training phase, benefiting from the diverse
intermediate domain images.

2477

