SCOPS: Self-Supervised Co-Part Segmentation
Wei-Chih Hung1* , Varun Jampani2 , Sifei Liu2 , Pavlo Molchanov2 , Ming-Hsuan Yang1 , and Jan Kautz2
1

UC Merced

2

NVIDIA

Figure 1: Robustness to variations. Sample part segmentation obtained by SCOPS on different types of image collections:
(left) unaligned faces from CelebA [29], (middle) birds from CUB [44] and (right) horses from PASCAL VOC [11] dataset
images, showing that SCOPS can be robust to appearance, viewpoint and pose variations.

Abstract
Parts provide a good intermediate representation of objects that is robust with respect to the camera, pose and appearance variations. Existing works on part segmentation
is dominated by supervised approaches that rely on large
amounts of manual annotations and can not generalize to
unseen object categories. We propose a self-supervised
deep learning approach for part segmentation, where we
devise several loss functions that aids in predicting part segments that are geometrically concentrated, robust to object
variations and are also semantically consistent across different object instances. Extensive experiments on different
types of image collections demonstrate that our approach
can produce part segments that adhere to object boundaries and also more semantically consistent across object
instances compared to existing self-supervised techniques.

1. Introduction
Much of the computer vision involves analyzing objects
surrounding us, such as humans, cars, furniture, and so
on. A major challenge in analyzing objects is to develop
a model that is robust to the multitude of object transformations and deformations due to changes in camera pose, oc*This work is done when the author was doing internship at NVIDIA.

clusions, object appearance, and pose variations. Parts provide a good intermediate representation of objects that is robust with respect to these variations. As a result, part-based
representations are used in a wide range of object analysis
tasks such as 3D reconstruction [55], detection [12], finegrained recognition [25], pose estimation [20], etc.
Several types of 2D part representations have been used
in the literature, with the three most common ones being
landmarks, bounding boxes, and part segmentations. A
common approach to the part analysis is to first manually
annotate large amounts of data and then leverage fullysupervised approaches to recognize parts [9, 29, 2, 4, 5].
However, these annotations, especially part segmentation,
are often quite costly. The annotations are also specific to a
single object category and usually do not generalize to other
object classes. Consequently, it is difficult to scale the fullysupervised models to unseen categories and there is a need
for weakly supervised techniques for part recognition that
only rely on very weak supervision or no supervision at all.
Part representations, once obtained, are robust to variations and help in high-level object understanding. However, obtaining part segmentations is challenging due to the
above mentioned intra-class variations. An image collection of a single object category, despite having the same
category objects, usually have high variability regarding
pose, object appearances, camera viewpoint, the presence
1869

