Leveraging Shape Completion for 3D Siamese Tracking
Silvio Giancola*, Jesus Zarzar*, and Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
{silvio.giancola,jesusalejandro.zarzartorano,bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Point clouds are challenging to process due to their sparsity, therefore autonomous vehicles rely more on appearance attributes than pure geometric features. However, 3D
LIDAR perception can provide crucial information for urban navigation in challenging light or weather conditions.
In this paper, we investigate the versatility of Shape Completion for 3D Object Tracking in LIDAR point clouds. We
design a Siamese tracker that encodes model and candidate shapes into a compact latent representation. We regularize the encoding by enforcing the latent representation
to decode into an object model shape. We observe that
3D object tracking and 3D shape completion complement
each other. Learning a more meaningful latent representation shows better discriminatory capabilities, leading to
improved tracking performance. We test our method on
the KITTI Tracking set using car 3D bounding boxes. Our
model reaches a 76.94% Success rate and 81.38% Precision
for 3D Object Tracking, with the shape completion regularization leading to an improvement of 3% in both metrics.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving is changing the way we envision
human transportation. Introducing fully autonomous vehicles into our cities implies sharing the roads with existing
vehicles. Thus, it is imperative for autonomous vehicles
to outperform humans in the task of driving. Understanding the urban environment and the human driving process
is crucial for an agent to become capable of achieving and
exceeding human driving performance. Accordingly, autonomous vehicles need to outperform human perception so
to cope with an unbounded set of unpredictable situations.
An autonomous vehicle adapts its driving policy by understanding its environment. Modules for Road Detection [11, 6] and Road-sign Recognition [19, 54] indicate to
the car where and how to drive. Object Detection methods [8, 42] constrain the vehicle’s path in order to avoid
collisions while Object Tracking algorithms [59, 47] pre* Both authors contributed equally to this work.

Φ 𝑧̂ Ψ
Model Shape

Decoded Model

Cos. Sim.

Visualization Only

Φ
Candidate Shapes

𝑧

Ψ
Decoded Best Candidate

Figure 1. Our tracking model combines a Siamese network with an
Auto-Encoder. The Siamese network encodes sparse 3D shapes
into a latent representation z, in which shapes belonging to the
same object have a high cosine similarity. By regularizing our
tracker to auto-encode model shapes, we enforce that the encoder
maps point clouds into meaningful representations. The effect of
regularization is visualized by decoding a candidate shape.

dict their motion to anticipate danger. Autonomous vehicles
need to sense both appearance and geometric components
of the environment to extrapolate the semantic information
required for driving. RGB cameras provide both appearance and geometric information by either inferring depth
from single RGB cameras [55, 64] or by stereoscopy [61, 9].
Depth and shape completion [36, 23] are commonly used to
improve the limited sensing capability of RGB sensors.
Alternatively, LIDAR systems directly sense geometry
in a more accurate manner. LIDAR sensors are less sensitive to light and weather conditions, so they provide more
reliable information in a much larger range of driving conditions. However, LIDARs generate sparse point clouds,
not readily suitable for conventional CNN processing. Most
current works pre-process 3D point clouds for use in CNNs
by either voxelizing the 3D space [29, 21] or by projecting point clouds into a planar space [53, 27, 10, 51]. However, these methods lose fine-grained geometric details. It
is worthwhile to note that only a few works deal directly
with point clouds [43, 1]. We believe appearance information is insufficient to reach better-than-human driving performance, especially in challenging driving environments.
11359

