A Variational Pan-Sharpening with Local Gradient Constraints
Xueyang Fu12 ,
1
2

Zihuang Lin1 ,

Yue Huang1 ,

Xinghao Ding1∗

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Xiamen University, China

School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, China
∗

Corresponding author: dxh@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Pan-sharpening aims at fusing spectral and spatial information, which are respectively contained in the multispectral (MS) image and panchromatic (PAN) image, to
produce a high resolution multi-spectral (HRMS) image. In
this paper, a new variational model based on a local gradient constraint for pan-sharpening is proposed. Different with previous methods that only use global constraints
to preserve spatial information, we first consider gradient difference of PAN and HRMS images in different local
patches and bands. Then a more accurate spatial preservation based on local gradient constraints is incorporated
into the objective to fully utilize spatial information contained in the PAN image. The objective is formulated as
a convex optimization problem which minimizes two leastsquares terms and thus very simple and easy to implement.
A fast algorithm is also designed to improve efficiency. Experiments show that our method outperforms previous variational algorithms and achieves better generalization than
recent deep learning methods.

1. Introduction
Remote sensing images have become widely used in
many practical applications, such as environmental monitoring, object positioning and classification. Due to physical constraints, satellites such as IKONOS, QuickBird2, WorldView-2 and WorldView-3 capture two images of
the same scene at the same time, where one image called
panchromatic (PAN) image is of high spatial resolution, and
the other called multi-spectral (MS) image is of low spatial
resolution but it contains good spectral content. In order to
obtain the high resolution multi-spectral (HRMS) images,
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 61571382, 81671766, 61571005, 81671674,
61671309 and U1605252, in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for
the Central Universities under Grants 20720160075 and 20720180059, in
part by the CCF-Tencent open fund, and the Natural Science Foundation
of Fujian Province of China (No.2017J01126).

(a) PAN image

(b) MS image

(c) Fused result

Figure 1: An example of our proposed method. The fused
result has rich details with promising spectral preservation.

pan-sharpening techniques which refer to fuse the low resolution spectral information with the spatial structure in the
PAN image have been developed.

1.1. Related works
In the past decades, many pan-sharpening methods have
been proposed. Among these existing methods, the most
common methods include the intensity hue-saturation technique (IHS) [8], the principal component analysis (PCA)
[21] and Brovey transform [15]. These methods are popular due to their relatively fast computation. But they usually
suffer from spectral distortion while increasing spatial resolution of fused results.
Beside component substitution, the multi-resolution
analysis (MRA) method is another popular pan-sharpening
method in which the PAN image and MS image are decomposed into other planes by using some multi-resolution
tools, e.g., decimated wavelet transform (DWT) [22], a
trous wavelet transform (ATWT) [26] and Laplacian pyramid (LP) [7]. The MRA method can sharpen MS image
effectively. However, this may cause some local dissimilarities because the high frequencies extracted from the PAN
image are not exactly to those of the HRMS images.
Recently, in the light of the strong nonlinear mapping
ability of deep learning, researchers have begun exploring the deep convolutional neuron network based methods.
Although these methods [17, 23, 30] obtain excellent per-

10265

