Lending Orientation to Neural Networks for Cross-view Geo-localization
Liu Liu 1,2 and Hongdong Li 1,2
1
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
{Liu.Liu; hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
This paper studies image-based geo-localization (IBL)
problem using ground-to-aerial cross-view matching. The
goal is to predict the spatial location of a ground-level
query image by matching it to a large geotagged aerial image database (e.g., satellite imagery). This is a challenging
task due to the drastic differences in their viewpoints and
visual appearances. Existing deep learning methods for
this problem have been focused on maximizing feature similarity between spatially close-by image pairs, while minimizing other images pairs which are far apart. They do
so by deep feature embedding based on visual appearance
in those ground-and-aerial images. However, in everyday
life, humans commonly use orientation information as an
important cue for the task of spatial localization. Inspired
by this insight, this paper proposes a novel method which
endows deep neural networks with the ‘commonsense’ of
orientation. Given a ground-level spherical panoramic image as query input (and a large georeferenced satellite image database), we design a Siamese network which explicitly encodes the orientation (i.e., spherical directions) of
each pixel of the images. Our method significantly boosts
the discriminative power of the learned deep features, leading to a much higher recall and precision outperforming all
previous methods. Our network is also more compact using only 1/5th number of parameters than a previously bestperforming network. To evaluate the generalization of our
method, we also created a large-scale cross-view localization benchmark containing 100K geotagged ground-aerial
pairs covering a city. Our codes and datasets are available
at https://github.com/Liumouliu/OriCNN .

1. Introduction
This paper investigates the problem of image-based geolocalization using ground-to-aerial image matching. Given
a ground-level query image, we aim to recover the absolute
geospatial location at which the image is taken. This is done
by comparing the query image with a large collection of
geo-referenced aerial images (e.g., satellite images) without

(a) Query image

(b) Ground-level panorama

(c) Our satellite dataset (with GPS
footprints)

(d) The matched
satellite image

Figure 1: Given a ground-level spherical omnidirectional image
(a) (or its panoramic representation as shown in (b)) as a query
image, the task of image-based localization (IBL) is to estimate
the location of the query image by matching it to a large satellite
image database covering the same region, as given in (c). The
found correct match is shown in (d), which is centered at the very
same location as (a).

the aid of other localization sensors (such as GPS). Figure
1 illustrates an example scenario of such ground-to-aerial
cross-view localization problem.
While previous image-based geolocalization methods
have been primarily based on ground-to-ground (streetview level) image matching (e.g., [5, 24, 19, 18, 20, 27]),
using ground-to-aerial cross-view matching (i.e., matching
ground-level photos to aerial imagery ) is becoming an attractive approach for image-based localization, thanks to the
widespread coverage (over the entire Earth) and easy accessibility of satellite and aerial survey images. In contrast, the
coverage of ground-level street views (such as Google-map

5624

