Learning to Learn Image Classifiers with Visual Analogy
Linjun Zhou1

Peng Cui1
Shiqiang Yang1
Wenwu Zhu1
1
2
Tsinghua University
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Qi Tian2

zhoulj16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{cuip, yangshq, wwzhu}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn,

Abstract
Humans are far better learners who can learn a new
concept very fast with only a few samples compared with
machines. The plausible mystery making the difference is
two fundamental learning mechanisms: learning to learn
and learning by analogy. In this paper, we attempt to investigate a new human-like learning method by organically
combining these two mechanisms. In particular, we study
how to generalize the classification parameters from previously learned concepts to a new concept. we first propose a novel Visual Analogy Graph Embedded Regression
(VAGER) model to jointly learn a low-dimensional embedding space and a linear mapping function from the embedding space to classification parameters for base classes. We
then propose an out-of-sample embedding method to learn
the embedding of a new class represented by a few samples through its visual analogy with base classes and derive
the classification parameters for the new class. We conduct
extensive experiments on ImageNet dataset and the results
show that our method could consistently and significantly
outperform state-of-the-art baselines.

1. Introduction
The emergence of deep learning has advanced the image
classification performance into an unprecedented level. The
error rate on ImageNet has been halved and halved again
[11, 21, 9], even approaching human-level performance.
Despite the success, the state-of-the-art models are notoriously data hungry, requiring tons of samples for parameter learning. In real cases, however, the visual phenomena
follows a long-tail distribution [31] where only a few subcategories are data-rich and the rest are with limited training
samples. How to learn a classifier from as few samples as
possible is critical for real applications and fundamental for
exploring new learning mechanisms.
Compared with machines, people are far better learners
as they are capable of learning models from very limited
samples of a new category and make accurate prediction

tian.qi1@huawei.com

and judgment accordingly. An intuitive example is that a
baby learner can learn to recognize a wolf with only a few
sample images provided that he/she has been able to successfully recognize a dog. The key mystery making the difference is that people have strong prior knowledge to generalize across different categories [13]. It means that people
do not need to learn a new classifier (e.g. wolf) from scratch
as most machine learning methods, but generalize and adapt
the previously learned classifiers (e.g. dog) towards the new
category. A major way to acquire the prior knowledge is
through learning to learn from previous experience. In the
image classification scenario, learning to learn refers to the
mechanism that learning to recognize a new concept can be
accelerated by previously learned other related concepts.
A typical image classifier is constituted by representation and classification steps, leading to two fundamental
problems in learning to learn image classifiers: (1) how to
generalize the representations from previous concepts to a
new concept, and (2) how to generalize the classification
parameters of previous concepts to a new concept. In literature, transfer learning and domain adaptation methods [14]
are proposed with a similar notion, mainly focusing on the
problem of representation generalization across different
domains and tasks. With the development of CNN-based
image classification models, the high-level representations
learned from very large scale labeled dataset are demonstrated to have good transferability across different concepts
or even different datasets [26], which significantly alleviate
the representation generalization problem. However, how
to generalize the classification parameters in deep models
(e.g. the fc7 layer in AlexNet) from well-trained concepts
to a new concept (with only a few samples) is largely ignored by previous studies.
Learning by analogy has been proved to be a fundamental building block in human learning process [7], a plausible explanation on the fast learning of novel class is that
a human learner selects some similar classes from the base
classes by visual analogy, transfers and combines their classification parameters for the novel class. In this sense, visual analogy provides an effective and informative clue for

11497

