Hierarchical Deep Stereo Matching on High-resolution Images
∗

Gengshan Yang1 ,

1

Joshua Manela2 , Michael Happold2 , Deva Ramanan1,2
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Argo AI

gengshany@cmu.edu

{jmanela, mhappold, dramanan}@argo.ai

Figure 1: Illustration of on-demand depth sensing with a coarse-to-fine hierarchy on the proposed dataset. Our method
(HSM) captures the coarse layout of the scene in 91 milliseconds, finds the far-away car (shown in the red box) in 175 ms,
and recovers the details of the car given extra 255 ms.

Abstract
We explore the problem of real-time stereo matching on
high-res imagery. Many state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods
struggle to process high-res imagery because of memory
constraints or speed limitations. To address this issue, we
propose an end-to-end framework that searches for correspondences incrementally over a coarse-to-fine hierarchy.
Because high-res stereo datasets are relatively rare, we introduce a dataset with high-res stereo pairs for both training and evaluation. Our approach achieved SOTA performance on Middlebury-v3 and KITTI-15 while running significantly faster than its competitors. The hierarchical design also naturally allows for anytime on-demand reports
of disparity by capping intermediate coarse results, allowing us to accurately predict disparity for near-range structures with low latency (30ms). We demonstrate that the
performance-vs-speed tradeoff afforded by on-demand hierarchies may address sensing needs for time-critical applications such as autonomous driving.

1. Introduction
In safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving, it is important to accurately perceive the depth of ob∗ Work done during an internship at Argo AI. Data and code will be

available here.

stacles with low latency. Towards that end, we explore
the problem of real-time stereo matching on high-resolution
imagery.
LiDAR vs Stereo: LiDAR is the common choice for
outdoor depth sensing [32]. However, LiDARs are fundamentally limited in spatial density, particularly for longrange sensing. Only so many beams and detectors can be
packed together before cross-talk occurs. In principle, one
can increase density by scanning slowly, but this introduces
latency and rolling shutter effects that can be devastating for
dynamic scenes. Density of sensor measurements is crucial
for recognizing and segmenting objects at range. High-res,
global shutter stereo has the potential to address these limitations.
Why high-res? It is widely recognized that stereo is unreliable for long-range depth sensing [24]: the metric error
in estimated depth ∆Z of a triangulation-based stereo system with baseline b, focal length f , and pixel matching error
∆d can be written as ∆Z = Z 2 ∆d
b·f . Hence depth error increases quadratically with depth, implying that stereo will
provide unstable far-field depth estimates. But this is important for navigation at even moderate speeds - (see the
supplement for stopping distance profiles). Though one
can attempt to tweak the other factors to reduce the error,
higher-resolution (larger f ) appear to be the most promising
avenue: innovations in CMOS and CCD sensor technology
have allowed for mass-market, low-cost solutions for highresolution cameras.
15515

