TopNet: Structural Point Cloud Decoder
http://completion3d.stanford.edu

Lyne P. Tchapmi1

Vineet Kosaraju1
1

S. Hamid Rezatofighi1,2

Ian Reid2

Silvio Savarese1

Stanford University, 2 The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
3D point cloud generation is of great use for 3D scene
modeling and understanding. Real-world 3D object point
clouds can be properly described by a collection of lowlevel and high-level structures such as surfaces, geometric
primitives, semantic parts, etc. In fact, there exist many different representations of a 3D object point cloud as a set of
point groups. Existing frameworks for point cloud generation either do not consider structure in their proposed solutions, or assume and enforce a specific structure/topology,
e.g. a collection of manifolds or surfaces, for the generated point cloud of a 3D object. In this work, we propose a novel decoder that generates a structured point cloud
without assuming any specific structure or topology on the
underlying point set. Our decoder is softly constrained to
generate a point cloud following a hierarchical rooted tree
structure. We show that given enough capacity and allowing for redundancies, the proposed decoder is very flexible
and able to learn any arbitrary grouping of points including
any topology on the point set. We evaluate our decoder on
the task of point cloud generation for 3D point cloud shape
completion. Combined with encoders from existing frameworks, we show that our proposed decoder significantly outperforms state-of-the-art 3D point cloud completion methods on the Shapenet dataset.

1. Introduction
Generating 3D point clouds using neural networks is increasingly studied for various applications such as 3D reconstruction [9, 13, 37], object point cloud completion [38,
13], and representation learning for point clouds [37, 1, 13].
This work focuses on the common sub-task of producing a
complete 3D point cloud shape, given a feature vector representing the shape. The input feature can originate from
various inputs (such as images [9], 2.5D sketches [35], point
clouds [23], etc.), but the scope of evaluation in this work
focuses on the task of 3D object shape completion, where
the input is a partial 3D point cloud and the desired output

Figure 1: Our proposed decoder generates point clouds according to a tree structure where each node of the tree represents a
subset of the point cloud. The embedded point cloud structure is
shown by visualizing nodes in the decoder, as a collection of all
its descendant points. We show selected point grouping patterns
emerging from our structural decoder for several object classes.

is the ground-truth completed point cloud. The ability to
infer the full shape of an object from an incomplete scan
acquired by depth camera or LiDAR is indeed an important
task which enables several downstream applications such as
robotics manipulation [31], scene understanding for navigation [7], and virtual manipulation of completed shapes
[8].
Although moderate success has been achieved with performing shape completion on regular representations of 3D
objects such as distance fields, meshes, and voxel grids
[3, 6, 22, 28, 16, 14], these methods fall short due to inefficiency of such representations. Recent progresses in
developing highly efficient and powerful point cloud encoders [23, 21, 24, 20, 18], have made point clouds a highly
promising representation for 3D object generation and completion using neural networks. Several state-of-the-art ap1383

