Scene Graph Generation with External Knowledge and Image Reconstruction
Jiuxiang Gu1∗, Handong Zhao2 , Zhe Lin2 , Sheng Li3 , Jianfei Cai1 , Mingyang Ling4
1
ROSE Lab, Interdisciplinary Graduate School, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Adobe Research, USA 3 University of Georgia, USA 4 Google Cloud AI, USA
{jgu004, asjfcai}@ntu.edu.sg, {hazhao, zlin}@adobe.com
sheng.li@uga.edu, mingyangling@google.com

Abstract
Scene graph generation has received growing attention with the advancements in image understanding tasks
such as object detection, attributes and relationship prediction, etc. However, existing datasets are biased in terms
of object and relationship labels, or often come with noisy
and missing annotations, which makes the development of
a reliable scene graph prediction model very challenging.
In this paper, we propose a novel scene graph generation
algorithm with external knowledge and image reconstruction loss to overcome these dataset issues. In particular, we
extract commonsense knowledge from the external knowledge base to refine object and phrase features for improving
generalizability in scene graph generation. To address the
bias of noisy object annotations, we introduce an auxiliary
image reconstruction path to regularize the scene graph
generation network. Extensive experiments show that our
framework can generate better scene graphs, achieving the
state-of-the-art performance on two benchmark datasets:
Visual Relationship Detection and Visual Genome datasets.

1. Introduction
With recent breakthroughs in deep learning and image
recognition, higher-level visual understanding tasks, such
as visual relationship detection, has been a popular research
topic [9, 19, 15, 40, 44]. Scene graph, as an abstraction of
objects and their complex relationships, provides rich semantic information of an image. It involves the detection
of all hsubject-predicate-objecti triplets in an image and the
localization of all objects. Scene graph provides a structured representation of an image that can support a wide
range of high-level visual tasks, including image captioning [12, 14, 13, 43], visual question answering [36, 38, 47],
image retrieval [11, 21], and image generation [20]. How∗ This work was done during the author’s internship at Adobe Research.

Figure 1: Conceptual illustration of our scene graph learning model. The left (green) part illustrates the image to
scene graph generation, the right (blue) part illustrates the
image-level regularizer that reconstructs the image based
on object labels and bounding boxes. The commonsense
knowledge reasoning (top) is introduced to the scene graph
generation process.
ever, it is not easy to extract scene graphs from images,
since it involves not only detecting and localizing pairs of
interacting objects but also recognizing their pairwise relationships. Currently, there are two categories of approaches
for scene graph generation. Both categories group object
proposals into pairs and use the phrase features (features of
their union area) for predicate inference. The difference of
the two categories lies in the different procedures. The first
category detects the objects first and then recognizes the relationships between those objects [5, 28, 29]. The second
category jointly identifies the objects and their relationships
based on the object and relationship proposals [27, 25, 37].
Despite the promising progress introduced by these approaches, most of them suffer from the limitations of existing scene graph datasets. First, to comprehensively depict an image using the scene graph, it requires a wide
variety of relation triplets hsubject-predicate-objecti. Unfortunately, current datasets only capture a small portion
of the knowledge [29], e.g., Visual Relationship Detection
(VRD) dataset. Training on such a dataset with long-tail

1969

