Large-Scale, Metric Structure from Motion for Unordered Light Fields
Sotiris Nousias
University College London

Manolis Lourakis
FORTH

Christos Bergeles
King’s College London

sotiris.nousias.15@ucl.ac.uk

lourakis@ics.forth.gr

christos.bergeles@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper presents a large scale, metric Structure from
Motion (SfM) pipeline for generalised cameras with overlapping fields-of-view, and demonstrates it using Light Field
(LF) images. We build on recent developments in algorithms for absolute and relative pose recovery for generalised cameras and couple them with multi-view triangulation in a robust framework that advances the state-of-the-art
on 3D reconstruction from LFs in several ways. First, our
framework can recover the scale of a scene. Second, it is
concerned with unordered sets of LF images, meticulously
determining the order in which images should be considered. Third, it can scale to datasets with hundreds of LF
images. Finally, it recovers 3D scene structure while abstaining from triangulating using very small baselines. Our
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art, as demonstrated
by real-world experiments with variable size datasets.

1. Introduction
Structure from Motion (SfM) employs a set of 2D images acquired by a moving camera to estimate the 3D geometry of a scene and the camera motion. The vast majority of relevant research assumes that images have been
acquired with ordinary pinhole cameras, which collect converging light rays. Hence, most existing SfM frameworks
cannot be directly applied to generalised cameras, i.e. cameras which do not share a single centre of projection [9, 37].
In this work, we focus on SfM techniques suitable for
generalised, non-central projection cameras with overlapping fields-of-view, such as multi-ocular stereo rigs and
multi-camera arrays. Multi-camera arrays have long been
used in plenoptic, or Light Field (LF), imaging [25, 52].
Contrary to pinhole cameras that integrate the light rays that
intersect each pixel from every direction, a LF image measures the light along each ray reaching the imaging sensor,
avoiding angular integration. Thus, a LF captures a 4D slice
of the plenoptic function [1] and can be post-processed to
support a wide variety of applications [52].
Another approach to plenoptic imaging multiplexes dif-

Figure 1. Point cloud and camera poses (indicated with red pyramids) reconstructed with uLF-SfM from 303 views of an indoor
scene captured by Lytro Illum.

ferent 2D slices to capture a LF within a single portable
camera body [52]. Portable plenoptic cameras typically involve a microlens array placed between the sensor and main
lens [32, 36]. The spatial arrangement of the microlenses
permits the scene to be captured from multiple viewpoints
during a single exposure, essentially trading off spatial resolution on the image sensor with angular resolution. Each
independent viewpoint corresponds to a sub-aperture image [52], therefore a single-body plenoptic camera can be
considered as a system of multiple pinhole cameras with
overlapping fields-of-view. The sub-aperture image whose
coordinate frame coincides with that of the LF image will
be referred to as the central sub-aperture image.
It is also worth noting an emerging trend to include
plenoptic imaging capabilities in smartphones, exemplified
by Huawei P20 Pro that features three rear cameras, or the
Samsung Galaxy A9 that features four. Thus, it is timely to
devise bespoke SfM pipelines for plenoptic systems.
We discuss related prior work in Sec. 2. The operation of our pipeline, called uLF-SfM and depicted schematically in Fig. 2, is described afterwards. Specifically, we
first explain how correspondences are established among
LF images (Sec. 3) and how an initial reconstruction is obtained (Sec. 4). Subsequently, we discuss how additional
LF images are introduced to the reconstruction and extend
it (Sec. 5). Throughout the pipeline, care is taken to cope
13292

