SceneCode: Monocular Dense Semantic Reconstruction using Learned Encoded
Scene Representations
Shuaifeng Zhi, Michael Bloesch, Stefan Leutenegger, Andrew J. Davison
Dyson Robotics Laboratory at Imperial College
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
{s.zhi17, m.bloesch, s.leutenegger, a.davison}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Systems which incrementally create 3D semantic maps
from image sequences must store and update representations of both geometry and semantic entities. However,
while there has been much work on the correct formulation
for geometrical estimation, state-of-the-art systems usually
rely on simple semantic representations which store and update independent label estimates for each surface element
(depth pixels, surfels, or voxels). Spatial correlation is discarded, and fused label maps are incoherent and noisy.
We introduce a new compact and optimisable semantic
representation by training a variational auto-encoder that
is conditioned on a colour image. Using this learned latent
space, we can tackle semantic label fusion by jointly optimising the low-dimenional codes associated with each of a
set of overlapping images, producing consistent fused label
maps which preserve spatial correlation. We also show how
this approach can be used within a monocular keyframe
based semantic mapping system where a similar code approach is used for geometry. The probabilistic formulation
allows a flexible formulation where we can jointly estimate
motion, geometry and semantics in a unified optimisation.

1. Introduction
Intelligent embodied devices such as robots need to build
and maintain representations of their environments which
permit inference of geometric and semantic properties, such
as the traversability of rooms or the way to grasp objects.
Crucially, if this inference is to be scalable in terms of computing resources, these representations must be efficient;
and if devices are to operate robustly, the employed representations must cope with all of the variation present in the
real world. However, current real-time scene understanding
systems are still a long way from the performance needed
for truly ground-breaking applications [5, 9].
An eventual token-like, composable scene understand-

Figure 1: Dense semantic structure from motion on two
frames from the NYUv2 dataset. Compact representations
of semantics and geometry have been jointly optimised with
camera pose to obtain smooth and consistent estimates.

ing may finally give artificial systems the capability to reason about space and shape in the intuitive manner of humans [37]. Bringing deep learning into traditional handdesigned estimation methods for SLAM has certainly led
to big advances to representations which can capture both
shape and semantics [6, 36], but so far these are problematic in various ways. The most straightforward approaches,
such as [16, 14, 28, 38, 39, 26] which paint a dense geometric SLAM map with fused semantic labels predicted from
views [25, 24, 13], are expensive in terms of representation
size; label scenes in an incoherent way where each surface
element independently stores its class; and do not benefit
from semantic labelling improving motion or geometry estimation.
At the other end of the scale are approaches which explicitly recognise object instances and build scene models
as 3D object graphs [27, 35, 30, 31]. These representations
have the token-like character we are looking for, but are
limited to mapping discrete ‘blob-like’ objects from known
111776

