PointFlowNet: Learning Representations for
Rigid Motion Estimation from Point Clouds
Aseem Behl
Despoina Paschalidou
Simon Donné
Andreas Geiger
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI for Intelligent Systems and University of Tübingen
{aseem.behl,despoina.paschalidou,simon.donne,andreas.geiger}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Despite significant progress in image-based 3D scene
flow estimation, the performance of such approaches has
not yet reached the fidelity required by many applications.
Simultaneously, these applications are often not restricted to
image-based estimation: laser scanners provide a popular
alternative to traditional cameras, for example in the context
of self-driving cars, as they directly yield a 3D point cloud.
In this paper, we propose to estimate 3D motion from such
unstructured point clouds using a deep neural network. In
a single forward pass, our model jointly predicts 3D scene
flow as well as the 3D bounding box and rigid body motion
of objects in the scene. While the prospect of estimating 3D
scene flow from unstructured point clouds is promising, it is
also a challenging task. We show that the traditional global
representation of rigid body motion prohibits inference by
CNNs, and propose a translation equivariant representation
to circumvent this problem. For training our deep network,
a large dataset is required. Because of this, we augment real
scans from KITTI with virtual objects, realistically modeling
occlusions and simulating sensor noise. A thorough comparison with classic and learning-based techniques highlights
the robustness of the proposed approach.

of all, most leading techniques take several minutes or hours
to predict 3D scene flow. Secondly, stereo-based scene flow
methods suffer from a fundamental flaw, the “curse of twoview geometry”: it can be shown that the depth error grows
quadratically with the distance to the observer [20]. This
causes problems for the baselines and object depths often
found in self-driving cars, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (top).
Consequently, most modern self-driving car platforms
rely on LIDAR technology for 3D geometry perception. In
contrast to cameras, laser scanners provide a 360 degree
field of view with just one sensor, are generally unaffected
by lighting conditions, and do not suffer from the quadratic
error behavior of stereo cameras. However, while LIDAR
provides accurate 3D point cloud measurements, estimating the motion between two such scans is a non-trivial task.
Because of the sparse and non-uniform nature of the point
clouds, as well as the missing appearance information, the
data association problem is complicated. Moreover, characteristic patterns produced by the scanner, such as the circular
rings in Fig. 1 (bottom), move with the observer and can
easily mislead local correspondence estimation algorithms.
To address these challenges, we propose PointFlowNet,
a generic model for learning 3D scene flow from pairs of
unstructured 3D point clouds. Our main contributions are:

1. Introduction
For intelligent systems such as self-driving cars, the precise understanding of their surroundings is key. Notably, in
order to make predictions and decisions about the future,
tasks like navigation and planning require knowledge about
the 3D geometry of the environment as well as about the 3D
motion of other agents in the scene.
3D scene flow is the most generic representation of this
3D motion; it associates a velocity vector with 3D motion
to each measured point. Traditionally, 3D scene flow is
estimated based on two consecutive image pairs of a calibrated stereo rig [17, 39, 40]. While the accuracy of scene
flow methods has greatly improved over the last decade [24],
image-based scene flow methods have rarely made it into
robotics applications. The reasons for this are two-fold. First

• We present an end-to-end trainable model for joint 3D
scene flow and rigid motion prediction and 3D object
detection from unstructured LIDAR data, as captured
from a (self-driving) car.
• We show that a global representation is not suitable for
rigid motion prediction, and propose a local translationequivariant representation to mitigate this problem.
• We augment the KITTI dataset with virtual cars, taking
into account occlusions and simulating sensor noise, to
provide more (realistic) training data.
• We demonstrate that our approach compares favorably
to the state-of-the-art.
Our code and dataset are available at the project webpage1 .
1 https://github.com/aseembehl/pointflownet

7962

