Generative Dual Adversarial Network for Generalized Zero-shot Learning
He Huang1
Changhu Wang2
Philip S. Yu1,3
Chang-Dong Wang4
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
2
ByteDance AI Lab, China
3
Institute for Data Science, Tsinghua University, China
4
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
{hehuang, psyu}@uic.edu

wangchanghu@bytedance.com

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of generalized zero-shot
learning which requires the model to train on image-label
pairs from some seen classes and test on the task of classifying new images from both seen and unseen classes. In
this paper, we propose a novel model that provides a unified framework for three different approaches: visual →
semantic mapping, semantic → visual mapping, and
deep metric learning. Specifically, our proposed model consists of a feature generator that can generate various visual features given class embedding features as input, a
regressor that maps each visual feature back to its corresponding class embedding, and a discriminator that learns
to evaluate the closeness of an image feature and a class
embedding. All three components are trained under the
combination of cyclic consistency loss and dual adversarial loss. Experimental results show that our model not only
preserves higher accuracy in classifying images from seen
classes, but also performs better than existing state-of-theart models in classifying images from unseen classes.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved great success in image classification tasks [28], and these models are so effective that they are comparable with humans. However,
humans are much better at recognizing novel objects that
they only saw a few times before or heard of but never saw.
This is because deep learning models for image classification rely heavily on fully supervised training, and thus
they require a lot of labeled data. As there are too many
classes in the real world, it is almost impossible to collect
enough labeled data for each class. In this case, these models are challenged by the task of recognizing images from
classes that are unseen during training, which is also called
the zero-shot learning (ZSL) problem [1, 18]. In conven-

changdongwang@hotmail.com

tional zero-shot learning, the goal is to train an image classifier on a set of images from seen classes, and then test the
trained model using images from unseen classes, where the
sets of seen and unseen classes are totally disjoint, and that
during testing the label space only contains unseen classes.
However, this conventional setting is based on a strong assumption that in testing stage the model knows whether an
image is from the set of seen or unseen classes, which is
not realistic and thus not applicable in the real world. When
the model receives a new image, it does not know whether
it comes from seen or unseen classes, and thus it needs the
ability to classify images from the combination of seen and
unseen classes, which is called generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) [34, 6]. The main difference between zeroshot learning and generalized zero-shot learning is the label
space during testing, which means that models designed for
conventional zero-shot learning can still be applied in the
generalized zero-shot learning setting.
A common strategy for tackling zero-shot learning is to
map images and classes into the same latent space and then
perform nearest neighbor search. Most existing methods
project visual features to the semantic space spanned by
class attributes, such as [11, 33, 1, 27, 2, 17], as is illustrated in Figure 1(a). However, as pointed out by [29, 9, 38],
using semantic space as shared latent space will suffer
from the hubness problem, which means projecting highdimensional visual features to low-dimensional space will
further reduce the variance of features and the results may
become more clustered as a hub. In order to mitigate this
problem, [29, 9, 38] propose to project semantic features
into the visual space, as illustrated in the left part of Figure 1(b). However, using a deterministic approach to map a
class’s semantic embedding to the visual space is still problematic, since one class label has numerous corresponding
visual features. In contrast, some recent works [23, 35, 31]
propose to use generative methods that can generate various visual features conditioned on a semantic feature vector, as illustrated in the right part of Figure 1(b). Despite
1801

