Semantics Disentangling for Text-to-Image Generation
Guojun Yin1,2 , Bin Liu1 , Lu Sheng2,4∗, Nenghai Yu1 , Xiaogang Wang2 , Jing Shao3
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Space Information,
The Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2 CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
SenseTime Research, 4 College of Software, Beihang University
gjyin@mail.ustc.edu.cn, lsheng@buaa.edu.cn,
{flowice,ynh}@ustc.edu.cn, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, shaojing@sensetime.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
The rapid progress of the Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [11, 21, 1, 20] brings a remarkable evolution in natural image generation with diverse conditions. In
contrast to conditions such as random noises, label maps or
sketches, it is a more natural but challenging way to generate an image from a linguistic description (text) since (1) the
linguistic description is a natural and convenient medium
for a human being to describe an image, but (2) cross-modal
text-to-image generation is still challenging.
Existing text-to-image generation works [40, 37, 42, 14,
29] mainly focus on increasing the visual quality and resolution of the generated images by either a stacked coarseto-fine generator structure [40, 14] or an attention-guided
∗ Lu Sheng is the corresponding author.

(Text1)

(a-iii)

“this yellow bird’s
crown is black and it
has speckled wings"

(Text2)

(a-ii)

“a yellow bird has
speckled wings and
a black crown "

(a)

(Text1)

SCBN
“this yellow bird’s
crown is black and it
has speckled wings"

Text
Encoder

GANs

Contrastive
Loss

(b)
(Text2)

Synthesizing photo-realistic images from text descriptions is a challenging problem. Previous studies have shown
remarkable progresses on visual quality of the generated
images. In this paper, we consider semantics from the input
text descriptions in helping render photo-realistic images.
However, diverse linguistic expressions pose challenges in
extracting consistent semantics even though they depict the
same thing. To this end, we propose a novel photo-realistic
text-to-image generation model that implicitly disentangles
semantics to both fulfill the high-level semantic consistency
and low-level semantic diversity. To be specific, we design
(1) a Siamese mechanism in the discriminator to learn consistent high-level semantics, and (2) a visual-semantic embedding strategy by semantic-conditioned batch normalization to find diverse low-level semantics. Extensive experiments and ablation studies on CUB and MS-COCO datasets
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method in comparison to state-of-the-art methods.

(a-i)

Ground-truth
Image

“a yellow bird has
speckled wings and
a black crown "

Text
Encoder

GANs
SCBN

Figure 1. Given the descriptions in (a-ii), their images are generated by existing GANs in (a-iii). Compared to the groundtruth
image in (a-i), such holistic subjective text may lead generation
deviation (a-iii) due to the lacking of common and distinct semantic meanings. The proposed SD-GAN in (b) distills the semantic
commons by a Siamese structure and retains semantic diversities
& details via a semantic-conditioned batch normalization.

generation procedure [37]. However, these methods neglect
one important phenomenon that the human descriptions for
a same image are highly subjective and diverse in their expressions, it means that naively using these texts as unique
descriptions to generate images would often produce unstable appearance patterns that are far apart from the groundtruth images. For example, given different descriptions
(Fig 1(a-ii)) for the same ground-truth image in Fig. 1(a-i),
the generated images in Fig. 1(a-iii) by [37] present various
appearance patterns apart from the groundtruth, not even
similar to the same kind of bird. It shows that the rich variations of linguistic expressions pose challenges in extracting
consistent semantic commons from different descriptions of
4321
2327

