PointWeb: Enhancing Local Neighborhood Features for Point Cloud Processing
Hengshuang Zhao1∗ Li Jiang1∗ Chi-Wing Fu1 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent Youtu Lab
{hszhao, lijiang, cwfu, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper presents PointWeb, a new approach to extract contextual features from local neighborhood in a point
cloud. Unlike previous work, we densely connect each point
with every other in a local neighborhood, aiming to specify feature of each point based on the local region characteristics for better representing the region. A novel module, namely Adaptive Feature Adjustment (AFA) module, is
presented to find the interaction between points. For each
local region, an impact map carrying element-wise impact
between point pairs is applied to the feature difference map.
Each feature is then pulled or pushed by other features in
the same region according to the adaptively learned impact
indicators. The adjusted features are well encoded with region information, and thus benefit the point cloud recognition tasks, such as point cloud segmentation and classification. Experimental results show that our model outperforms the state-of-the-arts on both semantic segmentation
and shape classification datasets.

1. Introduction
We have witnessed great progress in image recognition
tasks, such as image classification [11, 22, 26, 7, 9, 8]
and semantic segmentation [14, 3, 35], which are mainly
advanced by the development of deep learning techniques
with massive model capacity. Beyond 2D image recognition, there is increasingly growing interest in 3D vision [18, 36, 6, 34, 4] for applications of autonomous driving, augmented reality, robotics, etc. Advent of large-scale
high-res 3D datasets [1, 5] also gives rise to the environment
of reasoning 3D data with deep neural networks.
Directly extending 2D image deep learning methods to
3D recognition tasks is not always feasible, since 3D scenes
are usually described by a set of points that are unordered
and scattered in 3D. It is also not reasonable to simply apply
2D feature aggregating operations like convolution to irregular point clouds, since these operations generally work on
∗ Equal contribution.

(a)

shared
MLP

(b)

shared
MLP

(c)

shared
MLP

Max
Pool

Max
Pool

Max
Pool

Figure 1. 3D segmentation illustration. (a) PointNet++ [20]. (b)
DGCNN [32]. (c) Our approach with the Adaptive Feature Adjustment (AFA) module. Blue points represent the features that integrate pair information. Red points are the features that integrate
region information. Compared with aggregating pair features from
a center point to others by concatenation, our approach adaptively
learns the impact indicator between each point pair, and aggregates
features in the whole region.

regular grids. Approaches [16, 23, 21] addressed this problem by voxelizing point clouds and applying 3D CNN for
feature learning, which is a natural thought. These methods run slowly and may suffer from information loss during the voxelization. Alternatively, PointNet [18] architecture directly processes raw point clouds with shared MultiLayer Perception (MLP). The following PointNet++ [20]
further improved the performance by introducing a hierarchical structure to extract global and local features. Unlike
2D convolutions that integrate features for a pixel with its
local neighborhood, feature aggregation of a local region in
PointNet++ is implemented by max pooling as in Fig. 1 (a).
For the Dynamic Graph CNN (DGCNN) [32], it aggregates information in each local region by concatenating features of a center point with the feature difference between

5565

