A Compact Embedding for Facial Expression Similarity
Raviteja Vemulapalli
Google AI

Aseem Agarwala
Google AI

ravitejavemu@google.com

aseemaa@google.com

Abstract
Most of the existing work on automatic facial expression
analysis focuses on discrete emotion recognition, or facial
action unit detection. However, facial expressions do not always fall neatly into pre-defined semantic categories. Also,
the similarity between expressions measured in the action
unit space need not correspond to how humans perceive expression similarity. Different from previous work, our goal
is to describe facial expressions in a continuous fashion using a compact embedding space that mimics human visual
preferences. To achieve this goal, we collect a large-scale
faces-in-the-wild dataset with human annotations in the
form: Expressions A and B are visually more similar when
compared to expression C, and use this dataset to train a
neural network that produces a compact (16-dimensional)
expression embedding. We experimentally demonstrate that
the learned embedding can be successfully used for various applications such as expression retrieval, photo album
summarization, and emotion recognition. We also show that
the embedding learned using the proposed dataset performs
better than several other embeddings learned using existing
emotion or action unit datasets.

1. Introduction
Automatic facial expression analysis has received significant attention from the computer vision community due to
its numerous applications such as emotion prediction, expression retrieval (Figure 1), photo album summarization,
candid portrait selection [14], etc. Most of the existing
work [32, 37] focuses on recognizing discrete emotions or
action units defined by the Facial Action Coding System
(FACS) [13]. However, facial expressions do not always fit
neatly into semantic boxes, and there could be significant
variations in the expression within the same semantic category. For example, smiles can come in many subtle variations, from shy smiles, to nervous smiles, to laughter. Also,
not every human-recognizable facial expression has a name.
In general, the space of facial expressions can be viewed as
a continuous, multi-dimensional space.

Figure 1: Expression retrieval results for embeddings
learned using the proposed dataset (top) and an existing
emotion classification dataset (bottom).
In this work, we focus on learning a compact, languagefree, subject-independent, and continuous expression embedding space that mimics human visual preferences. If
humans consider two expressions to be visually more similar when compared to a third one, then the distance
between these two expressions in the embedding space
should be smaller than their distances from the third expression. To learn such an embedding we collect a new
dataset, referred to as the Facial Expression Comparison
(FEC) dataset, that consists of around 500K expression
triplets generated using 156K face images, along with
annotations that specify which two expressions in each
triplet are most similar to each other. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first large-scale face dataset
with expression comparison annotations. This dataset can
be downloaded from https://ai.google/tools/
datasets/google-facial-expression/.
We show that a compact (16-dimensional) expression
embedding space can be learned by training a deep network
with the proposed FEC dataset using triplet loss [48]. Based
on the distances in the learned embedding space, we are able
to predict the most similar pair in a triplet with an accuracy
of 81.8% when evaluated on a held-out validation set. The
accuracy of median human rater is 87.5% on this validation set, and the accuracy of random selection is 33.3%. We
also show that the embedding learned using the FEC dataset
performs better than several other embeddings learned using existing emotion or action unit datasets.
15683

