Wide-Area Crowd Counting via Ground-Plane Density Maps and
Multi-View Fusion CNNs
Qi Zhang
Antoni B. Chan
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
qzhang364-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Scene map

Abstract
Crowd counting in single-view images has achieved outstanding performance on existing counting datasets. However, single-view counting is not applicable to large and
wide scenes (e.g., public parks, long subway platforms, or
event spaces) because a single camera cannot capture the
whole scene in adequate detail for counting, e.g., when the
scene is too large to fit into the field-of-view of the camera,
too long so that the resolution is too low on faraway crowds,
or when there are too many large objects that occlude large
portions of the crowd. Therefore, to solve the wide-area
counting task requires multiple cameras with overlapping
fields-of-view. In this paper, we propose a deep neural network framework for multi-view crowd counting, which fuses
information from multiple camera views to predict a scenelevel density map on the ground-plane of the 3D world. We
consider 3 versions of the fusion framework: the late fusion model fuses camera-view density maps; the naı̈ve early fusion model fuses camera-view feature maps; and the
multi-view multi-scale early fusion model favors that features aligned to the same ground-plane point have consistent scales. We test our 3 fusion models on 3 multi-view
counting datasets, PETS2009, DukeMTMC, and a newly
collected multi-view counting dataset containing a crowded street intersection. Our methods achieve state-of-the-art
results compared to other multi-view counting baselines.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting aims to estimate the number of the people in images or videos. It has a wide range of realworld applications, such as crowd management, public safety, traffic monitoring or urban planning [43]. For example, crowd counting can detect overcrowding on the railway
platform and help with the train schedule planning. Furthermore, the estimated crowd density map provides spatial information of the crowd, which can benefit other tasks, such
as human detection [8, 18, 27] and tracking [18, 34, 36].
Recently, with the strong learning ability of deep neural

Camera views
Fusion
module

Scene-level density map

Information Extraction

Information Alignment

Information Fusion

Figure 1: The pipeline of the proposed multi-view fusion framework. Feature maps are extracted from multiple camera views,
aligned on the ground-plane, and fused to obtain the scene-level
ground-plane density map. The scene map is shown for reference.

networks (DNNs), density map based crowd counting methods have achieved outstanding performance on the existing
counting datasets [1, 12, 42], where the goal is to count the
crowd in a single image. However, a single image view is
not adequate to cover a large and wide scene, such as a large
park or a long train platform. For these wide-area scenes,
a single camera view cannot capture the whole scene in adequate detail for counting, either because the the scene is
too large (wide) to fit within the field-of-view of the camera, or the scene is too long so that the resolution is too
low in faraway regions. Furthermore, a single view cannot
count regions that are still within the scene, but are totally
occluded by large objects (e.g., trees, large vehicles, building structures). Therefore, to solve the wide-area counting
task requires multiple camera views with overlapping fieldof-views, which combined can cover the whole scene and
can see around occlusions. The goal of wide-area counting
is then to use multiple camera views to estimate the crowd
count of the whole scene.
Existing multi-view counting methods rely on foreground extraction techniques and hand-crafted features.
Their crowd counting performance is limited by the effectiveness of the foreground extraction, as well as the representation ability of hand-crafted features. Considering
the strong learning power of DNNs as well as the perfor-

8297

