Tangent-Normal Adversarial Regularization for Semi-supervised Learning
Bing Yu1∗, Jingfeng Wu1∗, Jinwen Ma1 , Zhanxing Zhu123†
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University
3
Beijing Institute of Big Data Research
{byu,pkuwjf}@pku.edu.cn

jwma@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Compared with standard supervised learning, the key
difficulty in semi-supervised learning is how to make full
use of the unlabeled data. A recently proposed method,
virtual adversarial training (VAT), smartly performs adversarial training without label information to impose a local smoothness on the classifier, which is especially beneficial to semi-supervised learning. In this work, we propose
tangent-normal adversarial regularization (TNAR) as an
extension of VAT by taking the data manifold into consideration. The proposed TNAR is composed by two complementary parts, the tangent adversarial regularization (TAR)
and the normal adversarial regularization (NAR). In TAR,
VAT is applied along the tangent space of the data manifold, aiming to enforce local invariance of the classifier on
the manifold, while in NAR, VAT is performed on the normal space orthogonal to the tangent space, intending to impose robustness on the classifier against the noise causing
the observed data deviating from the underlying data manifold. Demonstrated by experiments on both artificial and
practical datasets, our proposed TAR and NAR complement
with each other, and jointly outperforms other state-of-theart methods for semi-supervised learning.

zhanxing.zhu@pku.edu.cn

the data manifold [1, 24, 19, 11, 13]. Following this stream,
we sort out three reasonable assumptions to motivate our
idea for semi-supervised learning:
The manifold assumption The observed data x presented
in high dimensional space RD is with high probability
concentrated in the vicinity of some underlying manifold with much lower dimensionality [3, 18, 4, 24],
denoted as M ∼
= Rd .
The noisy observation assumption The observed data x
can be decomposed into two parts as x = x0 + n,
where x0 is exactly supported on the underlying manifold M and n is some noise independent of x0 [2, 23].
The semi-supervised learning assumption If two points
x1 , x2 ∈ M are close in manifold distance, then the
conditional probability p(y|x1 ) and p(y|x2 ) are similar [1, 24, 19]. In other words, the true classifier, or
the true condition distribution p(y|X) varies smoothly
along the underlying manifold M.
According to the three assumptions, the best classifier we
aim to obtain should be 1) smooth along the data manifold;
2) robust to the off-manifold noise. Hence it is natural to
formulate a loss function [1, 11] for SSL as,
Lssl := Lsupervised + Rmanifold + Rnoise ,

1. Introduction
The main challenge in semi-supervised learning (SSL)
is how to utilize the large amount of the unlabeled data to
obtain useful information, benefiting the supervised learning on the relatively insufficient amount of labeled data. For
this purpose, one of the important line of research focuses
on the manifold assumption on the data distribution, i.e., the
observed data is distributed on a low dimensional manifold
that could be characterized using the large amount of the unlabeled data, and aims to learn a proper classifier based on
∗ Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

(1)

where the first term in Eq. (1) is the supervised learning loss,
the second term penalize the manifold smoothness of the
classifier, and the third term smooths the classifier so that it
is robust to noise, respectively. While the supervised learning loss Lsupervised concerning the labeled data is standard,
the key ingredient lies on how to design Rmanifold and Rnoise
smartly to 1) be effective for inducing the desired smoothness on the classifier, 2) be efficient for optimization, and 3)
make full use of the unlabeled data.
Existing works construct Rmanifold based on the Jacobian,
for instance, tangent propagation [26, 11]
X
Rmanifold = Ex∼p(x)
(Jx f ) · v ,
(2)
v∈Tx M

10676

