ADVENT: Adversarial Entropy Minimization for Domain Adaptation
in Semantic Segmentation
Tuan-Hung Vu1
1

Himalaya Jain1

Maxime Bucher1

valeo.ai, Paris, France

2

Matthieu Cord1,2

Patrick Pérez1

Sorbonne University, Paris, France

Abstract
Semantic segmentation is a key problem for many computer vision tasks. While approaches based on convolutional neural networks constantly break new records on different benchmarks, generalizing well to diverse testing environments remains a major challenge. In numerous real
world applications, there is indeed a large gap between
data distributions in train and test domains, which results
in severe performance loss at run-time. In this work, we
address the task of unsupervised domain adaptation in semantic segmentation with losses based on the entropy of the
pixel-wise predictions. To this end, we propose two novel,
complementary methods using (i) an entropy loss and (ii) an
adversarial loss respectively. We demonstrate state-of-theart performance in semantic segmentation on two challenging “synthetic-2-real” set-ups1 and show that the approach
can also be used for detection.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is the task of assigning class labels to all pixels in an image. In practice, segmentation
models often serve as the backbone in complex computer
vision systems like autonomous vehicles, which demand
high accuracy in a large variety of urban environments. For
example, under adverse weathers, the system must be able
to recognize roads, lanes, sideways or pedestrians despite
their appearances being largely different from ones in the
training set. A more extreme and important example is
so-called “synthetic-2-real” set-up [31, 30] – training samples are synthesized by game engines and test samples are
real scenes. Current fully-supervised approaches [23, 47, 2]
have not yet guaranteed a good generalization to arbitrary
test cases. Thus a model trained on one domain, named
as source, usually undergoes a drastic drop in performance
when applied on another domain, named as target.
1 Code available at https://github.com/valeoai/ADVENT.

Figure 1:

Proposed entropy-based unsupervised domain
adaptation for semantic segmentation. The top two rows show
results on source and target domain scenes of the model trained
without adaptation. The bottom row shows the result on the same
target domain scene of the model trained with entropy-based adaptation. The left and right columns visualize respectively the semantic segmentation outputs and the corresponding prediction entropy maps (see text for details).

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is the field of
research that aims at learning only from source supervision a well performing model on target samples. Among
the recent methods for UDA, many address the problem by
reducing cross-domain discrepancy, along with the supervised training on the source domain. They approach UDA
by minimizing the difference between the distributions of
the intermediate features or of the final outputs for source
and target data respectively. It is done at single [15, 32, 44]
or multiple levels [24, 25] using maximum mean discrepancies (MMD) or adversarial training [10, 42]. Other approaches include self-training [51] to provide pseudo labels
or generative networks to produce target data [14, 34, 43].
Semi-supervised learning addresses a closely related

2517

