CrDoCo: Pixel-level Domain Transfer with Cross-Domain Consistency

Optical flow

Depth prediction

Semantic seg.

Yun-Chun Chen1,2
Yen-Yu Lin1
Ming-Hsuan Yang3,4
Jia-Bin Huang5
1
Academia Sinica 2 National Taiwan University 3 UC Merced 4 Google 5 Virginia Tech

Labeled examples (source domain)
Input (target domain)
Output
Figure 1: Applications of the proposed method. Our method has the applications ranging from semantic segmentation (top
row), depth prediction (middle row), to optical flow estimation (bottom row).

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation algorithms aim to
transfer the knowledge learned from one domain to another
(e.g., synthetic to real images). The adapted representations often do not capture pixel-level domain shifts that are
crucial for dense prediction tasks (e.g., semantic segmentation). In this paper, we present a novel pixel-wise adversarial domain adaptation algorithm. By leveraging image-toimage translation methods for data augmentation, our key
insight is that while the translated images between domains
may differ in styles, their predictions for the task should be
consistent. We exploit this property and introduce a crossdomain consistency loss that enforces our adapted model to
produce consistent predictions. Through extensive experimental results, we show that our method compares favorably against the state-of-the-art on a wide variety of unsupervised domain adaptation tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are extremely data hungry. However, for many dense prediction tasks (e.g., semantic segmentation, optical flow estimation, and depth prediction), collecting large-scale and diverse datasets with pixel-level annotations is difficult since
the labeling process is often expensive and labor intensive
(see Figure 1). Developing algorithms that can transfer the
knowledge learned from one labeled dataset (i.e., source
domain) to another unlabeled dataset (i.e., target domain)
thus becomes increasingly important. Nevertheless, due to
the domain-shift problem (i.e., the domain gap between the
source and target datasets), the learned models often fail to
generalize well to new datasets.
To address these issues, several unsupervised domain
adaptation methods have been proposed to align data distributions between the source and target domains. Existing
methods either apply feature-level [39, 26, 44, 42, 15, 14]

1791

