Iterative Reorganization with Weak Spatial Constraints:
Solving Arbitrary Jigsaw Puzzles for Unsupervised Representation Learning
Chen Wei1∗, Lingxi Xie2,3†, Xutong Ren1 , Yingda Xia2 , Chi Su4 , Jiaying Liu1 , Qi Tian3 , Alan L. Yuille2
1
Peking University 2 Johns Hopkins University 3 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Inc. 4 Kingsoft Cloud
weichen582@pku.edu.cn
suchi@kingsoft.com

198808xc@gmail.com

liujiaying@pku.edu.cn

tonghelen@pku.edu.cn

tian.qi1@huawei.com

yxia25@jhu.edu

alan.l.yuille@gmail.com

Abstract
Learning visual features from unlabeled image data is
an important yet challenging task, which is often achieved
by training a model on some annotation-free information.
We consider spatial contexts, for which we solve so-called
jigsaw puzzles, i.e., each image is cut into grids and then
disordered, and the goal is to recover the correct configuration. Existing approaches formulated it as a classification
task by defining a fixed mapping from a small subset of
configurations to a class set, but these approaches ignore
the underlying relationship between different configurations
and also limit their applications to more complex scenarios.
This paper presents a novel approach which applies to
jigsaw puzzles with an arbitrary grid size and dimensionality. We provide a fundamental and generalized principle,
that weaker cues are easier to be learned in an unsupervised
manner and also transfer better. In the context of puzzle
recognition, we use an iterative manner which, instead of
solving the puzzle all at once, adjusts the order of the
patches in each step until convergence. In each step, we
combine both unary and binary features of each patch
into a cost function judging the correctness of the current
configuration. Our approach, by taking similarity between
puzzles into consideration, enjoys a more efficient way of
learning visual knowledge. We verify the effectiveness of
our approach from two aspects. First, it solves arbitrarily
complex puzzles, including high-dimensional puzzles, that
prior methods are difficult to handle. Second, it serves as a
reliable way of network initialization, which leads to better
transfer performance in visual recognition tasks including
classification, detection and segmentation.

1. Introduction
Deep learning especially convolutional neural networks
has been boosting the performance of a wide range of
∗ This work was partly done when the first author was interning at Johns
Hopkins University and Huawei Noah Ark’s Lab.
† Lingxi Xie is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. We study the problem of solving jigsaw puzzles for
visual recognition. Compared to the previous work [31] working
on 1,000 fixed configurations of 3 × 3 puzzles, our method can
generalize to arbitrary configurations of 2D and 3D puzzles.

applications in computer vision [24]. These statisticsbased approaches build hierarchical structures which contain a large number of neurons, so that visual knowledge
is learned by fitting labeled training data [21]. However,
annotating a large-scale dataset is often difficult and expensive. Therefore, weakly supervised or unsupervised
learning has attracted a lot of research attentions [48, 23].
These approaches are often built on some naturally existing constraints such as temporal consistency [47], spatial
relationship [8] and sum-up equations [32]. Such information, though being weak, constructs loss functions without
requiring annotations, and networks pre-trained in this way
can either be used for weak visual feature extraction [47]
or fine-tuned in a standalone supervised learning process
towards better recognition performance [10].
In this work, we focus on a specific way of exploiting spatial relationship, which is to solve so-called jigsaw
puzzles in unlabeled image data [31, 33, 44, 3]. These
approaches work by cutting an image into a grid, say, 3 × 3,
of patches and then disordering them as training data, with
11910

