Neural Illumination: Lighting Prediction for Indoor Environments
Shuran Song
Thomas Funkhouser
Google and Princeton University

Abstract

1. Introduction
The goal of this paper is to estimate the illumination arriving at a location in an indoor scene based on a selected
pixel in a single RGB image. As shown in Figure 1(a), the
input is a low dynamic range RGB image and a selected
2D pixel, and the output is a high dynamic range RGB illumination map encoding the incident radiance arriving from
every direction at the 3D location (“locale”) associated with
the selected pixel (Figure 1(b)). This task is important for
a range of applications in mixed reality and scene understanding. For example, the output illumination map can be
used to light virtual objects placed at the locale so that they
blend seamlessly into the real world imagery (Figure 8) and
can assist estimating other scene properties, such as surface
materials.
This goal is challenging because it requires a comprehensive understanding of the lighting environment. First,

Incoming light

C

B

Target locale
Camera

D
360°

Ａ

B

C

D

locale

(a) Input: Image+locale

180°

This paper addresses the task of estimating the light arriving from all directions to a 3D point observed at a selected pixel in an RGB image. This task is challenging because it requires predicting a mapping from a partial scene
observation by a camera to a complete illumination map for
a selected position, which depends on the 3D location of the
selection, the distribution of unobserved light sources, the
occlusions caused by scene geometry, etc. Previous methods attempt to learn this complex mapping directly using
a single black-box neural network, which often fails to estimate high-frequency lighting details for scenes with complicated 3D geometry. Instead, we propose “Neural Illumination,” a new approach that decomposes illumination prediction into several simpler differentiable sub-tasks: 1) geometry estimation, 2) scene completion, and 3) LDR-to-HDR
estimation. The advantage of this approach is that the subtasks are relatively easy to learn and can be trained with
direct supervision, while the whole pipeline is fully differentiable and can be fine-tuned with end-to-end supervision.
Experiments show that our approach performs significantly
better quantitatively and qualitatively than prior work.

Ａ

(b) Ground truth: Illumination map

Figure 1. Given a single LDR image and a selected 2D pixel, the
3a6d2322867f40d9a3d2758ab88df
goal
of Neural Illumination is to infer a panoramic HDR illu288_i2_4
mination map representing the light arriving from all directions at
the locale. The illumination map is encoded as a spherical image
parameterized horizontally by φ (0-360◦ ) and vertically by θ (0180◦ ), where each pixel (e.g. A,B,C,D) stores the RGB intensity
of light arriving at the “locale” from the direction (φ, θ).

it requires understanding the 3D geometry of the scene in
order to map between illumination observations at one 3D
location (the camera) and another (the selected 3D locale).
Second, it requires predicting the illumination coming from
everywhere in the scene, even though only part of the scene
is observed in the input image (e.g. the unobserved window in Figure 2). Third, it requires inferring HDR illumination from LDR observations so that virtual objects can be
lit realistically. While it is possible to train a single neural network that directly models the illumination function
end-to-end (from an input LDR image to an output HDR illumination map) [7], in practice optimizing a model for this
complex function is challenging, and thus previous attempts
have not been able to model high-frequency lighting details
for scenes with complicated 3D geometry.
In this paper, we propose to address these challenges by
decomposing the problem into three sub-tasks. First, to estimate the 3D geometric relationship between pixels in the
input image and the output illumination map, we train a net16918

