Noise-Tolerant Paradigm for Training Face Recognition CNNs
Wei Hu1 Yangyu Huang2∗ Fan Zhang1 Ruirui Li1
1
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China 2 Yunshitu Corporation, China
1

{huwei,zhangf,liruirui}@mail.buct.edu.cn
2

yangyu.huang.1990@gmail.com

Abstract
Benefit from large-scale training datasets, deep Convolutional Neural Networks(CNNs) have achieved impressive
results in face recognition(FR). However, tremendous scale
of datasets inevitably lead to noisy data, which obviously
reduce the performance of the trained CNN models. Kicking out wrong labels from large-scale FR datasets is still very expensive, although some cleaning approaches are
proposed. According to the analysis of the whole process of
training CNN models supervised by angular margin based
loss(AM-Loss) functions, we find that the θ distribution of
training samples implicitly reflects their probability of being clean. Thus, we propose a novel training paradigm that
employs the idea of weighting samples based on the above
probability. Without any prior knowledge of noise, we can
train high performance CNN models with large-scale FR
datasets. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
training paradigm. The codes are available at https:
//github.com/huangyangyu/NoiseFace.

1. Introduction
Large-scale datasets are crucial for training deep CNNs
in FR, and the scale of training datasets is growing tremendously. For example, a widely used FR training dataset,
MS-Celeb-1M [11], contains about 100K celebrities and
10M images. However, a previous work [42] points out
that a million scale FR dataset typically has a noise rate
higher than 30% (about 50% in the original MS-Celeb-1M).
The presence of noisy training data may adversely affect the final performance of trained CNNs. Though a recent
work [35] reports that deep CNNs still perform well even on
noisy datasets containing sufficient clean data, this conclusion cannot be transferred to FR, and experiments demonstrate that noisy data apparently decrease the performance
of the trained FR CNNs [42].
Large-scale datasets with high-quality label annotations are very expensive to obtain. Cleaning large-scale FR
datasets with automatic or semi-automatic approaches [11,

49, 5] cannot really solve this problem. As can be seen,
existed large-scale FR datasets, such as MS-Celeb-1M and
MegaFace [19], still consist considerable incorrect labels.
To obtain a noise-controlled FR dataset, manual annotation is inevitable. Although an approach is introduced to
effectively build a high-quality dataset IMDB-Face [42], it
actually further demonstrates the difficulties of obtaining a
large-scale well-annotated FR dataset. For example, it took
50 annotators one month to clean the IMDB-Face dataset,
which only contains 59K celebrities and 1.7M images.
Numerous training approaches have been investigated
aiming to train classification CNNs with noisy datasets [31, 50, 38, 10, 41, 12, 21, 9], but most of them are
not suitable for training FR models, because of the special characters of FR datasets (discussed in the Section 2).
Recently, weighting training samples is a promising direction [18, 13, 26] to deal with noisy data. However, extra datasets or complex networks are required in these approaches, limiting the use of them in FR.
The CNN models in FR are usally trained with loss functions, which aim to maximize inter-identity variation and
minimize intra-identity variation under a certain metric space. Very recently, some angular margin based loss(AMLoss for short in the paper) functions [24, 5, 45, 43] are
proposed and achieve the state-of-the-art performance.
In this paper, we propose a noise-tolerant paradigm to
learn face features on a large-scale noisy dataset directly,
different from other related approaches [49, 5] which aim
to clean the noisy dataset firstly. When training an AMLoss supervised CNN model, the θ histogram distribution
of training samples(the θ distribution for short, described in
Section 3.2) is employed to measure the possibility that a
sample is correctly labeled, and this possibility is then used
to determine the training weight of the sample. Throughout the training process, the proposed paradigm can alleviate the impact of noisy data by dynamically adjusting the
weight of samples, according to their θ distribution at that
time.
To summarize, our major works are as follows:
1. We observe that the θ value of a clean sample has high-

11887

