Adapting Object Detectors via Selective Cross-Domain Alignment
Xinge Zhu†
†

Jiangmiao Pang§

Ceyuan Yang†

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

§

Jianping Shi‡

Zhejiang University

‡

Dahua Lin†

SenseTime Research

{zx018,cyyang,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
pjm@zju.edu.cn, shijianping@sensetime.com

Abstract
State-of-the-art object detectors are usually trained on
public datasets. They often face substantial difficulties when
applied to a different domain, where the imaging condition
differs significantly and the corresponding annotated data
are unavailable (or expensive to acquire). A natural remedy is to adapt the model by aligning the image representations on both domains. This can be achieved, for example,
by adversarial learning, and has been shown to be effective
in tasks like image classification. However, we found that
in object detection, the improvement obtained in this way is
quite limited. An important reason is that conventional domain adaptation methods strive to align images as a whole,
while object detection, by nature, focuses on local regions
that may contain objects of interest. Motivated by this, we
propose a novel approach to domain adaption for object detection to handle the issues in “where to look” and “how to
align”. Our key idea is to mine the discriminative regions,
namely those that are directly pertinent to object detection,
and focus on aligning them across both domains. Experiments show that the proposed method performs remarkably
better than existing methods with about 4% ∼ 6% improvement under various domain-shift scenarios while keeping
good scalability.

1. Introduction
Over the past several years, the advances in deep learning has significantly pushed forward the state of the art
in various tasks in computer vision, such as object detection [3, 7, 14, 15, 18, 37, 34] and semantic segmentation [27, 47]. Yet, it should be noted that such significant progress relies, to a large extent, on large-scale
annotated training data. Whereas several public benchmarks [6, 11, 30] have already existed, they can only cover a
very limited range of scenarios. In real-world deployment,
the changes in environmental conditions, e.g. imaging sensors, weather, and illumination, can cause significant do-

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. We show two examples from the Cityscapes (a) and
Foggy-Cityscapes (b) dataset, respectively. It can be found that
there exists large domain gap between two images in appearance
distributions. The model trained on the Cityscapes dataset is directly applied on the Foggy-Cityscapes (from a → b), and it can
be observed that performance drop occurs (boxes with green color
mean correct results and red color denotes missing object).

main shift, and thus substantial performance degradation,
as shown in Fig 1.
A natural idea to tackle this issue is to obtain new training data as the domain shifts. Unfortunately, this approach
is not always feasible in practice, due to the huge cost
needed for large-scale annotation. The cost is especially
high for object detection or instance segmentation, as it requires detailed annotation, e.g. bounding boxes or masks
on individual objects. An appealing alternative is unsupervised domain adaptation, namely adapting a model trained
on standard datasets to a new domain (often referred to
as the target domain), but without annotating the target
data. A variety of methods have been developed along this
line, which have shown encouraging results on image classification [1, 12, 13, 16, 28, 43] and semantic segmentation [20, 39, 42, 46, 49]. However, how to effectively adapt
an object detector remains a widely open question.
In our initial attempts, we directly applied existing domain adaptation methods [10] to object detection (with
necessary technical adjustment), only to find very limited
performance gain (more details are showed in the experiments). Our investigation into this issue reveals a key difference between image classification and object detection:
in the context of object detection, we usually see an image
of a complex scene, where the objects of interest only occupy a small region thereof. Hence, attention to such local

687

