Semantic Projection Network for Zero- and Few-Label Semantic Segmentation
Yongqin Xian1∗
1

Subhabrata Choudhury1∗

Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus

Yang He1
2

1. Introduction
In semantic image segmentation the aim is assign a label
to every pixel in an image by partitioning it into several semantic regions and then learning the appearance of various
classes as well as the background. Although deep CNNbased approaches have achieved good performance for this
task, they require costly dense annotations to learn their numerous parameters. Hence, leveraging weak annotations
via image-level labels [34, 32, 31] or point [5], bounding
box [20], scribble-level annotations [25] recently gained interest. On the other hand, as humans, we easily learn to
recognize a previously unseen, i.e. novel, class by associating it with classes that we know. However, segmenting
∗ Equal contributions

Zeynep Akata1,2

Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab
University of Amsterdam
Training set

Abstract
Semantic segmentation is one of the most fundamental
problems in computer vision. As pixel-level labelling in this
context is particularly expensive, there have been several
attempts to reduce the annotation effort, e.g. by learning
from image level labels and bounding box annotations. In
this paper we take this one step further and propose zeroand few-label learning for semantic segmentation as a new
task and propose a benchmark on the challenging COCOStuff and PASCAL VOC12 datasets. In the task of zerolabel semantic image segmentation no labeled sample of
that class was present during training whereas in few-label
semantic segmentation only a few labeled samples were
present. Solving this task requires transferring the knowledge from previously seen classes to novel classes. Our
proposed semantic projection network (SPNet) achieves this
by incorporating class-level semantic information into any
network designed for semantic segmentation, and is trained
in an end-to-end manner. Our model is effective in segmenting novel classes, i.e. alleviating expensive dense annotations, but also in adapting to novel classes without forgetting its prior knowledge, i.e. generalized zero- and fewlabel semantic segmentation.

Bernt Schiele1

Test set
Zero-label semantic
segmentation

Our prediction

classes with many samples
Semantic knowledge

Few-label semantic
segmentation
classes with few samples

Our prediction

Figure 1: We propose (generalized) zero- and few-label semantic segmentation tasks, i.e. segmenting classes whose
labels are not seen by the model during training or the model
has a few labeled samples of those classes. To tackle these
tasks, we propose a model that transfers knowledge from
seen classes to unseen classes using side information, e.g.
semantic word embedding trained on free text corpus.

such novel classes via modern machine learning techniques
is still an open problem as this process requires knowledge
transfer from known classes to previously unseen ones.
Knowledge transfer to novel classes is not a new task.
Learning to predict novel classes has been studied extensively in the context of image classification, i.e. zero-shot
learning [23, 57, 7, 2]. In zero-label semantic segmentation (ZLSS), our aim is to segment previously unseen, i.e.
novel, classes, in few-label semantic segmentation (FLSS)
these novel classes have a small number of labeled training examples (see Figure 1). In this work, we also aim
for learning without forgetting the previously seen classes,
i.e. generalized ZLSS and FLSS. To achieve these aims, we
propose Semantic Projection Network (SPNet) that incorporates semantic word embeddings to an arbitrary semantic
segmentation network inspired by the success of zero-shot
learning. Prior models that tackle few-shot semantic segmentation [42, 11] operate in the foreground-background
segmentation setting. However, in our definition of FLSS
the model has to predict all the classes in an image separately, which is more challenging and realistic. Our framework utilizes the similarity between different categories in
a semantic segmentation network, enabling it to transfer
18256

