Feature Space Perturbations Yield More Transferable Adversarial Examples
Nathan Inkawhich, Wei Wen, Hai (Helen) Li and Yiran Chen
Duke University
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Durham, NC 27708
{nathan.inkawhich,wei.wen,hai.li,yiran.chen}@duke.edu

Abstract
Many recent works have shown that deep learning models are vulnerable to quasi-imperceptible input perturbations, yet practitioners cannot fully explain this behavior.
This work describes a transfer-based blackbox targeted adversarial attack of deep feature space representations that
also provides insights into cross-model class representations of deep CNNs. The attack is explicitly designed for
transferability and drives feature space representation of
a source image at layer L towards the representation of
a target image at L. The attack yields highly transferable
targeted examples, which outperform competition winning
methods by over 30% in targeted attack metrics. We also
show the choice of L to generate examples from is important, transferability characteristics are blackbox model agnostic, and indicate that well trained deep models have similar highly-abstract representations.

1. Introduction
Many researchers have shown how to intentionally fool
well trained deep learning algorithms with adversarial attacks [23, 5, 2, 20, 8]. The focus of most works is to have a
maximally devastating effect on the model, while introducing minimal perturbation to the data. In the case of imagebased data, the attacker works to disrupt the classification
ability of the network with imperceptible perturbations to
the image [23, 5, 1, 16, 15]. These attacks are of even
greater concern because we as a community do not have a
firm understanding of what is happening inside these largely
uninterpretable deep models. However, attacks may also
provide a way to study the inner-workings of such models.
One of the more difficult threat models for an adversary
operating on CNNs is a blackbox targeted attack. In this
scenario, the adversary only has access to inputs and outputs, with no working knowledge of the underlying weights
or architecture. Even more, the adversary may choose the
target class the oracle network misclassifies to. In this work,
we design a black-box targeted adversarial attack for deep

Figure 1: Illustration of Activation Attack. Given that the
whitebox model (fw ) and blackbox model (fb ) are initially
correct, the attack drives the layer L activations of the dog
image towards the layer L activations of the plane. After
attack, the dog’s activations are similar to the plane’s and
the perturbed image is classified as a plane to fw and fb .

CNN models. We design the attack using the property of
adversarial transferability, in which examples that are adversarial to one model will often be adversarial to other
models [11, 18, 13]. The unique aspect of this attack is
that it explicitly perturbs the feature space of a deep model
with the intentions of creating more transferable adversarial examples. The intuition comes from the observation that
intermediate features of well trained models are transferable
[26]. Thus, perturbations of intermediate features may also
be transferable.
To test this hypothesis, we design the Activation Attack
(AA), as shown in Fig. 1. By perturbing the source image, the algorithm drives the layer L activations of a whitebox model on the source image, towards the layer L activations of that model for a target image. The net effect
is perturbations in feature space. We test the transferability of the perturbed features by feeding the perturbed image

7066

