TraVeLGAN: Image-to-image Translation by Transformation Vector Learning
Matthew Amodio
Yale University

Smita Krishnaswamy
Yale University

matthew.amodio@yale.edu

smita.krishnaswamy@yale.edu

Abstract
Interest in image-to-image translation has grown substantially in recent years with the success of unsupervised
models based on the cycle-consistency assumption. The
achievements of these models have been limited to a particular subset of domains where this assumption yields good
results, namely homogeneous domains that are characterized by style or texture differences. We tackle the challenging problem of image-to-image translation where the
domains are defined by high-level shapes and contexts, as
well as including significant clutter and heterogeneity. For
this purpose, we introduce a novel GAN based on preserving intra-domain vector transformations in a latent space
learned by a siamese network. The traditional GAN system introduced a discriminator network to guide the generator into generating images in the target domain. To this
two-network system we add a third: a siamese network that
guides the generator so that each original image shares semantics with its generated version. With this new threenetwork system, we no longer need to constrain the generators with the ubiquitous cycle-consistency restraint. As
a result, the generators can learn mappings between more
complex domains that differ from each other by large differences - not just style or texture.

1. Introduction
Learning to translate an image from one domain to another has been a much studied task in recent years [36,
17, 15, 38, 13]. The task is intuitively defined when we
have paired examples of an image in each domain, but
unfortunately these are not available in many interesting
cases. Enthusiasm has grown as the field has moved towards unsupervised methods that match the distributions
of the two domains with generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [18, 11, 32, 35, 26]. However, there are infinitely
many mappings between the two domains [24], and there is
no guarantee that an individual image in one domain will
share any characteristics with its representation in the other
domain after mapping.

Figure 1: The TraVeLGAN architecture, which adds a siamese
network S to the traditional generator G and discriminator D and
trains to preserve vector arithmetic between points in the latent
space of S.

Other methods have addressed this non-identifiability
problem by regularizing the family of generators in various
ways, including employing cross-domain weight-coupling
in some layers [26] and decoding from a shared embedding
space [25]. By far the most common regularization, first introduced by the CycleGAN and the DiscoGAN, has been
forcing the generators to be each other’s inverse, known
18983

