RepMet: Representative-based metric learning for classification and few-shot
object detection
Leonid Karlinsky∗, Joseph Shtok∗ , Sivan Harary∗ , Eli Schwartz∗ , Amit Aides, Rogerio Feris
IBM Research AI
Raja Giryes
Tel-Aviv University

Alex M. Bronstein
Technion

Abstract
Distance metric learning (DML) has been successfully
applied to object classification, both in the standard regime
of rich training data and in the few-shot scenario, where
each category is represented by only a few examples. In
this work, we propose a new method for DML that simultaneously learns the backbone network parameters, the embedding space, and the multi-modal distribution of each of
the training categories in that space, in a single end-to-end
training process. Our approach outperforms state-of-theart methods for DML-based object classification on a variety of standard fine-grained datasets. Furthermore, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on the problem of few-shot object detection, by incorporating the proposed DML architecture as a classification head into a standard object detection model. We achieve the best results on
the ImageNet-LOC dataset compared to strong baselines,
when only a few training examples are available. We also
offer the community a new episodic benchmark based on the
ImageNet dataset for the few-shot object detection task.

1. Introduction
Due to the great success of deep neural networks (DNNs)
in the tasks of image classification and detection [7, 11, 12,
14, 32, 45], they are now widely accepted as the ‘feature
extractors of choice’ for almost all computer vision applications, mainly for their ability to learn good features from
the data. It is well-known that training a regular DNN model
from scratch requires a significant amount of training data
[26]. Yet, in many practical applications, one may be given
only a few training samples per class to learn a classifier.
This is known as the few-shot learning problem.
Recent studies have achieved significant advances in using DNNs for few-shot learning. This has been demonstrated for domain-specific tasks, such as face recognition [28] and for the classification of general categories
∗ The authors have contributed equally to this work

Figure 1. One-shot detection example. Surrounding images: examples of new categories unseen in training. Center image: detection result for the one-shot detector on an image containing instances of partridge, which is one of the new categories.

[6, 10, 33, 38, 40, 44]. However, very few works have investigated the problem of few-shot object detection, where
the task of recognizing instances of a category, represented
by a few examples, is complicated by the presence of the
image background and the need to accurately localize the
objects. Recently, several interesting papers demonstrated
preliminary results for the zero-shot object detection case
[1, 23] and for the few-shot transfer learning [5] scenario.
In this work, we propose a novel approach for Distance
Metric Learning (DML) and demonstrate its effectiveness
on both few-shot object detection and object classification.
We represent each class by a mixture model with multiple
modes, and consider the centers of these modes as the representative vectors for the class. Unlike previous methods,
we simultaneously learn the embedding space, backbone
network parameters, and the representative vectors of the
training categories, in a single end-to-end training process.
For few-shot object detection, we build upon modern approaches (e.g., the deformable-FPN variant of the Faster15197

