Point in, Box out: Beyond Counting Persons in Crowds
Yuting Liu1 , Miaojing Shi2 , Qijun Zhao1 , Xiaofang Wang2
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
2
Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA
yuting.liu@stu.scu.edu.cn; miaojing.shi@inria.fr; qjzhao@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Modern crowd counting methods usually employ deep
neural networks (DNN) to estimate crowd counts via density regression. Despite their significant improvements, the
regression-based methods are incapable of providing the
detection of individuals in crowds. The detection-based
methods, on the other hand, have not been largely explored
in recent trends of crowd counting due to the needs for expensive bounding box annotations. In this work, we instead
propose a new deep detection network with only point supervision required. It can simultaneously detect the size
and location of human heads and count them in crowds.
We first mine useful person size information from point-level
annotations and initialize the pseudo ground truth bounding
boxes. An online updating scheme is introduced to refine
the pseudo ground truth during training; while a locallyconstrained regression loss is designed to provide additional constraints on the size of the predicted boxes in a local
neighborhood. In the end, we propose a curriculum learning strategy to train the network from images of relatively accurate and easy pseudo ground truth first. Extensive
experiments are conducted in both detection and counting
tasks on several standard benchmarks, e.g. ShanghaiTech,
UCF CC 50, WiderFace, and TRANCOS datasets, and the
results show the superiority of our method over the state-ofthe-art.

1. Introduction
Counting people in crowded scenes is a crucial component for a wide range of applications including video
surveillance, safety monitoring, and behavior modeling.
It is a highly challenging task in dense crowds due to
heavy occlusions, perspective distortions, scale variations and varying density of people. Modern regression-based
methods [27, 49, 41, 25, 22, 20, 39] cast the problem as
regressing a density distribution map whose integral over
the map gives the people count within that image (see
Fig 1: Left). Owing to the advent of deep neural network-

Regression-based counting

Ours

Detection-based counting

Point supervision

Point
supervision
Point
supervision

Bbox supervision

Output: Location & Size

Output: Density map

Low

Output: Location &Size

Annotation Cost

High

Figure 1:

Comparison of our PSDDN with representative
regression- and detection-based crowd counting methods regarding their annotation costs for input and their output information.

s (DNN) [17], remarkable progress has been achieved in
these methods. They do not require annotating the bounding boxes but only the points of person heads at training.
Yet, as a consequence, they can not provide the detection of
persons at testing, neither.
The detection-based methods, which cast the problem as
detecting each individual in the crowds (see Fig 1: Right),
on the other hand, have not been largely explored in recent trends due to the lack of bounding box annotations. Liu et al. [22] have tried to manually annotate on partial of the bounding boxes in ShanghaiTech PartB (SHB)
dataset [49] and train a fully-supervised Faster R-CNN [32].
They combine the detection result with regression result for
crowd counting. Notwithstanding their efforts and obtained
improvements, they did not report results on datasets like
SHA [49] and UCF CC 50 [13], which have crowds on average five and ten times denser than that of SHB.
Annotating the bounding boxes of persons for training
images can be a great challenge in crowd counting datasets. Meanwhile, knowing the person size and locations in
a crowd at test stage is also very important; for example,
in video surveilance, it enables person recognition [37],
tracking [33], and re-identification [21]. Recently, some researchers [18, 14] start to work on this issue with point su16469

