Hyperspectral Image Reconstruction Using a Deep Spatial-Spectral Prior
Lizhi Wang1
1

Chen Sun1

Beijing Institute of Technology

2

Ying Fu1

Min H. Kim2

Hua Huang1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology

{lzwang, sunchen, fuying, huahuang}@bit.edu.cn, minhkim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Regularization is a fundamental technique to solve an illposed optimization problem robustly and is essential to reconstruct compressive hyperspectral images. Various handcrafted priors have been employed as a regularizer but
are often insufficient to handle the wide variety of spectra of natural hyperspectral images, resulting in poor reconstruction quality. Moreover, the prior-regularized optimization requires manual tweaking of its weight parameters to achieve a balance between the spatial and spectral
fidelity of result images. In this paper, we present a novel hyperspectral image reconstruction algorithm that substitutes
the traditional hand-crafted prior with a data-driven prior,
based on an optimization-inspired network. Our method
consists of two main parts: First, we learn a novel datadriven prior that regularizes the optimization problem with
a goal to boost the spatial-spectral fidelity. Our data-driven
prior learns both local coherence and dynamic characteristics of natural hyperspectral images. Second, we combine our regularizer with an optimization-inspired network
to overcome the heavy computation problem in the traditional iterative optimization methods. We learn the complete parameters in the network through end-to-end training, enabling robust performance with high accuracy. Extensive simulation and hardware experiments validate the
superior performance of our method over the state-of-theart methods.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging captures the spectral power distributions of a scene or an object as a three-dimensional
(3D) tensor, which describes spectral intensity per wavelength at each pixel location. By leveraging the rich spectral
information in hyperspectral images, various imaging and
vision applications have been benefited extending the current dimensions of the recognition and classification techniques to higher dimensions of novel applications, e.g., re-

mote sensing, medical imaging, vision inspection, digital
forensics, etc. [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
Since a hyperspectral image is a 3D tensor, the scenes
have to be measured with multiple exposures with one 1D
or 2D sensor. This imaging process is time-consuming and
limited to static objects [7]. With an objective to capture dynamic objects and scenes, quite a few snapshot hyperspectral imaging system have been proposed [8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
Based on compressive sensing [13], coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) [14] introduces a promising
solution. CASSI encodes the incident light into a snapshotimaging sensor and employs an optimization algorithm to
reconstruct the hyperspectral image as a 3D tensor.
To solve the under-determined reconstruction problem,
regularization technique is used to introduce the image priors, for instance, the total variation (TV) [15, 16], sparsity [17, 18] and non-local similarity (NLS) [19, 20]. They
have been formulated analytically to restrict the solution
space when solving the data term. However, these prior
are designed empirically and often insufficient to model the
wide variety of spectra of the real world. Also, the optimization based on a hand-crafted prior requires manual tweaking
of its weight parameters to handle the complicated characteristics of the target scenes.
Moreover, the optimization of reconstructing hyperspectral images cannot be solved with a closed form. Therefore, iterative optimization techniques have been used in
general. Recently, a novel research direction is to substitute the iteration-based optimization in compressive sensing with a deep neural network, e.g., LISTA [21] ADMMNet [22] and ISTA-Net [23]. These networks learn unrolled
solutions of an iterative optimization based on natural image statistics by means of deep learning. However, they still
inherit the sparsity prior by explicitly limiting features to be
sparse in a few layers. The optimization using the sparsity
prior suffers from the prior deviation problem as addressed
by Zhang et al. [24]. Besides, these neural network-based
approaches only account for CS reconstruction within the
spatial dimension, but in ignorance of the spectral dimension, as they do not learn any prior of spectral information

8032

