AANet: Attribute Attention Network for Person Re-Identifications
Chiat-Pin Tay1,2 , Sharmili Roy2 , and Kim-Hui Yap1,2
1

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Rapid-Rich Object Search Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Abstract
This paper proposes Attribute Attention Network
(AANet), a new architecture that integrates person attributes and attribute attention maps into a classification
framework to solve the person re-identification (re-ID)
problem. Many person re-ID models typically employ semantic cues such as body parts or human pose to improve
the re-ID performance. Attribute information, however, is
often not utilized. The proposed AANet leverages on a baseline model that uses body parts and integrates the key attribute information in an unified learning framework. The
AANet consists of a global person ID task, a part detection
task and a crucial attribute detection task. By estimating the
class responses of individual attributes and combining them
to form the attribute attention map (AAM), a very strong
discriminatory representation is constructed. The proposed
AANet outperforms the best state-of-the-art method [20] using ResNet-50 by 3.36% in mAP and 3.12% in Rank-1 accuracy on DukeMTMC-reID dataset. On Market1501 dataset,
AANet achieves 92.38% mAP and 95.10% Rank-1 accuracy
with re-ranking, outperforming [11], another state of the
art method using ResNet-152, by 1.42% in mAP and 0.47%
in Rank-1 accuracy. In addition, AANet can perform person attribute prediction (e.g., gender, hair length, clothing
length etc.), and localize the attributes in the query image.

1. Introduction
Given a query image, person re-ID aims to retrieve images of a queried person from a collection of networkcamera images. The retrieval is typically attempted from a
collection of images taken within a short time interval with
respect to the queried image. This supports the underlying
assumption that the query person’s appearance and clothing attributes remain unchanged across the query and the
collection images. Person re-ID is a challenging problem
due to many factors such as partial/total occlusion of the

Figure 1. Class-aware heat maps are extracted and combined to
form a discriminatory Attribute Attention Map (AAM) at the image level. The six heat maps shown here correspond to the six
attributes such as hair, upper clothing color, lower clothing color
etc. Best viewed in color.

subject, pose variation, ambient light changes, low image
resolution, etc. Recent deep learning based re-ID solutions
have demonstrated good retrieval performance.
The approaches used to solve the person re-ID problem
can be broadly divided into two categories. The first category comprises of metric learning methods that attempt to
learn an embedding space which brings images belonging to
a unique person close together and those belonging to different persons far away. Various approaches such as triplet
and quadruplet losses have been employed to learn such embedding spaces [10, 2].
The second category of methods poses the re-ID problem
in a classification set-up. Such methods learn by using Softmax normalization and computing cross-entropy loss, based
on person identity as ground truth, for back-propagation.
Research has shown that by integrating semantic information such as body parts, human pose etc, the classifica-

7134

