Deep Multimodal Clustering for Unsupervised Audiovisual Learning
Di Hu, Feiping Nie, Xuelong Li∗
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, P. R. China
hdui831@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, feipingnie@gmail.com, xuelong li@ieee.org

Abstract
The seen birds twitter, the running cars accompany with
noise, etc. These naturally audiovisual correspondences
provide the possibilities to explore and understand the outside world. However, the mixed multiple objects and sounds
make it intractable to perform efficient matching in the unconstrained environment. To settle this problem, we propose to adequately excavate audio and visual components
and perform elaborate correspondence learning among
them. Concretely, a novel unsupervised audiovisual learning model is proposed, named as Deep Multimodal Clustering (DMC), that synchronously performs sets of clustering with multimodal vectors of convolutional maps in different shared spaces for capturing multiple audiovisual correspondences. And such integrated multimodal clustering
network can be effectively trained with max-margin loss in
the end-to-end fashion. Amounts of experiments in feature
evaluation and audiovisual tasks are performed. The results demonstrate that DMC can learn effective unimodal
representation, with which the classifier can even outperform human performance. Further, DMC shows noticeable
performance in sound localization, multisource detection,
and audiovisual understanding.

1. Introduction
When seeing a dog, why the sound emerged in our mind
is mostly barking instead of miaow or others? It seems
easy to answer “we can only catch the barking dog in our
daily life”. As specific visual appearance and acoustic signal usually occur together, we can realize that they are
strongly correlated, which accordingly makes us recognize
the sound-maker of visual dog and the distinctive barking
sound. Hence, the concurrent audiovisual message provides
the possibilities to better explore and understand the outside
world [19].
The cognitive community has noticed such phenomenon
∗ Corresponding author

in the last century and named it as multisensory processing [19]. They found that some neural cells in superior
temporal sulcus (a brain region in the temporal cortex)
can simultaneously response to visual, auditory, and tactile signal [18]. When the concurrent audiovisual message
is perceived by the brain, such neural cells could provide
corresponding mechanism to correlate these different messages, which is further reflected in various tasks, such as
lip-reading [8] and sensory substitute [30].
In view of the merits of audiovisual learning in human
beings, it is highly expected to make machine possess similar ability, i.e., exploring and perceiving the world via the
concurrent audiovisual message. More importantly, in contrast to the expensive human-annotation, the audiovisual
correspondence can also provide valuable supervision, and
it is pervasive, reliable, and free [27]. As a result, the
audiovisual correspondence learning has been given more
and more attention recently. In the beginning, the coherent property of audiovisual signal is supposed to provide
cross-modal supervision information, where the knowledge
of one modality is transferred to supervise the other primitive one. However, the learning capacity is obviously limited by the transferred knowledge and it is difficult to expand the correspondence into unexplored cases. Instead of
this, a natural question emerges out: can the model learn the
audiovisual perception just by their correspondence without any prior knowledge? The recent works give definitive answers [3, 26]. They propose to train an audiovisual
two-stream network by simply appending a correspondence
judgement on the top layer. In other words, the model learns
to match the sound with the image that contains correct
sound source. Surprisingly, the visual and auditory subnets
have learnt to response to specific object and sound after
training the model, which can be then applied for unimodal
classification, sound localization, etc.
The correspondence assumption behind previous
works [27, 3, 6] rely on specific audiovisual scenario
where the sound-maker should exist in the captured
visual appearance and single sound source condition is
expected. However, such rigorous scenario is not entirely

9248

