Networks for Joint Affine and Non-parametric Image Registration
Zhengyang Shen
UNC Chapel Hill

Xu Han
UNC Chapel Hill

Zhenlin Xu
UNC Chapel Hill

Marc Niethammer
UNC Chapel Hill

zyshen@cs.unc.edu

xhs400@cs.unc.edu

zhenlinx@cs.unc.edu

mn@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
We introduce an end-to-end deep-learning framework
for 3D medical image registration. In contrast to existing approaches, our framework combines two registration methods: an affine registration and a vector
momentum-parameterized stationary velocity field (vSVF)
model. Specifically, it consists of three stages. In the first
stage, a multi-step affine network predicts affine transform
parameters. In the second stage, we use a U-Net-like network to generate a momentum, from which a velocity field
can be computed via smoothing. Finally, in the third stage,
we employ a self-iterable map-based vSVF component to
provide a non-parametric refinement based on the current
estimate of the transformation map. Once the model is
trained, a registration is completed in one forward pass. To
evaluate the performance, we conducted longitudinal and
cross-subject experiments on 3D magnetic resonance images (MRI) of the knee of the Osteoarthritis Initiative (OAI)
dataset. Results show that our framework achieves comparable performance to state-of-the-art medical image registration approaches, but it is much faster, with a better control of transformation regularity including the ability to produce approximately symmetric transformations, and combining affine as well as non-parametric registration.

1. Introduction
Registration is a fundamental task in medical image analysis to establish spatial correspondences between different
images. To allow, for example, localized spatial analyses of
cartilage changes over time or across subject populations,
images are first registered to a common anatomical space.
Traditional image registration algorithms, such as elastic [3, 25], fluid [5, 12, 29, 8, 31] or B-spline models [24],
are based on the iterative numerical solution of an optimization problem. The objective of the optimization is to minimize image mismatch and transformation irregularity. The
sought-for solution is then a spatial transformation which
aligns a source image well to a target image while assuring that the transformation is sufficiently regular. To this

end, a variety of different similarity measures to assess image mismatch have been proposed. For image pairs with a
similar intensity distribution, Mean Square Error (MSE) on
intensity differences is widely used. For multi-modal registration, however, Normalized Cross Correlation (NCC) and
Mutual Information (MI) usually perform better. Besides,
smooth transformation maps are typically desirable. Methods encouraging or enforcing smoothness use, for example, rigidity penalties [26] or penalties that encourage volume preservation [27, 22] to avoid folds in the transformation. Diffeomorphic transformations can also be achieved
by optimizing over sufficiently smooth velocity fields from
which the spatial transformation can be recovered via integration. Such methods include Large Displacement Diffeomorphic Metric Mapping (LDDMM) [5, 12] and Diffeomorphic Demons [29]. As optimizations are typically over
very high-dimensional parameter spaces, they are computationally expensive.
Recently, taking advantage of deep learning, research
has focused on replacing costly numerical optimization
with a learned deep regression model. These methods
are extremely fast as only the evaluation of the regression
model is required at test time. They imitate the behavior
of conventional, numerical optimization-based registration
algorithms as they predict the same types of registration parameters: displacement fields, velocity fields or momentum fields. Depending on the predicted parameters, theoretical properties of the original registration model can be
retained. For example, in Quicksilver [33], a network is
learned to predict the initial momentum of LDDMM, which
can then be used to find a diffeomorphic spatial transformation via LDDMM’s shooting equations. While earlier
work has focused on training models based on previously
obtained registration parameters via costly numerical optimization [6, 32], recent work has shifted to end-to-end formulations1 [10, 14, 4, 9]. These end-to-end approaches integrate image resampling into their network and were inspired
1 For these end-to-end approaches, the sought-for registration parameterization is either the final output of the network (for the prediction of
displacement fields) or an intermediate output (for the prediction of velocity fields) from which the transformation map can be recovered. The rest
of the formulation stays the same.

4224

