Learning to Separate Multiple Illuminants in a Single Image
Zhuo Hui,1 Ayan Chakrabarti,2 Kalyan Sunkavalli,3 and Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan1
1
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
Washington University in St. Louis
Adobe Research

Abstract
We present a method to separate a single image captured under two illuminants, with different spectra, into the
two images corresponding to the appearance of the scene
under each individual illuminant. We do this by training
a deep neural network to predict the per-pixel reflectance
chromaticity of the scene, which we use in a physics-based
image separation framework to produce the desired two output images. We design our reflectance chromaticity network and loss functions by incorporating intuitions from the
physics of image formation. We show that this leads to significantly better performance than other single image techniques and even approaches the quality of the prior work
that require additional images.

1. Introduction
Natural environments are often lit by multiple light
sources with different illuminant spectra. Depending on
scene geometry and material properties, each of these lights
causes different light transport effects like color casts, shading, shadows, specularities, etc. An image of the scene combines the effects from the different lights present, and is a
superposition of the images that would have been captured
under each individual light. We seek to invert this superposition, i.e., separate a single image observed under two light
sources, with different spectra, into two images, each corresponding to the appearance of the scene under one light
source alone. Such a decomposition can give users the ability to edit and relight photographs, as well as provide information useful for photometric analysis.
However, the appearance of a surface depends not only
on the properties of the light sources, but also on its geometry and material properties. When all of these quantities
are unknown, disentangling them is a significantly ill-posed
problem. Thus, past efforts to achieve such separation have
relied heavily on extensive manual annotation [8, 7, 9] or
access to calibrated scene and lighting information [12, 11].
More recently, Hui et al. [24, 25] demonstrate that the lighting separation problem can be reliably solved if one additionally knows the reflectance chromaticity of all surface

(a) Input image

(b) Output separated images

Figure 1. Our method separates a single image (a) captured under
two illuminants with different spectra (sun and sky illumination
here) into two images corresponding to the appearance of the scene
under the individual lights. Note that we are able to accurately
preserve the shading and shadows for each light.

points — which they recover by capturing a second image
of the same scene under flash lighting. Given that the flash
image is used in their processing pipeline only for estimating the reflectance chromaticity, could we computationally
estimate the reflectance chromaticity from a single image,
thereby avoiding the need to capture a flash photograph all
together? This would greatly enhance the applicability of
the method especially for scenarios where it is challenging
to sufficiently illuminate every pixel with the flash; for example, when the flash is not strong enough, the scene is
large, or the ambient light sources are too strong.
Our work is also motivated by the success of deep
convolutional neural networks for solving closely related
problems like intrinsic decompositions [32, 43], and reflectance estimation [41, 36, 34]; hence, we propose training a deep convolution neural network to perform this separation. However, we find that standard architectures, trained
only with the respect to the quality of the final separated
images, are unable to learn to effectively perform the separation. Therefore, we guide the design of our network using a physics-based analysis of the task [25] to match the
expected sequence of inference steps and intermediate outputs — reflectance chromaticities, shading chromaticities,
separated shading maps, and final separated images. In addition to ensuring that our architecture has the ability to express these required computations, this decomposition also
allows us to provide supervision to intermediate layers in
13780

