Signal-to-Noise Ratio: A Robust Distance Metric for Deep Metric Learning
Tongtong Yuan1 , Weihong Deng1∗, Jian Tang2,3 , Yinan Tang1 , Binghui Chen1
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
AI Labs, Didi Chuxing, Beijing, China
3
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY USA
{yuantt, whdeng, tn513, chenbinghui}@bupt.edu.cn, tangjian@didiglobal.com

Abstract
Deep metric learning, which learns discriminative features to process image clustering and retrieval tasks, has
attracted extensive attention in recent years. A number of
deep metric learning methods, which ensure that similar examples are mapped close to each other and dissimilar examples are mapped farther apart, have been proposed to
construct effective structures for loss functions and have
shown promising results. In this paper, different from the
approaches on learning the loss structures, we propose a
robust SNR distance metric based on Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(SNR) for measuring the similarity of image pairs for deep
metric learning. By exploring the properties of our SNR
distance metric from the view of geometry space and statistical theory, we analyze the properties of our metric and
show that it can preserve the semantic similarity between
image pairs, which well justify its suitability for deep metric
learning. Compared with Euclidean distance metric, our SNR distance metric can further jointly reduce the intra-class
distances and enlarge the inter-class distances for learned
features. Leveraging our SNR distance metric, we propose
Deep SNR-based Metric Learning (DSML) to generate discriminative feature embeddings. By extensive experiments
on three widely adopted benchmarks, including CARS196,
CUB200-2011 and CIFAR10, our DSML has shown its superiority over other state-of-the-art methods. Additionally,
we extend our SNR distance metric to deep hashing learning, and conduct experiments on two benchmarks, including
CIFAR10 and NUS-WIDE, to demonstrate the effectiveness
and generality of our SNR distance metric.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the extensive research on
metric learning, which aims at learning semantic distance
and embeddings such that similar examples are mapped to
∗ Corresponding author

nearby points on a manifold and dissimilar examples are
mapped apart from each other [20, 27, 30, 39]. Compared to
conventional distance metric learning, deep metric learning
learns a nonlinear embedding of the data using deep neural
networks, and it has shown significant benefits by exploring more loss structures. With the development of these
learning techniques, deep metric learning has been widely
applied to the tasks of face recognition [29, 28], image clustering and retrieval [33, 20].
Deep metric learning has made remarkable successes in
generating discriminative features. To improve the performance of learned features, many learning methods have explored the structures in the objective functions, such as contrastive loss [9], triplet loss [22, 36], lifted structured embedding [20], N-pair Loss method [27], etc. These deep
metric learning methods can be categorized as structurelearning methods, which focus on constructing more effective structures for objective functions by making use of
training batches or increasing negative examples. However,
most structure-learning methods simply take the Euclidean
distance as the semantic distance metric and ignore that the
distance metric is playing a nonnegligible role in deep metric learning. Different from structure-learning, some metric
learning methods [37, 6] employ new distance metrics to
metric learning. For example, Weinberger et al. have proposed a distance metric for k-nearest neighbor (kNN) classification in metric learning, i.e, Mahalanobis distance [37],
which shows that the performance of metric learning algorithms also depends on the distance metric. Contrary
to structure-learning methods, these methods exploring a
new distance metric can be categorized as distance-learning
methods. Compared to the structure-learning methods, designing a good distance metric for measuring the semantic
similarity may make a more significant impact on learning
discriminative embeddings. Therefore, we focus on designing of a novel and effective distance metric.
Measuring similarities between pairs of examples is critical for metric learning. The most well-known distance metric is Euclidean distance, which has been widely used in

4815

