Douglas-Rachford Networks: Learning Both the Image Prior and Data Fidelity
Terms for Blind Image Deconvolution
Raied Aljadaany
Dipan K. Pal
Marios Savvides
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering.
Carnegie Mellon University
{raljadaa, dipanp, marioss}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Blind deconvolution problems are heavily ill-posed
where the specific blurring kernel is not known. Recovering these images typically requires estimates of the kernel.
In this paper, we present a method called Dr-Net, which
does not require any such estimate and is further able to
invert the effects of the blurring in blind image recovery
tasks. These image recovery problems typically have two
terms, the data fidelity term (for faithful reconstruction) and
the image prior (for realistic looking reconstructions). We
use the Douglas-Rachford iterations to solve this problem
since it is a more generally applicable optimization procedure than methods such as the proximal gradient descent
algorithm. Two proximal operators originate from these iterations, one for the data fidelity term and the second for
the image prior. It is non-trivial to design a hand-crafted
function to represent these proximal operators which would
work with real-world image distributions. We therefore approximate both these proximal operators using deep networks. This provides a sound motivation for the final architecture for Dr-Net which we find outperforms the stateof-the-art on two mainstream blind deconvolution benchmarks. While doing so, we also find that Dr-Net is one of
the fastest algorithms according to wall-clock times.

1. Introduction
The Blind Deconvolution Problem. Blind deconvolution problems are interesting inverse problems in image
processing. A large part of their challenge is the fact that
the kernel that caused the corruption is unknown. Assume a
corrupted image y can be generated via convolving a clear
image x with a kernel k. This can be written as:
y =k∗x+ǫ

(1)

where ǫ is an additive zero-mean white Gaussian noise
and ∗ is the convolution operation. The problem of recovering the clean image is an ill-posed inverse problem. One

Figure 1. From the left to the right, blurry image [34], recovered
image by Kupyn et. al. [25] and recovered image by our proposed
Dr-Net. Dr-Net recovers sharper images with finer details.

approach to solve it is by assuming some prior (or a set of)
on the image space and k is provided or estimated. Thus,
the clean image can be approximated by solving the following optimization problem:
x∗ = arg min ky − k ∗ xk22 + g(x)
x

(2)

where ky − k ∗ xk22 is the data fidelity term and g is an operator that defines some prior on the image space also called
the image prior (e.g l1 norm is used to promote sparsity).
A good prior is important to recover a feasible and highquality solution. Image priors are common in signal and image processing tasks such as inverse problems [30, 21] and
these communities have spent considerable effort in hand
designing suitable priors for signals [1, 42, 47]. However,
the optimization problem in Eq. 2 is useful only if good estimates are available for both the image prior and the blurring kernel. Indeed, it has been shown that image recovery
algorithms (based on the optimization problem in Eq. 2) fail
when the solution space invoked by the assumed prior does
not contain good approximations of the real data [13]. This
also happens when the estimated kernel is not accurate [6].
Addressing the need for knowing the blurring kernel.
4321
10235

