Graphical Contrastive Losses for Scene Graph Parsing
Ji Zhang1,2 , Kevin J. Shih2 , Ahmed Elgammal1 , Andrew Tao2 , Bryan Catanzaro2
1

Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University
2
Nvidia Corporation

Abstract
Most scene graph parsers use a two-stage pipeline to detect visual relationships: the first stage detects entities, and
the second predicts the predicate for each entity pair using
a softmax distribution. We find that such pipelines, trained
with only a cross entropy loss over predicate classes, suffer
from two common errors. The first, Entity Instance Confusion, occurs when the model confuses multiple instances
of the same type of entity (e.g. multiple cups). The second, Proximal Relationship Ambiguity, arises when multiple subject-predicate-object triplets appear in close proximity with the same predicate, and the model struggles to
infer the correct subject-object pairings (e.g. mis-pairing
musicians and their instruments). We propose a set of
contrastive loss formulations that specifically target these
types of errors within the scene graph parsing problem, collectively termed the Graphical Contrastive Losses. These
losses explicitly force the model to disambiguate related
and unrelated instances through margin constraints specific to each type of confusion. We further construct a relationship detector, called RelDN, using the aforementioned
pipeline to demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed losses.
Our model outperforms the winning method of the OpenImages Relationship Detection Challenge by 4.7% (16.5%
relatively) on the test set. We also show improved results
over the best previous methods on the Visual Genome and
Visual Relationship Detection datasets.

1. Introduction
Given an image, the aim of scene graph parsing is to infer
a visually grounded graph comprising localized entity categories, along with predicate edges denoting their pairwise
relationships. This is often formulated as the detection of
hsubject, predicate, objecti triplets within an image, e.g.
hman, holds, guitari in Figure 1b. Current state-of-the-art
methods achieve this goal by a two-stage mechanism: first

(a) without our losses

(b) with our losses

Figure 1: Example of failure of models without our losses and
success of our losses. (a) RelDN learned with only multi-class
cross-entropy loss incorrectly relates the man with the microphone, while (b) RelDN learned with our Graphical Contrastive
Losses detects the correct relationship hman, holds, guitari.

detecting entities, then predicting a predicate for each pair
of entities.
We find that scene graph parsing models using such
pipelines tend to struggle with two types of errors. The first
is Entity Instance Confusion, in which the subject or object is related to one of many instances of the same class,
and the model fails to distinguish between the target instance and the others. We show an example in Figure 2a, in
which the model identifies the man is holding a wine glass,
but struggles to determine exactly which of the 3 visually
similar wine glasses is being held. The incorrectly predicted
wine glass is transparent and intersecting with the left arm,
which makes it look like being held. The second type of
error, Proximal Relationship Ambiguity, occurs when the
image contains multiple subject-object pairs interacting in
the same way, and the model fails to identify the correct
pairing. An example can be seen in the multiple musicians
“playing” their respective instruments in Figure 2b. Due
to their close proximity, visual features for each musicianinstrument pair overlap significantly, making it difficult for
the scene graph models to identify the correct pairings.
The primary cause of these two failures lies in the inherent difficulty of inferring relationships such as “hold” and
“play” from visual cues. For example, which glass is being
111535

