Cycle-Consistency for Robust Visual Question Answering
Meet Shah1 , Xinlei Chen1 , Marcus Rohrbach1 , Devi Parikh1,2
1

Facebook AI Research, 2 Georgia Institute of Technology

{meetshah, xinleic, mrf}@fb.com, dparikh@gatech.edu

Abstract
Despite significant progress in Visual Question Answering over the years, robustness of today’s VQA models leave
much to be desired. We introduce a new evaluation protocol
and associated dataset (VQA-Rephrasings) and show that
state-of-the-art VQA models are notoriously brittle to linguistic variations in questions. VQA-Rephrasings contains
3 human-provided rephrasings for 40k questions spanning
40k images from the VQA v2.0 validation dataset. As a
step towards improving robustness of VQA models, we propose a model-agnostic framework that exploits cycle consistency. Specifically, we train a model to not only answer
a question, but also generate a question conditioned on the
answer, such that the answer predicted for the generated
question is the same as the ground truth answer to the original question. Without the use of additional annotations, we
show that our approach is significantly more robust to linguistic variations than state-of-the-art VQA models, when
evaluated on the VQA-Rephrasings dataset. In addition,
our approach outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on
the standard VQA and Visual Question Generation tasks on
the challenging VQA v2.0 dataset.

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) applications allow a
human user to ask a machine questions about images – be it
a user interacting with a visual chat-bot or a visually impaired user relying on an assistive device. As this technology steps out of the realm of curated datasets towards
real-world settings, it is desirable that VQA models be robust to and consistent across reasonable variations in the
input modalities. While there has been significant progress
in VQA over the years [1, 17, 2, 9, 19, 41, 3, 4], today’s
VQA models are, however, far from being robust.
VQA is a task that lies at the intersection of language
and vision. Existing works have studied the robustness and
sensitiveness of VQA models to meaningful semantic variations in images [9], changing answer distributions [2] and
adversarial attacks [39] to images. However, to the best of
our knowledge, no work has studied the robustness of VQA

What is in the basket?

Prediction
banana

What is contained in the basket?

pizza

What can be seen inside the basket?

remote

What does the basket mainly contain?

paper

Is it safe to turn left?

Yes

Can one safely turn left?

No

Would it be safe to turn left?

No

Would turning left considered safe in this picture?

Yes

Figure 1. Existing VQA models are brittle. Shown above are examples from our new large-scale VQA-Rephrasings dataset that
enables systematic evaluation of robustness of VQA models to linguistic variations in the input question. Also shown are answers
predicted by a state-of-the-art VQA model [41]. We see that the
model predicts different answers for different reasonable rephrasings of the same question. We propose a novel model-agnostic
framework that exploits cycle consistency in question answering
and question generation to make VQA models more robust, without using additional annotation. Moreover, it outperforms stateof-the-art models on the standard VQA and Visual Question Generation tasks on the VQA v2.0 dataset.

models to linguistic variations in the input question. This is
important both from the perspective of VQA being a benchmark to test multi-modal AI capabilities (do our VQA models really “understand” the question when answering it?)
and for applications (human users are likely to phrase the
same query in a variety of different linguistic forms). However, today’s state-of-the-art VQA models are brittle to such
linguistic variations as can be seen in Fig. 1.
One approach to make VQA models more robust is to
collect a dataset with diverse rephrasings of questions to
train VQA models. Alternatively, an automatic approach
that does not require additional human intervention but results in a VQA model that is robust to linguistic variations
observed in the natural language questions is desirable.
We propose a novel model-agnostic framework that relies on cycle consistency to learn robust VQA models without requiring additional annotation. Specifically, we train
16649

