Deep Dual Relation Modeling for Egocentric Interaction Recognition
Haoxin Li1,3,4 , Yijun Cai1,4 , Wei-Shi Zheng2,3,4,∗
1
School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518005, China
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
lihaoxin05@gmail.com, caiyj6@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Egocentric interaction recognition aims to recognize the
camera wearer’s interactions with the interactor who faces
the camera wearer in egocentric videos. In such a humanhuman interaction analysis problem, it is crucial to explore
the relations between the camera wearer and the interactor.
However, most existing works directly model the interactions as a whole and lack modeling the relations between
the two interacting persons. To exploit the strong relations
for egocentric interaction recognition, we introduce a dual
relation modeling framework which learns to model the relations between the camera wearer and the interactor based
on the individual action representations of the two persons.
Specifically, we develop a novel interactive LSTM module,
the key component of our framework, to explicitly model
the relations between the two interacting persons based on
their individual action representations, which are collaboratively learned with an interactor attention module and a
global-local motion module. Experimental results on three
egocentric interaction datasets show the effectiveness of our
method and advantage over state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Egocentric interaction recognition [11, 25, 31, 35, 39]
attracts increasing attention with the popularity of wearable
cameras and broad applications including human machine
interaction [2, 18] and group events retrieval [3, 4]. Different from exocentric (third-person) videos, in egocentric
videos, the camera wearers are commonly invisible and the
videos are usually recorded with dynamic ego-motion (see
Figure 1). The invisibility of the camera wearer hampers action recognition learning of the camera wearer, and the egomotion hinders direct motion description of the interactor,
which make egocentric interaction recognition challenging.
∗ Corresponding author

(a) Invisibility of the camera wearer

(b) Ego-motion of the camera wearer

Figure 1. Illustration of camera-wearer’s invisibility and egomotion. (a) compares the person (in red boxes) receiving something in exocentric (left) and egocentric (right) videos from NUSFPID dataset [25]. (b) shows adjacent frames with obvious egomotion in an egocentric video from UTokyo PEV dataset [39].

An egocentric interaction comprises the actions of the
camera wearer and the interactor that influence each other
with relations. So modeling the relations between the two
interacting persons is important for interaction analysis. To
model the relations between the the two interacting persons explicitly, we need to obtain individual action representations of the two persons primarily. Therefore, we formulate the egocentric interaction recognition problem into
two interconnected subtasks, individual action representation learning and dual relation modeling.
In recent years, various works attempt to recognize interactions from egocentric videos. Existing methods integrated motion information using statistical properties of trajectories and optical flows [25, 31, 38] or utilized face orientations descriptors [11] with SVM classifiers for recognition. Deep neural network was also adopted to aggregate short-term and long-term information for classification
[35]. However, some of them [31] aimed to recognize in-

7932

