Neural Task Graphs: Generalizing to Unseen Tasks
from a Single Video Demonstration
De-An Huang*, Suraj Nair*, Danfei Xu*, Yuke Zhu, Animesh Garg,
Li Fei-Fei, Silvio Savarese, Juan Carlos Niebles
Computer Science Department, Stanford University

Abstract
Our goal is to generate a policy to complete an unseen
task given just a single video demonstration of the task in
a given domain. We hypothesize that to successfully generalize to unseen complex tasks from a single video demonstration, it is necessary to explicitly incorporate the compositional structure of the tasks into the model. To this end,
we propose Neural Task Graph (NTG) Networks, which use
conjugate task graph as the intermediate representation to
modularize both the video demonstration and the derived
policy. We empirically show NTG achieves inter-task generalization on two complex tasks: Block Stacking in BulletPhysics and Object Collection in AI2-THOR. NTG improves data efficiency with visual input as well as achieve
strong generalization without the need for dense hierarchical supervision. We further show that similar performance
trends hold when applied to real-world data. We show that
NTG can effectively predict task structure on the JIGSAWS
surgical dataset and generalize to unseen tasks.

1. Introduction
Learning sequential decisions and adapting to new task
objectives at test time is a long-standing challenge in
AI [5, 9]. In rich real domains, an autonomous agent has
to acquire new skills with minimal supervision. Recent
works have tackled the problem of one-shot imitation learning [8, 11, 40, 41] that learns from a single demonstration.
In this work, we push a step further to address one-shot visual imitation learning that operates directly on videos. We
first train a model on a set of seen in-domain tasks. The
model can then be applied on a single video demonstration
to obtain an execution policy of the new unseen task.
Learning directly from video is crucial for advancing the
existing imitation learning approaches to real-world scenarios as it is infeasible to annotate states, such as object trajectories, in each video. We focus on long-horizon tasks,
* indicates equal contribution

Single Video Demonstration

Task Completion

Action

NTG
Execution
Engine

NTG
Generator
Conjugate Task Graph

Env.

Visual Observation

Figure 1. Our goal is to execute an unseen task from a single video
demonstration. We propose Neural Task Graph Networks that
leverage compositionality by using the task graph as the intermediate representation. This leads to strong inter-task generalization.

as real-world tasks such as cooking or assembly are inherently long-horizon and hierarchical. Recent works have
attempted learning from pixel space [11, 27, 35, 42], but
learning long-horizon tasks from video in a one-shot setting
remains a challenge, since both the visual learning and task
complexity exacerbate the demand for better data efficiency.
Our solution explicitly models the compositionality in
the task structure and policy, enabling us to scale oneshot visual imitation to complex tasks. This is in contrast to previous works using unstructured task representations and policies [8, 11]. The use of compositionality
has led to better generalization in Visual Question Answering [17, 20, 24] and Policy Learning [3, 7, 38]. We propose
Neural Task Graph (NTG) Networks, a novel framework
that uses task graph as the intermediate representation to
explicitly modularize both the visual demonstration and the
derived policy. NTG consists of a generator and an execution engine, where the generator builds a task graph from
the task demo video to capture the structure of the task, and
the execution engine interacts with the environment to perform the task conditioned on the inferred task graph. Figure
1 shows an overview of NTG Networks.
The main technical challenge in using graphical task representations is that the unseen demos can easily introduce
states that are never observed during training. For example,

8565

