Underexposed Photo Enhancement using Deep Illumination Estimation
Ruixing Wang1,∗ Qing Zhang2,∗ Chi-Wing Fu1 Xiaoyong Shen3 Wei-Shi Zheng2 Jiaya Jia1,3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Sun Yat-sen University, China 3 YouTu Lab, Tencent

Abstract
This paper presents a new neural network for enhancing underexposed photos. Instead of directly learning an
image-to-image mapping as previous work, we introduce
intermediate illumination in our network to associate the
input with expected enhancement result, which augments
the network’s capability to learn complex photographic adjustment from expert-retouched input/output image pairs.
Based on this model, we formulate a loss function that
adopts constraints and priors on the illumination, prepare
a new dataset of 3,000 underexposed image pairs, and train
the network to effectively learn a rich variety of adjustment
for diverse lighting conditions. By these means, our network is able to recover clear details, distinct contrast, and
natural color in the enhancement results. We perform extensive experiments on the benchmark MIT-Adobe FiveK
dataset and our new dataset, and show that our network
is effective to deal with previously challenging images.

1. Introduction
Photo sharing on social networks is very common due
to the readily-available cameras on various devices, particularly the cell phones. However, the captured photo could
get underexposed due to low- and back-lighting; see Figure 1(a) for an example. Such photos not only look unpleasing and fail to capture what the user desires, but also
challenge many fundamental computer vision tasks, such
as segmentation, object detection and tracking, since the
underexposed regions have barely-visible details and relatively low contrast, as well as dull colors.
Severely-underexposed photo enhancement is a challenging task, since the underexposed regions are usually
imperceptible and the enhancement process is highly nonlinear and subjective. Although software exists to allow
users to interactively adjust photos, it is rather tedious and
difficult for non-experts since it requires to simultaneously
manipulate controls like color and contrast, while finely
tuning various objects and details in the photos. Several
∗ Joint first authors

(a) Input

(b) Auto-Enhance on iPhone

(c) Auto-Tone in Lightroom

(d) Our result

Figure 1: A challenging underexposed photo (a) enhanced
by various tools (b)-(d). Our result contains more details,
distinct contrast, and more natural color.
recent tools provide an automated function for users to enhance photos by just a single click, e.g., “Auto Enhance”
on iPhone and “Auto Tone” in Lightroom. These tools do
not greatly alter image contrast (and exposure) and may fail
on severely underexposed images due to the inherent difficulty of automatically balancing assorted factors in the adjustment; see Figure 1.
On the other hand, various methods were proposed in
the research community to tackle the problem. Early
work [34, 25, 32, 11, 26, 4] primarily focuses on contrast
enhancement, which may not be sufficient to recover image
details and color. More recent work [16, 17, 13, 9, 15, 22]
takes data-driven approaches to simultaneously learn adjustment in terms of color, contrast, brightness, and saturation for producing more expressive results. We note that
existing methods still have their respective limitations on
severely underexposed images; see Figure 2.
This paper presents a new end-to-end network for enhancing underexposed photos. Particularly, instead of directly learning an image-to-image mapping, we design our
network to first estimate an image-to-illumination mapping

6849

