Self-Supervised Learning via Conditional Motion Propagation
Xiaohang Zhan1 , Xingang Pan1 , Ziwei Liu1 , Dahua Lin1 , and Chen Change Loy2
1

CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Nanyang Technological University
1

{zx017, px117, zwliu, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
2
ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Intelligent agent naturally learns from motion. Various
self-supervised algorithms have leveraged motion cues to
learn effective visual representations. The hurdle here is
that motion is both ambiguous and complex, rendering previous works either suffer from degraded learning efficacy,
or resort to strong assumptions on object motions. In this
work, we design a new learning-from-motion paradigm to
bridge these gaps. Instead of explicitly modeling the motion probabilities, we design the pretext task as a conditional motion propagation problem. Given an input image
and several sparse flow guidance vectors on it, our framework seeks to recover the full-image motion. Compared
to other alternatives, our framework has several appealing
properties: (1) Using sparse flow guidance during training resolves the inherent motion ambiguity, and thus easing feature learning. (2) Solving the pretext task of conditional motion propagation encourages the emergence of
kinematically-sound representations that poss greater expressive power. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our framework learns structural and coherent features;
and achieves state-of-the-art self-supervision performance
on several downstream tasks including semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, and human parsing. Furthermore, our framework is successfully extended to several useful applications such as semi-automatic pixel-level
annotation. Project page: http://mmlab.ie.cuhk.
edu.hk/projects/CMP/.

1. Introduction
Humans have a remarkable ability of gaining useful
knowledge without direct supervision. The visual world
around us is highly structural, thus containing abundant natural supervisions to learn from. In daily navigation, we

CMP
Training
(a)

CMP
Testing
(b)

Figure 1. An illustration of our conditional motion propagation
task. In training, the goal is to predict optical flow from a static
image conditioned on sparse motion guidance. The guidance consists of sparse velocities sampled from the target optical flow with
a “watershed” strategy (see Section 3.2). In testing, the guidance
can be arbitrary, and the model is able to predict kinematicallysound results. For example, as shown in (b), given a guidance on
left foot, the model predicts that the shin is rotating. The optical
flows are visualized with Middlebury color wheel, and should be
viewed in color.

constantly perform the task of visual prediction by hallucinating what’s behind the corner. The recently introduced
self-supervised learning aims to empower machines with a
similar capacity, learning without explicit annotations. By
carefully designing pretext tasks comprising natural supervisions, self-supervised learning learns effective representations that can be used for several downstream scenarios.
In comparison to static pretext tasks such as colorization [34, 15] and inpainting [29], motion provides richer
and more structural information for us to exploit. The motion of a moving object generally indicates its kinematic

1881

