X2CT-GAN: Reconstructing CT from Biplanar X-Rays with Generative
Adversarial Networks
Xingde Ying∗ ,†,♭ , Heng Guo∗ ,§,♭ , Kai Ma♭ , Jian Wu† , Zhengxin Weng§ , and Yefeng Zheng♭
♭

YouTu Lab, Tencent
{kylekma, yefengzheng}@tencent.com

†

Zhejiang University

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

{yingxingde, wujian2000}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Computed tomography (CT) can provide a 3D view of the
patient’s internal organs, facilitating disease diagnosis, but
it incurs more radiation dose to a patient and a CT scanner is much more cost prohibitive than an X-ray machine
too. Traditional CT reconstruction methods require hundreds of X-ray projections through a full rotational scan of
the body, which cannot be performed on a typical X-ray machine. In this work, we propose to reconstruct CT from two
orthogonal X-rays using the generative adversarial network
(GAN) framework. A specially designed generator network
is exploited to increase data dimension from 2D (X-rays)
to 3D (CT), which is not addressed in previous research of
GAN. A novel feature fusion method is proposed to combine information from two X-rays. The mean squared error
(MSE) loss and adversarial loss are combined to train the
generator, resulting in a high-quality CT volume both visually and quantitatively. Extensive experiments on a publicly
available chest CT dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed method. It could be a nice enhancement of a
low-cost X-ray machine to provide physicians a CT-like 3D
volume in several niche applications.

1. Introduction
Immediately after its discovery by Wilhelm Rntgen in
1895, X-ray found wide applications in clinical practice. It
is the first imaging modality enabling us to non-invasively
see through a human body and diagnose changes of internal
anatomies. However, all tissues are projected onto a 2D image, overlaying each other. While bones are clearly visible,
soft tissues are often difficult to discern. Computed tomography (CT) is an imaging modality that reconstructs a 3D
volume from a set of X-rays (usually, at least 100 images)
captured in a full rotation of the X-ray apparatus around
the body. One prominent advantage of CT is that tissues
∗ Equally-contributed.

§

{ghgood, zxweng}@sjtu.edu.cn

Output

Input

X-ray

Generator
X-ray

CT

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed method. The network takes
2D biplanar X-rays as input and outputs a 3D CT volume.

are presented in the 3D space, which completely solves the
overlaying issue. However, a CT scan incurs far more radiation dose to a patient (depending on the number of X-rays
acquired for CT reconstruction). Moreover, a CT scanner
is often much more cost prohibitive than an X-ray machine,
making its less accessible in developing countries [37].
With hundreds of X-ray projections, standard reconstruction algorithms, e.g., filtered back projection or iterative reconstruction, can accurately reconstruct a CT volume
[14]. However, the data acquisition requires a fast rotation
of the X-ray apparatus around the patient, which cannot be
performed on a typical X-ray machine. In this work, we
propose to reconstruct a CT volume from biplanar X-rays
that are captured from two orthogonal view planes. The
major challenge is that the X-ray image suffers from severe
ambiguity of internal body information, where numbers of
CT volumes can exactly match the same input X-rays once
projected onto 2D. It seems to be unsolvable if we look for
general solutions with traditional CT reconstruction algorithms. However, human body anatomy is well constrained
and we may be able to learn the mapping from X-rays to
CT from a large training set through machine learning technology, especially deep learning (DL) methods. Recently,
the generative adversarial network (GAN) [11] has been

10619

