Typography with Decor: Intelligent Text Style Transfer
Wenjing Wang, Jiaying Liu∗, Shuai Yang, and Zongming Guo
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China

Abstract
Text effects transfer can dramatically make the text visually pleasing. In this paper, we present a novel framework
to stylize the text with exquisite decor, which are ignored by
the previous text stylization methods. Decorative elements
pose a challenge to spontaneously handle basal text effects
and decor, which are two different styles. To address this
issue, our key idea is to learn to separate, transfer and recombine the decors and the basal text effect. A novel text
effect transfer network is proposed to infer the styled version of the target text. The stylized text is finally embellished
with decor where the placement of the decor is carefully determined by a novel structure-aware strategy. Furthermore,
we propose a domain adaptation strategy for decor detection and a one-shot training strategy for text effects transfer,
which greatly enhance the robustness of our network to new
styles. We base our experiments on our collected topography dataset including 59,000 professionally styled text and
demonstrate the superiority of our method over other stateof-the-art style transfer methods.

1. Introduction
Artistic text, or styled text, is a kind of art wildly used in
design and media. As shown in Fig. 1, with text effects
such as color, texture, shading, and extra decorative elements, artistic text becomes more visually pleasing and can
vividly convey more semantic information. Traditionally, it
needs complex manual operations to migrate text effects to
other raw text, which is time-consuming especially when a
bunch of text is to be processed. In this work, we propose a
novel framework for transferring given text effects to arbitrary glyphs.
Text style transfer is a sub-topic of image style transfer.
Although the task of image style transfer [8, 4, 12, 28, 6]
have been wildly studied for years, text style transfer was
∗ Corresponding author.

This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China under contract No. 61772043 and Beijing Natural Science Foundation under contract No. L182002 and No. 4192025.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Figure 1: Demonstration of our text effects transfer method.
(a) Input . (b) Neural Style Transfer [8]. (c) Neural Doodles [4]. (d) T-Effect [23]. (e)-(h) Our results, where both
the basal text effects and the decorative elements can be
transferred to the target text.

not explored until recently. Yang et al. [23, 24] first explored this problem and designed a patch-based text effect transfer model. Due to the neglect of many important
attributes such as decorative elements, directions, regular
structures, etc., it fails on many kinds of text styles. On the
other hand, Azadi et al. [1] proposed a deep-based model,
which is able to stylize capital English alphabets given a few
shots. However, it can only generate images with a limited
resolution of 64 ⇥ 64 and is hard to be applied to texts other
than the 26 alphabets. Moreover, all these methods have assumed that the styles are uniform within or outside the text.
Thus, exquisite decorative elements, which are commonly
used in artistic text design, are ignored. These decorations
are usually drastically different from the basal text effects
and can make the text more visually impressive and more
information expressed. Treating decorative elements and
basal text effects as a whole style will seriously degrade the
visual quality of the stylization results, as shown in Fig. 1.
To address this problem, in this paper, we propose a
novel framework for text style transfer and pay special attention to decorative elements. The key idea is to detect,
separate and recombine these important embellishments.
15889

