DDLSTM: Dual-Domain LSTM for Cross-Dataset Action Recognition
Toby Perrett and Dima Damen
Department of Computer Science, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
<firstname>.<lastname>@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Domain alignment in convolutional networks aims to
learn the degree of layer-specific feature alignment beneficial to the joint learning of source and target datasets.
While increasingly popular in convolutional networks, there
have been no previous attempts to achieve domain alignment in recurrent networks. Similar to spatial features, both
source and target domains are likely to exhibit temporal dependencies that can be jointly learnt and aligned.
In this paper we introduce Dual-Domain LSTM (DDLSTM), an architecture that is able to learn temporal dependencies from two domains concurrently. It performs
cross-contaminated batch normalisation on both input-tohidden and hidden-to-hidden weights, and learns the parameters for cross-contamination, for both single-layer and
multi-layer LSTM architectures. We evaluate DDLSTM on
frame-level action recognition using three datasets, taking
a pair at a time, and report an average increase in accuracy
of 3.5%. The proposed DDLSTM architecture outperforms
standard, fine-tuned, and batch-normalised LSTMs.

1. Introduction
Online action recognition has direct implications on assistive and surveillance applications, enabling action classification as soon as a new frame is observed. It only depends
on previously observed frames, with no knowledge from future observations. This contrasts offline action recognition
where the whole action is observed before being classified.
One obstacle to deploying online action-recognition systems in the wild is that they require a large amount of training data to achieve high performance, so an open question is
how to make best-use of multiple datasets to achieve higher
recognition accuracy. Such cross-dataset temporal dependencies can be present even when datasets use different
class labels. In this paper, we focus on the related tasks
of kitchen activities. In one dataset, a sequence of actions
could be labeled as:
‘pick-up knife’ → ‘cut onion’ → ‘put onion in pan’
whereas a second dataset would have labels such as:
‘take knife’ → ‘chop potato’ → ‘place on a baking tray’

While the two sets of labels differ, we investigate how
a joint recurrent model can be learnt for both datasets
and we demonstrate that this joint training outperforms
independently-learnt models.
In online recognition, recurrent models are typically
used, particularly Long Short-Term Memory recurrent networks (LSTM) [9, 8, 27]. It has recently been shown that
LSTMs can benefit from multiple data sources when using CNN features for frame-based action classification [32].
However, LSTMs are not explicitly designed to handle information from multiple domains. We aim to address this
limitation by combining recent advances in CNN domain
adaptation [2] with batch-normalised LSTM training [4],
and introduce the Dual-Domain LSTM (DDLSTM). We
show that it is indeed possible for the DDLSTM to learn
jointly from two related datasets, and in a way which outperforms the standard LSTM for frame-based online action
recognition (whether jointly trained, or pre-trained and finetuned). Importantly, our formalism allows learning crosscontamination parameters in a differentiable manner within
the backpropation-through-time of the LSTM. In each experiment, we evaluate DDLSTM on pairs of datasets, out of
three datasets frequently used for kitchen-based activities:
50 Salads [40], Breakfast [21] and MPII Cooking 2 [36].
We also demonstrate the benefit of joint training with larger
datasets of related domains (e.g. EPIC [6]) to leverage missing temporal knowledge.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2
gives a summary of related domain adaptation and LSTM
literature. Section 3 introduces the proposed DDLSTM.
Section 4 gives an overview of the datasets we use for evaluation. Section 5 includes the comparative analysis, where
we show an average increase in frame-level recognition accuracy of 3.5%. Finally, the conclusion is in Section 6.

2. Background
Works which learn from multiple domains have traditionally used measures, such as the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [13, 28], to determine differences in feature space between the domains, and apply transformations
to bring them closer together [1, 33]. More recently, loss
17852

