An Efficient Schmidt-EKF for 3D Visual-Inertial SLAM
Patrick Geneva, James Maley, Guoquan Huang
University of Delaware
pgeneva@udel.edu, james.m.maley2.civ@mail.mil, ghuang@udel.edu

Abstract
It holds great implications for practical applications
to enable centimeter-accuracy positioning for mobile and
wearable sensor systems. In this paper, we propose a
novel, high-precision, efficient visual-inertial (VI)-SLAM
algorithm, termed Schmidt-EKF VI-SLAM (SEVIS), which
optimally fuses IMU measurements and monocular images
in a tightly-coupled manner to provide 3D motion tracking
with bounded error. In particular, we adapt the Schmidt
Kalman filter formulation to selectively include informative
features in the state vector while treating them as nuisance
parameters (or Schmidt states) once they become matured.
This change in modeling allows for significant computational savings by no longer needing to constantly update the
Schmidt states (or their covariance), while still allowing the
EKF to correctly account for their cross-correlations with
the active states. As a result, we achieve linear computational complexity in terms of map size, instead of quadratic
as in the standard SLAM systems. In order to fully exploit
the map information to bound navigation drifts, we advocate efficient keyframe-aided 2D-to-2D feature matching to
find reliable correspondences between current 2D visual
measurements and 3D map features. The proposed SEVIS is
extensively validated in both simulations and experiments.

1. Introduction
Enabling centimeter-accuracy positioning for mobile
and wearable devices such as smart phones and micro air
vehicles (MAVs), holds potentially huge implications for
practical applications. One of the most promising methods providing precision navigation in 3D is through the fusion of visual and inertial sensor measurements (i.e., visualinertial navigation systems or VINS) [30, 13, 22, 21, 17,
15]. This localization solution has the advantages of being
both cheap and ubiquitous, and has the potential to provide
position and orientation (pose) estimates which are on-par
in terms of accuracy with more expensive sensors such as
LiDAR. To date, various algorithms are available for VINS
problems including visual-inertial (VI)-SLAM [19, 45] and

visual-inertial odometry (VIO) [30, 29, 22], such as the extended Kalman filter (EKF) [30, 20, 14, 22, 17, 16, 50, 37],
unscented Kalman filter (UKF) [10, 4], and batch or slidingwindow optimization methods [46, 18, 21, 33, 52, 45, 40],
among which the EKF-based approaches remain arguably
the most popular for resource constrained devices because
of their efficiency. While current approaches can perform
well over a short period of time in a small-scale environment (e.g., see [13, 22, 15]), they are not robust and accurate
enough for long-term, large-scale deployments in challenging environments, due to their limited available resources
of sensing, memory and computation, which, if not properly addressed, often result in short mission duration or intractable real-time estimator performance.
In this paper, we will primarily focus on EKF-based VISLAM rather than VIO. VI-SLAM has the advantage of
building a map of the surrounding environment, which enables “loop closing” to bound long-term navigation drift.
VIO systems do not build a map and therefore cannot
leverage information from prior observations to help improve estimator performance. However, one of the largest
downsides of SLAM is that its computational complexity
grows quadratically with the number of landmarks in the
map, which commonly makes it computationally intractable
without simplifying assumptions to allow for them to run on
resource constrained sensor platforms such as mobile devices. To address this complexity issue, we leverage the
computationally-efficient multi-state constraint Kalman filter (MSCKF) [30] and selectively keep a number of features
(say n) in the state vector as a map of the environment, enabling the system to use them for a long period of time and
thus allowing for (implicit) loop closures to bound drifts.
This, however, would still exhibit O(n2 ) computational
complexity as in the standard EKF-based SLAM. By observing that features’ estimates do not have significant updates if they approach their steady state (i.e., becoming matured/converged), we could gain substantial computational
savings by avoiding performing EKF updates for those matured map features while still taking into account their uncertainty. To this end, we adapt the Schmidt Kalman filter
(SKF) [44] and treat map features as nuisance parameters

12105

