UnOS: Unified Unsupervised Optical-flow and Stereo-depth Estimation by
Watching Videos
Yang Wang1 Peng Wang1 Zhenheng Yang2 Chenxu Luo3 Yi Yang1 Wei Xu1
1
Baidu Research 2 University of Southern California 3 Johns Hopkins University
{wangyang59, wangpeng54, yangyi05, wei.xu}@baidu.com zhenheny@usc.edu chenxuluo@jhu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose UnOS, an unified system for
unsupervised optical flow and stereo depth estimation using
convolutional neural network (CNN) by taking advantages
of their inherent geometrical consistency based on the rigidscene assumption [31]. UnOS significantly outperforms
other state-of-the-art (SOTA) unsupervised approaches that
treated the two tasks independently. Specifically, given two
consecutive stereo image pairs from a video, UnOS estimates per-pixel stereo depth images, camera ego-motion
and optical flow with three parallel CNNs. Based on these
quantities, UnOS computes rigid optical flow and compares it against the optical flow estimated from the FlowNet,
yielding pixels satisfying the rigid-scene assumption. Then,
we encourage geometrical consistency between the two estimated flows within rigid regions, from which we derive
a rigid-aware direct visual odometry (RDVO) module. We
also propose rigid and occlusion-aware flow-consistency
losses for the learning of UnOS. We evaluated our results
on the popular KITTI dataset over 4 related tasks, i.e. stereo
depth, optical flow, visual odometry and motion segmentation.

1. Introduction
Estimating stereo depth [23] and optical flow [19] are
two fundamental problems in computer vision. Jointly considering the two provides dense 3D scene flow [34], which
enables numerous applications such as autonomous driving
[34], robot navigation [7, 12] and video analysis [42, 25].
Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) strategies for both tasks
rely on the advance of CNNs with supervised learning, e.g.
PSMNet [5] and PWCNet [40], which depend heavily on
the availability of training data[11, 32]. However, videos
are from various scenes when considering open-world problems [58], so it is not practical to collect dense ground truths
for these tasks at every place. Therefore, lots of efforts and
progresses have been made recently in unsupervised learning of stereo depth/matching [57], monocular depth estimations [60] and optical flow [38] with CNNs by just providing

Figure 1. Comparison between UnOS and other unsupervised
methods. (a) left image, (b) optical flow from [33], (d) UnOS
optical flow, (c) stereo depth from [14], (e) UnOS stereo, It can be
seen for both optical flow and stereo depth, UnOS generated results are more regularized and have sharper boundaries following
scene structures as shown in zoomed regions (best view in color).

stereo pairs or videos. These methods vastly improve the
generalization ability of the learned models. Nevertheless,
in those works, the two tasks were mostly treated independently in their pipeline, although it has shown to be very
useful to consider both of the tasks as a whole in the aspect
of 3D scene flow in traditional methods [43, 35, 41].
This paper completes this missing piece of unsupervised
learning by proposing joint learning of the two tasks, which
explores their geometrical relationship during training, and
boosts the performance on both sides as illustrated in Fig. 1.
We provide an overview of our system in Fig. 2. During
training, given two consecutive stereo image pairs, i.e. (Lt ,
Rt ) and (Ls , Rs ), UnOS jointly outputs stereo depth estimation (Dt ), camera ego-motion (Tt→s ) and optical flow
(Ft→s ) from StereoNet, MotionNet and FlowNet respectively. Then, a rigid-aware direct visual odometry (RDVO)
module is applied after the MotionNet, which refines and
updates the camera motion (Tut→s ). Next, we use Dt and
Tut→s to compute rigid flow Frt→s representing the motion
induced solely by the camera, which is compared against
Ft→s and yields a rigid mask M. In addition to the individual loss for each network, Frt→s and Ft→s are encouraged
to be consistent within rigid regions M, yielding more robust estimation for both tasks.
Our contributions are summarized as below,

8071

