Event-based High Dynamic Range Image and Very High Frame Rate Video
Generation using Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks
Lin Wang1∗, S. Mohammad Mostafavi I.2∗, Yo-Sung Ho, and Kuk-Jin Yoon1
1 Visual Intelligence Laboratory, Dept. Mechanical Engineering, KAIST, Korea
2 Computer Vision Laboratory, Dept. EECS, GIST, Korea

wanglin@kaist.ac.kr, mostafavi@gist.ac.kr, hoyo@gist.ac.kr, kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Event cameras have a lot of advantages over traditional
cameras, such as low latency, high temporal resolution, and
high dynamic range. However, since the outputs of event
cameras are the sequences of asynchronous events over
time rather than actual intensity images, existing algorithms
could not be directly applied. Therefore, it is demanding
to generate intensity images from events for other tasks. In
this paper, we unlock the potential of event camera-based
conditional generative adversarial networks to create images/videos from an adjustable portion of the event data
stream. The stacks of space-time coordinates of events are
used as inputs and the network is trained to reproduce images based on the spatio-temporal intensity changes. The
usefulness of event cameras to generate high dynamic range
(HDR) images even in extreme illumination conditions and
also non blurred images under rapid motion is also shown.
In addition, the possibility of generating very high frame
rate videos is demonstrated, theoretically up to 1 million
frames per second (FPS) since the temporal resolution of
event cameras are about 1 µs. Proposed methods are evaluated by comparing the results with the intensity images
captured on the same pixel grid-line of events using online
available real datasets and synthetic datasets produced by
the event camera simulator.

1. Introduction
Event cameras are bio-inspired vision sensors that mimic
the human eye in receiving the visual information [14].
While traditional cameras transmit intensity frames at a fixed
rate, event cameras transmit the changes of intensity at the
time of the changes, in the form of asynchronous events
that deliver space-time coordinates of the intensity changes.
They have lots of advantages over traditional cameras, e.g.
low latency in the order of microseconds, high temporal res∗ These two authors contributed equally

Figure 1. From left to right, input events, active pixel sensor (APS)
images from the DAVIS camera, and our results. Our methods
construct HDR images with more details that normal cameras could
not reproduce as in APS frames.

olution (around 1 µs) and high dynamic range. However,
since the outputs of events cameras are the sequences of
asynchronous events over time rather than actual intensity
images, most existing algorithms cannot be directly applied.
Thus, although it has been recently shown that event cameras are sufficient to perform some tasks such as 6-DoF pose
estimation[24] and 3D reconstruction [22, 11], it will be a
great help if we can generate intensity images from events
for other tasks such as object detection, tracking and SLAM.
Actually, it has been stated that event cameras, in principle, transfer all the information needed to reconstruct images
or a full video stream [2, 25, 24]. However, this statement has
never been thoroughly substantiated. Motivated by recent
advances of deep learning in image reconstruction and translation, we tackle the problem of generating intensity images
from events, and further unlock the potential of event cameras to produce high quality HDR intensity images and high
frame rate videos with no motion blur, which is especially
important when the robustness to fast motion and to extreme
illumination conditions is critical as in autonomous driving.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first attempt
focusing on pure events to HDR images and high frame

10081

