Scalable Convolutional Neural Network for Image Compressed Sensing
Wuzhen Shi1 , Feng Jiang1,2 , Shaohui Liu1,2 , and Debin Zhao1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{wzhshi, fjiang, shliu, dbzhao}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, deep learning based image Compressed Sensing (CS) methods have been proposed and demonstrated superior reconstruction quality with low computational complexity. However, the existing deep learning based image
CS methods need to train different models for different sampling ratios, which increases the complexity of the encoder
and decoder. In this paper, we propose a scalable convolutional neural network (dubbed SCSNet) to achieve scalable sampling and scalable reconstruction with only one
model. Specifically, SCSNet provides both coarse and fine
granular scalability. For coarse granular scalability, SCSNet is designed as a single sampling matrix plus a hierarchical reconstruction network that contains a base layer
plus multiple enhancement layers. The base layer provides
the basic reconstruction quality, while the enhancement layers reference the lower reconstruction layers and gradually improve the reconstruction quality. For fine granular
scalability, SCSNet achieves sampling and reconstruction
at any sampling ratio by using a greedy method to select
the measurement bases. Compared with the existing deep
learning based image CS methods, SCSNet achieves scalable sampling and quality scalable reconstruction at any
sampling ratio with only one model. Experimental results demonstrate that SCSNet has the state-of-the-art performance while maintaining a comparable running speed with
the existing deep learning based image CS methods.1

1. Introduction
Compressed Sensing (CS) [11] depicts a new paradigm for signal acquisition and reconstruction, which implements sampling and compression jointly. Given a sampling
matrix Φ ∈ Rm×n with m << n, CS states that a signal
x ∈ n×1 , which can be represented sparsely in a transform
domain, can be well reconstructed from its linear measurements y = Φx. Since the CS theory guarantees that a signal
1 Test code is available at: https://github.com/wzhshi/SCSNet.

Figure 1. The reconstruction quality and running speed comparison on CPU. The compared traditional CS methods are marked
with blue font, and the compared deep learning based CS methods are marked with green font. The chart is based on Set11 [20]
results of sampling ratio of 0.1.

can be reconstructed with high quality at low sampling ratio when the signal is sparse in some domain, there has been
significant interest in CS. Some works have been proposed
to apply CS to image acquisition [12, 17], source coding
[28, 15], wireless broadcast [37, 21], and so on.
In the study of CS, the two main challengges are (1) the
design of sampling matrix and (2) reconstructing the original signal from its linear measurements [14, 1]. To the first
challenge, the representative sampling matices include: the
random matrix [14], the binary matrix [1, 23], and the structural matrix [9, 15]. To the second challenge, the representative methods include: convex-optimization algorithms (e.g.
[8, 35, 13]), the greedy algorithms (e.g. [24, 33, 30]), and
the iterative thresholding algorithms (e.g. [16]). The iterative nature of these traditional methods lead to high computational complexity, which hampers their practical applications. Recently, a few deep learning based image CS reconstruction methods [26, 20, 4, 32, 39, 36] have been proposed. As shown in Figure 1, the deep learning based im-

12290

