End-to-End Multi-Task Learning with Attention
Shikun Liu
Edward Johns
Andrew J. Davison
Department of Computing, Imperial College London
{shikun.liu17, e.johns, a.davison}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Shared Features

We propose a novel multi-task learning architecture,
which allows learning of task-specific feature-level attention. Our design, the Multi-Task Attention Network
(MTAN), consists of a single shared network containing a
global feature pool, together with a soft-attention module
for each task. These modules allow for learning of taskspecific features from the global features, whilst simultaneously allowing for features to be shared across different
tasks. The architecture can be trained end-to-end and can
be built upon any feed-forward neural network, is simple
to implement, and is parameter efficient. We evaluate our
approach on a variety of datasets, across both image-toimage predictions and image classification tasks. We show
that our architecture is state-of-the-art in multi-task learning compared to existing methods, and is also less sensitive to various weighting schemes in the multi-task loss
function. Code is available at https://github.com/
lorenmt/mtan.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have seen great
success in a range of computer vision tasks, including image classification [11], semantic segmentation [1], and style
transfer [13]. However, these networks are typically designed to achieve only one particular task. For more complete vision systems in real-world applications, a network
which can perform multiple tasks simultaneously is far
more desirable than building a set of independent networks,
one for each task. This is more efficient not only in terms
of memory and inference speed, but also in terms of data,
since related tasks may share informative visual features.
This type of learning is called Multi-Task Learning
(MTL) [20, 14, 6], and in this paper we present a novel architecture for MTL based on feature-level attention masks,
which add greater flexibility to share complementary features. Compared to standard single-task learning, training
multiple tasks whilst successfully learning a shared representation poses two key challenges:

Task-Specific
Attention Modules
Task-Specific
Attention Modules

Figure 1: Overview of our proposal MTAN. The shared network takes input data and learns task-shared features, whilst
each attention network learns task-specific features, by applying attention modules to the shared network.
i) Network Architecture (how to share): A multi-task
learning architecture should express both task-shared
and task-specific features. In this way, the network is encouraged to learn a generalisable representation (to avoid
over-fitting), whilst also providing the ability to learn
features tailored to each task (to avoid under-fitting).
ii) Loss Function (how to balance tasks): A multi-task
loss function, which weights the relative contributions of
each task, should enable learning of all tasks with equal
importance, without allowing easier tasks to dominate.
Manual tuning of loss weights is tedious, and it is preferable to automatically learn the weights, or design a network which is robust to different weights.
However, most prior MTL approaches focus on only one
of these two challenges, whilst maintaining a standard implementation of the other. In this paper, we introduce a unified approach which addresses both challenges cohesively,
by designing a novel network which (i) enables both taskshared and task-specific features to be learned automatically, and consequently (ii) learns an inherent robustness to
the choice of loss weighting scheme.
The proposed network, which we call the Multi-Task Attention Network (MTAN) (see Figure 1), is composed of a
single shared network, which learns a global feature pool
containing features across all tasks. Then for each task,
11871

