Not All Areas Are Equal: Transfer Learning for Semantic Segmentation via
Hierarchical Region Selection
Ruoqi Sun 1∗ Xinge Zhu 2∗ Chongruo Wu 3 Chen Huang 4 Jianping Shi 5 Lizhuang Ma 1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
University of California, Davis 4 Carnegie Mellon University 5 SenseTime Research
ruoqisun7@sjtu.edu.cn
chenh2@andrew.cmu.edu

zx018@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

shijianping@sensetime.com

crwu@ucdavis.edu
ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The success of deep neural networks for semantic segmentation heavily relies on large-scale and well-labeled
datasets, which are hard to collect in practice. Synthetic
data offers an alternative to obtain ground-truth labels for
free. However, models directly trained on synthetic data
often struggle to generalize to real images. In this paper,
we consider transfer learning for semantic segmentation
that aims to mitigate the gap between abundant synthetic
data (source domain) and limited real data (target domain).
Unlike previous approaches that either learn mappings to
target domain or finetune on target images, our proposed
method jointly learn from real images and selectively from
realistic pixels in synthetic images to adapt to the target
domain. Our key idea is to have weighting networks to
score how similar the synthetic pixels are to real ones, and
learn such weighting at pixel-, region- and image-levels. We
jointly learn these hierarchical weighting networks and segmentation network in an end-to-end manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed approach significantly outperforms other existing baselines, and is applicable to scenarios with extremely limited real images.

1. Introduction
The advances in deep learning have led to many breakthroughs in artificial intelligence. Various tasks in computer
vision [13, 14, 32] have been revisited and have achieved
the state-of-the-art performance. However, these improvements often require vast labeled data, which is prohibitively
expensive for many vision tasks. Semantic segmentation
is such an example, in which annotating an image pixelwisely may take more than 90 minutes [7], resulting in a
failure to scale. Alternatively, researchers [24, 25] switched
to use Computer Graphics techniques to render synthetic
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this paper.

Figure 1. (a): Although two images are from different domains,
some regions still hold similar structures, like the car and road
region. Our design philosophy is to focus on these similar regions
for improving the effectiveness. (b): Results of joint training on
different numbers of synthetic images (from GTAV) and insufficient
real images. Blue bar indicates the result of using real images only.

images where pixel-wise labels are generated automatically
at a much faster speed. In this paper, we consider utilizing
abundant labeled synthetic data (source domain) and insufficient labeled real data (target domain) together to
make a better performance on real data. It is noted that our
problem setting is different from the unsupervised domain
adaptation (i.e., labeled synthetic data and unlabeled real
data) and semi-supervised domain adaptation (i.e., small
amount of labeled real data and abundant unlabeled real
data in one domain). Due to the labor-free annotations and
superior performance, the learning scheme we focus on has
much practical significance in real-world applications.
Given abundant labeled synthetic images and insufficient
labeled real-world images, it is natural to expect better segmentation performance from such ”augmentation” in pixel
space. However, this is usually not the case and perfor-

4360

