Panoptic Segmentation
Alexander Kirillov1,2
1

Kaiming He1

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Ross Girshick1
2

Carsten Rother2

Piotr Dollár1

HCI/IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany

Abstract
We propose and study a task we name panoptic segmentation (PS). Panoptic segmentation unifies the typically distinct tasks of semantic segmentation (assign a class label
to each pixel) and instance segmentation (detect and segment each object instance). The proposed task requires
generating a coherent scene segmentation that is rich and
complete, an important step toward real-world vision systems. While early work in computer vision addressed related image/scene parsing tasks, these are not currently
popular, possibly due to lack of appropriate metrics or associated recognition challenges. To address this, we propose a novel panoptic quality (PQ) metric that captures
performance for all classes (stuff and things) in an interpretable and unified manner. Using the proposed metric,
we perform a rigorous study of both human and machine
performance for PS on three existing datasets, revealing interesting insights about the task. The aim of our work is
to revive the interest of the community in a more unified
view of image segmentation. For more analysis and up-todate results, please check the arXiv version of the paper:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.00868.

1. Introduction
In the early days of computer vision, things – countable
objects such as people, animals, tools – received the dominant share of attention. Questioning the wisdom of this
trend, Adelson [1] elevated the importance of studying systems that recognize stuff – amorphous regions of similar
texture or material such as grass, sky, road. This dichotomy
between stuff and things persists to this day, reflected in
both the division of visual recognition tasks and in the specialized algorithms developed for stuff and thing tasks.
Studying stuff is most commonly formulated as a task
known as semantic segmentation, see Figure 1b. As stuff
is amorphous and uncountable, this task is defined as simply assigning a class label to each pixel in an image (note
that semantic segmentation treats thing classes as stuff).
In contrast, studying things is typically formulated as the
task of object detection or instance segmentation, where the

(a) image

(b) semantic segmentation

(c) instance segmentation

(d) panoptic segmentation

Figure 1: For a given (a) image, we show ground truth for: (b)
semantic segmentation (per-pixel class labels), (c) instance segmentation (per-object mask and class label), and (d) the proposed
panoptic segmentation task (per-pixel class+instance labels). The
PS task: (1) encompasses both stuff and thing classes, (2) uses a
simple but general format, and (3) introduces a uniform evaluation
metric for all classes. Panoptic segmentation generalizes both semantic and instance segmentation and we expect the unified task
will present novel challenges and enable innovative new methods.

goal is to detect each object and delineate it with a bounding box or segmentation mask, respectively, see Figure 1c.
While seemingly related, the datasets, details, and metrics
for these two visual recognition tasks vary substantially.
The schism between semantic and instance segmentation
has led to a parallel rift in the methods for these tasks. Stuff
classifiers are usually built on fully convolutional nets [30]
with dilations [51, 5] while object detectors often use object
proposals [15] and are region-based [37, 14]. Overall algorithmic progress on these tasks has been incredible in the
past decade, yet, something important may be overlooked
by focussing on these tasks in isolation.
A natural question emerges: Can there be a reconciliation between stuff and things? And what is the most effective design of a unified vision system that generates rich and
coherent scene segmentations? These questions are particularly important given their relevance in real-world applications, such as autonomous driving or augmented reality.

9404

