Reinforced Cross-Modal Matching and Self-Supervised Imitation Learning
for Vision-Language Navigation
Xin Wang1

Qiuyuan Huang2 Asli Celikyilmaz2 Jianfeng Gao2 Dinghan Shen3
Yuan-Fang Wang1 William Yang Wang1 Lei Zhang2
1
University of California, Santa Barbara 2 Microsoft Research, Redmond 3 Duke University
{xwang,yfwang,william}@cs.ucsb.edu
{qihua,aslicel,jfgao,leizhang}.microsoft.com, dinghan.shen@duke.edu

Abstract
Vision-language navigation (VLN) is the task of navigating an embodied agent to carry out natural language
instructions inside real 3D environments. In this paper,
we study how to address three critical challenges for this
task: the cross-modal grounding, the ill-posed feedback,
and the generalization problems. First, we propose a novel
Reinforced Cross-Modal Matching (RCM) approach that
enforces cross-modal grounding both locally and globally
via reinforcement learning (RL). Particularly, a matching
critic is used to provide an intrinsic reward to encourage
global matching between instructions and trajectories, and
a reasoning navigator is employed to perform cross-modal
grounding in the local visual scene. Evaluation on a VLN
benchmark dataset shows that our RCM model significantly
outperforms previous methods by 10% on SPL and achieves
the new state-of-the-art performance. To improve the generalizability of the learned policy, we further introduce a
Self-Supervised Imitation Learning (SIL) method to explore
unseen environments by imitating its own past, good decisions. We demonstrate that SIL can approximate a better
and more efficient policy, which tremendously minimizes the
success rate performance gap between seen and unseen environments (from 30.7% to 11.7%).

1. Introduction
Recently, vision-language grounded embodied agents
have received increased attention [36, 22, 7] due to their
popularity in many intriguing real-world applications, e.g.,
in-home robots and personal assistants. Meanwhile, such
an agent pushes forward visual and language grounding by
putting itself in an active learning scenario through firstperson vision. In particular, Vision-Language Navigation
(VLN) [2] is the task of navigating an agent inside real environments by following natural language instructions. VLN

Instruction
Turn right and head
towards the kitchen.
Then turn left, pass a
table and enter the
hallway. Walk down
the hallway and turn
into the entry way to
your right without
doors. Stop in front
of the toilet.

Local
visual
scene
Global
trajectories
in top-down
view

Initial Position
Target Position
Demonstration Path A
Executed Path B
Executed Path C

Figure 1: Demonstration of the VLN task. The instruction, the
local visual scene, and the global trajectories in a top-down view
is shown. The agent does not have access to the top-down view.
Path A is the demonstration path following the instruction. Path B
and C are two different paths executed by the agent.

requires a deep understanding of linguistic semantics, visual perception, and most importantly, the alignment of the
two. The agent must reason about the vision-language dynamics in order to move towards the target that is inferred
from the instructions.
VLN presents some unique challenges. First, reasoning
over visual images and natural language instructions can be
difficult. As we demonstrate in Figure 1, to reach a destination, the agent needs to ground an instruction in the local
visual scene, represented as a sequence of words, as well as
match the instruction to the visual trajectory in the global
temporal space. Secondly, except for strictly following expert demonstrations, the feedback is rather coarse, since
the “Success” feedback is provided only when the agent
reaches a target position, completely ignoring whether the
agent has followed the instructions (e.g., Path A in Figure 1)

6629

