Filter Pruning via Geometric Median
for Deep Convolutional Neural Networks Acceleration
Yang He1

Ping Liu1,2
Ziwei Wang3
Zhilan Hu4
Yi Yang1,5∗
1
2
CAI, University of Technology Sydney
JD.com
3
4
5
Information Science Academy, CETC
Huawei
Baidu Research

{yang.he-1}@student.uts.edu.au

{pino.pingliu,wangziwei26,yee.i.yang}@gmail.com

Abstract
Previous works utilized “smaller-norm-less-important”
criterion to prune filters with smaller norm values in a convolutional neural network. In this paper, we analyze this
norm-based criterion and point out that its effectiveness depends on two requirements that are not always met: (1)
the norm deviation of the filters should be large; (2) the
minimum norm of the filters should be small. To solve
this problem, we propose a novel filter pruning method,
namely Filter Pruning via Geometric Median (FPGM), to
compress the model regardless of those two requirements.
Unlike previous methods, FPGM compresses CNN models
by pruning filters with redundancy, rather than those with
“relatively less” importance. When applied to two image
classification benchmarks, our method validates its usefulness and strengths. Notably, on CIFAR-10, FPGM reduces
more than 52% FLOPs on ResNet-110 with even 2.69%
relative accuracy improvement. Moreover, on ILSVRC2012, FPGM reduces more than 42% FLOPs on ResNet101 without top-5 accuracy drop, which has advanced the
state-of-the-art. Code is publicly available on GitHub:
https://github.com/he-y/filter-pruning-geometric-median

1. Introduction
The deeper and wider architectures of deep CNNs bring
about the superior performance of computer vision tasks [6,
26, 45]. However, they also cause the prohibitively expensive computational cost and make the model deployment on mobile devices hard if not impossible. Even the
latest architecture with high efficiencies, such as residual
connection [12] or inception module [34], has millions
of parameters requiring billions of float point operations
(FLOPs) [15]. Therefore, it is necessary to attain the deep
CNN models which have relatively low computational cost
⇤ Corrsponding Author. Part of this work was done when Yi Yang was
visiting Baidu Research during his Professional Experience Program.

Filter Space
Large norm
Medium norm
Small norm

Previous
method

Pruning

Our
method

Filters before pruning

(a) Criterion for filter pruning
Filters to be
pruned

Number
of filters
0

𝓥1

𝒯

𝕍

Ideal distribution: 𝕍

Requirement 1: σ (𝕍) >> 0
Requirement 2: 𝒗1 → 0

𝓥2 Value of norm

(b) Requirements for norm-based criterion
Figure 1. An illustration of (a) the pruning criterion for normbased approach and the proposed method; (b) requirements for
norm-based filter pruning criterion. In (a), the green boxes denote
the filters of the network, where deeper color denotes larger norm
of the filter. For the norm-based criterion, only the filters with
the largest norm are kept based on the assumption that smallernorm filters are less important. In contrast, the proposed method
prunes the filters with redundant information in the network. In
this way, filters with different norms indicated by different intensities of green may be retained. In (b), the blue curve represents
the ideal norm distribution of the network, and the v1 and v2 is the
minimal and maximum value of norm distribution, respectively.
To choose the appropriate threshold T (the red shadow), two requirements should be achieved, that is, the norm deviation should
be large, and the minimum of the norm should be arbitrarily small.

but high accuracy.
Recent developments on pruning can be divided into
two categories, i.e., weight pruning [11, 1] and filter pruning [21, 39]. Weight pruning directly deletes weight values
14340

