Actively Seeking and Learning from Live Data
Damien Teney
Anton van den Hengel
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
The University of Adelaide
Adelaide, Australia
{damien.teney,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

What is the color of the car ?

Abstract
One of the key limitations of traditional machine learning methods is their requirement for training data that exemplifies all the information to be learned. This is a particular problem for visual question answering methods, which
may be asked questions about virtually anything. The approach we propose is a step toward overcoming this limitation by searching for the information required at test
time. The resulting method dynamically utilizes data from
an external source, such as a large set of questions/answers or images/captions. Concretely, we learn a set of
base weights for a simple VQA model, that are specifically
adapted to a given question with the information specifically retrieved for this question. The adaptation process
leverages recent advances in gradient-based meta learning
and contributions for efficient retrieval and cross-domain
adaptation. We surpass the state-of-the-art on the VQACP v2 benchmark and demonstrate our approach to be intrinsically more robust to out-of-distribution test data. We
demonstrate the use of external non-VQA data using the MS
COCO captioning dataset to support the answering process. This approach opens a new avenue for open-domain
VQA systems that interface with diverse sources of data.

1. Introduction
One of the ongoing criticisms of modern machine learning methods is that they presume the availability of large
volumes of training data [20, 44]. This training data should
be representative of the distribution from which the test data
will be sampled from, which may be unknowable at training time. These methods usually need constant retraining to
accommodate recent data, or to alleviate under-generalizing
under a domain shift between the training and test distributions. While there exists a host of approaches to address
these limitations (from continuum learning [37, 36] to domain adaptation [9, 30, 42] for example), the information
extracted from the training data is typically fixed into the

Yellow

Retrieval of relevant examples
from an external source
A white police car
parked on the street.

Adaptation of a
VQA model

What is the color this
book ? Yellow.
What is the color the
car ? Blue.

Figure 1. We propose a visual question answering (VQA) system
able to retrieve and utilize information from an external source,
at test time. The method learns to exploit external information
of various forms, and we demonstrate question/answer tuples, but
also images and corresponding captions. The method identifies
the external information needed to answer a question and adapt its
behaviour accordingly. This overcomes limitations of traditional
approaches, including overfitting to the training data.

parameters of a model during training, and applied without
modification thereafter. The approach we propose here addresses this limitation by exploiting new information as it
comes to light, by seeking out relevant data from a large external data source. It actively adapts its behaviour according
to the information gained from this data, which represents a
fundamental change from pure supervised learning.
This paper demonstrates this novel capability on the task
of Visual Question Answering (VQA). The task requires
answering a previously unseen question about a previously
unseen image. Questions are general and open-ended, and
thus require a virtually unlimited array of information and
skills to answer. The current approach to VQA is to train

1940

