A neural network based on SPD manifold learning for skeleton-based hand
gesture recognition
Xuan Son Nguyen, Luc Brun, Olivier Lézoray, Sébastien Bougleux
Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, ENSICAEN, CNRS, GREYC, 14000 Caen, France
{xsnguyen,luc.brun}@ensicaen.fr,{olivier.lezoray,sebastien.bougleux}@unicaen.fr

Abstract
This paper proposes a new neural network based on SPD
manifold learning for skeleton-based hand gesture recognition. Given the stream of hand’s joint positions, our approach combines two aggregation processes on respectively
spatial and temporal domains. The pipeline of our network
architecture consists in three main stages. The first stage
is based on a convolutional layer to increase the discriminative power of learned features. The second stage relies
on different architectures for spatial and temporal Gaussian
aggregation of joint features. The third stage learns a final
SPD matrix from skeletal data. A new type of layer is proposed for the third stage, based on a variant of stochastic
gradient descent on Stiefel manifolds. The proposed network is validated on two challenging datasets and shows
state-of-the-art accuracies on both datasets.

1. Introduction
Hand gesture recognition is an important research topic
with applications in many fields, e.g., assisted living,
human-robot interaction or sign language interpretation. A
large family of hand gesture recognition methods is based
on low-level features extracted from images, e.g., spatiotemporal interest points. However, with the introduction
of affordable depth sensing cameras, e.g., Intel Realsense
or Microsoft Kinect, and the availability of highly accurate
joint tracking algorithms, skeletal data can be obtained effectively with good precision. Skeletal data provides a rich
and high level description of the hand. This has led to an extensive development of approaches for skeleton-based hand
gesture recognition in recent years.
Early works on the recognition of hand gestures or human actions from skeletal data are based on a modeling
of the skeleton’s movement as time series [49, 52]. The
recognition step is thus based on the comparison of sequences of features describing skeleton’s movements using, e.g., Dynamic Time Warping [49] or Fourier Temporal

Pyramid [52].
Such approaches ignore the high correlations existing
between the movement of two adjacent hand joints (e.g.,
two joints of a same finger) within a hand gesture. Taking into account this information is a crucial step for hand
gesture recognition and requires the definition and the appropriate processing of hand joints’ neighborhoods. Recently, graph convolutional networks for action recognition [27, 56] have shown excellent performance by taking
into account physical connections of body joints defined by
the underlying structure of body skeleton. While the use
of physical connections of skeleton joints are important for
capturing discriminating cues in hand gesture and action
recognition, the identification of other connections induced
by the performed gestures and actions are also useful and
can greatly improve recognition accuracy [45].
Motivated by this observation, we model in this work
the hand skeleton as a 2D grid where connections, different from the classical physical connections of hand joints,
are added to better capture patterns defined by hand joints’
movements. Figure 1(a) shows the hand joint positions estimated by an Intel Realsense camera. Since the hand skeleton has an irregular geometric structure that differs from
grid-shaped structures, the 2D grid is constructed from the
hand skeleton by removing some hand joints and adding
connections between neighboring joints. Figure 1(b) shows
a 2D grid corresponding to the hand skeleton in Fig. 1(a).
This 2D grid integrates adjacency relationships between
hand joints that often have correlated movements. Moreover, this modeling allows us to use a classical convolutional layer instead of a graph convolutional operator on an
arbitrary geometric graph [56].
Our approach relies on SPD matrices to aggregate features resulting from the convolutional layer. The SPD matrices considered in this work combine mean and covariance
information which have been shown effective in various vision tasks [15, 21, 22]. Since SPD matrices are known to lie
on a Riemannian manifold, specific layers for deep neural
networks of SPD matrices should be designed [19, 60]. Beside good performances on action recognition tasks, these
112036

