Self-supervised Spatiotemporal Learning via Video Clip Order Prediction
Dejing Xu1 Jun Xiao1 Zhou Zhao1 Jian Shao1 Di Xie2 Yueting Zhuang1
1
Zhejiang University 2 Hikvision Research Institute
{xudejing,junx,zhaozhou,jshao,yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn; xiedi@hikvision.com

Abstract
shuffled frames

We propose a self-supervised spatiotemporal learning technique which leverages the chronological order of
videos. Our method can learn the spatiotemporal representation of the video by predicting the order of shuffled clips
from the video. The category of the video is not required,
which gives our technique the potential to take advantage
of infinite unannotated videos. There exist related works
which use frames, while compared to frames, clips are more
consistent with the video dynamics. Clips can help to reduce the uncertainty of orders and are more appropriate to
learn a video representation. The 3D convolutional neural networks are utilized to extract features for clips, and
these features are processed to predict the actual order. The
learned representations are evaluated via nearest neighbor
retrieval experiments. We also use the learned networks
as the pre-trained models and finetune them on the action
recognition task. Three types of 3D convolutional neural
networks are tested in experiments, and we gain large improvements compared to existing self-supervised methods.

1. Introduction
3D convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been
explored for the action recognition task in many previous works [38, 2, 30]. While many high-level tasks have
been proposed such as captioning [3] and question answering [43], action recognition is always significant for its
foundation status. However, compared to the progress made
by 2D CNNs over images, the improvements of 3D CNNs
over videos are much slower. Until recently, the 2D CNNs
that take both the RGB and flow streams [33] as inputs
still behave competitively with 3D CNNs in action recognition. The primary reason is that most of the existing
video datasets are relatively small-scale which may not be
able to optimize the immense number of parameters in 3D
CNNs [13]. ImageNet [5] plays an important role in various tasks in the image domain, but there is a lack of sim-

order 1

order 2

?

shuffled clips
order 1

order 2

X
√

Figure 1. Illustration of the necessity to use clips. The top three
rows show examples of frame-based order prediction. For the
shuffled frames, both order 1 and order 2 has the same correctness
since we cannot tell the direction of the gymnast in the balance
beam. However, for the clip-based order prediction in the bottom
rows, the judgment is simpler. The dynamics in each clip will help
to reveal the correct order.

ilar dataset in the video domain. In [13], several successful model architectures in image classification are extended
and trained on Kinetics [2] video dataset. The authors conclude that 3D CNNs and Kinetics may have the potential to
contribute to significant progress in fields related to various
video tasks as the 2D CNNs and ImageNet do.
Though nowadays the large-scale video datasets begin
to appear [12, 2], annotating new video datasets are always
required to tackle the problem in new domains. It needs a
wealth of resources and meticulous design to annotate such
one. Therefore it is valuable if we can leverage the unlabeled videos to facilitate learning. Self-supervised learning
is one kind of technique where the supervisory signal can be
obtained easily from the data itself. Researches have been
done in this area, in which both the images and videos are
exploited. For image data, there exist self-supervised tasks
such as predicting relative positions of image patches [6],
solve jigsaw puzzles [27], image inpainting [29] and image
color channel prediction [21]. Since the particular prop-

10334

