GA-Net: Guided Aggregation Net for End-to-end Stereo Matching
Feihu Zhang1∗
Victor Prisacariu1
1 University of Oxford

Ruigang Yang2
Philip H.S. Torr1
2 Baidu Research, Baidu Inc.

Abstract
In the stereo matching task, matching cost aggregation is
crucial in both traditional methods and deep neural network
models in order to accurately estimate disparities. We propose two novel neural net layers, aimed at capturing local
and the whole-image cost dependencies respectively. The
first is a semi-global aggregation layer which is a differentiable approximation of the semi-global matching, the second is the local guided aggregation layer which follows a
traditional cost filtering strategy to refine thin structures.
These two layers can be used to replace the widely
used 3D convolutional layer which is computationally
costly and memory-consuming as it has cubic computational/memory complexity. In the experiments, we show
that nets with a two-layer guided aggregation block easily outperform the state-of-the-art GC-Net which has nineteen 3D convolutional layers. We also train a deep
guided aggregation network (GA-Net) which gets better
accuracies than state-of-the-art methods on both Scene
Flow dataset and KITTI benchmarks. Code is available at

(a) Input image

(b) GC-Net [13]

(c) Our GA-Net-2

(d) Ground truth

Figure 1: Performance illustrations. (a) a challenging input image. (b) Result of the state-of-the-art method GC-Net [13] which
has nineteen 3D convolutional layers for matching cost aggregation. (c) Result of our GA-Net-2, which only uses two proposed
GA layers and two 3D convolutional layers. It aggregates the
matching information into the large textureless region and is an
order of magnitude faster than GC-Net. (d) Ground truth.

https://github.com/feihuzhang/GANet.

1. Introduction
Stereo reconstruction is a major research topic in computer vision, robotics and autonomous driving. It aims to
estimate 3D geometry by computing disparities between
matching pixels in a stereo image pair. It is challenging
due to a variety of real-world problems, such as occlusions,
large textureless areas (e.g. sky, walls etc.), reflective surfaces (e.g. windows), thin structures and repetitive textures.
Traditionally, stereo reconstruction is decomposed into
three important steps: feature extraction (for matching cost
computation), matching cost aggregation and disparity prediction [9, 21]. Feature-based matching is often ambiguous,
with wrong matches having a lower cost than the correct
ones, due to occlusions, smoothness, reflections, noise etc.
Therefore, cost aggregation is a key step needed to obtain
accurate disparity estimations in challenging regions.
Deep neural networks have been used for matching cost
∗ Part of the work was done when working in Baidu Research.

computation in, e.g, [30,33], with (i) cost aggregation based
on traditional approaches, such as cost filtering [10] and
semi-global matching (SGM) [9] and (ii) disparity computation with a separate step. Such methods considerably
improve over traditional pixel matching, but still struggle
to produce accurate disparity results in textureless, reflective and occluded regions. End-to-end approaches that link
matching with disparity estimation were developed in e.g.
DispNet [15], but it was not until GC-Net [13] that cost aggregation, through the use of 3D convolutions, was incorporated in the training pipeline. The more recent work of [3],
PSMNet, further improves accuracy by implementing the
stacked hourglass backbone [17] and considerably increasing the number of 3D convolutional layers for cost aggregation. The large memory and computation cost incurred by
using 3D convolutions is reduced by down-sampling and
up-sampling frequently, but this leads to a loss of precision
in the disparity map.
Among these approaches, traditional semi-global matching (SGM) [9] and cost filtering [10] are all robust and efficient cost aggregation methods which have been widely
1185

