Strong-Weak Distribution Alignment for Adaptive Object Detection
Kuniaki Saito1 , Yoshitaka Ushiku2 , Tatsuya Harada2,3 and Kate Saenko1
1

Boston University, 2 The University of Tokyo, 3 RIKEN
{keisaito, saenko}@bu.edu, {ushiku, harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

Overview of Proposed Method

Source

We propose an approach for unsupervised adaptation
of object detectors from label-rich to label-poor domains
which can significantly reduce annotation costs associated
with detection. Recently, approaches that align distributions of source and target images using an adversarial loss
have been proven effective for adapting object classifiers.
However, for object detection, fully matching the entire distributions of source and target images to each other at the
global image level may fail, as domains could have distinct
scene layouts and different combinations of objects. On
the other hand, strong matching of local features such as
texture and color makes sense, as it does not change category level semantics. This motivates us to propose a novel
method for detector adaptation based on strong local alignment and weak global alignment. Our key contribution is
the weak alignment model, which focuses the adversarial
alignment loss on images that are globally similar and puts
less emphasis on aligning images that are globally dissimilar. Additionally, we design the strong domain alignment
model to only look at local receptive fields of the feature
map. We empirically verify the effectiveness of our method
on four datasets comprising both large and small domain
shifts. Our code is available at https://github.com/
VisionLearningGroup/DA_Detection.

Local
Features

Global
Features

bird
Class
Bbox
Strong
Alignment

Weak
Alignment

Target
Class
Bbox
Global-Weak Alignment

Source
Target

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Upper: Our Strong-Weak model learns domain-invariant
features that are strongly aligned at the local patch level and
weakly (partially) aligned at the global scene level. Lower: Global
features obtained by our proposed weak alignment method on Pascal to Clipart. The target features are partially aligned with source,
which improves detection performance, as shown in our experiments.

Deep convolutional neural networks have greatly improved object recognition accuracy [17], but remain reliant
on large quantities of labeled training data. For object detection, annotation is particularly burdensome: each instance
of an object category in every image must be annotated with
a precise bounding box. Transferring pre-trained models
from label-rich domains is an attractive solution, but dataset
bias often reduces their generalization to novel data [30].
Various methods for unsupervised domain adaptation

(UDA) have been proposed to tackle the dataset bias problem [10, 40, 39, 24], most of which are based on domaininvariant alignment of the feature [31] or image [20, 14]
distributions. Recent methods align the source and target
distributions of examples using adversarial learning and are
motivated by theoretical results that bound the generalization error partially by the size of the discrepancy between
domains [2, 1]. The conventional wisdom is therefore that
16956

