UPSNet: A Uniﬁed Panoptic Segmentation Network
Yuwen Xiong1,2∗ Renjie Liao1,2∗ Hengshuang Zhao3∗†
Rui Hu1 Min Bai1,2 Ersin Yumer1 Raquel Urtasun1,2
1
Uber ATG 2 University of Toronto 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{yuwen, rjliao, rui.hu, mbai3, yumer, urtasun}@uber.com
hszhao@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

are frequently exploited for instance segmentation.
As an effort to leverage the possible complementariness of
these two tasks and push the segmentation systems further towards real-world application, Kirillov et al. [17] uniﬁed them and
proposed the so-called panoptic segmentation task. It is interesting to note that tasks with the same spirit have been studied under various names before deep learning became popular. Notable
ones include image parsing [33], scene parsing [33] and holistic
scene understanding [36]. In panoptic segmentation, countable
objects (those that map to instance segmentation tasks well) are
called things whereas amorphous and uncountable regions (those
that map to semantic segmentation tasks better) are called stuff.
For any pixel, if it belongs to stuff, the goal of a panoptic segmentation system is simply to predict its class label within the stuff
classes. Otherwise the system needs to decide which instance it
belongs to as well as which thing class it belongs to. The challenge of this task lies in the fact that the system has to give a
unique answer for each pixel.

In this paper, we propose a uniﬁed panoptic segmentation network (UPSNet) for tackling the newly proposed panoptic segmentation task. On top of a single backbone residual network,
we ﬁrst design a deformable convolution based semantic segmentation head and a Mask R-CNN style instance segmentation
head which solve these two subtasks simultaneously. More importantly, we introduce a parameter-free panoptic head which
solves the panoptic segmentation via pixel-wise classiﬁcation.
It ﬁrst leverages the logits from the previous two heads and
then innovatively expands the representation for enabling prediction of an extra unknown class which helps better resolve
the conﬂicts between semantic and instance segmentation. Additionally, it handles the challenge caused by the varying number of instances and permits back propagation to the bottom
modules in an end-to-end manner. Extensive experimental results on Cityscapes, COCO and our internal dataset demonstrate that our UPSNet achieves state-of-the-art performance
with much faster inference. Code has been made available at:
https://github.com/uber-research/UPSNet.

In this paper, we propose a uniﬁed panoptic segmentation network (UPSNet) to approach the panoptic segmentation problem
as stated above. Unlike previous methods [17, 19] which have
two separate branches designed for semantic and instance segmentation individually, our model exploits a single network as
backbone to provide shared representations. We then design two
heads on top of the backbone for solving these tasks simultaneously. Our semantic head builds upon deformable convolution [9] and leverages multi-scale information from feature pyramid networks (FPN) [22]. Our instance head follows the Mask
R-CNN [15] design and outputs mask segmentation, bounding
box and its associated class. As shown in experiments, these
two lightweight heads along with the single backbone provide
good semantic and instance segmentations which are comparable to separate models. More importantly, we design a panoptic
head which predicts the ﬁnal panoptic segmentation via pixelwise classiﬁcation of which the number of classes per image
could vary. It exploits the logits from the above two heads and
adds a new channel of logits corresponding to an extra unknown
class. By doing so, it provides a better way of resolving the conﬂicts between semantic and instance segmentation. Moreover,
our parameter-free panoptic head is very lightweight and could

1. Introduction
Relying on the advances in deep learning, computer vision
systems have been substantially improved, especially in tasks
such as semantic segmentation [40] and instance segmentation [15]. The former focuses on segmenting amorphous image
regions which share similar texture or material such as grass, sky
and road, whereas the latter focuses on segmenting countable objects such as people, bicycle and car. Since both tasks aim at
understanding the visual scene at the pixel level, a shared model
or representation could arguably be beneﬁcial. However, the dichotomy of these two tasks lead to very different modeling strategies despite the inherent connections between them. For example, fully convolutional neural networks [26] are often adopted
for semantic segmentation while proposal based detectors [31]
∗ Equal contribution.
† This work was done when Hengshuang Zhao was an intern at Uber ATG.

8818

