NM-Net: Mining Reliable Neighbors for Robust Feature Correspondences
Chen Zhao1 , Zhiguo Cao1 , Chi Li1 , Xin Li2 , and Jiaqi Yang ∗1
1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Lane Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, West Virginia University
1

{hust zhao, zgcao, li chi, jqyang} @hust.edu.cn
2
Xin.Li @mail.wvu.edu

Abstract
Feature correspondence selection is pivotal to many
feature-matching based tasks in computer vision. Searching for spatially k-nearest neighbors is a common strategy
for extracting local information in many previous works.
However, there is no guarantee that the spatially k-nearest
neighbors of correspondences are consistent because the
spatial distribution of false correspondences is often irregular. To address this issue, we present a compatibilityspecific mining method to search for consistent neighbors.
Moreover, in order to extract and aggregate more reliable
features from neighbors, we propose a hierarchical network
named NM-Net with a series of convolution layers taking
the generated graph as input, which is insensitive to the
order of correspondences. Our experimental results have
shown the proposed method achieves the state-of-the-art
performance on four datasets with various inlier ratios and
varying numbers of feature consistencies.

1. Introduction
Searching for good feature correspondences (a.k.a.
matches) is a fundamental step in computer vision tasks e.g., structure from motion [32], simultaneous location and
mapping [2], panoramic stitching [4], and stereo matching
[14]. Finding consistent feature correspondences between
two images relies on two key steps [22, 3, 23] - i.e., feature
matching and correspondence selection. Specifically, initial
correspondences can be obtained by matching local keypoint features such as SIFT [22]. Due to various reasons
(e.g., key-point localization errors, limited distinctiveness
of local descriptors, and illumination/viewpoint changes),
mismatches are often inevitable. To address this issue, correspondence selection can be employed as a postprocessing
∗ Corresponding author

(a) Image segmentation

(b) Point cloud segmentation

(c) Correspondence selection

Figure 1. Comparison of (c) correspondence selection (can be
viewed as a binary classification task for each correspondence)
with standard segmentation problems including (a) image segmentation and (b) point cloud segmentation. Most spatially adjacent
pixels and points in (a) and (b) are semantically consistent (belonging to the same class), yet the spatial distribution of mismatches in
(c) is irregular, resulting in many outliers (red dots) contaminated
in the local regions around inliers (green crosses). For visualization, image correspondences (4D) are projected to a 2D space via
tsne [24].

step to ensure correct matches and improve the accuracy [3].
This paper focuses on a learning-based approach toward selecting correct matches from an initial set of feature correspondences [36].
Feature correspondence selection is challenging due to
the scarcity of available information as well as the limitation of local feature representations. Spatial positions of
matched features are discrete and irregular (note that RGB
or texture information is not available any more). To effectively mine the consistency from raw positions, spatially local information is often employed in previous hand-crafted

215

