Sequence-to-Sequence Domain Adaptation Network
for Robust Text Image Recognition
Yaping Zhang1,2 , Shuai Nie1 , Wenju Liu1∗, Xing Xu3,5 , Dongxiang Zhang4,5 , Heng Tao Shen3
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Center for Future Media & School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
5
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
Afanti AI Lab, China
{yaping.zhang, shuai.nie, lwj}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, xing.xu@uestc.edu.cn, zhangdongxiang37@gmail.com, shenhengtao@hotmail.com

Abstract
Domain adaptation has shown promising advances for
alleviating domain shift problem. However, recent visual
domain adaptation works usually focus on non-sequential
object recognition with a global coarse alignment, which
is inadequate to transfer effective knowledge for sequencelike text images with variable-length fine-grained character information. In this paper, we develop a Sequence-toSequence Domain Adaptation Network (SSDAN) for robust
text image recognition, which could exploit unsupervised
sequence data by an attention-based sequence encoderdecoder network. In the SSDAN, a gated attention similarity (GAS) unit is introduced to adaptively focus on aligning
the distribution of the source and target sequence data in an
attended character-level feature space rather than a global
coarse alignment. Extensive text recognition experiments
show the SSDAN could efficiently transfer sequence knowledge and validate the promising power of the proposed
model towards real world applications in various recognition scenarios, including the natural scene text, handwritten
text and even mathematical expression recognition.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have achieved remarkable results
on text image reading [3, 5, 7, 13, 21, 23, 31]. However, it
remains challenging to build a robust text recognizer that
can handle varying data in new scenarios effectively, due to
the inevitable domain shift when the actual data is encountered at “test time”. As shown in Figure 1, the text data distribution tends to be changed by multiple factors, such as,
the different appearances in natural scene texts [21], various handwriting styles in handwritten texts [3], and even
∗ Corresponding author.

Scene text

Handwritten text

Mathematical
expression text

Synthetic/Realistic

Writing style

Structure diversity

Training
(Source)
Test
(Target)
Domain shift
(Type)

Figure 1. Examples of different types of domain shift in text image
recognition scenarios.

diverse structures in mathematical expressions [7]. To build
a robust text recognizer for the shifted target text image, a
general solution is to collect large scale annotated text images, while they are high-cost and cannot cover all diversities. However, unsupervised target text images are easily
available. If we could take advantage of the unsupervised
text images to reduce domain shift, it will be helpful.
Unsupervised domain adaptation is an effective way using the unlabeled target domain data to mitigate the domain shift, which is to align the feature distribution between the source and target domain. Recent research endeavors [30, 38] on domain adaptation have shown the potential results on character recognition. They generally optimize the global representation of a character to minimize
some measure of domain shift, such as maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [24, 38], correlation alignment distance
(CORAL) [35, 41], or adversarial loss [9, 30, 36], where
feature dimensions are fixed in the source and target domain. However, a text image is the combination of different characters, which is a variable-length label sequence instead of an isolation. Consequently, the most popular domain adaptation methods cannot be directly applied to the
sequence prediction, since a global fixed-length representation lacks important fine-grained information at the character level, which in turn cannot appropriately describe the
content of sequence-like images.
In this paper, to address the aforementioned issues, we

2740

