Deep Tree Learning for Zero-shot Face Anti-Spoofing
Yaojie Liu, Joel Stehouwer, Amin Jourabloo, Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{liuyaoj1, stay.jb, jourablo, liuxm}@msu.edu
Mask 1

1. Introduction
Face is one of the most popular biometric modalities due
to its convenience of usage, e.g., access control, phone unlock. Despite the high recognition accuracy, face recognition systems are not able to distinguish between real human
faces and fake ones, e.g., photograph, screen. Thus, they are
vulnerable to face spoof attacks, which deceives the systems
to recognize as another person. To safely use face recognition, face anti-spoofing techniques are required to detect
spoof attacks before performing recognition.
Attackers can utilize a wide variety of mediums to
launch spoof attacks. The most common ones are replaying videos/images on digital screens, i.e., replay attack, and
printed photograph, i.e., print attack. Different methods
are proposed to handle replay and print attacks, based on
either handcrafted features [7, 35, 38] or CNN-based fea-

Print
Partial Paper

Replay

…

Transparent
Mask

Unknown Spoof Attacks

Partial Paper

Makeup
Live
Known Spoof
Unknown Spoof

…

Face anti-spoofing is designed to prevent face recognition systems from recognizing fake faces as the genuine
users. While advanced face anti-spoofing methods are developed, new types of spoof attacks are also being created
and becoming a threat to all existing systems. We define
the detection of unknown spoof attacks as Zero-Shot Face
Anti-spoofing (ZSFA). Previous ZSFA works only study 12 types of spoof attacks, such as print/replay, which limits
the insight of this problem. In this work, we investigate the
ZSFA problem in a wide range of 13 types of spoof attacks,
including print, replay, 3D mask, and so on. A novel Deep
Tree Network (DTN) is proposed to partition the spoof samples into semantic sub-groups in an unsupervised fashion.
When a data sample arrives, being know or unknown attacks, DTN routes it to the most similar spoof cluster, and
makes the binary decision. In addition, to enable the study
of ZSFA, we introduce the first face anti-spoofing database
that contains diverse types of spoof attacks. Experiments
show that our proposed method achieves the state of the art
on multiple testing protocols of ZSFA.

Known Spoof Attacks

Abstract

Figure 1: To detect unknown spoof attacks, we propose a Deep
Tree Network (DTN) to unsupervisely learn a hierarchic embedding for known spoof attacks. Samples of unknown attacks will be
routed through DTN and classified at the destined leaf node.

tures [4,18,20,32]. Recently, high-quality 3D custom mask
is also used for attacking, i.e., 3D mask attack. In [29–31],
methods for detecting print/replay attacks are found to be
less effective for this new spoof, and hence the authors
leverage the remote photoplethysmography (r-PPG) to detect the heart rate pulse as the spoofing cue. Further, facial makeup may also influence the outcome of recognition,
i.e., makeup attack [12]. Many works [11–13] study facial
makeup, despite not as an anti-spoofing problem.
All aforementioned methods present algorithmic solutions to the known spoof attack(s), where models are trained
and tested on the same type(s) of spoof attacks. However,
in real-world applications, attackers can also initiate spoof
attacks that we, the algorithm designers, are not aware of,
termed unknown spoof attacks1 . Researchers increasingly
pay attention to the generalization of anti-spoofing models,
i.e., how well they are able to detect spoof attacks that have
never been seen during the training? We define the prob1 There is subtle distinction between 1) unseen attacks, attack types that
are known to algorithm designers so that algorithms could be tailored to
them, but their data are unseen during training; 2) unknown attacks, attack
types that are neither known to designers nor seen during training. We do
not differentiate these two cases and term both unknown attacks.

14680

