Shape Robust Text Detection with Progressive Scale Expansion Network
Wenhai Wang1,4∗, Enze Xie2,5∗ , Xiang Li3,4∗†, Wenbo Hou1 , Tong Lu1‡, Gang Yu5 , Shuai Shao5
1
National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Department of Comuter Science and Technology, Tongji University
3
School of Computer and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
4
Momenta
5
Megvii (Face++) Technology Inc.
{wangwenhai362, Johnny ez, lysucuo}@163.com, xiang.li.implus@qq.com
lutong@nju.edu.cn, {yugang, shaoshuai}@megvii.com

Abstract
Scene text detection has witnessed rapid progress especially with the recent development of convolutional neural networks. However, there still exists two challenges
which prevent the algorithm into industry applications. On
the one hand, most of the state-of-art algorithms require
quadrangle bounding box which is in-accurate to locate the
texts with arbitrary shape. On the other hand, two text instances which are close to each other may lead to a false
detection which covers both instances. Traditionally, the
segmentation-based approach can relieve the first problem
but usually fail to solve the second challenge. To address
these two challenges, in this paper, we propose a novel
Progressive Scale Expansion Network (PSENet), which can
precisely detect text instances with arbitrary shapes. More
specifically, PSENet generates the different scale of kernels
for each text instance, and gradually expands the minimal
scale kernel to the text instance with the complete shape.
Due to the fact that there are large geometrical margins among the minimal scale kernels, our method is effective to split the close text instances, making it easier to use
segmentation-based methods to detect arbitrary-shaped text
instances. Extensive experiments on CTW1500, Total-Text,
ICDAR 2015 and ICDAR 2017 MLT validate the effectiveness of PSENet. Notably, on CTW1500, a dataset full of
long curve texts, PSENet achieves a F-measure of 74.3% at
27 FPS, and our best F-measure (82.2%) outperforms state∗ Authors contributed equally.
† Xiang Li is with PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and

Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, 210094, China. Xiang Li is also a visiting
scholar in Momenta.
‡ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The results of different methods, best viewed in color.
(a) is the original image. (b) refers to the result of regressionbased method, which displays disappointing detections as the red
box covers nearly more than half of the context in the green box.
(c) is the result of naive semantic segmentation, which mistakes
3 text instances as 1 instance since their boundary pixels are partially connected. (d) is the result of our proposed PSENet, which
successfully distinguishs and detects the 4 unique text instances.

of-art algorithms by 6.6%. The code will be released in the
future.

1. Introduction
Scene text detection in the wild is a fundamental problem with numerous applications such as scene understanding, product identification, and autonomous driving. Many
progress has been made in recent years with the rapid development of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [9, 14,
31]. We can roughly divide the existing CNN based algorithm into two categories: regression-based approaches and

9336

