Zero-Shot Task Transfer
Arghya Pal, Vineeth N Balasubramanian
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, INDIA
{cs15resch11001, vineethnb}@iith.ac.in

Abstract
In this work, we present a novel meta-learning algorithm that regresses model parameters for novel tasks for
which no ground truth is available (zero-shot tasks). In
order to adapt to novel zero-shot tasks, our meta-learner
learns from the model parameters of known tasks (with
ground truth) and the correlation of known tasks to zeroshot tasks. Such intuition finds its foothold in cognitive science, where a subject (human baby) can adapt to a novel
concept (depth understanding) by correlating it with old
concepts (hand movement or self-motion), without receiving an explicit supervision. We evaluated our model on the
Taskonomy dataset, with four tasks as zero-shot: surface
normal, room layout, depth and camera pose estimation.
These tasks were chosen based on the data acquisition complexity and the complexity associated with the learning process using a deep network. Our proposed methodology outperforms state-of-the-art models (which use ground truth)
on each of our zero-shot tasks, showing promise on zeroshot task transfer. We also conducted extensive experiments
to study the various choices of our methodology, as well as
showed how the proposed method can also be used in transfer learning. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
such effort on zero-shot learning in the task space.

1. Introduction
The major driving force behind modern computer vision,
machine learning, and deep neural network models is the
availability of large amounts of curated labeled data. Deep
models have shown state-of-the-art performances on different vision tasks. Effective models that work in practice entail a requirement of very large labeled data due to their
large parameter spaces. Expecting availability of largescale hand-annotated datasets for every vision task is not
practical. Some tasks require extensive domain expertise,
long hours of human labor, expensive data collection sensors - which collectively make the overall process very expensive. Even when data annotation is carried out using

Figure 1: Our Zero-Shot Task Transfer framework explores
the meta-manifold of Encoder-Decoder parameters of m known
tasks (tasks for which exemplar ground truth is available), i.e.
1
2
m
{τE1 , τE2 , · · · , τEm } and {τD
, τD
, · · · , τD
}, to regress Encoder(m+1)
(m+1)
Decoder parameters of zero-shot tasks, i.e. τE
and τD
(for which no ground truth is available). We compare our objective with that of Taskonomy [42], where the main objective is to
find an optimum path from a source task and target task, to delineate the difference.

crowdsourcing (e.g. Amazon Mechanical Turk), additional
effort is required to measure the correctness (or goodness)
of the obtained labels. Due to this, many vision tasks are
considered expensive [43], and practitioners either avoid
such tasks or continue with lesser amounts of data that can
lead to poorly performing models. We seek to address this
problem in this work, viz., to build an alternative approach
that can obtain model parameters for tasks without any labeled data. Extending the definition of zero-shot learning
from basic recognition settings, we call our work Zero-Shot
Task Transfer.
Cognitive studies show results where a subject (human
baby) can adapt to a novel concept (e.g. depth understanding) by correlating it with known concepts (hand movement or self-motion), without receiving an explicit supervision [15]. In similar spirit, we present our meta-learning
algorithm that computes Encoder-Decoder parameters for
novel tasks for which no ground truth is available (called
zero-shot tasks). In order to adapt to a zero-shot task, our
meta-learner learns from the Encoder-Decoder parameters
of known tasks (with ground truth) and their task correlation to the novel task. Formally, given the knowledge of
12189

