Densely Semantically Aligned Person Re-Identification
Zhizheng Zhang1∗
1

Cuiling Lan2†

Wenjun Zeng2
2

University of Science and Technology of China

zhizheng@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Zhibo Chen1†

Microsoft Research Asia

{culan, wezeng}@microsoft.com

chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a densely semantically aligned person reidentification framework. It fundamentally addresses the
body misalignment problem caused by pose/viewpoint variations, imperfect person detection, occlusion, etc. By leveraging the estimation of the dense semantics of a person image, we construct a set of densely semantically aligned part
images (DSAP-images), where the same spatial positions
have the same semantics across different images. We design a two-stream network that consists of a main full image
stream (MF-Stream) and a densely semantically-aligned
guiding stream (DSAG-Stream). The DSAG-Stream, with
the DSAP-images as input, acts as a regulator to guide
the MF-Stream to learn densely semantically aligned features from the original image. In the inference, the DSAGStream is discarded and only the MF-Stream is needed,
which makes the inference system computationally efficient
and robust. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first
to make use of fine grained semantics to address the misalignment problems for re-ID. Our method achieves rank-1
accuracy of 78.9% (new protocol) on the CUHK03 dataset,
90.4% on the CUHK01 dataset, and 95.7% on the Market1501 dataset, outperforming state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) aims to match a specific
person across multiple camera views or in different occasions from the same camera view. It facilitates many important applications, such as cross-camera tracking [40].
This task is challenging due to large variations on person
pose and viewpoint, imperfect person detection, cluttered
background, occlusion, and lighting differences, etc. Many
of these factors result in spatial misalignment of the human
body as shown in Fig. 1, where the same spatial positions do
not correspond to the same semantics. The misalignment is
one of the key challenges [30, 33, 53, 37, 48, 34, 57], which
compromises performance.
∗ This work is done when Zhizheng Zhang is an intern at MSRA.
† Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. Examples to illustrate the challenges of spatial misalignment in person re-ID caused by (a) different camera viewpoints,
(b) different poses, (c) imperfect person detection, (d) misalignment within a local part, (e) cluttered background, (f) occlusion.

Some paradigms employ the convolutional neural networks to learn global feature representation in an end-toend manner [1, 43, 8, 4, 2]. However, the capability of the
global representations is limited by: 1) the lack of emphasis
on local differences [48], and 2) the absence of any explicit
mechanism to tackle the misalignment [2].
In recent years, many efforts have been made to alleviate
these problems [33, 53, 37, 48, 34, 19]. To make the features
focus on some local details, some works make a straightforward partition of the person image into a few fixed rigid
parts (e.g., horizontal stripes) and learn detailed local features [5, 37, 18, 3, 35, 39]. However, such a partition cannot well align the human body parts. Some works have attempted the use of pose (which identifies different types of
parts, e.g., head, arm, etc.) to localize body parts for learning part-aligned features [47, 15, 49, 33, 53, 42]. However,
the body part alignment based on pose is too coarse to have
satisfactory alignment. As shown in Fig. 1 (d), even for the
same type of parts, there is still spatial misalignment within
the parts, where the human semantics are different for the
same spatial positions. It becomes critical to design an architecture which enables the efficient learning of densely

667

