Layout-Graph Reasoning for Fashion Landmark Detection
Weijiang Yu1 , Xiaodan Liang1,2∗ , Ke Gong1,2 , Chenhan Jiang1 ,
Nong Xiao1 , Liang Lin1,2
1
Sun Yat-sen University, 2 DarkMatter AI Research
weijiangyu8@gmail.com, xdliang328@gmail.com, kegong936@gmail.com,
jchcyan@gmail.com, xiaon6@sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Detecting dense landmarks for diverse clothes, as a fundamental technique for clothes analysis, has attracted increasing research attention due to its huge application potential. However, due to the lack of modeling underlying semantic layout constraints among landmarks, prior
works often detect ambiguous and structure-inconsistent
landmarks of multiple overlapped clothes in one person.
In this paper, we propose to seamlessly enforce structural
layout relationships among landmarks on the intermediate
representations via multiple stacked layout-graph reasoning layers. We define the layout-graph as a hierarchical
structure including a root node, body-part nodes (e.g. upper body, lower body), coarse clothes-part nodes (e.g. collar, sleeve) and leaf landmark nodes (e.g. left-collar, rightcollar). Each Layout-Graph Reasoning(LGR) layer aims
to map feature representations into structural graph nodes
via a Map-to-Node module, performs reasoning over structural graph nodes to achieve global layout coherency via
a layout-graph reasoning module, and then maps graph
nodes back to enhance feature representations via a Nodeto-Map module. The layout-graph reasoning module integrates a graph clustering operation to generate representations of intermediate nodes (bottom-up inference) and
then a graph deconvolution operation (top-down inference)
over the whole graph. Extensive experiments on two public
fashion landmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of
our model. Furthermore, to advance the fine-grained fashion landmark research for supporting more comprehensive
clothes generation and attribute recognition, we contribute
the first Fine-grained Fashion Landmark Dataset (FFLD)
containing 200k images annotated with at most 32 keypoints for 13 clothes types.

*Corresponding Author

Landmark Node Feature

Bottom-up inference

…

(a)

Prediction

Top-down inference

Message propagation

…

Landmark Clothes-part Body-part
Node Feature Node Feature Node Feature

Root Node

Prediction

(b) Feature

Figure 1: (a) Traditional DCNNs [25] suffer from great performance drops when facing heavy overlapping of humans
and clothes nesting because of lacking structural constraint
and commonsense knowledge. (e.g. the left waistline and
right sleeve on the lady are wrongly predicted on the child.)
(b) Our LGR provides graph-based inferences among landmarks, leveraging symmetric and hierarchical relations to
constrain landmark’s layout in one person.

1. Introduction
Fashion landmark detection that targets at localizing keypoints at the functional regions of clothes (e.g. collar, waistline), has attracted research attention and lots of demands
driven by the boom of electronic commerce, such as clothing retrieval [36, 30, 5, 16], clothes generation [10, 21] and
fashion image classification [36, 27, 8]. To support these
comprehensive high-level applications, the landmark detectors need to effectively deal with arbitrary clothing appearances, diverse clothes layouts and styles, multiply human

2937

