NETTAILOR: Tuning the architecture, not just the weights
Pedro Morgado ∗
Nuno Vasconcelos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{pmaravil,nuno}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Real-world applications of object recognition often require
the solution of multiple tasks in a single platform. Under the
standard paradigm of network fine-tuning, an entirely new CNN
is learned per task, and the final network size is independent
of task complexity. This is wasteful, since simple tasks require
smaller networks than more complex tasks, and limits the number of tasks that can be solved simultaneously. To address these
problems, we propose a transfer learning procedure, denoted
NETTAILOR1, in which layers of a pre-trained CNN are used as
universal blocks that can be combined with small task-specific
layers to generate new networks. Besides minimizing classification error, the new network is trained to mimic the internal
activations of a strong unconstrained CNN, and minimize its
complexity by the combination of 1) a soft-attention mechanism
over blocks and 2) complexity regularization constraints. In
this way, NETTAILOR can adapt the network architecture, not
just its weights, to the target task. Experiments show that networks adapted to simple tasks, such as character or traffic sign
recognition, become significantly smaller than those adapted to
hard tasks, such as fine-grained recognition. More importantly,
due to the modular nature of the procedure, this reduction in
network complexity is achieved without compromise of either
parameter sharing across tasks, or classification accuracy.

1. Introduction
Real-world applications of machine learning for vision often
involve the ability to solve multiple recognition tasks. For
example, a robot should be able to decide if a door is open
or closed, whether an object can be picked up or not, what
is the expression on a person’s face, among others. However,
attempting to design a single recognizer for all tasks is often
impractical, since datasets for different tasks are not always
available at the same time, and state-of-the-art models use
∗ This
work was partially funded by graduate fellowship
SFRH/BD/109135/2015 from the Portuguese Ministry of Sciences and Education, NRI Grants IIS-1546305 and IIS-1637941, and NVIDIA GPU donations.
1 Source code and pre-trained models available at:
https://pedro-morgado.github.io/nettailor.

Figure 1: Architecture fine-tuning with NETTAILOR. Pre-trained
blocks shown in gray, task-specific in green. Left: Pre-trained
CNN augmented with low-complexity blocks that introduce skip
connections. Center: Optimization prunes blocks of poor trade-off
between complexity and impact on recognition. Right: The final
network is a combination of pre-trained and task-specific blocks.

different training procedures (e.g. face recognition is solved
through an embedding approach [57], while object recognition
uses a classification loss [20]). Instead, the standard solution is
to use an off-the-shelf convolutional neural network (CNN) pretrained on a large dataset such as ImageNet [9], MS-COCO [33]
or MIT-Places [73], and fine-tune it to each task [70, 27, 15].
Although fine-tuning often achieve good performance on the
target task [70], this practice is quite wasteful. First, fine-tuning
produces a large network per task, independently of the task
complexity. Hence, computing and storage requirements
increase linearly with the number of tasks, with simpler tasks
like optical character recognition (OCR) being as demanding
as hard tasks like fine-grained recognition. Second, although
the resulting networks are derived from a common pre-trained
model, they differ in all their parameters. Hence, as the robot
switches between tasks, large arrays of parameters need to be
reloaded, which may hinder operation in real-time. Other smart
computing platforms, such as consumer electronics devices,
mobile devices or smart cars, also face similar problems.
In this work, we seek a solution to these problems. Layers of
a large pre-trained neural network are viewed as universal blocks
that can be combined to generate new networks. The universal
blocks implement universal filters shared by all tasks. They are

3044

