ContactDB: Analyzing and Predicting Grasp Contact via Thermal Imaging
Samarth Brahmbhatt1 , Cusuh Ham1 , Charles C. Kemp1 and James Hays1,2
1
Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines, Georgia Tech 2 Argo AI
{samarth.robo,cusuh}@gatech.edu, charlie.kemp@bme.gatech.edu, hays@gatech.edu

Figure 1: Example contact maps from ContactDB, constructed from multiple 2D thermal images of hand-object contact
resulting from human grasps.
cations, forces and stability that allows post-grasp actions
Abstract
with objects, and are also significantly influenced by the
post-grasp intent [8, 2, 45]. For example, people typically
Grasping and manipulating objects is an important hugrasp a knife by the handle to use it, but grasp it by the blunt
man skill. Since hand-object contact is fundamental to
side of the blade to hand it off.
grasping, capturing it can lead to important insights. HowA large body of previous work [20, 29, 36, 46, 49, 3,
ever, observing contact through external sensors is chal50,
52, 21, 36, 21, 6, 46] has recorded human grasps, with
lenging because of occlusion and the complexity of the humethods
ranging from data gloves that measure joint conman hand. We present ContactDB, a novel dataset of configuration
to manually arranged robotic hands. ContactDB
tact maps for household objects that captures the rich handdiffers significantly from these previous datasets by focusobject contact that occurs during grasping, enabled by use
ing primarily on the contact resulting from the rich interof a thermal camera. Participants in our study grasped 3D
action between hand and object. Specifically, we represent
printed objects with a post-grasp functional intent. Concontact through the texture of 3D object meshes, which we
tactDB includes 3750 3D meshes of 50 household objects
call ‘contact maps’ (see Figure 1).
textured with contact maps and 375K frames of synchroThere are multiple motivations for recording grasping
nized RGB-D+thermal images. To the best of our knowlactivity through contact maps. Since it is object-centric,
edge, this is the first large-scale dataset that records deit enables detailed analysis of grasping preferences influtailed contact maps for human grasps. Analysis of this data
enced by functional intent, object shape, size and semanshows the influence of functional intent and object size on
tic category, and learning object shape features for grasp
grasping, the tendency to touch/avoid ‘active areas’, and
prediction, and grasp re-targeting to kinematically diverse
the high frequency of palm and proximal finger contact. Fihand models. Previously employed methods of recording
nally, we train state-of-the-art image translation and 3D
grasping activity do not easily support such analysis, as we
convolution algorithms to predict diverse contact patterns
discuss in Section 2.
from object shape. Data, code and models are available at
We created ContactDB by recording human participants
https://contactdb.cc.gatech.edu.
grasping a set of 3D printed household objects in our laboratory, with two different post-grasp functional intents–using
the object and handing it off. See Section 3 for more details
1. Introduction
on the data collection procedure, size of the dataset and the
kinds of data included.
Humans excel at grasping and then performing tasks
Except for contact edges viewed from select angles, and
with household objects. Human grasps exhibit contact lo18709

