SiCloPe: Silhouette-Based Clothed People
Ryota Natsume1,3∗
Shunsuke Saito1,2∗
Chongyang Ma4
Hao Li1,2,5
1

Zeng Huang1,2
Weikai Chen1
Shigeo Morishima3

2
USC Institute for Creative Technologies
University of Southern California
3
4
5
Waseda University
Snap Inc.
Pinscreen

Abstract
We introduce a new silhouette-based representation
for modeling clothed human bodies using deep generative
models. Our method can reconstruct a complete and
textured 3D model of a person wearing clothes from a single
input picture. Inspired by the visual hull algorithm, our
implicit representation uses 2D silhouettes and 3D joints
of a body pose to describe the immense shape complexity
and variations of clothed people. Given a segmented 2D
silhouette of a person and its inferred 3D joints from the
input picture, we first synthesize consistent silhouettes from
novel view points around the subject. The synthesized
silhouettes which are the most consistent with the input
segmentation are fed into a deep visual hull algorithm
for robust 3D shape prediction. We then infer the texture
of the subject’s back view using the frontal image and
segmentation mask as input to a conditional generative
adversarial network. Our experiments demonstrate that
our silhouette-based model is an effective representation
and the appearance of the back view can be predicted
reliably using an image-to-image translation network. While
classic methods based on parametric models often fail for
single-view images of subjects with challenging clothing,
our approach can still produce successful results, which are
comparable to those obtained from multi-view input.

1. Introduction
The ability to digitize and predict a complete and fully
textured 3D model of a clothed subject from a single view
can open the door to endless applications, ranging from
virtual and augmented reality, gaming, virtual try-on, to
3D printing. A system that could generate a full-body
3D avatar of a person by simply taking a picture as input
would significantly impact the scalability of producing
virtual humans for immersive content creation, as well as its
attainability by the general population. Such single-view
∗ Joint first authors

input image

fully textured 3D mesh

Figure 1: Given a single image of a person from the frontal
view, we can automatically reconstruct a complete and
textured 3D clothed body shape.

inference is extremely difficult due to the vast range of
possible shapes and appearances that clothed human bodies
can take in natural conditions. Furthermore, only a 2D
projection of the real world is available and the entire back
view of the subject is missing.
While 3D range sensing [26, 34] and photogrammetry [39] are popular ways of obtaining complete 3D models,
they are restricted to a tedious scanning process or require
specialized equipment. The modeling of humans from a
single view, on the other hand, has been facilitated by the
availability of large 3D human model repositories [3, 28],
where a parametric model of human shapes is used to guide
the reconstruction process [6]. However, these parametric
models only represent naked bodies and do not describe the
clothing geometry nor the texture. Another option is to use a
pre-captured template of the subject in order to handle new
poses [54], but such an approach is limited to the recording
of one particular person.
In this work, we propose a deep learning based nonparametric approach for generating the geometry and texture
of clothed 3D human bodies from a single frontal-view
image. Our method can predict fine-level geometric details
of clothes and generalizes well to new subjects different
from those being used during training (See Figure 1).
While directly estimating 3D volumetric geometry from a
single view is notoriously challenging and likely to require a
large amount of training data as well as extensive parameter
tuning, two cutting-edge deep learning techniques have
14480

