Learning RoI Transformer for Oriented Object Detection in Aerial Images
Jian Ding, Nan Xue, Yang Long, Gui-Song Xia∗, Qikai Lu
LIESMARS-CAPTAIN, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430079, China
{jian.ding, xuenan, longyang, guisong.xia, qikai lu}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Object detection in aerial images is an active yet challenging task in computer vision because of the bird’s-eye
view perspective, the highly complex backgrounds, and the
variant appearances of objects. Especially when detecting
densely packed objects in aerial images, methods relying on
horizontal proposals for common object detection often introduce mismatches between the Region of Interests (RoIs)
and objects. This leads to the common misalignment between the final object classification confidence and localization accuracy. In this paper, we propose a RoI Transformer to address these problems. The core idea of RoI
Transformer is to apply spatial transformations on RoIs
and learn the transformation parameters under the supervision of oriented bounding box (OBB) annotations. RoI
Transformer is with lightweight and can be easily embedded into detectors for oriented object detection. Simply apply the RoI Transformer to light-head RCNN has achieved
state-of-the-art performances on two common and challenging aerial datasets, i.e., DOTA and HRSC2016, with
a neglectable reduction to detection speed. Our RoI Transformer exceeds the deformable Position Sensitive RoI pooling when oriented bounding-box annotations are available.
Extensive experiments have also validated the flexibility and
effectiveness of our RoI Transformer.

1. Introduction
Object detection in aerial images aims at locating objects of interest (e.g., vehicles, airplanes) on the ground
and identifying their categories. With more and more
aerial images being available, object detection in aerial images has been a specific but active topic in computer vision [3, 29, 36, 6]. However, unlike natural images that
are often taken from horizontal perspectives, aerial images
are typically taken from bird’s-eye view, which implies
that objects in aerial images are always arbitrary oriented.
Moreover, the highly complex backgrounds and variant appearances of objects further increase the difficulty of object detection in aerial images. These problems have been
∗ Corresponding author: guisong.xia@whu.edu.cn.

Figure 1. Horizontal (top) v.s. Rotated RoI warping (bottom) illustrated in an image with many densely packed objects. One horizontal RoI often contains several instances, which leads ambiguity
to the subsequent classification and location task. By contrast, a
rotated RoI warping usually provides more accurate regions for
instances and enables to better extract discriminative features for
object detection.

often approached by an oriented and densely packed object detection task [37, 31, 12], which is new while wellgrounded and have attracted much attention in the past
decade [27, 30, 26, 18, 1].
Many of recent progress on object detection in aerial images have benefited a lot from the R-CNN frameworks [9,
8, 32, 2, 29, 38, 6, 12, 16]. These methods have reported promising detection performances, by using horizontal bounding boxes as region of interests (RoIs) and
then relying on region features for category identification [2, 29, 6]. However, as observed in [37, 28], these
horizontal RoIs (HROIs) typically lead to misalignments
between the bounding boxes and objects. For instance, as
shown in Fig. 1, due to the oriented and densely-distributed
properties of objects in aerial images, several instances are
often crowded and contained by one HRoI. As a result, it
usually turns to be difficult to train a detector for extracting
object features and identifying the object’s accurate localization.
Instead of using horizontal bounding boxes, oriented
bounding boxes have been employed to give more accurate locations of objects [37, 23, 28]. In order to achieve

2849

