Unsupervised Moving Object Detection via
Contextual Information Separation
Yanchao Yang*
UCLA Vision Lab

Antonio Loquercio*
University of Zurich

Davide Scaramuzza
University of Zurich

Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab

Abstract
We propose an adversarial contextual model for detecting moving objects in images. A deep neural network is
trained to predict the optical flow in a region using information from everywhere else but that region (context), while
another network attempts to make such context as uninformative as possible. The result is a model where hypotheses
naturally compete with no need for explicit regularization
or hyper-parameter tuning. Although our method requires
no supervision whatsoever, it outperforms several methods
that are pre-trained on large annotated datasets. Our model
can be thought of as a generalization of classical variational generative region-based segmentation, but in a way
that avoids explicit regularization or solution of partial differential equations at run-time. We publicly release all our
code and trained networks.1

1. Introduction
Consider Fig. 1: Even relatively simple objects, when
moving in the scene, cause complex discontinuous changes
in the image. Being able to rapidly detect independently
moving objects in a wide variety of scenes from images is
functional to the survival of animals and autonomous vehicles alike. We wish to endow artificial systems with similar capabilities, without the need to pre-condition or learn
similar-looking backgrounds. This problem relates to motion segmentation, foreground/background separation, visual attention, video object segmentation as we discuss in
Sect. 3. For now, we use the words “object” or “foreground”
informally2 to mean (possibly multiple) connected regions
of the image domain, to be distinguished from their surrounding, which we call “background” or “context,” according to some criterion.
Since objects exist in the scene, not in the image, a
method to infer them from the latter rests on an operational
1 http://rpg.ifi.uzh.ch/unsupervised_detection.html

*These two authors contributed equally.
Correspondence to
yanchao.yang@cs.ucla.edu and loquercio@ifi.uzh.ch
2 The precise meaning of these terms will be formalized in Sect. 2.

Figure 1: An encounter between a hawk and a drone (top). The
latter will not survive without being aware of the attack. Detecting
moving objects is crucial to the survival of animal and artificial
systems alike. Note that the optical flow (middle row) is quite diverse within the region where the hawk projects: It changes both
in space and time. Grouping this into a moving object (bottom
row) is our goal in this work. Note the object is detected by our
algorithm across multiple scales, partial occlusions from the viewpoint, and complex boundaries.

definition based on measurable image correlates. We call
moving objects regions of the image whose motion cannot be explained by that of their surroundings. In other
words, the motion of the background is uninformative of
the motion of the foreground and vice-versa. The “information separation” can be quantified by the information reduction rate (IRR) between the two as defined in Sect. 2. This
naturally translates into an adversarial inference criterion
that has close connections with classical variational regionbased segmentation, but with a twist: Instead of learning a
generative model of a region that explains the image in that
region as well as possible, our approach yields a model that
tries to explain it as poorly as possible using measurements
from everywhere else but that region.
In generative model-based segmentation, one can always
explain the image with a trivial model, the image itself. To
avoid that, one has to impose model complexity bounds,
bottlenecks or regularization. Our model does not have access to trivial solutions, as it is forced to predict a region
without looking at it. What we learn instead is a contextual adversarial model, without the need for explicit regularization, where foreground and background hypotheses

879

