Hybrid Scene Compression for Visual Localization
Federico Camposeco1 Andrea Cohen1 Marc Pollefeys1,2 Torsten Sattler3
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 2 Microsoft 3 Chalmers University of Technology

Abstract
Localizing an image w.r.t. a 3D scene model represents a
core task for many computer vision applications. An increasing number of real-world applications of visual localization on mobile devices, e.g., Augmented Reality or
autonomous robots such as drones or self-driving cars,
demand localization approaches to minimize storage and
bandwidth requirements. Compressing the 3D models used
for localization thus becomes a practical necessity. In this
work, we introduce a new hybrid compression algorithm
that uses a given memory limit in a more effective way.
Rather than treating all 3D points equally, it represents a
small set of points with full appearance information and
an additional, larger set of points with compressed information. This enables our approach to obtain a more complete scene representation without increasing the memory
requirements, leading to a superior performance compared
to previous compression schemes. As part of our contribution, we show how to handle ambiguous matches arising
from point compression during RANSAC. Besides outperforming previous compression techniques in terms of pose
accuracy under the same memory constraints, our compression scheme itself is also more efficient. Furthermore, the
localization rates and accuracy obtained with our approach
are comparable to state-of-the-art feature-based methods,
while using a small fraction of the memory.

1. Introduction
Visual localization constitutes an essential step in 3D
computer vision. It plays an important role in large scale
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [1, 15, 36] and SLAM [11].
Visual localization is also a key task for both robotics, e.g.,
self-driving cars [14], and mobile device applications such
as virtual and augmented reality [25].
The classical approach to visual localization requires a
sparse 3D scene model, where each point is associated to
a 3D position and one or more image descriptors [22, 32].
In order to localize a query image, a set of 2D-3D correspondences can be established by using descriptor matching
between features in the image and 3D points in the scene.

Figure 1. Comparison of compressed scenes. (Top) 3D model
obtained using a state-of-the-art model compression scheme [9].
(Bottom) Output of our hybrid approach. Full-descriptor points
are shown in red and compressed points in green. Both models use
the same amount of memory, but ours leads to a better localization
performance: For a compression rate of ∼2%, the percentage of
localized query images improves from ∼70% to more than 85%.

These matches can then be used for robust pose estimation
based on RANSAC and a minimal pose solver [13].
In many applications, coarse localization priors are available, e.g., from GPS or WiFi signals. These priors can be
used to coarsely determine the part of the 3D model shown
in a given query image within tens to hundreds of meters.
Thus, it is often only necessary to match against a part of a
larger 3D model. Still, it is important to compress these
small- to medium-scale parts, e.g., to be able to transfer
them to mobile devices or to be able to handle more requests in a server-side application [28]. In this work, we
thus focus on efficiently handling scenes of this size.
Previous works on 3D scene compression mostly fall
under two categories: either the models are compressed

7653

