Variational Prototyping-Encoder: One-Shot Learning with Prototypical Images
Junsik Kim
Tae-Hyun Oh†
Seokju Lee
Fei Pan
In So Kweon
Dept. of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea
†
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, US

Abstract
In daily life, graphic symbols, such as traffic signs and
brand logos, are ubiquitously utilized around us due to its
intuitive expression beyond language boundary. We tackle
an open-set graphic symbol recognition problem by one-shot
classification with prototypical images as a single training
example for each novel class. We take an approach to learn
a generalizable embedding space for novel tasks. We propose a new approach called variational prototyping-encoder
(VPE) that learns the image translation task from real-world
input images to their corresponding prototypical images as
a meta-task. As a result, VPE learns image similarity as
well as prototypical concepts which differs from widely used
metric learning based approaches. Our experiments with
diverse datasets demonstrate that the proposed VPE performs favorably against competing metric learning based
one-shot methods. Also, our qualitative analyses show that
our meta-task induces an effective embedding space suitable
for unseen data representation.

1. Introduction
A meaningful graphic symbol visually and compactly
expresses semantic information. Such graphic symbols are
called ideogram,1 which are designed to encode signal or
identity information in an abstract form. They effectively
convey the gist of intended signals while capturing the attention of the reader in a way that allows the reader to grasp the
ideas readily and rapidly [2]. Its instant (immediate) recognition characteristic is leveraged for safety signals (e.g., traffic
signs) and for better visibility and identity of commercial
logos. Moreover, the compactness of iconic representativeness enables emoticons and visual hashtags [3]. Ideograms
are often independent of any particular language and are
comprehensible only by those with familiarity with prior
conventions beyond language boundaries, e.g., pictorial resemblance to a physical object.
1 This is also formally called as a pictogram, pictogramme, pictograph,
simply picto or icon. In this work, we interchangeably refer to an ideogram
using the word “symbol” for simplicity.

Figure 1. Prototypes of symbolic icons. The top and bottom rows
show traffic signs and logo prototypes, respectively.

While such symbols utilize human-perception-friendly
designs, machine-based understanding of the abstract visual imagery is not necessarily straightforward due to several challenges. Original symbols in a canonical domain as
shown in Fig. 1, referred to as a prototype, are rendered in a
physical form by printing or displaying. These prototypes go
through geometric and photometric perturbations via printing and imaging pipelines. The discrepancy between real
and canonical domains introduces a large perceptual gap in
the visual domain (termed domain discrepancy). This gap is
significant in that it is difficult to close it due to extreme data
imbalance between real images and a single prototype of a
symbol (called an intra-class data imbalance). Moreover,
even for real images, the annotation is typically expensive
when constructing a large-scale real dataset. Although there
are a few datasets with a limited number of classes, they
have a noticeable class imbalance (called an inter-class data
imbalance). Thereby, the absence of a large number of training examples for a class often raises an issue when training
a large capacity learner, i.e., deep neural networks.
To deal with such challenges, in this work we present a
deep neural network called variational prototyping-encoder
(VPE) for one-shot classification of graphic symbols. Given
a single prototype of each symbol class (called a support set),
VPE classifies a query into its corresponding category without requiring a large fully supervised dataset, i.e., one-shot
classification. The key ideas when attempting to alleviate
the domain discrepancy and data imbalance issues are as
follows: 1) VPE exploits existing pairs of prototypes and
their corresponding real images to learn a generalizable la-

9462

