Defense Against Adversarial Images using Web-Scale Nearest-Neighbor Search
Abhimanyu Dubey∗1, 2 , Laurens van der Maaten2 , Zeki Yalniz2 , Yixuan Li2 , and Dhruv Mahajan2
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
Facebook AI

Abstract
A plethora of recent work has shown that convolutional
networks are not robust to adversarial images: images that
are created by perturbing a sample from the data distribution as to maximize the loss on the perturbed example.
In this work, we hypothesize that adversarial perturbations
move the image away from the image manifold in the sense
that there exists no physical process that could have produced the adversarial image. This hypothesis suggests that
a successful defense mechanism against adversarial images should aim to project the images back onto the image manifold. We study such defense mechanisms, which
approximate the projection onto the unknown image manifold by a nearest-neighbor search against a web-scale image database containing tens of billions of images. Empirical evaluations of this defense strategy on ImageNet suggest
that it is very effective in attack settings in which the adversary does not have access to the image database. We
also propose two novel attack methods to break nearestneighbor defenses, and demonstrate conditions under which
nearest-neighbor defense fails. We perform a series of ablation experiments, which suggest that there is a trade-off between robustness and accuracy in our defenses, that a large
image database (with hundreds of millions of images) is
crucial to get good performance, and that careful construction the image database is important to be robust against
attacks tailored to circumvent our defenses.

1. Introduction
A range of recent studies has demonstrated that many
modern machine-learning models are not robust to adversarial examples: examples that are intentionally designed
to be misclassified by the models, whilst being nearly indistinguishable from regular examples in terms of some distance measure. Whilst adversarial examples have been con-

structed against speech recognition [3] and text classification [5] systems, most recent work on creating adversarial examples has focused on computer vision [2, 9, 17, 19,
21, 32], in which adversarial images are often perceptually
indistinguishable from real images. Such adversarial images have successfully fooled systems for image classification [32], object detection [38], and semantic segmentation [6]. In practice, adversarial images are constructed by
maximizing the loss of the machine-learning model (such
as a convolutional network) with respect to the input image,
starting from a “clean” image. This maximization creates
an adversarial perturbation of the original image; the perturbation is generally constrained or regularized to have a
small ℓp -norm in order for the adversarial image to be perceptually (nearly) indistinguishable from the original.
Because of the way they are constructed, many adversarial images are different from natural images in that there
exists no physical process by which the images could have
been generated. Hence, if we view the set of all possible
natural images1 as samples from a manifold that is embedded in image space, many adversarial perturbations may be
considered as transformations that take a sample from the
image manifold and move it away from that manifold. This
hypothesis suggests an obvious approach for implementing
defenses that aim to increase the robustness of machinelearning models against “off-manifold” adversarial images
[24, 39]: viz., projecting the adversarial images onto the image manifold before using them as input into the model.
As the true image manifold is unknown, in this paper,
we develop defenses that approximate the image manifold
using a massive database of tens of billions of web images.
Specifically, we approximate the projection of an adversarial example onto the image manifold by the finding nearest neighbors in the image database. Next, we classify the
“projection” of the adversarial example, i.e., the identified
nearest neighbor(s), rather than the adversarial example itself. Using modern techniques for distributed approximate
nearest-neighbor search to make this strategy practical, we
1 For simplicity, we ignore synthetic images such as drawings.

∗ This work was done while Abhimanyu Dubey was at Facebook AI.

18767

