Synthesizing 3D Shapes from Silhouette Image Collections using
Multi-projection Generative Adversarial Networks
Xiao Li1,2 , Yue Dong2 , Pieter Peers3 and Xin Tong2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
3
Microsoft Research Asia
College of William & Mary

Abstract
We present a new weakly supervised learning-based
method for generating novel category-specific 3D shapes
from unoccluded image collections. Our method is weakly
supervised and only requires silhouette annotations from
unoccluded, category-specific objects. Our method does
not require access to the object’s 3D shape, multiple observations per object from different views, intra-image pixelcorrespondences, or any view annotations. Key to our
method is a novel multi-projection generative adversarial
network (MP-GAN) that trains a 3D shape generator to be
consistent with multiple 2D projections of the 3D shapes,
and without direct access to these 3D shapes. This is
achieved through multiple discriminators that encode the
distribution of 2D projections of the 3D shapes seen from
a different views. Additionally, to determine the view information for each silhouette image, we also train a view
prediction network on visualizations of 3D shapes synthesized by the generator. We iteratively alternate between
training the generator and training the view prediction network. We validate our multi-projection GAN on both synthetic and real image datasets. Furthermore, we also show
that multi-projection GANs can aid in learning other highdimensional distributions from lower dimensional training
datasets, such as material-class specific spatially varying
reflectance properties from images.

1. Introduction
Learning to synthesize novel 3D shapes from a class of
objects is a challenging problem with many applications in
computer vision, ranging from single image 3D reconstruction [6, 9, 25, 32, 37], to shape completion [36], to 3D shape
analysis [34]. Typically, such methods are trained on reference 3D shapes, or on images from different viewpoints
with labeled pixel-correspondences and/or with viewpoint
information. Creating such training sets for new object categories is labor-intensive and cumbersome. In this paper

we propose a novel weakly supervised method for learning
to generate 3D shapes from unoccluded silhouette imagecollections without relying on reference 3D shapes, correspondences, or view annotations.
A key challenge in learning to synthesize 3D shapes
from image-collections gathered from uncontrolled sources
is that we cannot count on having multiple observations of
the same object from different viewpoints; we only have
samples from the distributions of images of the objects from
different views. We overcome this practical problem using
a novel generative adversarial network (GAN) architecture
that learns the high dimensional distribution of 3D shapes
from multiple independently sampled low dimensional distributions of silhouette images of the objects. The relation
between each low dimensional distribution of silhouette images and the high dimensional 3D shapes is characterized by
a “projection”, and the resulting multi-projection GAN architecture employs, for each projection, a different discriminator that encodes the characteristics of the corresponding
projection’s silhouette image distribution. Intuitively, the
proposed multi-projection GAN learns the distribution of
3D shapes for which the visualizations for each viewpoint
matches the corresponding (independent) distributions of
the training silhouette images for that same view.
A second key challenge is that the viewpoint information
is often not available for the training images that are gathered “in the wild”. To address this challenge, we utilize a
view prediction network for inferring the view information
for each of the training images. Ideally, the view prediction
network should be trained by the types of 3D shapes synthesized by our generator. However, this creates a circular
dependency, because the 3D shape generator needs the view
prediction network to train from silhouette images. We resolve this dilemma by jointly training both networks in an
iterative alternating fashion, resulting in a 3D shape learning pipeline that is robust to non-uniform viewpoint distributions over the training data (i.e., we make no assumptions
on the viewpoint distribution).
Our method facilitates training of a 3D shape generator from weakly supervised real-world image collections
15535

