Modularized Textual Grounding for Counterfactual Resilience
Zhiyuan Fang1 , Shu Kong2 , Charless Fowlkes2 , Yezhou Yang1
1
2

{zy.fang, yz.yang}@asu.edu
{skong2, fowlkes}@ics.uci.edu

Arizona State University, Tempe, USA
University of California, Irvine, USA

Abstract
Computer Vision applications often require a textual
grounding module with precision, interpretability, and resilience to counterfactual inputs/queries. To achieve high
grounding precision, current textual grounding methods
heavily rely on large-scale training data with manual annotations at the pixel level. Such annotations are expensive to obtain and thus severely narrow the model’s scope
of real-world applications. Moreover, most of these methods sacrifice interpretability, generalizability, and they neglect the importance of being resilient to counterfactual inputs. To address these issues, we propose a visual grounding system which is 1) end-to-end trainable in a weakly
supervised fashion with only image-level annotations, and
2) counterfactually resilient owing to the modular design.
Specifically, we decompose textual descriptions into three
levels: entity, semantic attribute, color information, and
perform compositional grounding progressively. We validate our model through a series of experiments and demonstrate its improvement over the state-of-the-art methods.
In particular, our model’s performance not only surpasses
other weakly/un-supervised methods and even approaches
the strongly supervised ones, but also is interpretable for
decision making and performs much better in face of counterfactual classes than all the others.

1. introduction
Deep neural networks have spawned a flurry of successful work on various computer vision applications, from
modular tasks like object instance detection [20, 22, 36] and
semantic segmentation [43, 10], to more complex multimodal ones like visual question answering (VQA) [1] and
image captioning [2, 33]. For complex vision applications (e.g., visual search engine and video auto-captioning),
it is critical to build a reliable textual grounding system,
which connects natural language descriptions and image regions [67, 34, 32, 58, 65].
Current methods typically formulate the textual grounding problem as a search process or image-text matching. For

Text: I am looking for a boy in blue.
Person

Boy

Blue

Result

Counter-factual Phrase Grounding: woman in brown
Person

Woman

Brown

N/A

Figure 1: Illustration of our textual grounding framework
that decomposes textual descriptions into three levels: entity, semantic attributes and color information. As an example, for textual grounding from the sentence shown above,
our system localizes the entity (person), semantic attributes
(boy, woman), the color blue, and progressively produces
the final textual grounding by combining results. Note that
owing to the decomposable description and modular design,
our system is highly interpretable and resilient to counterfactual inputs/qeueries (bottom row).
example, [58] proposed textual-visual feature matching by
reconstruction loss. [9] fulfills textual grounding with two
steps: the generation of object proposals and match with the
query. [67] utilizes pre-trained module to conduct searching and matching progressively. Given a novel image and
queries, these models return the proposals which yield the
highest matching score/probability as the final output. Although they achieve state-of-the-art performance in terms of
grounding precision, they rely on a large-scale training sets
with manually annotated bounding boxes on the objects of
interest. This inevitably prevents them from generalizing to
other data domains which have no such fine-grained manual
annotations for model training or fine-tuning [65].
Moreover, these models lack the interpretability for decision making and the resilience to counterfactual queries,
which often appear jointly to make these models even more

6378

