Photometric Mesh Optimization for Video-Aligned 3D Object Reconstruction
Chen-Hsuan Lin1,2* Oliver Wang2 Bryan C. Russell2 Eli Shechtman2
Vladimir G. Kim2 Matthew Fisher2 Simon Lucey1
1

The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

chlin@cmu.edu

2

Adobe Research

{owang,brussell,elishe,vokim,matfishe}@adobe.com

slucey@cs.cmu.edu

https://chenhsuanlin.bitbucket.io/photometric-mesh-optim/

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of 3D object mesh
reconstruction from RGB videos. Our approach combines
the best of multi-view geometric and data-driven methods
for 3D reconstruction by optimizing object meshes for multiview photometric consistency while constraining mesh deformations with a shape prior. We pose this as a piecewise
image alignment problem for each mesh face projection. Our
approach allows us to update shape parameters from the
photometric error without any depth or mask information.
Moreover, we show how to avoid a degeneracy of zero photometric gradients via rasterizing from a virtual viewpoint.
We demonstrate 3D object mesh reconstruction results from
both synthetic and real-world videos with our photometric
mesh optimization, which is unachievable with either naı̈ve
mesh generation networks or traditional pipelines of surface
reconstruction without heavy manual post-processing.

1. Introduction
The choice of 3D representation plays a crucial role in 3D
reconstruction problems from 2D images. Classical multiview geometric methods, most notably structure from motion
(Sf M) and SLAM, recover point clouds as the underlying
3D structure of RGB sequences, often with very high accuracy [10, 29]. Point clouds, however, lack inherent 3D
spatial structure that is essential for efficient reasoning. In
many scenarios, mesh representations are more desirable –
they are significantly more compact since they have inherent
geometric structures defined by point connectivity, while
they also represent continuous surfaces necessary for many
applications such as robotics (e.g., accurate localization for
autonomous driving), computer graphics (e.g., physical simulation, texture synthesis), and virtual/augmented reality.
Another drawback of classical multi-view geometric
methods is reliance on hand-designed features and can be
* Work done during CHL’s internship at Adobe Research.

Figure 1: Our video-aligned object mesh reconstruction
enforcing multi-view consistency while constraining shape
deformations with shape priors, generating an output mesh
with improved geometry with respect to the input views.

fragile when their assumptions are violated. This happens
especially in textureless regions or when there are changes
in illumination. Data-driven approaches [5, 15], on the other
hand, learn priors to tackle ill-posed 3D reconstruction problems and have recently been widely applied to 3D prediction
tasks from single images. However, they can only reliably reconstruct from the space of training examples it learns from,
resulting in limited ability to generalize to unseen data.
In this work, we address the problem of 3D mesh reconstruction from image sequences by bringing together the best
attributes of multi-view geometric methods and data-driven
approaches (Fig. 1). Focusing on object instances, we use
shape priors (specifically, neural networks) to reconstruct
geometry with incomplete observations as well as multi-view
geometric constraints to refine mesh predictions on the input
sequences. Our approach allows dense reconstruction with
object semantics from learned priors, which is not possible
from the traditional pipelines of surface meshing [21] from
multi-view stereo (MVS). Moreover, our approach general1969

