f-VAEGAN-D2: A Feature Generating Framework for Any-Shot Learning
Yongqin Xian1
1

Saurabh Sharma1

Bernt Schiele1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus
Visualization

2

Zeynep Akata1,2

Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
When labeled training data is scarce, a promising data
augmentation approach is to generate visual features of unTextual To
Explanation
known classes using their attributes.
learn the class conThis
ditional
distribution
of
CNN
features,
these
models rely on
flower has
pairs
of
image
features
and
class
attributes.
Hence, they
a large
f-VAEGAN-D2
brown
can not make use of the Sunflower
abundance
of
unlabeled
data sam… because it has
a
center and
ples.
In
this
paper,
we
tackle
any-shot
learning
problems
brown
center
and
yellow
its petals
.
petals
are long. i.e. zero-shot and few-shot, in
unified feature generating framework that operates in both inductive and transductive learning settings. We develop a conditional generative model that combines the strength of VAE and GANs and
in addition, via an unconditional discriminator, learns the
marginal feature distribution of unlabeled images. We empirically show that our model learns highly discriminative
CNN features for five datasets, i.e. CUB, SUN, AWA and
ImageNet, and establish a new state-of-the-art in any-shot
learning, i.e. inductive and transductive (generalized) zeroand few-shot learning settings. We also demonstrate that
our learned features are interpretable: we visualize them by
inverting them back to the pixel space and we explain them
by generating textual arguments of why they are associated
with a certain label.

1. Introduction
Learning with limited labels has been an important topic
of research as it is unrealistic to collect sufficient amounts
of labeled data for every object. Recently, generating visual features of previously unseen classes [58, 5, 28, 11]
has shown its potential to perform well on extremely imbalanced image collections. However, current feature generation approaches have still shortcomings. First, they rely
on simple generative models which are not able to capture
complex data distributions. Second, in many cases, they do
not truly generalize to the under represented classes. Third,
although classifiers trained on a combination of real and
generated features obtain state-of-the-art results, generated
features may not be easily interpretable.

real
image
∈

Feature
Reconstruction
(f-VAE)
Feature
Generator
(f-WGAN)

Transductive
Learning (D2)

This is a sunflower because ...
feature space
… it has
a brown
center and yellow petals .

Figure 1: Our any-shot feature generating framework learns
discriminative and interpretable CNN features from both labeled data of seen and unlabeled data of novel classes.
Our main focus in this work is a new model that generates visual features of any class, utilizing labeled samples
when they are available and generalizing to unknown concepts whose labeled samples are not available. Prior work
used GANs for this task [58, 11] as they directly optimize
the divergence between real and generated data, but they
suffer from mode collapse issues [3]. On the other hand,
feature generation with VAE [28] is more stable. However,
VAE optimizes the lower bound of log likelihood rather than
the likelihood itself [23]. Our model combines the strengths
of VAE and GANs by assembling them to a conditional
feature generating model, called f-VAEGAN-D2, that synthesizes CNN image features from class embeddings, i.e.
class-level attributes or word2vec [35]. Thanks to its additional discriminator that distinguishes real and generated
features, our f-VAEGAN-D2 is able to use unlabeled data
from previously unseen classes without any condition. The
features learned by our model, e.g. Figure 1, are disciminative in that they boost the performance of any-shot learning
as well as being visually and textually interpretable.
Our main contributions are as follows. (1) We propose
110275

