Unsupervised Domain-Specific Deblurring via Disentangled Representations
Boyu Lu
Jun-Cheng Chen
Rama Chellappa
UMIACS, University of Maryland, College Park
bylu@umiacs.umd.edu

pullpull@cs.umd.edu

rama@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Image deblurring aims to restore the latent sharp images from the corresponding blurred ones. In this paper,
we present an unsupervised method for domain-specific,
single-image deblurring based on disentangled representations. The disentanglement is achieved by splitting the
content and blur features in a blurred image using content
encoders and blur encoders. We enforce a KL divergence
loss to regularize the distribution range of extracted blur
attributes such that little content information is contained.
Meanwhile, to handle the unpaired training data, a blurring
branch and the cycle-consistency loss are added to guarantee that the content structures of the deblurred results match
the original images. We also add an adversarial loss on deblurred results to generate visually realistic images and a
perceptual loss to further mitigate the artifacts. We perform extensive experiments on the tasks of face and text deblurring using both synthetic datasets and real images, and
achieve improved results compared to recent state-of-theart deblurring methods.

1. Introduction
Image blur is an important factor that adversely affects
the quality of images and thus significantly degrades the
performances of many computer vision applications, such
as object detection [15] and face recognition [22, 21]. To
address this problem, blind image deblurring methods aim
to restore the latent sharp image from a blurred image. Conventional approaches often formulate the image deblurring
task as a blur kernel estimation problem. Since this problem is highly ill-posed, many priors have been proposed
to model images and kernels [29, 41, 13]. However, most
of these priors only perform well on generic natural images, but cannot generalize to specific image domains, like
face [36], text [9] and low-illumination images [10]. Therefore, some priors (e.g. L0 -regularized intensity and gradient
prior [28], face exemplars [27]) have been developed to handle these domain-specific image deblurring problems. But
still these methods can only handle certain types of blur and

(a) Blurred

(b) Madam et al. [25]

(c) Ours

(d) Blurred

(e) CycleGAN [44]

(f) Ours

Figure 1. Real-world blurred face and text results of the proposed
method compared with other state-of-the-art unpaired deblurring
methods. The deblurred image of (b) is from [25]. For (e), we
apply our trained model using the publicly available code of [44].

often require longer inference time.
Recently, some learning-based approaches have been
proposed for blind image deblurring [15, 26, 36]. CNNbased models can tackle more complex blur types and
the inference is fast due to GPU acceleration. Meanwhile, the Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) have
been found to be effective in generating more realistic images. Nonetheless, most of these methods need paired training data, which is expensive to collect in practice. Although numerous blur generation methods have been developed [15, 38, 4], they are not capable of learning all types
of blur variants in the wild. Moreover, strong supervision
may cause algorithms to overfit training data and thus cannot generalize well to real images.
More recently, Nimisha et al. [25] proposed an unsupervised image deblurring method based on GANs where
they add reblur loss and multi-scale gradient loss on the
model. Although they achieved good performance on the
synthetic datasets, their results on some real blurred images
are not satisfactory (Fig. 1(b)). Another solution might be

10225

