Unsupervised Domain Adaptation using Feature-Whitening and Consensus Loss
Subhankar Roy1,2 , Aliaksandr Siarohin1 , Enver Sangineto1 , Samuel Rota Bulò3 ,
Nicu Sebe1 and Elisa Ricci1,2
1
DISI, University of Trento, Italy, 2 Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy, 3 Mapillary Research
{subhankar.roy, aliaksandr.siarohin, enver.sangineto, niculae.sebe, e.ricci}@unitn.it
samuel@mapillary.com

Abstract
A classifier trained on a dataset seldom works on other
datasets obtained under different conditions due to domain
shift. This problem is commonly addressed by domain adaptation methods. In this work we introduce a novel deep
learning framework which unifies different paradigms in
unsupervised domain adaptation. Specifically, we propose
domain alignment layers which implement feature whitening for the purpose of matching source and target feature
distributions. Additionally, we leverage the unlabeled target
data by proposing the Min-Entropy Consensus loss, which
regularizes training while avoiding the adoption of many
user-defined hyper-parameters. We report results on publicly available datasets, considering both digit classification and object recognition tasks. We show that, in most
of our experiments, our approach improves upon previous
methods, setting new state-of-the-art performances.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have been successfully applied to
different visual recognition tasks, demonstrating an excellent generalization ability. However, analogously to other
statistical machine learning techniques, deep neural networks also suffer from the problem of domain shift [47],
which is observed when predictors trained on a dataset do
not perform well when applied to novel domains.
Since collecting annotated training data from every possible domain is expensive and sometimes even impossible,
over the years several Domain Adaptation (DA) methods
[34, 5] have been proposed. DA approaches leverage labeled data in a source domain in order to learn an accurate
prediction model for a target domain. Specifically, in the
special case of Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA),
no annotated target data are available at training time. Note
that, even if target-sample labels are not available, unlabeled
data can and usually are exploited at training time.
Most UDA methods attempt to reduce the domain shift

by directly aligning the source and target marginal distributions. Notably, approaches based on the Correlation Alignment paradigm model domain data distributions in terms
of their second-order statistics. Specifically, they match
distributions by minimizing a loss function which corresponds to the difference between the source and the target covariance matrices obtained using the network’s lastlayer activations [43, 44, 32]. Another recent and successful UDA paradigm exploits domain-specific alignment layers, derived from Batch Normalization (BN) [18], which
are directly embedded within the deep network [3, 24, 31].
Other prominent research directions in UDA correspond
to those methods which also exploit the target data posterior distribution. For instance, the entropy minimization
paradigm adopted in [3, 37, 13], enforces the network’s prediction probability distribution on each target sample to be
peaked with respect to some (unknown) class, thus penalizing high-entropy target predictions. On the other hand, the
consistency-enforcing paradigm [38, 7, 46] is based on specific loss functions which penalize inconsistent predictions
over perturbed copies of the same target samples.
In this paper we propose to unify the above paradigms
by introducing two main novelties. First, we align the
source and the target data distributions using covariance
matrices similarly to [43, 44, 32]. However, instead of
using a loss function computed on the last-layer activations, we use domain-specific alignment layers which compute domain-specific covariance matrices of intermediate
features. These layers “whiten” the source and the target
features and project them into a common spherical distribution (see Fig. 1 (a), blue box). We call this alignment
strategy Domain-specific Whitening Transform (DWT). Notably, our approach generalizes previous BN-based DA
methods [3, 24, 30] which do not consider inter-feature correlations and rely only on feature standardization.
The second novelty we introduce is a novel loss function,
the Min-Entropy Consensus (MEC) loss, which merges
both the entropy [3, 37, 13] and the consistency [7] loss
function. The motivation behind our proposal is to avoid the
4321
9471

