Does Learning Specific Features for Related Parts Help Human Pose Estimation?
Wei Tang and Ying Wu
Northwestern University
2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208
{wtt450, yingwu}@eecs.northwestern.edu

Abstract
Human pose estimation (HPE) is inherently a homogeneous multi-task learning problem, with the localization of
each body part as a different task. Recent HPE approaches
universally learn a shared representation for all parts, from
which their locations are linearly regressed. However, our
statistical analysis indicates not all parts are related to each
other. As a result, such a sharing mechanism can lead to
negative transfer and deteriorate the performance. This potential issue drives us to raise an interesting question. Can
we identify related parts and learn specific features for them
to improve pose estimation? Since unrelated tasks no longer
share a high-level representation, we expect to avoid the adverse effect of negative transfer. In addition, more explicit
structural knowledge, e.g., ankles and knees are highly related, is incorporated into the model, which helps resolve
ambiguities in HPE. To answer this question, we first propose a data-driven approach to group related parts based
on how much information they share. Then a part-based
branching network (PBN) is introduced to learn representations specific to each part group. We further present a
multi-stage version of this network to repeatedly refine intermediate features and pose estimates. Ablation experiments indicate learning specific features significantly improves the localization of occluded parts and thus benefits
HPE. Our approach also outperforms all state-of-the-art
methods on two benchmark datasets, with an outstanding
advantage when occlusion occurs.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation (HPE) aims to locate body parts
from input images1 . It serves as a fundamental tool for several practical applications such as human-computer interaction [27], person re-identification [34] and action recognition [46]. Early work attempts to solve this problem via
handcrafted features and graphical models [10, 30, 32, 36,
1 We focus on 2D single-person pose estimation from RGB images.

Figure 1. Top: Previous approaches exploit CNNs to learn fully
shared features for all body parts, from which their locations, in
the form of spatial coordinates or heat maps, are linearly regressed.
Middle: Mutual information of each part’s location w.r.t. the right
ankle’s location. Bottom: Our statistical analysis (Sec. 3.1) indicates not all parts are related to each other. Motivated by the
fact that sharing a representation for unrelated tasks can deteriorate their performances, this paper tries to identify related parts
and study whether learning specific features for them helps improve pose estimation.

41, 53]. However, they failed to perform well in case of severe body deformation, occlusion, clutter backgrounds and
varying viewpoints.
To tackle these difficulties, recent and state-of-the-art
HPE systems [18, 38, 49, 50, 5, 6, 35, 3, 28, 48, 51, 45] are

1107

