Multispectral and Hyperspectral Image Fusion by MS/HS Fusion Net
Qi Xie1 , Minghao Zhou1 , Qian Zhao1 , Deyu Meng1,∗, Wangmeng Zuo2 , Zongben Xu1
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University; 2 Harbin Institute of Technology
xq.liwu@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

woshizhouminghao@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

1. Introduction
A hyperspectral (HS) image consists of various bands of
images of a real scene captured by sensors under different
spectrums, which can facilitate a fine delivery of more faithful knowledge under real scenes, as compared to traditional
images with only one or a few bands. The rich spectra of HS
images tend to significantly benefit the characterization of
the imaged scene and greatly enhance performance in different computer vision tasks, including object recognition,
classification, tracking and segmentation [10, 37, 35, 36].
In real cases, however, due to the limited amount of incident energy, there are critical tradeoffs between spatial and
spectral resolution. Specifically, an optical system usually
can only provide data with either high spatial resolution but
a small number of spectral bands (e.g., the standard RGB
image) or with a large number of spectral bands but reduced spatial resolution [23]. Therefore, the research issue
∗ Corresponding author.

C∈ℝ

R∈ℝ ×

Abstract
(a)

Z

Y∈ℝ

×

×

(b)

+

band linear
combination

X ∈ℝ

×

×

×

⊗ + downsampling

Z

A
∈ℝ ×

Y∈ℝ × ×

Deep net

Hyperspectral imaging can help better understand the
characteristics of different materials, compared with traditional image systems. However, only high-resolution multispectral (HrMS) and low-resolution hyperspectral (LrHS)
images can generally be captured at video rate in practice.
In this paper, we propose a model-based deep learning approach for merging an HrMS and LrHS images to generate
a high-resolution hyperspectral (HrHS) image. In specific,
we construct a novel MS/HS fusion model which takes the
observation models of low-resolution images and the lowrankness knowledge along the spectral mode of HrHS image into consideration. Then we design an iterative algorithm to solve the model by exploiting the proximal gradient method. And then, by unfolding the designed algorithm,
we construct a deep network, called MS/HS Fusion Net,
with learning the proximal operators and model parameters
by convolutional neural networks. Experimental results on
simulated and real data substantiate the superiority of our
method both visually and quantitatively as compared with
state-of-the-art methods along this line of research.

timmy.zhaoqian@gmail.com

zbxu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

fold YA ∈ ℝ ×

×

X ∈ℝ × ×

B

(c)

∈ℝ − ×

Y ∈ ℝ × ×( − )

(d)

fold YB ∈ ℝ ×

×

Figure 1. (a)(b) The observation models for HrMS and LrHS images, respectively. (c) Learning bases Ŷ by deep network, with
HrMS Y and LrHS Z as the input of the network. (d) The HrHSI
X can be linearly represented by Y and to-be-estimated Ŷ , in a
formulation of X ≈ Y A + Ŷ B, where the rank of X is r.

on merging a high-resolution multispectral (HrMS) image
and a low-resolution hyperspectral (LrHS) image to generate a high-resolution hyperspectral (HrHS) image, known
as MS/HS fusion, has attracted great attention [47].
The observation models for the HrMS and LrHS images
are often written as follows [12, 24, 25]:
Y = XR + Ny ,
(1)
Z = CX + Nz ,
(2)
where X ∈ RHW ×S is the target HrHS image1 with H, W
and S as its height, width and band number, respectively,
Y ∈ RHW ×s is the HrMS image with s as its band number
(s < S), Z ∈ Rhw×S is the LrHS image with h, w and S
as its height, width and band number (h < H, w < W ),
R ∈ RS×s is the spectral response of the multispectral sensor as shown in Fig. 1 (a), C ∈ Rhw×HW is a linear operator which is often assumed to be composed of a cyclic
convolution operator φ and a down-sampling matrix D as
shown in Fig. 1 (b), Ny and Nz are the noises contained in
1 The target HS image can also be written as tensor X ∈ RH×W ×S .
We also denote the folding operator for matrix to tensor as: fold(X) = X .

1585

