Generalized Zero-Shot Recognition based on Visually Semantic Embedding
Pengkai Zhu
Hanxiao Wang
Venkatesh Saligrama
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Boston University

Abstract
We propose a novel Generalized Zero-Shot learning
(GZSL) method that is agnostic to both unseen images and
unseen semantic vectors during training. Prior works in
this context propose to map high-dimensional visual features to the semantic domain, which we believe contributes
to the semantic gap. To bridge the gap, we propose a novel
low-dimensional embedding of visual instances that is “visually semantic.” Analogous to semantic data that quantifies the existence of an attribute in the presented instance,
components of our visual embedding quantifies existence of
a prototypical part-type in the presented instance. In parallel, as a thought experiment, we quantify the impact of noisy
semantic data by utilizing a novel visual oracle to visually
supervise a learner. These factors, namely semantic noise,
visual-semantic gap and label noise lead us to propose a
new graphical model for inference with pairwise interactions between label, semantic data, and inputs. We tabulate
results on a number of benchmark datasets demonstrating
significant improvement in accuracy over state-of-art under
both semantic and visual supervision.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is emerging as an important
tool for large-scale classification [20], where one must account for challenges posed by non-uniform and sparse annotated classes [5], the prohibitive expense in labeling large
fractions of data [4], and the need to account for appearance
of novel objects for in-the-wild scenarios.
ZSL proposes to learn a model for classifying images
for “unseen” classes for which no training data is available
by leveraging semantic features, which are shared by both
seen and unseen classes. A few recent works [7, 24] point
out that, unseen image class recognition, while important,
overlooks real-world scenarios, where both seen and unseen instances appear. Consequently, generalized zero-shot
learning (GZSL) methods capable of recognizing both seen
and unseen instances at test time are required.
We propose to train a GZSL method, that takes labeled
seen class images and associated semantic side information
as input, while being agnostic to both unseen images and
unseen associated semantic vectors.

Challenges. We list challenges in this context:
Visual ! Semantic Gap. Visual feature representations
such as the final-layer outputs of deep neural networks are
high-dimensional and not semantically meaningful. This
limits the learner in identifying robust associations between
visual patterns and semantic data.
Semantic!Visual Gap. A fundamental drawback of semantic data is that they are often not visually meaningful and it
is difficult for a learner to identify and suppress non-visual
semantic components during training.Additionally, semantic information provided for some classes (ex. sofa-chair),
are nearly identical. This is challenging in a GZSL setting
particularly when one of such classes is among the unseen.
Novelty. At a conceptual level visual representation and supervision fundamentally impacts accuracy. We re-examine
these concepts and propose novel methods in Sec. 3 to identify and bridge the visual-semantic gap.
Visually Semantic Embedding. By a visually semantic embedding, we mean a mapping of visual instances to a representation that mirrors how semantic data is presented for
an instance. In Sec. 3.1 we propose to train a model that
learns a finite list of parts based on a multi-attention model
and expresses the input as a finite probabilistic mixture of
part-types, which we then output as our representation. Our
intuition is informed by semantic data where for each instance, an annotator could score existence of attributes from
a common vocabulary. Analogously, our embedding scores
existence of proto-typical part types in a presented instance.
3-Node Graphical Model. A key aspect of our setup, which
is presented in Sec. 3.1, is a graphical model[13] that has
semantic (S), input (X) and label (Y) variables in a 3-node
clique. This is based on the key insight that the labels are
not fully explained by either the input or the semantic instance and thus we require a model that accounts for 3-way
connection (S $ X, X $ Y, Y $ S). This is a significant departure from existing works [15], where the semantic
signal is given paramount importance and the structure is a
chain X $ S $ Y .
Following convention, we conduct experiments with semantic supervision on benchmark datasets in Sec. 4. While
we demonstrate significant improvement over state-of-theart, we are driven to understand and quantify how semantic
12995

