Patch-based Discriminative Feature Learning for Unsupervised
Person Re-identification
Qize Yang1,3 , Hong-Xing Yu1 , Ancong Wu2 , and Wei-Shi Zheng∗1,4
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
Accuvision Technology Co. Ltd.
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
yangqz@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xKoven@gmail.com, wuancong@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract

Large gap due to other
dissimilar parts

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id) aims to match the underlying identity of a person from non-overlapping camera views. Because of its important applications in security and surveillance, person re-id has been drawing lots
of attention from both academia and industry. In the past
decades, most of the existing re-id works focus on distance metric learning [16, 3, 45, 54, 38, 39, 36] and feature learning [10, 20, 53, 2]. Particularly, deep learning
[18, 28, 34, 43, 40, 37, 1, 5, 25, 55] has been adopted to
re-id community and achieved significant progress. However, most existing re-id methods require tremendous la∗ Corresponding author

Market-1501

Market-1501

While discriminative local features have been shown effective in solving the person re-identification problem, they
Large gap due to other
gap
are limited dissimilar
to be trained
on fully Small
pairwise
labelled data
parts
which is expensive to obtain. In this work, we overcome this
problem by proposing a patch-based unsupervised learning framework in order to learn discriminative feature from
patches instead of the whole images.
The
patch-based
Similar image
patches
learning leverages similarity between
patches
sampled from
the left-to learn a
Similar person images
side we
image.
discriminative model. Specifically,
develop a PatchNet
to select patches from the feature map and learn discriminative features for these patches. To provide effective guidance for the PatchNet to learn discriminative patch feature on unlabeled datasets, we propose an unsupervised
patch-based discriminative feature learning loss. In addition, we design an image-level feature learning loss to
leverage all the patch features of the same image to serve
as an image-level guidance for the PatchNet. Extensive experiments validate the superiority of our method for unsupervised person re-id. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/QizeYang/PAUL.

MSMT17

MSMT17

2

Similar person images

Small gap

Similar image patches
sampled from the leftside image.

Figure 1. Some image samples of MSMT17 [40] and Market-1501
[53]. It is easier to find that if two images are similar, then their
patches would probably also be similar. And the gap of the similar
patches would be smaller than the similar images

beled dataset which limits its scalability and usability in the
real-world application scenario, because it is expensive and
difficult to manually label a large scale dataset. Some recent works focus on using unsupervised learning to address
the scalability problem by improving the hand-crafted features [10, 8, 24, 20], clustering [46, 47, 7]. State-of-the-art
unsupervised re-id methods transfer the knowledge from a
labelled source re-id dataset [40, 37, 1, 5, 25]. However,
these methods are limited on the image level while the gaps
of images between different datasets are significant. Thus
they still yield weak performances.
While the label information of unlabelled data is absent,
we find an interesting observation that as shown in Figure 1,
if two images are similar, then their patches would probably also be similar. Based on this observation, a patch-based
discriminative feature learning model would be more generalizable and can learn discriminative patch feature among
different datasets. This inspires us to develop a patchbased unsupervised person re-id model to learn discriminative patch feature instead of image feature. Although some

3633

