Thinking Outside the Pool:
Active Training Image Creation for Relative Attributes
Aron Yu
University of Texas at Austin

Kristen Grauman
UT Austin and Facebook AI Research

aron.yu@utexas.edu

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

1. Introduction
Visual recognition methods are famously data hungry. Today’s deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
achieve excellent results on various challenging tasks, and
one critical ingredient is access to large manually annotated
datasets [6, 8, 18, 59]. A common paradigm has emerged
where a supervised learning task is defined, the relevant images/videos are scraped from the Web, and crowdworkers
are enlisted to annotate them. A practical downside to this
paradigm, of course, is the burden of getting all those annotations, which can be significant.
However, setting efficiency concerns aside, we contend
that the standard paradigm also quietly suffers a curation
concern. The assumption is that the more data we gather
for labeling, the better. And indeed unlabeled photos are
virtually unlimited. Yet—particularly when relying on Web
photos—the visual variety and information content of the
images amassed for labeling eventually reach a limit. The

>

Open

Current wisdom suggests more labeled image data is always better, and obtaining labels is the bottleneck. Yet curating a pool of sufficiently diverse and informative images
is itself a challenge. In particular, training image curation
is problematic for fine-grained attributes, where the subtle
visual differences of interest may be rare within traditional
image sources. We propose an active image generation approach to address this issue. The main idea is to jointly
learn the attribute ranking task while also learning to generate novel realistic image samples that will benefit that
task. We introduce an end-to-end framework that dynamically “imagines” image pairs that would confuse the current model, presents them to human annotators for labeling,
then improves the predictive model with the new examples.
On two datasets, we show that by thinking outside the pool
of real images, our approach gains generalization accuracy
on challenging fine-grained attribute comparisons.

more

less

Masculine

Abstract

>
more

less

Figure 1: Our approach learns to actively create training images
for fine-grained attribute comparisons, focusing attention on informative pairs of images unavailable in the real image training pool.
Here we show two example pairs it generated to improve learning
of open (left) and masculine (right).

resulting deep network inherits this limit in terms of how
well it can generalize. Importantly, while active learning
methods can try to prioritize informative instances for labeling, the curation problem remains: existing active selection methods scan the pool of manually curated unlabeled
images when choosing which ones to label [12, 54, 55, 65].
We propose to address the curation challenge with active image generation. The main idea is to jointly learn the
target visual task while also learning to generate novel realistic image samples that, once manually labeled, will benefit
that task. We focus specifically on the fine-grained relative
attribute task [33, 42, 49, 50, 58]: given two images, the
system must infer which one more evidently exhibits an attribute (e.g., which is more furry, more red, more smiling).
The curation problem is particularly pronounced for finegrained relative attributes. This is because while at test time
an image pair may be arbitrarily close in an attribute, it is
difficult to locate extensive training samples showing such
subtle differences for all attributes [61]. Our idea is for the
system to dynamically “imagine” image pairs that would
confuse the current learning-to-rank model, then present
them to human annotators for labeling. See Figure 1.
To this end, we introduce an end-to-end deep network
consisting of an attribute-conditioned image generator, a
ranking network, and a control network. The network is
seeded with real labeled image pairs of the form “image
X exhibits attribute a more than image Y ”. Then the control network learns to generate latent visual parameters to
present to the image generator so as to form image pairs
1708

