Inverse Cooking: Recipe Generation from Food Images
Amaia Salvador1∗ Michal Drozdzal2 Xavier Giro-i-Nieto1 Adriana Romero2
1
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya 2 Facebook AI Research
{amaia.salvador, xavier.giro}@upc.edu, {adrianars, mdrozdzal}@fb.com

Abstract
People enjoy food photography because they appreciate
food. Behind each meal there is a story described in a complex recipe and, unfortunately, by simply looking at a food
image we do not have access to its preparation process.
Therefore, in this paper we introduce an inverse cooking
system that recreates cooking recipes given food images.
Our system predicts ingredients as sets by means of a novel
architecture, modeling their dependencies without imposing any order, and then generates cooking instructions by
attending to both image and its inferred ingredients simultaneously. We extensively evaluate the whole system on the
large-scale Recipe1M dataset and show that (1) we improve
performance w.r.t. previous baselines for ingredient prediction; (2) we are able to obtain high quality recipes by leveraging both image and ingredients; (3) our system is able to
produce more compelling recipes than retrieval-based approaches according to human judgment. We make code and
models publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Food is fundamental to human existence. Not only does
it provide us with energy—it also defines our identity and
culture [10, 34]. As the old saying goes, we are what we eat,
and food related activities such as cooking, eating and talking about it take a significant portion of our daily life. Food
culture has been spreading more than ever in the current
digital era, with many people sharing pictures of food they
are eating across social media [31]. Querying Instagram for
#food leads to at least 300M posts; similarly, searching for
#foodie results in at least 100M posts, highlighting the unquestionable value that food has in our society. Moreover,
eating patterns and cooking culture have been evolving over
time. In the past, food was mostly prepared at home, but
nowadays we frequently consume food prepared by thirdparties (e.g. takeaways, catering and restaurants). Thus,
the access to detailed information about prepared food is
∗ Work done during internship at Facebook AI Research
1 https://github.com/facebookresearch/inversecooking

Title: Biscuits
Ingredients:
Flour, butter, sugar, egg, milk, salt.
Instructions:
- Preheat oven to 450 degrees.
- Cream butter and sugar.
- Add egg and milk.
- Sift flour and salt together.
- Add to creamed mixture.
- Roll out on floured board to 1/4
inch thickness.
- Cut with biscuit cutter.
- Place on ungreased cookie sheet.
- Bake for 10 minutes.

Figure 1: Example of a generated recipe, composed of a
title, ingredients and cooking instructions.
limited and, as a consequence, it is hard to know precisely
what we eat. Therefore, we argue that there is a need for
inverse cooking systems, which are able to infer ingredients
and cooking instructions from a prepared meal.
The last few years have witnessed outstanding improvements in visual recognition tasks such as natural image classification [47, 14], object detection [42, 41] and semantic
segmentation [27, 19]. However, when comparing to natural image understanding, food recognition poses additional
challenges, since food and its components have high intraclass variability and present heavy deformations that occur
during the cooking process. Ingredients are frequently occluded in a cooked dish and come in a variety of colors,
forms and textures. Further, visual ingredient detection requires high level reasoning and prior knowledge (e.g. cake
will likely contain sugar and not salt, while croissant will
presumably include butter). Hence, food recognition challenges current computer vision systems to go beyond the
merely visible, and to incorporate prior knowledge to enable high-quality structured food preparation descriptions.
Previous efforts on food understanding have mainly focused on food and ingredient categorization [1, 39, 24].
However, a system for comprehensive visual food recognition should not only be able to recognize the type of meal
or its ingredients, but also understand its preparation pro110453

