Self-calibrating Deep Photometric Stereo Networks
Guanying Chen1

Kai Han2 Boxin Shi3,4 Yasuyuki Matsushita5 Kwan-Yee K. Wong1
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 University of Oxford
3
Peking University 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory 5 Osaka University

Abstract
This paper proposes an uncalibrated photometric stereo
method for non-Lambertian scenes based on deep learning.
Unlike previous approaches that heavily rely on assumptions of specific reflectances and light source distributions,
our method is able to determine both shape and light directions of a scene with unknown arbitrary reflectances observed under unknown varying light directions. To achieve
this goal, we propose a two-stage deep learning architecture, called SDPS-Net, which can effectively take advantage
of intermediate supervision, resulting in reduced learning
difficulty compared to a single-stage model. Experiments
on both synthetic and real datasets show that our proposed
approach significantly outperforms previous uncalibrated
photometric stereo methods.

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo aims at recovering the surface normal
of a static object from a set of images captured under different light directions [34, 29]. Calibrated photometric stereo
methods assume known light directions, and promising results have been reported [28] at the cost of tedious light
source calibration. The problem of uncalibrated photometric stereo, where light directions are unknown, still remains
an open challenge, and its stable solution is wanted because
of the ease of setting. In this work, we study the problem
of uncalibrated photometric stereo for surfaces with general
and unknown isotropic reflectance.
Most of the existing methods for uncalibrated photometric stereo [2, 27, 23] assume a simplified reflectance model,
such as the Lambertian model, and focus on resolving the
shape-light ambiguity, such as the Generalized Bas-Relief
(GBR) ambiguity [3]. Although methods of [19, 20] can
handle surfaces with general bidirectional reflectance distribution functions (BRDFs), they rely on a uniform distribution of light directions for deriving a solution.
Recently, with the great success of deep learning in various computer vision tasks, deep learning based methods
have been introduced to calibrated photometric stereo [25,

31, 15, 5]. Instead of explicitly modeling complex surface reflectances, they directly learn the mapping from reflectance observations to surface normals given light directions. Although they have obtained promising results in a
calibrated setting, they cannot handle the more challenging
problem of uncalibrated photometric stereo, where light directions are unknown. One simple strategy to handle uncalibrated photometric stereo with deep learning is to directly
learn the mapping from images to surface normals without
taking the light directions as input. However, as reported
in [5], the performance of such a model lags far behind
those which take both images and light directions as input.
In this paper, we propose a two-stage model named Selfcalibrating Deep Photometric Stereo Networks (SDPS-Net)
to tackle this problem. The first stage of SDPS-Net, denoted as Lighting Calibration Network (LCNet), takes an
arbitrary number of images as input and estimates their
corresponding light directions and intensities. The second
stage of SDPS-Net, denoted as Normal Estimation Network
(NENet), estimates a surface normal map of a scene based
on the lighting conditions estimated by LCNet and the input
images. The rationales behind the design of our two-stage
model are as follows. First, lighting information is very important for normal estimation since lighting is the source of
various cues, such as shading and reflectance, and estimating the light directions (3-vectors) and intensities (scalars)
is in principle much easier than directly estimating the normal map (a 3-vector at each pixel location) together with the
lighting conditions. Second, by explicitly learning to estimate light directions and intensities, the model can take advantage of the intermediate supervision, resulting in a more
interpretable behavior. Last, the proposed LCNet can be
seamlessly integrated with existing calibrated photometric
stereo methods, which enables them to deal with unknown
lighting conditions. Our code and model can be found at
https://guanyingc.github.io/SDPS-Net.

2. Related Work
In this section, we review learning based photometric
stereo and uncalibrated photometric stereo methods. We
also briefly review the loosely related work on learning
18739

