MetaCleaner: Learning to Hallucinate Clean Representations for
Noisy-Labeled Visual Recognition

1

Weihe Zhang∗ 1
Yali Wang∗ 1
Yu Qiao† 1,2
Shenzhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable successes in large-scale visual recognition. However,
they often suffer from overfitting under noisy labels. To
alleviate this problem, we propose a conceptually simple
but effective MetaCleaner, which can learn to hallucinate a
clean representation of an object category, according to a
small noisy subset from the same category. Specially, MetaCleaner consists of two flexible submodules. The first submodule, namely Noisy Weighting, can estimate the confidence scores of all the images in the noisy subset, by analyzing their deep features jointly. The second submodule,
namely Clean Hallucinating, can generate a clean representation from the noisy subset, by summarizing the noisy
images with their confidence scores. Via MetaCleaner,
DNNs can strengthen its robustness to noisy labels, as well
as enhance its generalization capacity with richer data diversity. Moreover, MetaCleaner can be easily integrated
into the standard training procedure of DNNs, which promotes its value for real-life applications. We conduct extensive experiments on two popular benchmarks in noisylabeled recognition, i.e., Food-101N and Clothing1M. For
both datasets, our MetaCleaner significantly outperforms
baselines, and achieves the state-of-the-art performance.

Figure 1. MetaCleaner. Suppose that there are 5 images altogether
in the steak category, where 2 images are noisy-labeled, i.e., hamburger and pizza. In a training batch, we feed a randomly-sampled
subset of this category (e.g., 4 images) into DNNs, and generate
the semantic representations of these images. First, MetaCleaner
compares these representations in the feature space, which can discover relations between images, and thus generate the confidence
score of each image in the subset. Second, MetaCleaner summarizes the importance of different images in the subset to hallucinate
a ‘clean’ representation of steak. This imaginary representation
can improve the robustness of DNNs to label noise as well as generalize the capacity of DNNs with richer data diversity.

1. Introduction
Over the past years, visual recognition has been driven
by Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) [10, 11, 32]. However,
these models rely on large-scale data sets with manuallyannotated labels. Collecting such data sets is expensive or
time-consuming. Alternatively, a practical solution is to
crawl images automatically from the internet. But these
web images are noisy-labeled, e.g., a pizza image is often
collected into the steak category. Many studies have shown
∗ Equally-contributed first authors ({wh.zhang1, yl.wang}@siat.ac.cn)
† Corresponding author (yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn)

that, such corrupted labels tend to deteriorate the classification performance of DNNs [5, 26].
One solution is label noise correction [23, 42]. However,
these approaches mainly work on the label space, which
requires a confusion matrix to build connections between
clean and noise labels. In practice, it is often difficult and
labor-intensive to obtain such statics information for largescale data sets. To further improve effectiveness, an alternative solution has been proposed by weighting [12, 15, 25],
i.e., assigning the confidence score of each image into the
corresponding training loss. However, such mechanism

7373

