Adversarial Structure Matching for Structured Prediction Tasks
Jyh-Jing Hwang1,2,∗
Tsung-Wei Ke1,∗
1
UC Berkeley / ICSI
Berkeley, CA, USA
{jyh,twke,stellayu}@berkeley.edu

Jianbo Shi2
Stella X. Yu1
2
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
{jyh,jshi}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Pixel-wise losses, e.g., cross-entropy or L2, have been
widely used in structured prediction tasks as a spatial extension of generic image classification or regression. However, its i.i.d. assumption neglects the structural regularity present in natural images. Various attempts have been
made to incorporate structural reasoning mostly through
structure priors in a cooperative way where co-occurring
patterns are encouraged.
We, on the other hand, approach this problem from an
opposing angle and propose a new framework, Adversarial Structure Matching (ASM), for training such structured
prediction networks via an adversarial process, in which
we train a structure analyzer that provides the supervisory
signals, the ASM loss. The structure analyzer is trained to
maximize the ASM loss, or to emphasize recurring multiscale hard negative structural mistakes among co-occurring
patterns. On the contrary, the structured prediction network is trained to reduce those mistakes and is thus enabled
to distinguish fine-grained structures. As a result, training
structured prediction networks using ASM reduces contextual confusion among objects and improves boundary localization. We demonstrate that our ASM outperforms pixelwise IID loss or structural prior GAN loss on three different
structured prediction tasks: semantic segmentation, monocular depth estimation, and surface normal prediction.

1. Introduction
Pixel-wise losses, e.g. cross-entropy or L2, are widely
used in structured prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation, monocular depth estimation, and surface normal
prediction [21, 40, 13, 31], as a spatial extension of generic
image recognition [29, 20]. However, the disadvantage of
such pixel-wise losses is also obvious due to its additive nature and i.i.d. assumption of predictions: IID losses would
* Equal contributions.

Figure 1: Experimental results on semantic segmentation on
PASCAL VOC 2012 [14], monocular depth estimation, and
surface normal prediction on Stanford 2D-3D-S [2]. Networks trained using IID loss and shape prior based (GAN)
loss mostly fail at confusing contexts (top row) and ambiguous boundaries (bottom 2 rows) whereas our ASM approach
improves upon these aspects.

yield the same overall error for different spatial distributions
of prediction mistakes. Ideally, some mistakes such as implausible and incomplete round wheels should incur more
penalty than slightly thinner wheels. Structural reasoning is
thus highly desirable for structured prediction tasks.
Various attempts have been made to incorporate structural reasoning into structured prediction in a cooperative way, including two mainstreams, bottom-up Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) [28, 61] and top-down shape
priors [53, 19, 24] or Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [17, 41, 22]: (1) CRF enforces label consistency
between pixels and is commonly employed as a postprocessing step [28, 7], or as a plug-in module inside deep
neural networks [61, 39] that coordinate bottom-up information. Effective as it is, CRF is usually sensitive to input appearance changes and needs expensive iterative inference. (2) As an example of learning top-down shape priors, GAN emerges as an alternative to enforce structural

4056

