Radial Distortion Triangulation
Zuzana Kukelova
Visual Recognition Group, FEE, CTU in Prague

Viktor Larsson
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich

kukelova@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

viktor.larsson@inf.ethz.ch

Original image

1. Introduction
In the parlance of modern computer vision, to triangulate a
n
point—given n ≥ 2 camera projection matrices {Pi }i=1 ,
n
Pi ∈ R3×4 , and a set of image points {xi }i=1 , xi =
⊤
[xi , yi , 1] —is to find X ∈ R4 , such that
αi xi = Pi X, i = 1, . . . , n,

αi ∈ R,

(1)

i.e., such that the points xi are the projections of the point
X using the projection matrices Pi [14].
For a noise-less scenario, the triangulation problem becomes a trivial exercise in linear algebra. In the presence
of noise, however, the n rays originating from the camera
centers through the image points xi do not generally intersect in the 3D space, i.e., there is no 3D point X that would

Proposed

This paper presents the first optimal, maximal likelihood,
solution to the triangulation problem for radially distorted
cameras. The proposed solution to the two-view triangulation problem minimizes the ℓ2 -norm of the reprojection
error in the distorted image space.
We cast the problem as the search for corrected distorted
image points, and we use a Lagrange multiplier formulation
to impose the epipolar constraint for undistorted points. For
the one-parameter division model, this formulation leads
to a system of five quartic polynomial equations in five unknowns, which can be exactly solved using the Gröbner basis method. While the proposed Gröbner basis solution is
provably optimal; it is too slow for practical applications.
Therefore, we developed a fast iterative solver to this
problem. Extensive empirical tests show that the iterative
algorithm delivers the optimal solution virtually every time,
thus making it an ℓ2 -optimal algorithm de facto. It is iterative in nature, yet in practice, it converges in no more
than five iterations. We thoroughly evaluate the proposed
method on both synthetic and real-world data, and we show
the benefits of performing the triangulation in the distorted
space in the presence of radial distortion.

Undistorted image

Naive

Abstract

Figure 1. Level-sets for the reprojection error in the distorted and
undistorted images. Top: First undistorting the images and then
performing triangulation (e.g. using [25]) minimizes the ℓ2 error in
the undistorted images. Due to the non-linear distortion this does
not minimize any meaningful cost in the original image. Bottom:
The proposed method instead minimizes the ℓ2 error in the original
image.

satisfy Eq. (1) for all xi . Thus, for noisy data, the triangulation problem becomes an optimization problem of finding
a point X that fits the constraints in Eq. 1 “the best“. What
constitutes “the best“ fit necessarily depends on the input
data and computational resources at hand. However, it has
been shown [13] that assuming independent Gaussian noise
on the image measurements, the optimal, maximum likelihood solution to the triangulation problem is a solution that
minimizes the ℓ2 -norm of the reprojection error.
Since triangulation is an integral part of many larger
computer vision methods and systems, a plethora of algorithms for solving this problem has been proposed in the
past. Taxonomy of the triangulation methods can be established along several lines: the methods may vary in the
number of views they can handle, in the form of the objective function (algebraic, reprojection error), in the way they
measure the error (ℓ2 -norm, ℓ∞ -norm, ℓ1 -norm), or in the
optimization method they use to compute the results.
One of the simplest solutions to the triangulation problem is the linear least square method [14]. This method is

9681

