ROI-10D: Monocular Lifting of 2D Detection to 6D Pose and Metric Shape
Fabian Manhardt∗
TU Munich

Wadim Kehl∗
Toyota Research Institute

Adrien Gaidon
Toyota Research Institute

fabian.manhardt@tum.de

wadim.kehl@tri.global

adrien.gaidon@tri.global

Abstract
We present a deep learning method for end-to-end
monocular 3D object detection and metric shape retrieval.
We propose a novel loss formulation by lifting 2D detection, orientation, and scale estimation into 3D space. Instead of optimizing these quantities separately, the 3D instantiation allows to properly measure the metric misalignment of boxes. We experimentally show that our 10D lifting of sparse 2D Regions of Interests (RoIs) achieves great
results both for 6D pose and recovery of the textured metric geometry of instances. This further enables 3D synthetic
data augmentation via inpainting recovered meshes directly
onto the 2D scenes. We evaluate on KITTI3D against other
strong monocular methods and demonstrate that our approach doubles the AP on the 3D pose metrics on the official
test set, defining the new state of the art.

1. Introduction
How much can one understand a scene from a single
color image? Using large annotated datasets and deep neural networks, the Computer Vision community has steadily
pushed the envelope of what was thought possible, not just
for semantic understanding but also in terms of 3D properties of scenes and objects. In particular, Deep learning
methods on monocular imagery have proven competitive
with multi-sensor approaches for important ill-posed inverse problems like 3D object detection ([3, 31, 20, 34, 24],
6D pose tracking [30, 40], depth prediction [9, 11, 13, 42,
33], or shape recovery [18, 23]. These improvements have
been mainly accomplished by incorporating strong implicit
or explicit priors that regularize the underconstrained output space towards geometrically-coherent solutions. Furthermore, these models benefit directly from being end-toend trainable in general. This leads to increased accuracy,
since networks are discriminatively tuned towards the target
objective instead of intermediate outputs followed by nontrainable post-processing heuristics. The main challenge,

Figure 1. Top (from left to right): our 2D detections, 3D boxes, and
meshed shapes inferred from a single monocular image in one forward pass. Middle: our predictions on top of a LIDAR point cloud,
demonstrating metric accuracy. Bottom: example well-localized,
metrically-accurate, textured meshes predicted by our network.

though, is to design a model and differentiable loss function
that lend itself to well-behaved minimization.
In this work we introduce a new end-to-end method for
metrically accurate monocular 3D object detection, i.e. the
task of predicting the location and extent of objects in 3D
using a single RGB image as input. Our key idea is to
regress oriented 3D bounding boxes by lifting predicted 2D
Regions of Interest (RoIs) using a monocular depth network. Our main contributions are:
• an end-to-end multi-scale deep network for monocular 3D object detection, including a differentiable 2D
to 3D RoI lifting map that internally regresses all required components for 3D box instantiation;

∗ Equal contribution. This work was part of an internship stay at TRI.

2069

