Detecting Overfitting of Deep Generative Networks via Latent Recovery
Ryan Webster, Julien Rabin, Loı̈c Simon and Frédéric Jurie
Normandie Univ., ENSICAEN, UNICAEN, CNRS, GREYC, France
ryan.webster@unicaen.fr

target y

1. Introduction and Related Work
In just a few short years, image generation with deep
networks has gone from niche to a center piece of machine learning. This was largely initiated by Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [13] and since then incredible progress has been made, from deep convolutional GAN
(DCGAN) [32] producing artifacted faces, to progressive
GANS (PGGAN) [20] producing faces which are virtually
indistinguishable from real ones even to human observers
and at high resolution (see Fig. 1). While a large amount
of research has proposed new generative models, less research has been devoted to the evaluation of such models.
Furthermore, evaluating overfitting of deep generators has
been performed via intuitive visual demonstrations, such as
training set nearest neighbor search and latent space interpolation [7, 20]. Fig. 1 (last column) illustrates the nearest
neighbor (NN) test, where NND (y) is the training dataset

NND (y)

φ(y) (pool)
G(z)
y∈D
φ(y) (color)

State of the art deep generative networks have achieved
such realism that they can be suspected of memorizing
training images. It is why it is not uncommon to include
visualizations of training set nearest neighbors, to suggest
generated images are not simply memorized. We argue this
is not sufficient and motivates studying overfitting of deep
generators with more scrutiny. We address this question by
i) showing how simple losses are highly effective at reconstructing images for deep generators ii) analyzing the statistics of reconstruction errors for training versus validation
images. Using this methodology, we show that pure GAN
models appear to generalize well, in contrast with those using hybrid adversarial losses, which are amongst the most
widely applied generative methods. We also show that standard GAN evaluation metrics fail to capture memorization
for some deep generators. Finally, we note the ramifications
of memorization on data privacy. Considering the already
widespread application of generative networks, we provide
a step in the right direction towards the important yet incomplete picture of generative overfitting.

NNG (y)

y 6∈ D

Abstract

Figure 1: Rather than inspecting the most similar images
NND (y) in the training dataset D for sampled generated images
G(z) (row 3), we consider finding the most similar image in the
manifold NNG (y) of generated images (column 2). As seen in the
last two rows, NNG (y) is more meaningful under some transformations. Analysis of the discrepancy between reconstructions of
the train set D and reconstructions outside D makes it possible to
detect overfitting for some generators.

NN of a few images y. While NND (y) with the Euclidean
distance is a common heuristic (last column in Fig. 1), it is
purely visual and sensitive to transformations of the training
data.
In contrast, we suggest to rely on the opposite method111273

