Learning to Localize Through Compressed Binary Maps
Xinkai Wei1,2∗ Ioan Andrei Bârsan1,3∗ Shenlong Wang1,3∗
Julieta Martinez1 Raquel Urtasun1,3
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group 2 University of Waterloo 3 University of Toronto
{xinkai.wei,andreib,slwang,julieta,urtasun}@uber.com

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2

One of the main difficulties of scaling current localization systems to large environments is the on-board storage
required for the maps. In this paper we propose to learn
to compress the map representation such that it is optimal
for the localization task. As a consequence, higher compression rates can be achieved without loss of localization
accuracy when compared to standard coding schemes that
optimize for reconstruction, thus ignoring the end task. Our
experiments show that it is possible to learn a task-specific
compression which reduces storage requirements by two
orders of magnitude over general-purpose codecs such as
WebP without sacrificing performance.

1. Introduction
One of the fundamental tasks in autonomous driving is
the ability to localize the self-driving vehicle (SDV) with
respect to a geo-referenced map, as this enables routing the
vehicle from point A to point B. Furthermore, high precision localization enables the use of high definition (HD)
maps that capture the static parts of the environment. This
map is used by most self driving teams as a component of
perception and motion planning modules.
LiDAR-based localization systems are usually employed
for precise localization of SDVs [3, 9, 12, 13, 30, 31]. They
rely on having an HD map, which contains dense point
clouds [29, 31] and/or intensity LiDAR images of the
ground [3, 12, 13, 30]. One of the main difficulties of scaling current localization systems to large environments is the
on-board storage required for the HD maps. For instance,
storing a LiDAR intensity map as a 16-bit PNG file would
require roughly 900 GB for a city such as Los Angeles, and
over 168 TB for the entire United States.1 Storing this information onboard the vehicle is infeasible for scalability past
∗ Equal contribution
1 Based on information from the US Bureau of Transportation Statistics,

assuming that it takes approximately 4 MB to store a 150 m road segment
as a 16-bit PNG single-channel image (https://www.bts.gov ).

Localization Error (cm)

Abstract

PNG
WebP
JPG
Ours

0.58
0.40 1.05

0.0112
10 2

0.18
0.280.48 1.03
0.30

10 1
100
Bits Per Pixel (log scale)

4.94
101

Figure 1: End failure rate for localization under different map compression settings. Lower is better.
a single city. Streaming the HD map data on the go makes
the system dependent on a reliable broadband connection,
which may not always be available.
In this paper we propose to learn to compress the map
representation such that it is optimal for the localization
task. As a consequence, higher compression rates can be
achieved without loss of localization accuracy and robustness compared to standard coding schemes that optimize
for reconstruction, thus ignoring the end task. In particular,
we leverage a fully convolutional network to learn to binarize the map features, and further compress the binarized
representation using run-length encoding on top of Huffman coding. Both the binarization net and the decoder are
learned end-to-end using a task-specific loss. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this idea in the context of a stateof-the-art LiDAR intensity-based localization system [3],
and show that it is possible to learn a task-specific compression scheme which reduces storage requirements by two
orders of magnitude over general-purpose codecs such as
WebP, without sacrificing performance.

2. Related Work
Localization Using HD Maps: High-definition maps
have been widely used in the field of robot localization due
110316

