Foreground-aware Image Inpainting
Wei Xiong1∗ Jiahui Yu2 Zhe Lin3 Jimei Yang3 Xin Lu3 Connelly Barnes3 Jiebo Luo1
1
2
3
University of Rochester
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Adobe Research
1

{wxiong5,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu 2 jyu79@illinois.edu
3

{zlin, jimyang, xinl, cobarnes}@adobe.com

Abstract
Existing image inpainting methods typically fill holes by
borrowing information from surrounding pixels. They often produce unsatisfactory results when the holes overlap
with or touch foreground objects due to lack of information
about the actual extent of foreground and background regions within the holes. These scenarios, however, are very
important in practice, especially for applications such as
the removal of distracting objects. To address the problem, we propose a foreground-aware image inpainting system that explicitly disentangles structure inference and content completion. Specifically, our model learns to predict
the foreground contour first, and then inpaints the missing region using the predicted contour as guidance. We
show that by such disentanglement, the contour completion
model predicts reasonable contours of objects, and further
substantially improves the performance of image inpainting. Experiments show that our method significantly outperforms existing methods and achieves superior inpainting
results on challenging cases with complex compositions.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting is an important problem in computer
vision, and has many applications including image editing,
restoration and composition. We focus on hole filling tasks
encountered commonly when removing unwanted regions
or objects from photos. Filling holes in images with complicated foreground and background composition is one of
the most significant and challenging scenarios.
Conventional inpainting methods [8, 6, 5, 26] typically
fill missing pixels by matching and pasting patches based on
low level features such as mean square difference of RGB
values or SIFT descriptors [19]. These methods can synthesize plausible stationary textures but often produce critical failures in images with complex structures. To alleviate the problem, different structures of images have been
∗ Work was primarily done while Wei Xiong was an Intern at Adobe.

exploited [11, 12, 24]. For example, Huang et al. [11]
explicitly utilize planar structures as guidance to rectify
perspectively-distorted textures. However, these methods
still rely on existing patches and low-level features, and thus
are unable to handle challenging cases where holes overlap
with or are close to foreground objects. In such cases, a
higher understanding of image content is required.
Recently, deep learning based methods [13, 17, 28, 29, 7]
have emerged as a promising alternative avenue by treating the problem as learning an end-to-end mapping from
masked input to completed output. These learning-based
methods are able to hallucinate novel contents by training
on large scale datasets [15, 30]. To produce visually realistic results, generative adversarial networks (GANs) [9]
are employed to train the inpainting networks. However,
by default all these methods assume that a generative network can learn to predict or understand the structure in the
image implicitly, without explicit modeling of structures or
foreground/background layers in the learning process.
However, this has not been an easy task even for stateof-the-art models, such as PartialConv [17] and GatedConv [28]. For example, Fig. 1 shows two common failure
cases. On the top case, both GatedConv [28] and PartialConv [17] fail to infer a reasonable contour in the missing
region, and incorrectly predict a gold medal with an obvious notch. In addition, on the bottom case, both generate
obvious artifacts around the neck of the dog. We conjecture
that these failures may come from several limitations of current learning-based inpainting systems: (1) learning-based
inpainting models are usually trained to fill randomly generated masks which are often completely located in the background or inside a foreground object. This is inconsistent
with real-world cases where the holes might be close to or
only have a small overlap with the foreground (e.g., cases of
distracting region removal); (2) without explicitly modeling
background and foreground layer boundaries, current deep
neural network-based methods may not be able to predict
the structure accurately inside the holes by simply training
to fill random masks.
To this end, we propose a foreground-aware image in-

5840

