Attention-guided Network for Ghost-free High Dynamic Range Imaging
Qingsen Yan1,2† , Dong Gong2† , Qinfeng Shi2 ,
Anton van den Hengel2 , Chunhua Shen2 , Ian Reid2 , Yanning Zhang1∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
The University of Adelaide, Australia
https://donggong1.github.io/ahdr

Abstract
Ghosting artifacts caused by moving objects or misalignments is a key challenge in high dynamic range (HDR)
imaging for dynamic scenes. Previous methods first register the input low dynamic range (LDR) images using optical
flow before merging them, which are error-prone and cause
ghosts in results. A very recent work tries to bypass optical flows via a deep network with skip-connections, however, which still suffers from ghosting artifacts for severe
movement. To avoid the ghosting from the source, we propose a novel attention-guided end-to-end deep neural network (AHDRNet) to produce high-quality ghost-free HDR
images. Unlike previous methods directly stacking the LDR
images or features for merging, we use attention modules
to guide the merging according to the reference image. The
attention modules automatically suppress undesired components caused by misalignments and saturation and enhance desirable fine details in the non-reference images.
In addition to the attention model, we use dilated residual dense block (DRDB) to make full use of the hierarchical
features and increase the receptive field for hallucinating
the missing details. The proposed AHDRNet is a non-flowbased method, which can also avoid the artifacts generated
by optical-flow estimation error. Experiments on different datasets show that the proposed AHDRNet can achieve
state-of-the-art quantitative and qualitative results.

1. Introduction
The dynamic range of natural luminance values varies
over several orders of magnitude. However, most digital
photography sensors can only measure a limited fraction of
∗ † The first two authors contributed equally to this work. This work
was partially supported by NSFC (61871328), ARC (DP140102270, DP160100703). Q. Yan and Y. Zhang were partially supported by National
Engineering Laboratory for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean Big Data Application Technology. Q. Yan was supported by a scholarship from
CSC.

Figure 1. LDR images with different exposures are shown in (a),
and our result after tonemapping is shown in (b). The areas of
the images that exhibit both large-scale movement and saturation
are displayed in (c). The proposed AHDRNet generates an HDR
image with less ghosting artifacts and more details in saturated
regions (See zoomed-in patches in (d)).

this range. The resulting low dynamic range (LDR) images thus often have over or underexposed regions and don’t
reflect the human ability to see details in both bright and
dark areas of a scene. High dynamic range (HDR) imaging has been developed to compensate for these limitations,
and ideally aims to generate a single image that represents
a broad range of illuminations.
Some specialized hardware devices [24, 35] have been
proposed to produce HDR images directly, but they are usually too expensive to be widely adopted. As a result, computational HDR imaging methods have drawn more attention. The most common strategy is to take a series of LDR
images at different exposures and then merge them into an
HDR image [2, 21, 23, 29, 39]. In multiple exposure meth11751

