SeerNet: Predicting Convolutional Neural Network Feature-Map Sparsity
through Low-Bit Quantization
Shijie Cao∗1 , Lingxiao Ma∗2 , Wencong Xiao∗3 , Chen Zhang†4 , Yunxin Liu4 , Lintao Zhang4 ,
Lanshun Nie1 , and Zhi Yang2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Peking University 3 Beihang University 4 Microsoft Research
{v-shicao,v-lima,v-wencxi,zhac,yunxin.liu,lintaoz}@microsoft.com,
nls@hit.edu.cn,yangzhi@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Today’s breakthrough in artificial intelligence often
comes from deep neural networks (DNNs) with very large
multi-layer models. Inference on these bulky models often requires a huge amount of computational power and a
large amount of energy. Running these models in a lowcost, energy-efficient and low-latency way is highly desirable and has attracted much attention in the research community.
Exploring sparsity in DNNs is a key technique to reduce
model-inference cost. Many DNNs, particularly convolu∗ Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research.
† Corresponding author.

Binary sparse masks

Q-ReLU

Q-Conv

✁q

Fq

or

M

Q-maxpooling

Wq

Sparse Convolution

F♣

W
ReLU

F

or
max-pooling

S-Conv

Output feature map
for next Conv

Softmax

In this paper, we present a novel and general method to
accelerate convolutional neural network (CNN) inference
by taking advantage of feature map sparsity. We experimentally demonstrate that a highly quantized version of the
original network is sufficient in predicting the output sparsity accurately, and verify that leveraging such sparsity in
inference incurs negligible accuracy drop compared with
the original network. To accelerate inference, for each convolution layer, our approach first obtains a binary sparsity
mask of the output feature maps by running inference on
a quantized version of the original network layer and then
conducts a full-precision sparse convolution to find out the
precise values of the non-zero outputs. Compared with existing work, our approach avoids the overhead of training
additional auxiliary networks, while is still applicable to
general CNN networks without being limited to certain application domains.

Quantized Prediction

Conv

Conv

cat
dog
pig
cow
boy

Figure 1. Overall flow of our SeerNet inference for a convolution layer. The sparsity prediction is done layer by layer. The
weights of the original layer are denoted as W and the corresponding weights of the quantized layer are denoted as Wq . The input
feature map F (or input image for the first CNN layer) is quantized
into Fq . Based on Wq and Fq , we execute the quantized low-bit
inference (Q-Conv and Q-ReLU, i.e., quantized convolution and
quantized ReLU activation) to generate the sparsity mask M. With
M, we execute the full-precision sparse inference (S-Conv, i.e.,
sparse convolution) over W and F to get the output feature map
F’, which is also the input of the next layer.

tional neural networks (CNNs), are highly sparse with many
values involved in the calculation being zero or close to
zero. By skipping the computation involving zero values,
the model-inference cost could be significantly reduced.
Sparsity can arise in several different places in neural network inference. Weight sparsity in CNNs has been exten-

11216

