MVF-Net: Multi-View 3D Face Morphable Model Regression
Fanzi Wu2†∗ Linchao Bao1∗ Yajing Chen3 Yonggen Ling1
Yibing Song1 Songnan Li2 King Ngi Ngan2,4 Wei Liu1
1

3

Tencent AI Lab 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Abstract
We address the problem of recovering the 3D geometry of
a human face from a set of facial images in multiple views.
While recent studies have shown impressive progress in 3D
Morphable Model (3DMM) based facial reconstruction, the
settings are mostly restricted to a single view. There is an
inherent drawback in the single-view setting: the lack of reliable 3D constraints can cause unresolvable ambiguities.
We in this paper explore 3DMM-based shape recovery in
a different setting, where a set of multi-view facial images
are given as input. A novel approach is proposed to regress
3DMM parameters from multi-view inputs with an end-toend trainable Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Multiview geometric constraints are incorporated into the network by establishing dense correspondences between different views leveraging a novel self-supervised view alignment loss. The main ingredient of the view alignment loss is
a differentiable dense optical flow estimator that can backpropagate the alignment errors between an input view and
a synthetic rendering from another input view, which is projected to the target view through the 3D shape to be inferred. Through minimizing the view alignment loss, better
3D shapes can be recovered such that the synthetic projections from one view to another can better align with the observed image. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over other 3DMM methods.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D facial shapes from 2D images is essential for many virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) applications. In order to obtain fully-rigged 3D
meshes that are necessary for subsequent steps like facial
animations and editing, 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) [2]
is often adopted in the reconstruction to provide a parametric representation of 3D face models. While conventional
approaches recover the 3DMM parameters of given facial
images through analysis-by-synthesis optimization [3, 25],
∗ Equal contributions. Emails: {wufanzi412, linchaobao}@gmail.com
† This work was done when Fanzi Wu was an intern at Tencent AI Lab.

Figure 1. An illustration of the view alignment loss. The rendered
projection from view A to B via the optimal underlying 3D model
should align best with the image observed at view B.

recent work has demonstrated the effectiveness of regressing 3DMM parameters using convolutional neural networks
(CNN) [40, 35, 32, 17, 12, 29, 28]. In spite of the remarkable progress in this topic, recovering 3DMM parameters
from a single view suffers from an inherent drawback: the
lack of reliable 3D constraints can cause unresolvable ambiguities, e.g., the height of nose and cheekbones of a face
is difficult to tell given only a frontal view.
A better way to reconstruct more faithful 3D shapes from
2D images is to exploit multi-view geometric constraints
using a set of facial images in different views. In this
case, structure-from-motion (SfM) and multi-view stereo
(MVS) algorithms [9] can be employed to reconstruct an
initial 3D model and then a 3DMM fitting can be performed
using the 3D geometric constraints from the initial model
[2]. However, the separated two steps are error-prone: the
SfM/MVS step cannot utilize the strong human facial prior
from 3DMM and hence its results are usually rather noisy,
which further leads to erroneous 3DMM fitting. An alternative approach is to directly fit 3DMM parameters from
multi-view images through analysis-by-synthesis optimization [25], but it requires a complicated, nonlinear optimization that can be difficult to solve in practice.
In this paper we propose a novel approach, which adopts
an end-to-end trainable CNN to regress 3DMM parameters
in the multi-view setting. Inspired by the photometric bun-

959

