Rob-GAN: Generator, Discriminator, and Adversarial Attacker
Xuanqing Liu Cho-Jui Hsieh
University of California, Los Angeles
{xqliu, chohsieh}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study two important concepts in adversarial deep
learning—adversarial training and generative adversarial
network (GAN). Adversarial training is the technique used
to improve the robustness of discriminator by combining adversarial attacker and discriminator in the training phase.
GAN is commonly used for image generation by jointly
optimizing discriminator and generator. We show these
two concepts are indeed closely related and can be used
to strengthen each other—adding a generator to the adversarial training procedure can improve the robustness of
discriminators, and adding an adversarial attack to GAN
training can improve the convergence speed and lead to better generators. Combining these two insights, we develop
a framework called Rob-GAN to jointly optimize generator
and discriminator in the presence of adversarial attacks—
the generator generates fake images to fool discriminator;
the adversarial attacker perturbs real images to fool discriminator, and the discriminator wants to minimize loss under
fake and adversarial images. Through this end-to-end training procedure, we are able to simultaneously improve the
convergence speed of GAN training, the quality of synthetic
images, and the robustness of discriminator under strong
adversarial attacks. Experimental results demonstrate that
the obtained classifier is more robust than state-of-the-art
adversarial training approach [23], and the generator outperforms SN-GAN on ImageNet-143.

1. Introduction
Adversarial deep learning has received a significant
amount of attention in the last few years. In this paper,
we study two important but different concepts—adversarial
attack/defense and generative adversarial network (GAN).
Adversarial attacks are algorithms that find a highly resembled images to cheat a classifier. Training classifiers under
adversarial attack (also known as adversarial training) has
become one of the most promising ways to improve the
robustness of classifiers [23]. On the other hand, GAN is
∗ Project repository:

Figure 1: Illustration of the training process. This is similar
to the standard GAN training, i.e. alternatively updating
the generator G and discriminator D networks. The main
difference is that whenever feeding the real images to the D
network, we first invoke adversarial attack, so the discriminator is trained with adversarial examples.
a generative model where the generator learns to convert
white noise to images that look authentic to the discriminator [11, 28]. We show in this paper that they are indeed
closely related and can be used to strengthen each other,
specifically we have the following key insights:
1. The robustness of adversarial trained classifier can be
improved if we have a deeper understanding of the
image distribution. Therefore a generator can improve
the adversarial training process.
2. GAN training can be very slow to reach the equilibrium
if the discriminator has a large curvature on the image
manifold. Therefore an adversarial trained discriminator can accelerate GAN training.
Based on these findings, we managed to accelerate and stabilize the GAN training cycle, by enforcing the discriminator
to stay robust on image manifold. At the same time, since
data augmentation is used in the robust training process,
the generator provides more information about the data distribution. Therefore we get a more robust classifier that
generalizes better to unseen data. Our contributions can be
summarized as follows:
1. We give insights why the current adversarial training
algorithm does not generalize well to unseen data. Parallelly, we explain why the GAN training is slow to

11234

