Patch-based Progressive 3D Point Set Upsampling
Wang Yifan1 Shihao Wu1 Hui Huang2*
Daniel Cohen-Or2,3 Olga Sorkine-Hornung1
1

ETH Zurich

2

Shenzhen University

3

Tel Aviv University

Figure 1: We develop a deep neural network for 3D point set upsampling. Intuitively, our network learns different levels of detail in multiple steps, where
each step focuses on a local patch from the output of the previous step. By progressively training our patch-based network end-to-end, we successfully
upsample a sparse set of input points, step by step, to a dense point set with rich geometric details. Here we use circle plates for points rendering, which are
color-coded by point normals.

Abstract
We present a detail-driven deep neural network for point
set upsampling. A high-resolution point set is essential for
point-based rendering and surface reconstruction. Inspired
by the recent success of neural image super-resolution techniques, we progressively train a cascade of patch-based upsampling networks on different levels of detail end-to-end.
We propose a series of architectural design contributions
that lead to a substantial performance boost. The effect
of each technical contribution is demonstrated in an ablation study. Qualitative and quantitative experiments show
that our method significantly outperforms the state-of-theart learning-based [58, 59], and optimazation-based [23]
approaches, both in terms of handling low-resolution inputs
and revealing high-fidelity details. The data and code are
at https://github.com/yifita/3pu.

1. Introduction
The success of neural super-resolution techniques in image space encourages the development of upsampling methods for 3D point sets. A recent plethora of deep learning
super-resolution techniques have achieved significant improvement in single image super-resolution performance [9,
27, 32, 47]; in particular, multi-step methods have been
shown to excel in their performance [11, 30, 62]. Dealing
* Corresponding author: Hui Huang (hhzhiyan@gmail.com)

with 3D point sets, however, is challenging since, unlike images, the data is unstructured and irregular [3,17,19,34,55].
Moreover, point sets are often a result of customer-level
scanning devices, and they are typically sparse, noisy and
incomplete. Thus, upsampling techniques are particularly
important, and yet the adaption of image-space techniques
to point sets is far from straightforward.
Neural point processing is pioneered by PointNet [41]
and PointNet++ [42], where the problem of irregularity and
the lack of structure is addressed by applying shared multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) for the feature transformation
of individual points, as well as a symmetric function, e.g.,
max pooling, for global feature extraction. Recently, Yu et
al. [59] introduced the first end-to-end point set upsampling
network, PU-Net, where both the input and the output are
the 3D coordinates of a point set. PU-Net extracts multiscale features based on PointNet++ [42] and concatenates
them to obtain aggregated multi-scale features on each input point. These features are expanded by replication, then
transformed to an upsampled point set that is located and
uniformly distributed on the underlying surface. Although
multiscale features are gathered, the level of detail available
in the input patch is fixed, and thus both high-level and lowlevel geometric structures are ignored. The method consequently struggles with input points representing large-scale
or fine-scale structures, as shown in Figures 11 and 12.
In this paper, we present a patch-based progressive upsampling network for point sets. The concept is illustrated
in Figures 1 and 2. The multi-step upsampling breaks a,
say, 16×-upsampling network, into four 2× subnets, where
15958

