SpherePHD: Applying CNNs on a Spherical PolyHeDron Representation of 360◦
Images
Yeonkun Lee∗, Jaeseok Jeong∗, Jongseob Yun∗, Wonjune Cho∗, Kuk-Jin Yoon
Visual Intelligence Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering, KAIST, Korea
{dldusrjs, jason.jeong, jseob, wonjune, kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Omni-directional cameras have many advantages over
conventional cameras in that they have a much wider fieldof-view (FOV). Accordingly, several approaches have been
proposed recently to apply convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) to omni-directional images for various visual tasks.
However, most of them use image representations defined in
the Euclidean space after transforming the omni-directional
views originally formed in the non-Euclidean space. This
transformation leads to shape distortion due to nonuniform
spatial resolving power and the loss of continuity. These
effects make existing convolution kernels experience difficulties in extracting meaningful information.
This paper presents a novel method to resolve such problems of applying CNNs to omni-directional images. The
proposed method utilizes a spherical polyhedron to represent omni-directional views. This method minimizes the
variance of the spatial resolving power on the sphere surface, and includes new convolution and pooling methods
for the proposed representation. The proposed method can
also be adopted by any existing CNN-based methods. The
feasibility of the proposed method is demonstrated through
classification, detection, and semantic segmentation tasks
with synthetic and real datasets.

1. Introduction
360◦ cameras have many advantages over traditional
cameras because they offer an omni-directional view of
a scene rather than a narrow field of view. This omnidirectional view of 360◦ cameras1 allows us to extract more
information from the scene at once. Therefore, 360◦ cameras play an important role in systems requiring rich information of surroundings, e.g. advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) and autonomous robotics.
Meanwhile, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
∗ These authors contributed equally
1 ‘360◦ ’ and ‘omni-directional’ are used interchangeably in the paper.

Figure 1. Spatial distortion due to nonuniform spatial resolving
power in an ERP image. Yellow squares on both sides represent
the same surface areas on the sphere.

been widely used for many visual tasks to preserve locality
information. They have shown great performance in classification, detection, and semantic segmentation problems as
in [9] [12] [13] [15] [16].
Following this trend, several approaches have been proposed recently to apply CNNs to omni-directional images
to solve classification, detection, and semantic segmentation problems. Since the input data of neural networks are
usually represented in the Euclidean space, they need to represent the omni-directional images in the Euclidean space,
even though omni-directional images are originally represented in non-Euclidean polar coordinates. Despite omnidirectional images existing in a non-Euclidean space, equirectangular projection (ERP) has been commonly used to
represent omni-directional images in regular grids.
However, there exists spatial distortion in ERP images
coming from the nonuniform spatial resolving power, which
is caused by the non-linearity of the transformation as
shown in Fig. 1. This effect is more severe near the poles.
In addition, a different kind of distortion is observable when
the omni-directional image is taken by a tilted 360◦ camera.
In this case, without compensating for the camera tilt angle,
ERP introduces a sinusoidal fluctuation of the horizon as
in Fig. 2. This also distorts the image, making the task of
visual perception much more difficult.
In conventional 2D images, the regular grids along vertical and horizontal directions allow the convolution domain
to be uniform; the uniform domain enables the same shaped

9181

