Uncertainty Guided Multi-Scale Residual Learning-using a Cycle Spinning CNN
for Single Image De-Raining
Rajeev Yasarla and Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
ryasarl1@jhu.edu, vpatel36@jhu.edu

Abstract
Single image de-raining is an extremely challenging
problem since the rainy image may contain rain streaks
which may vary in size, direction and density. Previous approaches have attempted to address this problem by leveraging some prior information to remove rain streaks from
a single image. One of the major limitations of these approaches is that they do not consider the location information of rain drops in the image. The proposed Uncertainty
guided Multi-scale Residual Learning (UMRL) network attempts to address this issue by learning the rain content
at different scales and using them to estimate the final derained output. In addition, we introduce a technique which
guides the network to learn the network weights based on
the confidence measure about the estimate. Furthermore,
we introduce a new training and testing procedure based
on the notion of cycle spinning to improve the final deraining performance. Extensive experiments on synthetic
and real datasets to demonstrate that the proposed method
achieves significant improvements over the recent state-ofthe-art methods.

1. Introduction
Many practical computer vision-based systems such as
surveillance and autonomous driving often require processing and analysis of videos and images captured under adverse weather conditions such as rain, snow, haze etc. These
weather-based conditions adversely affect the visual quality
of images and as a result often degrade the performance of
vision systems. Hence, it is important to develop algorithms
that can automatically remove these artifacts before they are
fed to a vision-based system for further processing.
In this paper, we address the problem of removing rain
streaks from a single rainy image. Rain streak removal or
image de-raining is a difficult problem since a rainy image
may contain rain streaks which may vary in size, direction

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 1: Sample image de-raining results. (a) Rainy image. (b) De-rained using DID-MDN [35] where zoomed in
part shows the blurry effects on face and various rain streaks
near the elbow. (c) De-rained using UMRL. (d) Rainy image. (e) De-rained using Fu et al. [8] where zoomed in part
shows under de-raining of the image. (f) De-rained using
UMRL, zoomed in highlighted parts show the clear differences between UMRL and other compared methods.
and density. A number of different techniques have been
developed in the literature to address this problem. These
algorithms can be clustered into two main groups - (i) video
based algorithms [36, 9, 25, 20, 16], and (ii) single imagebased algorithms [35, 8, 18, 31, 37]. Algorithms corresponding to the first category assume temporal consistency
among the image frames, and use this assumption for deraining. On the other hand, single image de-raining methods attempt to use some prior information to remove rain
components from a single image [18, 13, 37, 35]. Priors
such as sparsity [33, 21] and low-rank representation [4]
have been used in the literature. In particular, the method
proposed by Fu et al. [8] uses a priori image domain knowledge by focusing on high frequency details during training
to improve the de-raining performance. However, it was
shown in [35], that this method tends to remove some im18405

