Cross-atlas Convolution for Parameterization Invariant Learning
on Textured Mesh Surface
Shiwei Li1
Zixin Luo1
Mingmin Zhen1
Yao Yao1∗
1
2†
1
Tianwei Shen
Tian Fang
Long Quan
{slibc|zluoag|mzhen|yyaoag|tshenaa|quan}@cse.ust.hk
1

Abstract
We present a convolutional network architecture for direct feature learning on mesh surfaces through their atlases
of texture maps. The texture map encodes the parameterization from 3D to 2D domain, rendering not only RGB values
but also rasterized geometric features if necessary. Since
the parameterization of texture map is not pre-determined,
and depends on the surface topologies, we therefore introduce a novel cross-atlas convolution to recover the original mesh geodesic neighborhood, so as to achieve the invariance property to arbitrary parameterization. The proposed module is integrated into classification and segmentation architectures, which takes the input texture map of a
mesh, and infers the output predictions. Our method not
only shows competitive performances on classification and
segmentation public benchmarks, but also paves the way for
the broad mesh surfaces learning.

1. Introduction
The 3D mesh is one of the most popular representation
for 3D shape, which consists of an array of vertices and
an array of face indices indicating the surface geometry.
It could be augmented with texture coordinates and texture
maps to render the color appearance of the mesh.
Feature learning on textured meshes is challenging: on
the geometry side, the arrays of vertices and faces are permutable. The mesh geometry by its design, could be very
adaptive: a similar shape can be meshed in very different
patterns, with irregular vertex densities and inconsistent triangle qualities. On the texture side, the parameterization of
texture map could be arbitrary and still renders the same appearance, as long as the texture coordinate is in accordance
with the content in texture map.
Existing methods that can directly or indirectly op∗ Intern at Shenzhen Zhuke Innovation Technology (Altizure)
† Corresponding author

fangtian@altizure.com

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Shenzhen Zhuke Innovation Technology (Altizure)
erate on textured meshes include 1) multi-view projection [37, 11, 10], which renders the RGB(D) images from
all perspectives of the mesh. The multi-view images can
be consumed via 2D convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
and the global feature is aggregated by view pooling. However, this is only feasible for small objects [43] where occlusion is not significant. When it comes to larger scenes
where occlusion and view selection are non-trivial, their
performance would degrade . 2) Volumetric models can
be easily obtained from meshes, which could be consumed
by 3D CNNs [43, 5, 25]. As mentioned in [6], the volumetric representation is memory-consuming and loses rich
valuable image details, thus hindering the performance. 3)
Point-based learning is a recent breakthrough [28, 30]. The
colored point cloud can be sampled from the mesh. As
the point cloud learning employs multi-layer perceptrons
rather than convolutions, it takes significantly more parameters and thus the maximum number of points can be learned
is far less than image pixels under the same configuration.
4) Geometric deep learning [3] techniques can directly process on meshes via spectral analyses [4, 8, 16, 13, 46] or
geodesic convolutions [24, 2, 26]. While their methods focus more on learning the intrinsic geometries for the dynamic correspondence task [1]. It’s unclear how they can
combine the texture or image for semantic feature learning.
In fact, the textured mesh is a self-contained combination
of 2D texture and 3D shape. Some recent works are aware
of this importance and perform joint learning on 2D images and 3D shapes [29, 6, 36], achieving improved performances. However, processing on multi-view images, rather
than a single texture map, is redundant as the same 3D area
is processed by multiple times. Besides, such bundled datastructure of 3D shape, images and camera poses is difficult
to acquire. With the popularity of 3D sensing techniques, it
would be easier and more common to obtain the standalone
textured mesh model.
To this end, we propose to perform direct learning on the
textured mesh via its texture map. The texture map can in-

6143

