A Parametric Top-View Representation of Complex Road Scenes
Ziyan Wang1 * Buyu Liu2
1
Carnegie Mellon University

Samuel Schulter2
Manmohan Chandraker2,3
2
NEC Laboratories America 3 UC San Diego

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of inferring the
layout of complex road scenes given a single camera as input. To achieve that, we first propose a novel parameterized
model of road layouts in a top-view representation, which is
not only intuitive for human visualization but also provides
an interpretable interface for higher-level decision making.
Moreover, the design of our top-view scene model allows
for efficient sampling and thus generation of large-scale
simulated data, which we leverage to train a deep neural
network to infer our scene model’s parameters. Specifically,
our proposed training procedure uses supervised domainadaptation techniques to incorporate both simulated as well
as manually annotated data. Finally, we design a Conditional Random Field (CRF) that enforces coherent predictions for a single frame and encourages temporal smoothness among video frames. Experiments on two public data
sets show that: (1) Our parametric top-view model is representative enough to describe complex road scenes; (2) The
proposed method outperforms baselines trained on manuallyannotated or simulated data only, thus getting the best of
both; (3) Our CRF is able to generate temporally smoothed
while semantically meaningful results.

1. Introduction
Understanding complex layouts of the 3D world is a crucial ability for applications like robot navigation, driver assistance systems or autonomous driving. Recent success
in deep learning-based perception systems enables pixelaccurate semantic segmentation [3, 4, 33] and (monocular)
depth estimation [9, 15, 32] in the perspective view of the
scene. Other works like [10, 23, 25] go further and reason about occlusions and build better representations for
3D scene understanding. The representation in these works,
however, is typically non-parametric, i.e., it provides a semantic label for a 2D/3D point of the scene, which makes
higher-level reasoning hard for downstream applications.
In this work, we focus on understanding driving scenarios
and propose a rich parameterized model describing com* Work done during an internship at NEC Laboratories America.

Figure 1: Our goal is to infer the layout of complex driving
scenes from a single camera. Given a perspective image (top
left) that captures a 3D scene, we predict a rich and interpretable scene description (bottom right), which represents
the scene in an occlusion-reasoned semantic top-view.

plex road layouts in a top-view representation (Fig. 1 and
Sec. 3.1). The parameters of our model describe important
scene attributes like the number and width of lanes, and the
existence of, and distance to various types of intersections,
crosswalks and sidewalks. An explicit model of such parameters is beneficial for higher-level modeling and decision
making as it provides a tangible interface to the real world.
In contrast to prior art [7, 14, 17, 23, 24, 25], our proposed
scene model is richer, fully parameterized and can be inferred from a single camera input with a combination of
deep neural networks and a graphical model.
However, training deep neural networks requires large
amounts of training data. Although annotating the scene
attributes of our model for real RGB images is possible, it
is also costly to do at a large-scale and, more importantly,
extremely difficult for certain scene attributes. While the
existence of a crosswalk is a binary attribute and is easy
to annotate, annotating the exact width of a side road requires the knowledge of scene geometry, which is hard when
only given a perspective RGB image. We thus propose to
leverage simulated data. However, in contrast to rendering
photo-realistic RGB images, which is a difficult and time-

10325

