Learning Parallax Attention for Stereo Image Super-Resolution
Longguang Wang1 , Yingqian Wang1 , Zhengfa Liang2 , Zaiping Lin1 , Jungang Yang1 , Wei An1 , Yulan Guo1∗
1
College of Electronic Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, China
2
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Blind Signal Processing, China
{wanglongguang15,yulan.guo}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Stereo image pairs can be used to improve the performance of super-resolution (SR) since additional information is provided from a second viewpoint. However, it is
challenging to incorporate this information for SR since
disparities between stereo images vary significantly. In
this paper, we propose a parallax-attention stereo superresolution network (PASSRnet) to integrate the information
from a stereo image pair for SR. Specifically, we introduce a parallax-attention mechanism with a global receptive field along the epipolar line to handle different stereo
images with large disparity variations. We also propose a
new and the largest dataset for stereo image SR (namely,
Flickr1024). Extensive experiments demonstrate that the
parallax-attention mechanism can capture correspondence
between stereo images to improve SR performance with a
small computational and memory cost. Comparative results
show that our PASSRnet achieves the state-of-the-art performance on the Middlebury, KITTI 2012 and KITTI 2015
datasets.

1. Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) aims to reconstruct highresolution (HR) images from their low-resolution (LR)
counterparts. Recovering an HR image from a single shot
is a long-standing problem [1, 2, 3]. Recently, dual cameras
are becoming increasingly popular in mobile phones and
autonomous vehicles. It is already demonstrated that
subpixel shifts contained in LR stereo images can be used
to improve SR performance [4]. However, since disparities
between stereo images can vary significantly for different
baselines, focal lengths, depths and resolutions, it is highly
challenging to incorporate stereo correspondence for SR.
Traditional multi-image SR methods [7, 8] use patch recurrence across images to obtain correspondence. However,
these methods cannot exploit sub-pixel correspondence and
their computational cost is high. Recent CNN-based frameworks [9, 10, 11] incorporate optical flow estimation and SR

Bicubic

SRCNN

LapSRN

StereoSR

Ours

Groundtruth

Figure 1: Visual results achieved by bicubic interpolation,
SRCNN [1], LapSRN [5], StereoSR [6] and our network for
2× SR. These results are achieved on “test image 002” of
the KITTI 2015 dataset.

in unified networks to solve the video SR problem. However, these methods cannot be directly applied to stereo image SR since the disparity can be much larger than their
receptive field.
Stereo matching has been investigated to obtain correspondence between a stereo image pair [12, 13, 14]. Recent CNN-based methods [15, 16, 17, 18] use 3D or 4D
cost volumes in their networks to model long-range dependency between stereo image pairs. Intuitively, these CNNbased stereo matching methods can be integrated with SR
to provide accurate correspondence. However, 4D cost volume based methods [15, 16] suffer from a high computational and memory burden, which is unbearable for stereo
image SR. Although the efficiency of 3D cost volume based
methods [17, 18] is improved, these methods cannot handle
stereo images with large disparity variations since a fixed
maximum disparity is used to construct a cost volume.
Recently, Jeon et al. proposed a stereo SR network
(StereoSR) [6] to provide correspondence cues for SR using
an image stack. Specifically, the image stack is obtained by
concatenating the left image and the images generated by
shifting the right image with different intervals. A direct
mapping between parallax shifts and an HR image is then
obtained. However, the flexibility of this method for different sensors and scenes is limited since the largest allowed
disparity is fixed (i.e., 64 in [6]) in this algorithm.
112250

