Auto-Encoding Scene Graphs for Image Captioning
Xu Yang, Kaihua Tang, Hanwang Zhang, Jianfei Cai
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University,
{s170018@e,kaihua001@e}.ntu.edu.sg,{hanwangzhang@,ASJFCai@}ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We propose Scene Graph Auto-Encoder (SGAE) that incorporates the language inductive bias into the encoderdecoder image captioning framework for more human-like
captions. Intuitively, we humans use the inductive bias to
compose collocations and contextual inference in discourse.
For example, when we see the relation “person on bike”,
it is natural to replace “on” with “ride” and infer “person riding bike on a road” even the “road” is not evident. Therefore, exploiting such bias as a language prior
is expected to help the conventional encoder-decoder models less likely overfit to the dataset bias and focus on reasoning. Specifically, we use the scene graph — a directed
graph (G) where an object node is connected by adjective
nodes and relationship nodes — to represent the complex
structural layout of both image (I) and sentence (S). In the
textual domain, we use SGAE to learn a dictionary (D) that
helps to reconstruct sentences in the S → G → D → S
pipeline, where D encodes the desired language prior; in
the vision-language domain, we use the shared D to guide
the encoder-decoder in the I → G → D → S pipeline.
Thanks to the scene graph representation and shared dictionary, the inductive bias is transferred across domains
in principle. We validate the effectiveness of SGAE on the
challenging MS-COCO image captioning benchmark, e.g.,
our SGAE-based single-model achieves a new state-of-theart 127.8 CIDEr-D on the Karpathy split, and a competitive
125.5 CIDEr-D (c40) on the official server even compared
to other ensemble models. Code has been made available
at: https://github.com/yangxuntu/SGAE.

1. Introduction
Modern image captioning models employ an end-to-end
encoder-decoder framework [10, 30, 29, 2, 27], i.e., the encoder encodes an image into vector representations and then
the decoder decodes them into a language sequence. Since
its invention inspired from neural machine translation [3],
this framework has experienced several significant upgrades

Road

Dirt

red
On

On
Motorbike

Dirt

red

Helmet

Down

Countryside

Wear

Motorcycle

On

Man

Hat

On
Person

Road

Dictionary

“a man with a red
helmet riding a
motorcycle down a
countryside dirt
road”

Figure 1. Illustration of auto-encoding scene graphs (blue arrows)
into the conventional encoder-decoder framework for image captioning (red arrows), where the language inductive bias is encoded in the trainable shared dictionary. Word colors correspond
to nodes in image and sentence scene graphs.

such as the top-bottom [50] and bottom-up [2] visual attentions for dynamic encoding, and the reinforced mechanism
for sequence decoding [38, 9, 35]. However, a ubiquitous
problem has never been substantially resolved: when we
feed an unseen image scene into the framework, we usually get a simple and trivial caption about the salient objects
such as “there is a dog on the floor”, which is no better than
just a list of object detection [29]. This situation is particularly embarrassing in front of the booming “mid-level”
vision techniques nowadays: we can already detect and segment almost everything in an image [12, 17, 36].
We humans are good at telling sentences about a visual
scene. Not surprisingly, cognitive evidences [32] show that
the visually grounded language generation is not end-toend and largely attributed to the “high-level” symbolic reasoning, that is, once we abstract the scene into symbols,
the generation will be almost disentangled from the visual
perception. For example, as shown in Figure 1, from the
scene abstraction “helmet-on-human” and “road dirty”, we
can say “a man with a helmet in countryside” by using the
common sense knowledge like “country road is dirty”. In
fact, such collocations and contextual inference in human

10685

