Fast Spatio-Temporal Residual Network for Video Super-Resolution
Sheng Li1 , Fengxiang He2 , Bo Du∗1 , Lefei Zhang∗1 , Yonghao Xu3 , and Dacheng Tao2
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, SCS, FEIT, the University of Sydney, Australia
3
The State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping, and Remote Sensing,
Wuhan University, China
2

{shli, remoteking, zhanglefei}@whu.edu.cn {fengxiang.he, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au
yonghaoxu@ieee.org

Abstract
Recently, deep learning based video super-resolution
(SR) methods have achieved promising performance. To simultaneously exploit the spatial and temporal information
of videos, employing 3-dimensional (3D) convolutions is a
natural approach. However, straight utilizing 3D convolutions may lead to an excessively high computational complexity which restricts the depth of video SR models and
thus undermine the performance. In this paper, we present
a novel fast spatio-temporal residual network (FSTRN) to
adopt 3D convolutions for the video SR task in order to enhance the performance while maintaining a low computational load. Specifically, we propose a fast spatio-temporal
residual block (FRB) that divide each 3D filter to the product of two 3D filters, which have considerably lower dimensions. Furthermore, we design a cross-space residual
learning that directly links the low-resolution space and
the high-resolution space, which can greatly relieve the
computational burden on the feature fusion and up-scaling
parts. Extensive evaluations and comparisons on benchmark datasets validate the strengths of the proposed approach and demonstrate that the proposed network significantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) addresses the problem of estimating a high-resolution (HR) image or video from its lowresolution (LR) counterpart. SR is wildly used in various
computer vision tasks, such as satellite imaging [4] and
surveillance imaging [17]. Recently, deep learning based
methods have been a promising approach to solve SR prob∗ Corresponding author.

kxk
Conv2d

ReLU

ReLU

kxkxk
Conv3d

kxk
Conv2d

Addition

(a) EDSR

Addition

(b) 3D residual block

PReLU
1xkxk
Conv3d
kx1x1
Conv3d

Addition

(c) Proposed FRB

Figure 1: Comparison of (a) residual block in EDSR[27],
(b) single C3D residual block, and (c) the proposed FRB.

lem [5, 20, 27, 29, 30, 45]. A straight idea for video SR
is to perform single image SR frame by frame. However,
it ignores the temporal correlations among frames, the output HR videos usually lack the temporal consistency, which
may emerge as spurious flickering artifacts [33].
Most existing methods for the video SR task utilize the
temporal fusion techniques to extract the temporal information in the data, such as motion compensation [3, 39],
which usually need manually deigned structure and much
more computational consumption. To automatically and
simultaneously exploit the spatial and temporal information, it is natural to employ 3-dimensional (3D) filters to

10522

