Face Parsing with RoI Tanh-Warping
Jinpeng Lin1∗ Hao Yang2∗ Dong Chen2 Ming Zeng1† Fang Wen2
1
Software School of Xiamen University
2
Microsoft Research

Lu Yuan2

jplinforever@gmail.com zengming@xmu.edu.cn
{haya, doch, fangwen, luyuan}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Face parsing computes pixel-wise label maps for different semantic components (e.g., hair, mouth, eyes) from face
images. Existing face parsing literature have illustrated
significant advantages by focusing on individual regions of
interest (RoIs) for faces and facial components. However,
the traditional crop-and-resize focusing mechanism ignores
all contextual area outside the RoIs, and thus is not suitable when the component area is unpredictable, e.g. hair.
Inspired by the physiological vision system of human, we
propose a novel RoI Tanh-warping operator that combines
the central vision and the peripheral vision together. It addresses the dilemma between a limited sized RoI for focusing and an unpredictable area of surrounding context for
peripheral information. To this end, we propose a novel
hybrid convolutional neural network for face parsing. It
uses hierarchical local based method for inner facial components and global methods for outer facial components.
The whole framework is simple and principled, and can
be trained end-to-end. To facilitate future research of face
parsing, we also manually relabel the training data of the
HELEN dataset and will make it public. Experiments on
both HELEN and LFW-PL benchmarks demonstrate that
our method surpasses state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Given an input face image, face parsing assigns a pixelwise label for each semantic component, e.g., hair, facial
skins, eyes, nose, mouth and etc.. Compared with face
alignment, face parsing can provide more precise areas, and
more importantly, face parsing can output the hair area,
which is necessary for a variety of high level applications,
such as face understanding, editing and animation.
∗ Equal contribution. This work is done when Jinpeng Lin is an intern
at Microsoft Research Asia.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Our face parsing results. The proposed method is able
to segment facial components as well as whole hair regions. It
can also distinguish people who are close. Different brightness
represent different individuals. (Best viewed in color)

Previous face parsing methods cannot handle hair segmentation very well. Some previous works [28, 14, 6] crop
a ﬁxed-size area around the face and ignore the surrounding
area. These methods often fail to obtain the whole hair area.
[17] propose using Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN)
and Recurrent Propagation for face parsing, but it cannot
distinguish the hair area of different people nearby. There
are also some face parsing algorithms [31, 10, 20, 35] that
just ignore the hair area due to the limitations of the algorithm or the data.
The difﬁculty of the segmentation of both the inner facial
components and the hair at one time is as follows. Generally, it is possible to improve accuracy by predicting each
face region ﬁrst, and then predict the per-pixel mask in each
region individually. The estimated region yields good hints,
including spatial constraint and instance information, for
predicting high accuracy masks. However, if only focusing on the center of the face, the hair in the surrounding
area will be ignored. This is a problem because we need
an accurate and tight location of each face for inner facial
components while requiring the surrounding context for the
hair region.
Our method is inspired by the human vision. When looking at something, human combine information of central vi15654

