Single Image Reflection Removal Beyond Linearity
Qiang Wen1 , Yinjie Tan1 , Jing Qin2 , Wenxi Liu3 , Guoqiang Han1 , Shengfeng He1∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Department of Nursing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Fuzhou University

Reflection Removal

Image Synthesis

1

Transmission

Reflection

Linear Synthesis [25]

Clipped Linear Synthesis [2]

Our Synthesis

Real-world Scene

Transmission from [2]

Transmission from [30]

Transmission from [31]

Our Transmission

Figure 1: Existing reflection removal methods rely heavily on the linearly synthesized data, which, however, cannot simulate
the real-world reflections. We propose to synthesize and remove reflection beyond linearity, leading to the controllable
synthesis and clean reflection removal.

Abstract
Due to the lack of paired data, the training of image
reflection removal relies heavily on synthesizing reflection
images. However, existing methods model reflection as a
linear combination model, which cannot fully simulate the
real-world scenarios. In this paper, we inject non-linearity
into reflection removal from two aspects. First, instead of
synthesizing reflection with a fixed combination factor or
kernel, we propose to synthesize reflection images by predicting a non-linear alpha blending mask. This enables a
free combination of different blurry kernels, leading to a
controllable and diverse reflection synthesis. Second, we
design a cascaded network for reflection removal with three
tasks: predicting the transmission layer, reflection layer,
and the non-linear alpha blending mask. The former two
tasks are the fundamental outputs, while the latter one being the side output of the network. This side output, on
the other hand, making the training a closed loop, so that
the separated transmission and reflection layers can be recombined together for training with a reconstruction loss.
Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate the proposed synthesis and removal approaches out∗ Corresponding author (hesfe@scut.edu.cn).

performs state-of-the-art methods on two standard benchmarks, as well as in real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
Undesired reflection from glasses not only damages
the image quality, but also influences the performance of
computer vision tasks like image classification. To remove reflection, early researches design hand-crafted priors
[11, 13, 18, 26], while recent works [2, 31, 25, 29] train
deep models to remove reflection patterns.
Notwithstanding the demonstrated success of deep reflection removal models, the arguably most critical challenge is to obtain sufficient paired training data, which includes the reflection images and their corresponding clean
transmission images. To synthesize reflection data, existing
methods [2, 31, 25, 29] simply blend two images with a linear model. Particularly, they express the reflection image
S ∈ [0, 1]m×n×3 as the linear combination of the transmission layer T ∈ [0, 1]m×n×3 and the reflection layer
R ∈ [0, 1]m×n×3 :
S = αT + (1 − α) (K ⊗ R) ,

(1)

where α ∈ (0.5, 1) is the combination factor, ⊗ denotes a
13771

