Art2Real: Unfolding the Reality of Artworks
via Semantically-Aware Image-to-Image Translation
Matteo Tomei Marcella Cornia Lorenzo Baraldi Rita Cucchiara
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
{name.surname}@unimore.it

Abstract
The applicability of computer vision to real paintings
and artworks has been rarely investigated, even though a
vast heritage would greatly benefit from techniques which
can understand and process data from the artistic domain.
This is partially due to the small amount of annotated artistic data, which is not even comparable to that of natural images captured by cameras. In this paper, we propose a semantic-aware architecture which can translate artworks to photo-realistic visualizations, thus reducing the
gap between visual features of artistic and realistic data.
Our architecture can generate natural images by retrieving
and learning details from real photos through a similarity
matching strategy which leverages a weakly-supervised semantic understanding of the scene. Experimental results
show that the proposed technique leads to increased realism and to a reduction in domain shift, which improves the
performance of pre-trained architectures for classification,
detection, and segmentation. Code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/aimagelab/art2real.

1. Introduction
Our society has inherited a huge legacy of cultural artifacts from past generations: buildings, monuments, books,
and exceptional works of art. While this heritage would
benefit from algorithms which can automatically understand its content, computer vision techniques have been
rarely adapted to work in this domain.
One of the reasons is that applying state of the art techniques to artworks is rather difficult, and often brings poor
performance. This can be motivated by the fact that the visual appearance of artworks is different from that of photorealistic images, due to the presence of brush strokes, the
creativity of the artist and the specific artistic style at hand.
As current vision pipelines exploit large datasets consisting of natural images, learned models are largely biased towards them. The result is a gap between high-level con-

Artistic Domain

Realistic Domain

Artistic paintings
Real photos
Generated images

Original Painting

Art2Real

Real Photos

Figure 1: We present Art2Real, an architecture which can
reduce the gap between the distributions of visual features
from artistic and realistic images, by translating paintings
to photo-realistic images.
volutional features of the two domains, which leads to a
decrease in performance in the target tasks, such as classification, detection or segmentation.
This paper proposes a solution to the aforementioned
problem that avoids the need for re-training neural architectures on large-scale datasets containing artistic images.
In particular, we propose an architecture which can reduce
the shift between the feature distributions from the two
domains, by translating artworks to photo-realistic images
which preserve the original content. A sample of this setting is depicted in Fig. 1.
As paired training data is not available for this task,
we revert to an unpaired image-to-image translation setting [56], in which images can be translated between different domains while preserving some underlying characteristics. In our art-to-real scenario, the first domain is that
of paintings while the second one is that of natural images.
The shared characteristic is that they are two different visualizations of the same class of objects, for example, they

5849

