Isospectralization, or how to hear shape, style, and correspondence
Luca Cosmo
University of Venice

Mikhail Panine
École Polytechnique

Arianna Rampini
Sapienza University of Rome

luca.cosmo@unive.it

mpanine@lix.polytechnique.fr

rampini@di.uniroma1.it

Maks Ovsjanikov
École Polytechnique

Michael M. Bronstein
Imperial College London / USI

Emanuele Rodolà
Sapienza University of Rome

m.bronstein@imperial.ac.uk

emanuele.rodola@uniroma1.it

maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Initialization

Abstract
The question whether one can recover the shape of a
geometric object from its Laplacian spectrum (‘hear the
shape of the drum’) is a classical problem in spectral geometry with a broad range of implications and applications. While theoretically the answer to this question is negative (there exist examples of iso-spectral but non-isometric
manifolds), little is known about the practical possibility
of using the spectrum for shape reconstruction and optimization. In this paper, we introduce a numerical procedure called isospectralization, consisting of deforming one
shape to make its Laplacian spectrum match that of another. We implement the isospectralization procedure using
modern differentiable programming techniques and exemplify its applications in some of the classical and notoriously hard problems in geometry processing, computer vision, and graphics such as shape reconstruction, pose and
style transfer, and dense deformable correspondence.

1. Introduction
Can one hear the shape of the drum? This classical
question in spectral geometry, made famous by Mark Kac’s
eponymous paper [21], inquires about the possibility of recovering the structure of a geometric object from its Laplacian spectrum. Empirically, the relation between shape and
its acoustic properties has long been known and can be
traced back at least to medieval bellfounders. However,
while it is known that the spectrum carries many geometric and topological properties of the shape such as the area,
total curvature, number of connected components, etc., it
is now known that one cannot ‘hear’ the metric. Examples of high-dimensional manifolds that are isospectral but
not isometric have been constructed in 1964 [27] (predating
Kac’s paper), but it took until 1992 to produce a counterexample of 2D polygons giving a negative answer to Kac’s

Reconstruction

opt.
target
init.

Without isospectralization

With isospectralization

Figure 1. Top row: Mickey-from-spectrum: we recover the shape
of Mickey Mouse from its first 20 Laplacian eigenvalues (shown
in red in the leftmost plot) by deforming an initial ellipsoid shape;
the ground-truth target embedding is shown as a red outline on top
of our reconstruction. Bottom row: Aligning the Laplacian eigenvalues (‘isospectralization’) can be used as a preconditioning step
for non-isometric deformable shape matching. We show the correspondence obtained with a baseline matching algorithm before
(left) and after (right) isospectralization. Corresponding points are
depicted with same color.

question [16, 15].
Nevertheless, the question of relation between shape and
spectrum is far from being closed, from both theoretical
and practical perspectives. Specifically, it is not yet certain
whether the counterexamples are the rule or the exception.
So far, everything points towards the latter. In fact, there
are known classes of manifolds in which the spectral reconstruction is generically possible. See [39, 40, 41, 18] for
such results. Thus, it is plausible that the theoretical existence of rather ‘exotic’ counter-examples of non-isometric
4321
7529

