What Object Should I Use? - Task Driven Object Detection
Johann Sawatzky∗

Yaser Souri∗
Christian Grund
University of Bonn

Juergen Gall

{jsawatzk, ysouri, grund, jgall} @ uni-bonn.de

Abstract
When humans have to solve everyday tasks, they simply
pick the objects that are most suitable. While the question
which object should one use for a specific task sounds trivial for humans, it is very difficult to answer for robots or
other autonomous systems. This issue, however, is not addressed by current benchmarks for object detection that focus on detecting object categories. We therefore introduce
the COCO-Tasks dataset which comprises about 40,000 images where the most suitable objects for 14 tasks have been
annotated. We furthermore propose an approach that detects the most suitable objects for a given task. The approach builds on a Gated Graph Neural Network to exploit
the appearance of each object as well as the global context of all present objects in the scene. In our experiments,
we show that the proposed approach outperforms other approaches that are evaluated on the dataset like classification
or ranking approaches.

1. Introduction
The task of object detection in images has been widely
studied and the community achieved impressive progress on
datasets like COCO [24] or Pascal VOC [11]. For many applications like assistive or autonomous systems, however, it
is insufficient to detect all instances of a set of object categories. Similar to humans, the systems interact with the
environment to solve certain tasks. For instance, if a service
robot is asked to serve a glass of wine, detecting all glasses
in an image does not answer the question which of them
it should use. Taking a beer glass is definitely the wrong
choice if a wine glass is available, but if no other glasses are
available it might be the best option for the task. Even if
there are several wine glasses, not all of them are necessary
suitable since some of the glasses might be already used by
someone else or need to be cleaned. If no glasses are available, some alternatives have to be considered. For instance,
wine can be drunk from a cup or jug as well. This shows that
∗ contributed equally, alphabetically ordered

Figure 1. What object in the scene would a human choose to serve
wine? In the left image, the wine glass is preferred to other drinking glasses. In the right image, neither a wine glass nor other
drinking glasses are present. The cup is therefore chosen by the
human.

answering the question, which object should be used for a
task is very difficult since it depends on the present object
categories in an image and the properties of the objects.
In this work, we address the problem of task driven object detection. It requires to detect all objects in an image
which serve a given task best. To this end, we propose the
task driven object detection (COCO-Tasks) dataset, which
is based on the images and annotated objects of the COCO
dataset [24]. For evaluation, we define 14 tasks and asked
humans to mark all objects in an image which they favor
to solve a given task. If none of the objects in an image
is suitable, the annotators were allowed to select none of
the objects. The dataset comprises about 40,000 annotated
images and for each task between 1,100 and 9,900 objects
have been marked by the annotators, where the number of
different object categories varies between 6 and 30 for the
different tasks. Figures 1 and 2 show a few examples.
In our experimental evaluation, we show that task driven
object detection cannot be treated as a standard object detection task. If a standard object detector is trained for
each task using the human annotations as ground-truth, the
predictions are not very accurate since the favored objects
strongly depend on the presence of other objects and their
properties. We therefore propose a method based on Gated
Graph Neural Networks (GGNN) [22] that explicitly incorporates all detection hypotheses in an image to infer which
objects are preferred for a task. Our experimental results
17605

