Selective Sensor Fusion for Neural Visual-Inertial Odometry
Changhao Chen1 , Stefano Rosa1 , Yishu Miao2 , Chris Xiaoxuan Lu1 ,
Wei Wu3 , Andrew Markham1 , Niki Trigoni1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
2
MO Intelligence 3 Tencent

Abstract
Deep learning approaches for Visual-Inertial Odometry
(VIO) have proven successful, but they rarely focus on incorporating robust fusion strategies for dealing with imperfect input sensory data. We propose a novel end-to-end selective sensor fusion framework for monocular VIO, which
fuses monocular images and inertial measurements in order to estimate the trajectory whilst improving robustness
to real-life issues, such as missing and corrupted data or
bad sensor synchronization. In particular, we propose two
fusion modalities based on different masking strategies: deterministic soft fusion and stochastic hard fusion, and we
compare with previously proposed direct fusion baselines.
During testing, the network is able to selectively process
the features of the available sensor modalities and produce
a trajectory at scale. We present a thorough investigation on
the performances on three public autonomous driving, Micro Aerial Vehicle (MAV) and hand-held VIO datasets. The
results demonstrate the effectiveness of the fusion strategies, which offer better performances compared to direct
fusion, particularly in presence of corrupted data. In addition, we study the interpretability of the fusion networks
by visualising the masking layers in different scenarios and
with varying data corruption, revealing interesting correlations between the fusion networks and imperfect sensory
input data.

1. Introduction
Humans are able to perceive their self-motion through
space via multimodal perceptions. Optical flow (visual
cues) and vestibular signals (inertial motion sense) are the
two most sensitive cues for determining self-motion [9].
In the fields of computer vision and robotics, integrating
visual and inertial information in the form of Visual-Inertial
Odometry (VIO) is a well researched topic [17, 20, 19, 11,
29], as it enables ubiquitous mobility for mobile agents by
providing robust and accurate pose information. Moreover,
cameras and inertial sensors are relatively low-cost, power-

efficient and widely found in ground robots, smartphones,
and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Existing VIO approaches generally follow a standard pipeline that involves
fine-tuning of both feature detection and tracking, and of the
sensor fusion strategy. These models rely on handcrafted
features, and fuse the information based on filtering [20] or
nonlinear optimization [19, 11, 29]. However, naively using all features before fusion will lead to unreliable state
estimation, as incorrect feature extraction or matching cripples the entire system. Real issues which can and do occur
include camera occlusion or operation in low-light conditions [40], excess noise or drift within the inertial sensor
[26], time-synchronization between the two streams or spatial misalignment [21].
Recent studies on applying deep neural networks
(DNNs) to solving visual-inertial odometry [30] or visual
odometry [18, 7] showed competitive performance in terms
of both accuracy and robustness. Although DNNs excel at
extracting high-level features representative of egomotion,
these learning-based methods are not explicitly modelling
the sources of degradation in real-world usages. Without considering possible sensor errors, all features are directly fed into other modules for further pose regression in
[4, 7, 18], or simply concatenated as in [30]. These factors
can possibly cause troubles to the accuracy and safety of
VIO systems, when the input data are corrupted or missing.
For this reason, we present a generic framework that
models feature selection for robust sensor fusion. The selection process is conditioned on the measurement reliability and the dynamics of both egomotion and environment. Two alternative feature weighting strategies are presented: soft fusion, implemented in a deterministic fashion;
and hard fusion, which introduces stochastic noise and intuitively learns to keep the most relevant feature representations, while discarding useless or misleading information.
Both architectures are trained in an end-to-end fashion.
By explicitly modelling the selection process, we are
able to demonstrate the strong correlation between the
selected features and the environmental/measurement dynamics by visualizing the sensor fusion masks, as illus110542

