DAVANet: Stereo Deblurring with View Aggregation
Shangchen Zhou1 Jiawei Zhang1 Wangmeng Zuo2∗ Haozhe Xie2 Jinshan Pan3 Jimmy Ren1
1
SenseTime Research 2 Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
https://shangchenzhou.com/projects/davanet

1. Introduction
With the wide use of dual-lens smartphones, unmanned
aerial vehicles and autonomous robots, stereoscopic vision
has attracted increasing attention from researchers. Relevant studies not only covers traditional stereo tasks, such
as stereo matching [42, 3, 29] and scene flow estimation [22, 23, 11], but also some novel tasks for improving visual effects of stereoscopic 3D contents, for example,
stereo super-resolution [12], stereo video retargeting [18]
and stereo neural style transfer [4, 7]. However, stereo image deblurring has rarely been discussed. In fact, the images
captured by handheld or on-board stereo cameras often contain blur due to camera shake and object motion. The blurry
stereo images would cause visual discomfort to viewers and
make it difficult for further image processing.
∗ Corresponding author

(a)

(c)

(e)

(b)

(d)

(f)

Right

Nowadays stereo cameras are more commonly adopted
in emerging devices such as dual-lens smartphones and unmanned aerial vehicles. However, they also suffer from
blurry images in dynamic scenes which leads to visual discomfort and hampers further image processing. Previous
works have succeeded in monocular deblurring, yet there
are few studies on deblurring for stereoscopic images. By
exploiting the two-view nature of stereo images, we propose a novel stereo image deblurring network with Depth
Awareness and View Aggregation, named DAVANet. In our
proposed network, 3D scene cues from the depth and varying information from two views are incorporated, which
help to remove complex spatially-varying blur in dynamic
scenes. Specifically, with our proposed fusion network, we
integrate the bidirectional disparities estimation and deblurring into a unified framework. Moreover, we present a
large-scale multi-scene dataset for stereo deblurring, containing 20,637 blurry-sharp stereo image pairs from 135 diverse sequences and their corresponding bidirectional disparities. The experimental results on our dataset demonstrate that DAVANet outperforms state-of-the-art methods
in terms of accuracy, speed, and model size.

Left

Abstract

Figure 1: Depth-varying and view-varying blur. (a, b) are
the stereo blurry images, (c, d) are the motion trajectories in
terms of optical flow which models the blur kernels and (e,
f) are the estimated disparities. The objects with different
depths have different blurs which can be seen between green
and yellow boxes. In addition, the green boxes show that
the blurs are different between two views. The proposed
DAVANet makes use of the above properties for deblurring.

Dynamic scene deblurring from a single blurry image
is a highly ill-posed task. Due to depth variation and object/camera motion in dynamic scenes, it is difficult to estimate spatially variant blur with the limited information
from single observation. Although the existing CNN based
methods [38, 44, 16, 2, 24, 35] have achieved encouraging
results in monocular deblurring, they still fail when handling complicated non-uniform blur. To the best of our
knowledge, there are few traditional methods [40, 33, 28]
proposed to exploit stereo information for deblurring, where
a coarse depth or piecewise rigid 3D scene flow is utilized
to estimate blur kernels in a hierarchical or iterative framework. However, they are time-consuming due to the complex optimization process.
With a stereopsis configuration, our motivation is based
on two observations: (i) Depth information can provide
helpful prior information for estimating spatially-varying
blur kernels. The near points are more blurry than the distant ones in a static scene which can be seen between the
green and yellow boxes in Figure 1. Compared monocularbased algorithms, the proposed stereo-based method can

10996

