MARS: Motion-Augmented RGB Stream for Action Recognition
Karteek Alahari2

Nieves Crasto1
Philippe Weinzaepfel1
1
NAVER LABS Europe∗

Abstract

74

Most state-of-the-art methods for action recognition
consist of a two-stream architecture with 3D convolutions:
an appearance stream for RGB frames and a motion stream
for optical flow frames. Although combining flow with RGB
improves the performance, the cost of computing accurate
optical flow is high, and increases action recognition latency. This limits the usage of two-stream approaches in
real-world applications requiring low latency. In this paper,
we introduce two learning approaches to train a standard
3D CNN, operating on RGB frames, that mimics the motion stream, and as a result avoids flow computation at test
time. First, by minimizing a feature-based loss compared to
the Flow stream, we show that the network reproduces the
motion stream with high fidelity. Second, to leverage both
appearance and motion information effectively, we train
with a linear combination of the feature-based loss and the
standard cross-entropy loss for action recognition. We denote the stream trained using this combined loss as MotionAugmented RGB Stream (MARS). As a single stream, MARS
performs better than RGB or Flow alone, for instance with
72.7% accuracy on Kinetics compared to 72.0% and 65.6%
with RGB and Flow streams respectively.

72

1. Introduction
The emergence of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [13, 19, 36], together with larger datasets [10, 18]
have recently led to remarkable progress in action recognition [2, 32, 37]. To integrate temporal information with
CNNs, three main ideas have been proposed. Simonyan and
Zisserman [32] introduced a two-stream approach where
one stream models appearance by taking RGB frames as
input, and the other processes optical flow frames to leverage motion information. Tran et al. [37] proposed an architecture with 3D convolutions on RGB frames, i.e., convolutions operating over both space and time. And lastly,
∗ Work done while N. Crasto was an intern at Inria and NAVER LABS.
† Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000
Grenoble, France

Accuracy (%)

70
68

Cordelia Schmid2
2
Inria†

Accuracy vs Time on MiniKinetics
MARS+RGB

MARS MERS+RGB

RGB+TVL1Flow

RGB

66
64
62
60
0.1

MERS

TVL1Flow

1.0
10.0
100.0
Average Time per video in seconds

Figure 1: Accuracy vs. time on MiniKinetics for different
streams using 16-frame clips. Time is averaged over all
videos. Flows are estimated using TV-L1 [45]. Our MERS
approach successfully mimics the Flow stream, while being
significantly faster, as it avoids flow computation. Combining MERS with the RGB stream (MERS+RGB), we achieve
accuracy comparable to RGB+Flow at a significantly lower
computation cost. Rather than using two streams, our
MARS approach is twice as fast as MERS+RGB and maintains the same performance. Note that computation time
only depends on the input size, irrespective of the dataset:
MARS is ∼100 times faster than RGB+TVL1Flow.
recurrent neural networks, such as LSTMs, have been used
to aggregate information iteratively over frames [5]. Recent
methods [2, 38, 44] are based on the combination of the
two-stream approach with 3D convolutions in each stream
that are trained using large datasets [18].
In summary, the strategy of combining 3D CNN-based
RGB and Flow streams produces the best results, but it
does have significant drawbacks. Firstly, two-stream approaches require explicit and accurate optical flow extraction from RGB frames, which is computationally expensive,
as shown in the accuracy vs. time plot on the MiniKinetics
dataset [44] in Figure 1. From the plot, we observe that
Flow and RGB+Flow are significantly slower than RGB.
Efficient methods for computing flow do exist [34], but they
are not as effective when combined with the RGB stream

7882

