MOTS: Multi-Object Tracking and Segmentation
Paul Voigtlaender1 Michael Krause1 Aljos̆a Os̆ep1 Jonathon Luiten1
Berin Balachandar Gnana Sekar1 Andreas Geiger2 Bastian Leibe1
1
RWTH Aachen University 2 MPI for Intelligent Systems and University of Tübingen
{voigtlaender,osep,luiten,leibe}@vision.rwth-aachen.de
{michael.krause,berin.gnana}@rwth-aachen.de andreas.geiger@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
This paper extends the popular task of multi-object
tracking to multi-object tracking and segmentation (MOTS).
Towards this goal, we create dense pixel-level annotations
for two existing tracking datasets using a semi-automatic
annotation procedure. Our new annotations comprise
65,213 pixel masks for 977 distinct objects (cars and pedestrians) in 10,870 video frames. For evaluation, we extend existing multi-object tracking metrics to this new task.
Moreover, we propose a new baseline method which jointly
addresses detection, tracking, and segmentation with a single convolutional network. We demonstrate the value of
our datasets by achieving improvements in performance
when training on MOTS annotations. We believe that
our datasets, metrics and baseline will become a valuable resource towards developing multi-object tracking approaches that go beyond 2D bounding boxes. We make
our annotations, code, and models available at https:
//www.vision.rwth-aachen.de/page/mots.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the computer vision community has
made significant advances in increasingly difficult tasks.
Deep learning techniques now demonstrate impressive performance in object detection as well as image and instance
segmentation. Tracking, on the other hand, remains challenging, especially when multiple objects are involved. In
particular, results of recent tracking evaluations [37, 7, 25]
show that bounding box level tracking performance is saturating. Further improvements will only be possible when
moving to the pixel level. We thus propose to think of all
three tasks – detection, segmentation and tracking – as interconnected problems that need to be considered together.
Datasets that can be used to train and evaluate models
for instance segmentation usually do not provide annotations on video data or even information on object identities across different images. Common datasets for multiobject tracking, on the other hand, provide only bounding

Figure 1: Segmentations vs. Bounding Boxes. When objects pass each other, large parts of an object’s bounding box
may belong to another instance, while per-pixel segmentation masks locate objects precisely. The shown annotations
are crops from our KITTI MOTS dataset.
box annotations of objects. These can be too coarse, e.g.,
when objects are partially occluded such that their bounding box contains more information from other objects than
from themselves, see Fig. 1. In these cases, pixel-wise segmentation of the objects results in a more natural description of the scene and may provide additional information
for subsequent processing steps. For segmentation masks
there is a well-defined ground truth, whereas many different (non-tight) boxes might roughly fit an object. Similarly,
tracks with overlapping bounding boxes create ambiguities
when compared to ground truth that usually need to be resolved at evaluation time by heuristic matching procedures.
Segmentation based tracking results, on the other hand, are
by definition non-overlapping and can thus be compared to
ground truth in a straightforward manner.
In this paper, we therefore propose to extend the wellknown multi-object tracking task to instance segmentation
tracking. We call this new task “Multi-Object Tracking

7942

