Weakly Supervised Learning of Instance Segmentation with Inter-pixel Relations
Jiwoon Ahn
DGIST, Kakao Corp.

Sunghyun Cho∗
DGIST

Suha Kwak∗
POSTECH

jyun@dgist.ac.kr

scho@dgist.ac.kr

suha.kwak@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper presents a novel approach for learning instance segmentation with image-level class labels as supervision. Our approach generates pseudo instance segmentation labels of training images, which are used to train a fully
supervised model. For generating the pseudo labels, we first
identify confident seed areas of object classes from attention
maps of an image classification model, and propagate them
to discover the entire instance areas with accurate boundaries. To this end, we propose IRNet, which estimates rough
areas of individual instances and detects boundaries between different object classes. It thus enables to assign instance labels to the seeds and to propagate them within the
boundaries so that the entire areas of instances can be estimated accurately. Furthermroe, IRNet is trained with interpixel relations on the attention maps, thus no extra supervision is required. Our method with IRNet achieves an outstanding performance on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset,
surpassing not only previous state-of-the-art trained with
the same level of supervision, but also some of previous
models relying on stronger supervision.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is a task that jointly estimates
class labels and segmentation masks of individual objects.
As in other visual recognition tasks, supervised learning of
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) has driven recent
advances in instance segmentation [7, 9, 10, 16, 17, 23, 30,
35]. Due to the data-hungry nature of deep CNNs, this approach demands an enormous number of training images
with groundtruth labels, which are given by hand in general. However, manual annotation of instance-wise segmentation masks is prohibitively time-consuming, which results
in existing datasets limited in terms of both class diversity
and the amount of annotated data. It is thus not straightforward to learn instance segmentation models that can handle
diverse object classes in the real world.
∗ Co-corresponding authors.

One way to alleviate this issue is weakly supervised
learning that adopts weaker and less expensive labels than
instance-wise segmentation masks as supervision. Thanks
to low annotation costs of weak labels, approaches in this
category can utilize more training images of diverse objects,
although they have to compensate for missing information
in weak labels. For instance segmentation, bounding boxes
have been widely used as weak labels since they provide
every property of objects except shape [22, 41]. However, it
is still costly to obtain box labels for a variety of classes in
a large number of images as they are manually annotated.
To further reduce the annotation cost, one may utilize
image-level class labels for learning instance segmentation
since such labels are readily available in large-scale image
classification datasets, e.g., ImageNet [42]. Furthermore,
although image-level class labels indicate only the existence of object classes, they can be used to derive strong
cues for instance segmentation, called Class Attention Maps
(CAMs) [37, 43, 45, 49]. A CAM roughly estimates areas
of each class by investigating the contribution of local image regions to the classification score of the class. However, CAMs cannot be directly utilized as supervision for
instance segmentation since they have limited resolution,
often highlight only partial areas of objects, and most importantly, cannot distinguish different instances of the same
class. To resolve this issue, a recent approach [50] incorporates CAMs with an off-the-shelf segmentation proposal
technique [2], which however has to be trained separately
on an external dataset with additional supervision.
In this paper, we present a novel approach for learning
instance segmentation using image-level class labels, which
outperforms the previous state-of-the-art trained with the
same level of supervision [50] and even some of approaches
relying on stronger supervision [16, 22]. Moreover, it requires neither additional supervision nor any segmentation
proposals unlike the previous approaches [16, 50]. Our
method generates pseudo instance segmentation labels of
training images given their image-level labels and trains a
known CNN model with the pseudo labels. For generating
the pseudo labels, it utilizes CAMs, but as mentioned earlier, they can neither distinguish different instances nor find

2209

