Face Anti-Spoofing: Model Matters, So Does Data
Xiao Yang12∗, Wenhan Luo2∗ , Linchao Bao2 , Yuan Gao2 , Dihong Gong2 , Shibao Zheng1 , Zhifeng Li2†, Wei Liu2†
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
{xiao yang, sbzh}@sjtu.edu.cn, {whluo.china, linchaobao, ethan.y.gao, gongdihong}@gmail.com,
michaelzfli@tencent.com, wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
Face anti-spoofing is an important task in full-stack
face applications including face detection, verification, and
recognition. Previous approaches build models on datasets
which do not simulate the real-world data well (e.g., small
scale, insignificant variance, etc.). Existing models may
rely on auxiliary information, which prevents these antispoofing solutions from generalizing well in practice. In
this paper, we present a data collection solution along with
a data synthesis technique to simulate digital medium-based
face spoofing attacks, which can easily help us obtain a
large amount of training data well reflecting the real-world
scenarios. Through exploiting a novel Spatio-Temporal
Anti-Spoof Network (STASN), we are able to push the performance on public face anti-spoofing datasets over stateof-the-art methods by a large margin. Since the proposed
model can automatically attend to discriminative regions,
it makes analyzing the behaviors of the network possible.
We conduct extensive experiments and show that the proposed model can distinguish spoof faces by extracting features from a variety of regions to seek out subtle evidences
such as borders, moire patterns, reflection artifacts, etc.

1. Introduction
Face anti-spoofing [40, 1, 15, 14] is an important, yet
challenging problem in the face recognition community. It
has wide practical applications in face authentication, security check, and access control. This task is to recognize
whether a face is captured from spoof attacks, including
printed face, replaying a face video with digital medium,
wearing a mask, etc. Therefore, face anti-spoofing is quite
vital to the security of face recognition systems [39].
Previous methods have made a progress in achieving acceptable accuracy in recent years, while are hardly adopt∗ equal contributions
† correspondence authors

Figure 1. The proposed model STASN includes three components,
TASM, RAM and SASM. TASM extracts temporal and global feature representation, SASM learns discrimination from local important regions, attended by RAM. With our collected data, the model
achieves the state-of-the-art performance.

able in practical applications due to various reasons. For
example, one reason may be that some methods are trained
using datasets which are of small scale and/or indistinctive variations. This prevents these methods from generalizing well. Moreover, some algorithms rely on additional
information, such as rPPG [26] and depth [2]. The performance depends on the quality of the auxiliary information
to some extent. The dependence may also bring inconvenience in practice. Besides, existing datasets for face antispoofing including NUAA [37], CASIA-MFSD [44], and
Replay-Attack [11] were released years ago. More recent
MSU-USSA [32] and OULU-NPU datasets [10] do not include significant variations in poses, illuminations, and expressions. Current methods are trained/tested on specific
datasets, but are not comprehensively justified in the complex real scenarios.
To make the research on face anti-spoofing more valuable for practical applications, in this paper we present an
easy-to-execute solution to obtain a large amount of training
data and build a model upon the data to push the limits of the
face anti-spoofing performance. Specifically, we download
positive samples (live face videos) from the Web, and collect negative samples by recording displayed videos on various digital devices. A novel spoof face synthesis method

3507

