2.5D Visual Sound
Ruohan Gao*
The University of Texas at Austin

Kristen Grauman
Facebook AI Research

rhgao@cs.utexas.edu

grauman@fb.com†

Abstract
Binaural audio provides a listener with 3D sound sensation, allowing a rich perceptual experience of the scene.
However, binaural recordings are scarcely available and
require nontrivial expertise and equipment to obtain. We
propose to convert common monaural audio into binaural audio by leveraging video. The key idea is that visual frames reveal significant spatial cues that, while explicitly lacking in the accompanying single-channel audio, are strongly linked to it. Our multi-modal approach
recovers this link from unlabeled video. We devise a
deep convolutional neural network that learns to decode
the monaural (single-channel) soundtrack into its binaural counterpart by injecting visual information about object and scene configurations. We call the resulting output
2.5D visual sound—the visual stream helps “lift” the flat
single channel audio into spatialized sound. In addition to
sound generation, we show the self-supervised representation learned by our network benefits audio-visual source
separation. Our video results: http://vision.cs.
utexas.edu/projects/2.5D_visual_sound/

1. Introduction
Multi-modal perception is essential to capture the richness of real-world sensory data and environments. People
perceive the world by combining a number of simultaneous
sensory streams, among which the visual and audio streams
are paramount. In particular, both audio and visual data
convey significant spatial information. We see where objects are and how the room is laid out. We also hear them:
sound-emitting objects indicate their location, and sound reverberations reveal the room’s main surfaces, materials, and
dimensions. Similarly, as in the famous cocktail party scenario, while having a conversation at a noisy party, one can
hear another voice calling out and turn to face it. The two
senses naturally work in concert to interpret spatial signals.
* Work done during an internship at Facebook AI Research.
† On
leave from The University of Texas at

(grauman@cs.utexas.edu).

Austin

visual spatial information

Mono2Binaural
mono audio

2.5D visual sound
(predicted binaural audio)

Figure 1: Binaural audio creates a 3D soundscape for listeners, but such recordings remain rare. The proposed approach infers 2.5D visual sound by injecting the spatial information contained in the video frames accompanying a
typical monaural audio stream.

The human auditory system uses two ears to extract individual sound sources from a complex mixture. The duplex
theory proposed by Lord Rayleigh says that sound source
locations are mainly determined by time differences between the sounds reaching each ear (Interaural Time Difference, ITD) and differences in sound level entering the
ears (Interaural Level Difference, ILD) [37]. Accordingly,
to mimic human hearing, binaural audio is usually recorded
using two microphones attached to the two ears of a dummy
head (see Fig. 2). The rig’s two microphones, their spacing,
and the physical shape of the ears are all significant for approximating how humans receive sound signals. As a result,
when playing binaural audio through headphones, listeners
feel the 3D sound sensation of being in the place where the
recording was made and can easily localize the sounds. The
immersive spatial sound is valuable for audiophiles, AR/VR
applications, and social video sharers alike.
However, binaural recordings are difficult to obtain in
daily life due to the high price of the recording device and
the required expertise. Consumer-level cameras typically
only record monaural audio with a single microphone, or
stereo audio recorded using two microphones with arbitrary arrangement and without physical representation of
the pinna (outer ear). We contend that for both machines
1324

