End-to-End Time-Lapse Video Synthesis from a Single Outdoor Image
Seonghyeon Nam1
William Brendel2
1

Yonsei University

Chongyang Ma2
Menglei Chai2
Ning Xu3
Seon Joo Kim1
2

Snap Inc.

3

Amazon Go

Abstract
Time-lapse videos usually contain visually appealing
content but are often difficult and costly to create. In this
paper, we present an end-to-end solution to synthesize a
time-lapse video from a single outdoor image using deep
neural networks. Our key idea is to train a conditional
generative adversarial network based on existing datasets of
time-lapse videos and image sequences. We propose a multiframe joint conditional generation framework to effectively
learn the correlation between the illumination change of
an outdoor scene and the time of the day. We further
present a multi-domain training scheme for robust training
of our generative models from two datasets with different
distributions and missing timestamp labels. Compared
to alternative time-lapse video synthesis algorithms, our
method uses the timestamp as the control variable and does
not require a reference video to guide the synthesis of the
final output. We conduct ablation studies to validate our
algorithm and compare with state-of-the-art techniques both
qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Time-lapse videos are typically created by using a fixed
or slowly moving camera to capture an outdoor scene at a
large frame interval. This unique kind of videos is visually
appealing since it often presents drastic color tone changes
and fast motions, which show the passage of time. But timelapse videos usually require a sophisticated hardware setup
and are time-consuming to capture and edit. Therefore, it
is desirable and helpful to design and develop a system to
facilitate the creation of time-lapse videos.
The appearance of an outdoor scene depends on many
complicated factors including weather, season, time of
day, and objects in the scene. As a result, most timelapse videos present highly nonlinear changes in both the
temporal and spatial domains, and it is difficult to derive
an explicit model to synthesize realistic time-lapse videos
while taking all the deciding factors into account accurately.

Figure 1: For each single outdoor image (the first column),
we can predict continuous illuminance changes over time in
an end-to-end manner (four columns on the right).

With various emerging social network services, a large
amount of time-lapse video data that is captured at different
locations around the world has become accessible on the
Internet. Therefore, a natural idea for generating timelapse videos is to automatically synthesize the animation
output by learning from a large-scale video database. A
data-driven hallucination algorithm [27] was proposed to
synthesize a time-lapse video from an input image via a
color transfer based on a reference video retrieved from
a database. However, this framework needs to store the
entire database of time-lapse videos for retrieval at runtime.
Also, it may not always be possible to find a reference video
that has components semantically similar to the input image
for a visually plausible color transfer. Recent advances
in computer vision and machine learning have shown that
deep neural networks can be used to achieve photorealistic
style transfer [22, 19, 18] and to synthesize high-fidelity
video sequences [16, 34, 2]. Yet most existing deep video
generation techniques require a reference video or a label
map sequence to guide the synthesis of the output video.
In this work, we present an end-to-end data-driven timelapse hallucination solution for a single image without the
requirement of any semantic labels or reference videos at
runtime. Given an outdoor image as the input, our method

1409

