D3 TW: Discriminative Differentiable Dynamic Time Warping
for Weakly Supervised Action Alignment and Segmentation
Chien-Yi Chang, De-An Huang, Yanan Sui, Li Fei-Fei, Juan Carlos Niebles
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA

Abstract

Positive Transcript ℓ"

take_egg

1. Introduction
Video action understanding has gained increasing interest over recent years because of the large amount of video
data. In contrast to fully annotated approaches [20, 31, 39]
which require annotations of the exact start and end time of
each action, weakly supervised approaches [7, 15, 29, 3, 21]
significantly reduce the required annotation effort and improve the applicability to real-world data. In particular, we
focus on one type of weak label commonly referred to as
action order or transcript, which uses an ordered list of actions occurring in the video as supervision.
The major challenge of using only the action order as
supervision is that the ground truth target, frame-wise action label is not available at training time. Previous work
resorts to using a variety of surrogate loss functions that
maximize the posterior probability of the weak labels or
the action ordering given the video. However, as shown
in [15] , using surrogate loss functions can easily lead to

break_egg

fry_egg

Correct Alignment Cost
%& ℓ" , $
Video $

We address weakly supervised action alignment and segmentation in videos, where only the order of occurring actions is available during training. We propose Discriminative Differentiable Dynamic Time Warping (D3 TW), the first
discriminative model using weak ordering supervision. The
key technical challenge for discriminative modeling with
weak supervision is that the loss function of the ordering
supervision is usually formulated using dynamic programming and is thus not differentiable. We address this challenge with a continuous relaxation of the min-operator in
dynamic programming and extend the alignment loss to be
differentiable. The proposed D3 TW innovatively solves sequence alignment with discriminative modeling and end-toend training, which substantially improves the performance
in weakly supervised action alignment and segmentation
tasks. We show that our model is able to bypass the degenerated sequence problem usually encountered in previous work and outperform the current state-of-the-art across
three evaluation metrics in two challenging datasets.

Correct
Alignment
Incorrect
Alignment

Incorrect Alignment Cost
%& ℓ# , $

break_egg

Discriminative Loss

fry_egg
#

Negative Transcript ℓ

%& ℓ" , $ + ) < %& ℓ# , $
∀ℓ# ~. ∖ ℓ"

Figure 1. We use only the ordered list of actions or the transcript
as weak supervision for training. This setting is challenging as the
desired output is not available at training. We address this challenge by proposing the first discriminative model for this task. The
cost
(`+ , X) of aligning the video X (middle) to the ground
truth or positive transcript `+ (top) should be smaller than that of
the negative transcript ` (bottom) that are randomly sampled.

degenerated results that align some occurring actions to a
single frame in the video. Such degenerated results are far
from the ground truth we desire because each action usually spans many frames during its execution. While previous works have attempted to address this challenge using
frame-to-frame similarity [15], fine-to-coarse strategy [28],
and segment length modeling [29], these approaches still
consider the degenerated results that align to single frames
as valid solutions subject to the surrogate loss functions.
The main contribution of this paper is to address the
challenge by proposing the first discriminative model using order supervision. As illustrated in Figure 1, the idea
is that the probability of having the correct alignment with
the positive or ground truth transcript should be higher than
that of negative transcripts. In contrast to previous works
that only maximize the posterior probability of the weak labels [15, 28, 29], our discriminative formulation does not
suffer from the degenerated alignment as it is no longer an
obvious and trivial solution to the newly proposed discriminative loss. Further, minimizing the discriminative loss
directly contributes to the improvement of our target in contrast to previous work. Similar ideas have been studied in

3546

