Occlusion-Net: 2D/3D Occluded Keypoint Localization Using Graph Networks
N. Dinesh Reddy
Minh Vo
Srinivasa G. Narasimhan
Carnegie Mellon University
{dnarapur,mpvo,srinivas}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We present Occlusion-Net1 , a framework to predict 2D
and 3D locations of occluded keypoints for objects, in a
largely self-supervised manner. We use an off-the-shelf detector as input (e.g. MaskRCNN [16]) that is trained only
on visible key point annotations. This is the only supervision
used in this work. A graph encoder network then explicitly classifies invisible edges and a graph decoder network
corrects the occluded keypoint locations from the initial detector. Central to this work is a trifocal tensor loss that
provides indirect self-supervision for occluded keypoint locations that are visible in other views of the object. The
2D keypoints are then passed into a 3D graph network that
estimates the 3D shape and camera pose using the selfsupervised reprojection loss. At test time, Occlusion-Net
successfully localizes keypoints in a single view under a diverse set of occlusion settings. We validate our approach on
synthetic CAD data as well as a large image set capturing
vehicles at many busy city intersections. As an interesting
aside, we compare the accuracy of human labels of invisible
keypoints against those predicted by the trifocal tensor.

1. Introduction
Virtually any scene has occlusions. Even a scene with
a single object exhibits self-occlusions - a camera can only
view one side of an object (left or right, front or back), or
part of the object is outside the field of view. More complex
occlusions occur when one or more objects block part(s)
of another object. Understanding and dealing with occlusions is hard due to the large variation in the type, number
and extent of occlusions possible in scenes. As such, occlusions are an important reason for failure of many computer vision approaches for object detection [9, 14, 34, 16],
tracking[49, 5, 44, 41], reconstruction [20, 19] and recognition, even today’s advanced deep learning based ones.
The computer vision community has collectively attempted numerous approaches to deal with occlusions [12,
1 The code and dataset can be found at http://www.cs.cmu.edu/
ILIM/projects/IM/CarFusion/
˜

Figure 1: Accurate 2D keypoint localization under severe
occlusion in our CarFusion dataset. Different colors depicts
different objects in the scene.
13, 26, 35] for decades. Bad predictions due to occlusions are dealt with as noise/outliers in robust estimators.
Many methods provide confidence or uncertainty estimates
to downstream approaches that need to sort out whether the
uncertainty corresponds to occlusion. But it is hard to predict performance as they usually do not take occlusions explicitly into account.
On the other hand, occlusions are explicitly treated as
missing parts in model fitting methods [50, 40]. These approaches have had better success as they exploit a statistical
model of a particular type of object (e.g. car, human, etc.).
But much remains to be done. For instance, severe occlusions, such as when a large part of an object is blocked, can
result in poor fitting[52]. Further, often these approaches do
not explicitly know which parts of an object are missing and
attempt to simultaneously estimate the model fit as well as
the missing parts.
In this work, we present an approach to explicitly predict 2D and 3D keypoint locations of the occluded parts of
an object using graph networks, in a largely self-supervised
manner. Our method receives as input, the output of any
detector (e.g., using the MaskRCNN architecture [16]) that
has been trained on a particular category of object with human supervision of only visible keypoints and their types
(e.g., front, back, left, right). Implicitly, then, the key points
that are not labeled are assumed to be invisible. This is the
17326

