Unsupervised Learning of Dense Shape Correspondence
Oshri Halimi
Technion, Israel

Or Litany
Facebook AI Research

Emanuele Rodolà
Sapienza University of Rome

oshri.halimi@gmail.com

orlitany@fb.com

rodola@di.uniroma1.it

Reference

Alex Bronstein
Technion, Israel

Ron Kimmel
Technion, Israel

bron@cs.technion.ac.il

ron@cs.technion.ac.il

Unsupervised
(this paper)

Supervised [28]

FM (SHOT) [36]

FM (SHOT)
+PMF

SGMDS [4]

SGMDS
+ PMF

Figure 1: Dense correspondence between articulated objects obtained with the proposed unsupervised loss, optimized on
a single (unlabeled) example. Our method is compared with the state-of-the-art supervised network pre-trained on human
shapes, as well as with two axiomatic methods, employing a post processing algorithm [49] on the axiomatic results. See
Section 5.1 for more details. Correspondence is visualized by colors mapped from the leftmost reference shape.

Abstract
We introduce the first completely unsupervised correspondence learning approach for deformable 3D shapes.
Key to our model is the understanding that natural deformations, such as changes in pose, approximately preserve the
metric structure of the surface, yielding a natural criterion
to drive the learning process toward distortion-minimizing
predictions. On this basis, we overcome the need for annotated data and replace it by a purely geometric criterion. The resulting learning model is class-agnostic, and
is able to leverage any type of deformable geometric data
for the training phase. In contrast to existing supervised approaches which specialize on the class seen at training time,
we demonstrate stronger generalization as well as applicability to a variety of challenging settings. We showcase our
method on a wide selection of correspondence benchmarks,
where the proposed method outperforms other methods in
terms of accuracy, generalization, and efficiency.

1. Introduction
The problem of finding accurate dense correspondence
between non-rigid shapes is fundamental in geometry pro-

cessing. It is a key component in applications such as deformation modeling, cross-shape texture mapping, pose and
animation transfer to name just a few. Dense deformable
shape correspondence algorithms can be broadly categorized into two families. The first can be referred to as
axiomatic or model-based for which a certain geometric
assumption is asserted and pursuit for by some numerical
scheme. Modeling assumptions attempt to characterize the
action of a class of deformations on some geometric quantities commonly referred to as descriptors. Such geometric
quantities often encode local geometric information in the
vicinity of a point on the shape (point-wise descriptors) such
as normal orientation [47], curvature [37], and heat [45] or
wave [6] propagation properties. Another type of geometric
quantities are the global relations between pairs of points
(pair-wise descriptors), which include geodesic [21, 14, 4],
diffusion [17, 12] or commute time [50] distances. Given a
pair of shapes, a dense map between them is sought to minimize the discrepancy between such descriptors. While the
minimization of the point-wise discrepancies can be formulated as a linear assignment problem (LAP) and solved efficiently for reasonable scales, the use of pair-wise descriptors leads to a quadratic assignment problem (QAP) that is
14370

