Image space
Image
feature space

Joint VAE
latent
space

Semanti
feature spa

Generalized Zero- and Few-Shot Learning via Aligned Variational Autoencoders

Bosch Center for AI

2

UC Berkeley

Samarth Sinha3
3

Trevor Darrell2

University of Toronto
Semantic space

Abstract

red head
brown belly
brown
wings
Many approaches in
generalized
zero-shot learning rely
gray beak

Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) is a challenging
task especially for unbalanced and large datasets such as
ImageNet [5]. Although at training time no visual data of
some classes, i.e. unseen classes, are provided the classifier
must learn to differentiate between all classes, i.e. seen and
unseen classes. As visual data of unseen classes is not available at training time, typically knowledge transfer from seen
to unseen classes is achieved via some form of side information that encode semantic relationship between classes,
i.e. class embeddings.
Most approaches to GZSL [6, 1, 20, 34, 2] learn a mapping between images and their class embeddings. An orthogonal approach is to augment data by generating artifi-

feature space
red head
pink belly
brown wings
gray beak

latent space

E2

1. Introduction

Classifier
Semantic
University of Amsterdam
feature space

E1

on cross-modal mapping between the image feature space
and the class embedding space. As labeled images are expensive, one direction is to augment the dataset by generating either images or image features. However, the former
misses fine-grained details and the latter requires learning
a mapping associated with class embeddings. In this work,
we take feature generation one step further and propose a
model where a shared latent space of image features and
class embeddings is learned by modality-specific aligned
variational autoencoders. This leaves us with the required
discriminative information about the image and classes in
the latent features, on which we train a softmax classifier.
The key to our approach is that we align the distributions
learned from images and from side-information to construct
latent features that contain the essential multi-modal information associated with unseen classes. We evaluate our
learned latent features on several benchmark datasets, i.e.
CUB, SUN, AWA1 and AWA2, and establish a new state
of the art on generalized zero-shot as well as on few-shot
learning. Moreover, our results on ImageNet with various
zero-shot splits show that our latent features generalize well
in large-scale settings.

4

Zeynep Akata4

D2

1

Sayna Ebrahimi2

D1

Edgar Schönfeld1

Classifier

Figure 1: Our CADA-VAE model learns a latent embedding
(z) of image features (x) and class embedding (c(y) of labels y) via aligned VAEs optimized with cross-alignment
(LCA ) and distribution alignment (LDA ) objectives, and
subsequently trains a classifier on sampled latent features
of seen and unseen classes.

cial images [23]. However, due to the level of detail missing
in the synthetic images, CNN features extracted from them
do not improve classification accuracy. To alleviate this issue, [36] proposed to generate image features via a conditional WGAN, which simplifies the task of the generative
model and directly optimizes the loss on image features. Although the features generated by [36] improved GZSL significantly, GAN-based loss functions suffer from instability in training. Hence, recently conditional variational autoencoders (VAE) [18, 14] have been employed for this purpose. As GZSL is inherently a multi-modal learning task,
[29] proposed to transform both modalities to the latent
spaces of autoencoders and match the corresponding distributions by minimizing the Maximum Mean Discrepancy
(MMD). Learning such cross-modal embeddings is beneficial for potential downstream tasks that require multimodal
fusion, e.g. visual question answering. In this domain, [22]
recently used a cross-modal autoencoder to extend visual
question answering to previously unseen objects.
18247

Image
feature s

