Steady-state Non-Line-of-Sight Imaging
Wenzheng Chen1,2 * Simon Daneau1,3 Fahim Mannan1 Felix Heide1,4
1

Algolux

2

University of Toronto

3

Université de Montréal

4

Princeton University

Abstract
Conventional intensity cameras recover objects in the direct line-of-sight of the camera, whereas occluded scene
parts are considered lost in this process. Non-line-of-sight
imaging (NLOS) aims at recovering these occluded objects
by analyzing their indirect reflections on visible scene surfaces. Existing NLOS methods temporally probe the indirect
light transport to unmix light paths based on their travel
time, which mandates specialized instrumentation that suffers from low photon efficiency, high cost, and mechanical
scanning. We depart from temporal probing and demonstrate steady-state NLOS imaging using conventional intensity sensors and continuous illumination. Instead of assuming perfectly isotropic scattering, the proposed method
exploits directionality in the hidden surface reflectance,
resulting in (small) spatial variation of their indirect reflections for varying illumination. To tackle the shapedependence of these variations, we propose a trainable architecture which learns to map diffuse indirect reflections to
scene reflectance using only synthetic training data. Relying on consumer color image sensors, with high fill factor,
high quantum efficiency and low read-out noise, we demonstrate high-fidelity color NLOS imaging for scene configurations tackled before with picosecond time resolution.

1. Introduction
Recovering objects from conventional monocular imagery represents a central challenge in computer vision,
with a large body of work on sensing techniques using
controlled illumination with spatial [50, 41] or temporal
coding [32, 24, 19, 39], multi-view reconstruction methods [18], sensing via coded optics [47], and recently learned
reconstruction methods using single-view monocular images [49, 11, 16]. While these sensing methods drive
applications across domains, including autonomous vehicles, robotics, augmented reality, and dataset acquisition
for scene understanding [52], they only recover objects in
the direct line-of-sight of the camera. This is because ob* The majority of this work was done while interning at Algolux.

Figure 1: We demonstrate that it is possible to image occluded
objects outside the direct line-of-sight using continuous illumination and conventional cameras, without temporal sampling. We
sparsely scan a diffuse wall with a beam of white light and reconstruct “hidden” objects only from spatial variations in steady-state
indirect reﬂections.

jects outside the line-of-sight only contribute to a measurement through indirect reﬂections via visible diffuse object
surfaces. These reﬂections are extremely weak due to the
multiple scattering, and they lose (most) angular information on the diffuse scene surface (as opposed to a mirror
surface in the scene). NLOS imaging aims at recovering
objects outside a camera’s line-of-sight from these indirect
light transport components.
To tackle the lack of angular resolution, a number of
NLOS approaches have been described that temporally
probe the light-transport in the scene, thereby unmixing
light path contributions by their optical path length [1, 30,
36, 43] and effectively trading angular with temporal resolution. To acquire temporally resolved images of light
transport, existing methods either directly sample the temporal impulse response of the scene by recording the temporal echoes of laser pulses [54, 43, 17, 7, 53, 3, 42], or
they use amplitude-coded illumination and time-of-ﬂight
sensors [21, 26, 25]. While amplitude coding approaches
16790

