Collaborative Learning of Semi-Supervised Segmentation and Classification for
Medical Images
Yi Zhou, Xiaodong He, Lei Huang, Li Liu, Fan Zhu, Shanshan Cui and Ling Shao
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
{yi.zhou, xiaodong.he, lei.huang, li.liu, fan.zhu, shanshan.cui, ling.shao}@inceptioniai.org

Abstract

Pixel-level annotated data
Pixel-wise
Supervision

Medical image analysis has two important research areas: disease grading and fine-grained lesion segmentation.
Although the former problem often relies on the latter, the
two are usually studied separately. Disease severity grading can be treated as a classification problem, which only
requires image-level annotations, while the lesion segmentation requires stronger pixel-level annotations. However,
pixel-wise data annotation for medical images is highly
time-consuming and requires domain experts. In this paper, we propose a collaborative learning method to jointly
improve the performance of disease grading and lesion segmentation by semi-supervised learning with an attention
mechanism. Given a small set of pixel-level annotated data,
a multi-lesion mask generation model first performs the traditional semantic segmentation task. Then, based on initially predicted lesion maps for large quantities of imagelevel annotated data, a lesion attentive disease grading
model is designed to improve the severity classification accuracy. Meanwhile, the lesion attention model can refine
the lesion maps using class-specific information to fine-tune
the segmentation model in a semi-supervised manner. An
adversarial architecture is also integrated for training. With
extensive experiments on a representative medical problem
called diabetic retinopathy (DR), we validate the effectiveness of our method and achieve consistent improvements
over state-of-the-art methods on three public datasets.

1. Introduction
In the medical imaging community, automatic disease
diagnosis has been widely explored and applied to various practical computer-aided medical systems. Disease
grading [28, 6, 50, 40] and pixel-wise lesion segmentation
[12, 10, 29] are two main fundamental problems in this area.
The goal of disease grading is to predict the classification
label for the severity of a disease, while segmentation aims
to address more fine-grained, pixel-wise lesion detection.

Discriminator

Adversarial
Learning

Lesion Attentive
Classification

Disease
Grading

~ ×10& images

Lesion Segmentation

Pixel-wise
Supervision
~ ×10' images

Image-level annotated data

Pseudo Lesion
Masks

Attention maps for semisupervised learning

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed collaborative learning
method of semi-supervised multi-lesion segmentation and disease
severity classification. Here we conduct studies on the fundus images for diabetic retinopathy.

These two tasks are usually studied independently. However, accurate lesion detection can make huge contributions
to classifying the disease grades, while class-specific information can also benefit segmentation performance.
Labeling medical images is expensive since it requires
the very time-consuming dedication of domain experts, especially for pixel-level annotations. Compared with general
object segmentation tasks [23, 16, 45, 51, 8], which have
large amounts of annotated training data available, employing a fully-supervised architectures [26, 9, 20] to train medical models is impractical. However, purely-unsupervised
learning approaches [39, 12, 55] are also not acceptable due
to their limited accuracy. As such, we aim to develop a
semi-supervised method [34, 35], which can use the limited number of pixel-level annotated images available along
with the large quantities of broader, image-level annotations
to simultaneously enhance the performance of both the segmentation and classification models.
In this paper, we propose a collaborative learning method
for disease grading and lesion segmentation and select a
common disease called diabetic retinopathy (DR) for evaluation. DR is an eye disease that results from diabetes
mellitus, and can lead to blindness. The severity of DR
can be graded into five stages: normal, mild, moderate, severe non-proliferative and proliferative, according to international protocol [19, 3]. The severity grading has strong
correlations with different lesion symptoms, such as mi-

2079

