Self-supervised 3D hand pose estimation through training by fitting
Chengde Wan1 , Thomas Probst1 , Luc Van Gool1,3 , and Angela Yao2
1

ETH Zürich 2 National University of Singapore 3 KU Leuven

Abstract
We present a self-supervision method for 3D hand pose
estimation from depth maps. We begin with a neural network initialized with synthesized data and fine-tune it on
real but unlabelled depth maps by minimizing a set of datafitting terms. By approximating the hand surface with a set
of spheres, we design a differentiable hand renderer to align
estimates by comparing the rendered and input depth maps.
In addition, we place a set of priors including a data-driven
term to further regulate the estimate’s kinematic feasibility.
Our method makes highly accurate estimates comparable to
current supervised methods which require large amounts of
labelled training samples, thereby advancing state-of-theart in unsupervised learning for hand pose estimation.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has significantly advanced state-of-the-art
for 3D hand pose estimation. The improvement in the accuracy of learning-based approaches can be attributed to two
factors: choices in network design, and increased amounts
of labelled data [29, 49, 53]. However, acquiring accurate 3D hand pose labels can be extremely difficult; current
methods require marker-based motion capture [13], 6DoF
sensors [53], or multi-view model-based tracking [45]. In
all of these cases, careful supervision and manual cleaning
of the labels is additionally necessary for high quality annotations. A commonly proposed alternative is to synthesize
training samples – this is much easier, comes at virtually
no cost and a variety of viewpoints, poses, and hand shapes
can be generated. Unfortunately, the domain shift in terms
of appearance, hand shape, and pose from synthesized to
real data samples is highly non-trivial. As we show in our
experiments, models trained on synthetic data exhibit a significant drop in accuracy when applied to real data.
A recent trend in hand pose estimation is to combine the
benefits of learning-based discriminative approaches with
model-based tracking methods [2, 13, 33, 43]. Model-based
tracking casts pose estimation as a frame-wise model-fitting

Figure 1. Method overview. (a) Outline of the proposed method;
(b) Rendered depth map from estimation through differentiable
renderer; (c) Corresponding input depth maps.

problem and requires no training data. Learning-based approaches can then be incorporated either by providing better initialization [33, 43], or by supporting the fitting with
key-point estimations [2, 13] to reduce the risk of getting
trapped in local minima.
In this paper, we provide an alternative way to exploit
the complementary benefits of unsupervised model-fitting
and data-driven learning approaches. Specifically, we propose a self-supervision method for learning 3D hand pose
from depth maps. Note that our approach does not require any manual annotation, either from labelling keypoints [24, 54] or from manual initialization of a modelbased tracker [40, 45]. At the same time, we are able to
achieve accuracy comparable with current state-of-the-art
that requires large amounts of labeled data.
Our proposed method supervises itself with a set of carefully designed differentiable model-fitting terms. Following a discriminative paradigm, hand poses are estimated
with a deep neural network. During training, the network learns to make more accurate estimates by back110853

