Kervolutional Neural Networks
Chen Wang1

Jianfei Yang1

Lihua Xie1

Junsong Yuan2

chenwang@dr.com

yang0478@ntu.edu.sg

elhxie@ntu.edu.sg

jsyuan@buffalo.edu

1
2

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Computer Science and Engineering Department, State University of New York at Buffalo, USA

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have enabled the
state-of-the-art performance in many computer vision tasks.
However, little effort has been devoted to establishing convolution in non-linear space. Existing works mainly leverage
on the activation layers, which can only provide point-wise
non-linearity. To solve this problem, a new operation, kervolution (kernel convolution), is introduced to approximate
complex behaviors of human perception systems leveraging
on the kernel trick. It generalizes convolution, enhances the
model capacity, and captures higher order interactions of
features, via patch-wise kernel functions, but without introducing additional parameters. Extensive experiments show
that kervolutional neural networks (KNN) achieve higher
accuracy and faster convergence than baseline CNN.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been tremendously successful in computer vision, e.g. image recognition
[31, 20] and object detection [16, 42]. The core operator,
convolution, was partially inspired by the animal visual cortex where different neurons respond to stimuli in a restricted
and partially overlaped region known as the receptive field
[27, 28]. Convolution leverages on its equivariance to translation to improve the performance of a machine learning
system [18]. Its efficiency lies in that the learnable parameters are sparse and shared across the entire input (receptive
field). Nonetheless, convolution still has certain limitations,
which will be analyzed below. To address them, this paper introduces kervolution to generalize convolution via the kernel
trick. The artificial neural networks containing kervolutional
layers are named as kervolutional neural networks (KNN).
There is circumstantial evidence that suggests most cells
inside striate cortex1 can be categorized as simple, complex,
and hypercomplex, with specific response properties [28].
1 The striate cortex is the part of the visual cortex that is involved in
processing visual information.

However, the convolutional layers are linear and designed to
mimic the behavior of simple cells in human visual cortex
[57], hence they are not able to express the non-linear behaviors of the complex and hypercomplex cells inside the striate
cortex. It was also demonstrated that higher order non-linear
feature maps are able to make subsequent linear classifiers
more discriminative [37, 1, 9]. However, the non-linearity
that comes from the activation layers, e.g. rectified linear
unit (ReLU) can only provide point-wise non-linearity. We
argue that CNN may perform better if convolution can be
generalized to patch-wise non-linear operations via kernel
trick. Because of the increased expressibility and model
capacity, better model generalization may be obtained.
Non-linear generalization is simple in mathematics, however, it is generally difficult to retain the advantages of convolution, i.e. (i) sharing weights (weight sparsity) and (ii)
low computational complexity. There exists several works
towards non-linear generalization. The non-linear convolutional networks [57] implement a quadratic convolution at
the expense of additional n(n + 1)/2 parameters, where n is
the size of the receptive field. However, the quadratic form
of convolution loses the property of "weight sparsity", since
the number of additional parameters of the non-linear terms
increases exponentially with the polynomial order, which
dramatically increases the training complexity. Another strategy to introduce high order features is to explore the pooling
layers. The kernel pooling method in [9] directly concatenates the non-linear terms, while it requires the calculation
of non-linear terms, resulting in a higher complexity.
To address the above problems, kervolution is introduced
in this paper to extend convolution to kernel space while
keeping the aforementioned advantages of linear convolutions. Since convolution has been applied to many fields,
e.g. image and signal processing, we expect kervolution will
also play an important role in those applications. However,
in this paper, we focus on its applications in artificial neural
networks. The contributions of this paper include: (i) via
kernel trick, the convolutional operator is generalized to kervolution, which retains the advantages of convolution and
brings new features, including the increased model capacity,

31

