Weakly-Supervised Discovery of Geometry-Aware Representation
for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Xipeng Chen∗1
Kwan-Yee Lin∗ 2,3
Wentao Liu3
1
2
Sun Yat-Sen University
Peking University
1
3

3

Chen Qian3
Liang Lin1
SenseTime Research

chenxp37@mail2.sysu.edu.cn 2 linjunyi@pku.edu.cn

{liuwentao,qianchen}@sensetime.com 4 linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Recent studies have shown remarkable advances in 3D
human pose estimation from monocular images, with the
help of large-scale in-door 3D datasets and sophisticated
network architectures. However, the generalizability to different environments remains an elusive goal.
In this work, we propose a geometry-aware 3D representation for the human pose to address this limitation by
using multiple views in a simple auto-encoder model at the
training stage and only 2D keypoint information as supervision. A view synthesis framework is proposed to learn the
shared 3D representation between viewpoints with synthesizing the human pose from one viewpoint to the other one.
Instead of performing a direct transfer in the raw imagelevel, we propose a skeleton-based encoder-decoder mechanism to distil only pose-related representation in the latent
space. A learning-based representation consistency constraint is further introduced to facilitate the robustness of
latent 3D representation. Since the learnt representation
encodes 3D geometry information, mapping it to 3D pose
will be much easier than conventional frameworks that use
an image or 2D coordinates as the input of 3D pose estimator. We demonstrate our approach on the task of 3D human pose estimation. Comprehensive experiments on three
popular benchmarks show that our model can significantly
improve the performance of state-of-the-art methods with
simply injecting the representation as a robust 3D prior.

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation refers to estimating 3D locations of body parts given an image or a video. This task is
an active research topic in the computer vision community
for serving as a key step for many applications, e.g., action
recognition, human-computer interaction, and autonomous
∗Xipeng Chen and Kwan-Yee Lin have contributed equally and assert
joint first authorship. Corresponding author is Liang Lin. The work was
done during the internship at Sense-Time Research.

Input  Image  

Deep    Network
(a)  

3D  Pose  Prediction

Input  Image  

2D  Keypoint heat  maps   Deep    Network
(b)	
  

3D  Pose  Prediction

G

φ
Input  Image  

2D
Pre-­trained  
2D  Human  Pose  Estimator   Skeleton

Pre-­trained
Encoder

Shallow    
Learnt
Representation Network

3D  Pose  
Prediction

(c)	
  

Figure 1: Motivation. Most state-of-the-arts usually directly learn
the 3D poses from monocular images (as shown in (a)), or first estimate 2D poses and then lift 2D poses to 3D poses (as shown
in (b)). Both categories require sophisticated deep network architectures and abundant annotated training samples. Instead, we
consider learning a geometry representation from multi-view information with only 2D annotations as supervision. The learnt
representation could map to 3D pose with a shallow network and
less annotated training samples, as shown in (c).

driving. Significant advances in particular datasets have
been achieved in recent years due to the abundant annotations and sophisticated designed deep neural networks.
However, since precise 3D annotation requires large efforts,
and usually subjects to specific conditions in practice, like
motions, environments, and appearances, etc., the bottleneck of generalizability still exists.
Weakly-supervised learning provides an alternative
paradigm for learning robust geometry representation without requiring extensive precise 3D annotation. Most of
approaches [42, 27, 25, 38] leverage knowledge transformation to learn the robustness by training 3D annotations
with abundant 2D annotations in-the-wild. These methods face the difficulties of large domain shift between constrained lab environment for 3D annotations and unconstrained in-the-wild environment for 2D annotations. Some
approaches try to represent body shape through multiple
view images acquired by synchronized cameras with the
usage of view-consistency property [27], pre-defined parametric 3D model fitting [3, 23, 10], or by sequence with
the usage of time-independent features [13]. Nevertheless,
fitting a pre-defined 3D model or exploiting limited multi-

10895

