Learning Spatial Common Sense with Geometry-Aware Recurrent Networks
Hsiao-Yu Fish Tung1∗ Ricson Cheng 2∗† Katerina Fragkiadaki 1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Uber Advanced Technologies Group
{htung,katef}@cs.cmu.edu, ricsonc@uber.com

Abstract
We integrate two powerful ideas, geometry and deep visual representation learning, into recurrent network architectures for mobile visual scene understanding. The proposed networks learn to “lift” and integrate 2D visual features over time into latent 3D feature maps of the scene.
They are equipped with differentiable geometric operations, such as projection, unprojection, egomotion estimation and stabilization, in order to compute a geometricallyconsistent mapping between the world scene and their 3D
latent feature state. We train the proposed architectures to
predict novel camera views given short frame sequences as
input. Their predictions strongly generalize to scenes with a
novel number of objects, appearances and configurations;
they greatly outperform previous works that do not consider egomotion stabilization or a space-aware latent feature state. We train the proposed architectures to detect and
segment objects in 3D using the latent 3D feature map as
input—as opposed to per frame features. The resulting object detections persist over time: they continue to exist even
when an object gets occluded or leaves the field of view.
Our experiments suggest the proposed space-aware latent
feature memory and egomotion-stabilized convolutions are
essential architectural choices for spatial common sense to
emerge in artificial embodied visual agents.

1. Introduction
Current state-of-the-art visual systems [11] accurately
detect object categories that are rare and unfamiliar to many
of us, such as gyromitra, a particular genus of mushroom
(Figure 1 top left). Yet, they neglect the basic principles of
object permanence or spatial awareness that a one-year-old
child has developed: once the camera turns away, or a person walks in front of the gyromitra, its detection disappears
and it is replaced by the objects detected in the new visual
frame. We believe the ability of current visual systems to
detect rare and exquisite object categories and their inability
∗ Indicates equal contribution
† Work done while at CMU

Figure 1. Internet vision versus robotic vision. Pictures taken
by humans (top row) (and uploaded on the web) are the output of
visual perception of a well-trained agent, the human photographer.
The content is skillfully framed and the objects appear in canonical
scales and poses. Pictures taken by mobile agents, such as a NAO
robot during a robot soccer game (bottom row), are the input to
such visual perception. The objects are often partially occluded
and appear in a wide variety of locations, scales and poses. We
present recurrent neural architectures for the latter, that integrate
visual information over time to piece together the visual story of
the scene.

to carry out elementary spatial reasoning is due to the fact
that they are trained to label object categories from static
Internet photos (in ImageNet and COCO datasets) using a
single frame as input. Our overexposure to Internet photos makes us forget how pictures captured by mobile agents
look. Consider Figure 1. Internet photos are skillfully captured by human photographers, are well framed and show
objects unoccluded, in canonical locations, scales and poses
(top row). Instead, photos captured by NAO robots during a
soccer game show objects in a wide variety of scales, poses,
locations, and occlusion configurations (bottom row). Often, it would not even make sense to label objects in such
images, as most objects appear only half-visible. In the case
of Internet vision, the picture is the output of visual perception of a well-trained visual agent, the human photographer.
In the case of mobile robotic vision, the picture is the input
to such visual perception. Thus, different architectures may
be needed for each.
We present Geometry-aware Recurrent Neural Network

2595

