Deep Metric Learning to Rank
Fatih Cakir∗1 , Kun He∗2 , Xide Xia2 , Brian Kulis2 , and Stan Sclaroff2
1

2

FirstFuel, fcakirs@gmail.com
Boston University, {hekun,xidexia,bkulis,sclaroff}@bu.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel deep metric learning method by revisiting the learning to rank approach. Our method, named
FastAP, optimizes the rank-based Average Precision measure, using an approximation derived from distance quantization. FastAP has a low complexity compared to existing methods, and is tailored for stochastic gradient descent.
To fully exploit the benefits of the ranking formulation, we
also propose a new minibatch sampling scheme, as well as
a simple heuristic to enable large-batch training. On three
few-shot image retrieval datasets, FastAP consistently outperforms competing methods, which often involve complex
optimization heuristics or costly model ensembles.

1. Introduction
Metric learning [3, 18] is concerned with learning distance functions that conform to a certain definition of similarity. Often, in pattern recognition problems, the definition
of similarity is task-specific, and the success of metric learning hinges on aligning its learning objectives with the task.
In this paper, we focus on what is arguably the most important application area of metric learning: nearest neighbor retrieval. For nearest neighbor retrieval applications,
the similarity definition typically involves neighborhood relationships, and nearly all metric learning methods follow
the same guiding principle: the true “neighbors” of a reference object should be closer than its “non-neighbors” in the
learned metric space.
Taking inspirations from the information retrieval literature, we treat metric learning as a learning to rank problem [22], where the goal is to optimize the total ordering of
objects as induced by the learned metric. The learning to
rank perspective has been adopted by classical metric learning methods [20,24], but has received less attention recently
in deep metric learning. Working directly with ranked lists
∗ Equal contribution. Kun He is now with Facebook Reality Labs.

FastAP
 ( n 2 ) pairs

 (n3 ) triplets

Figure 1: We propose FastAP, a novel deep metric learning
method that optimizes Average Precision over ranked lists
of examples. This solution avoids a high-order explosion
of the training set, which is a common problem in existing
losses defined on pairs or triplets. FastAP is optimized using
SGD, and achieves state-of-the-art results.
has two primary advantages over many other approaches:
we avoid the high-order explosion of the training set, and
focus on orderings that are invariant to distance distortions.
This second property is noteworthy in particular, as it allows circumventing the use of highly sensitive parameters
such as distance thresholds and margins.
Our main contribution is a novel solution to optimizing
Average Precision [4], a performance measure that has seen
wide usage within and beyond information retrieval, such
as in image retrieval [29], feature matching [14], and fewshot learning [37]. To tackle the highly challenging problem of optimizing this rank-based and non-decomposable
objective, we employ an efficient quantization-based approximation, and tailor our algorithmic design for stochastic
gradient descent. The result is a new deep metric learning
method that we call FastAP.
We evaluate FastAP on three few-shot image datasets,
and observe state-of-the-art retrieval results. Notably, with

1861

