Deep Embedding Learning with Discriminative Sampling Policy
Yueqi Duan1,2,3 , Lei Chen1,2,3,4 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3,∗ , Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
4
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, China
duanyq14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; chen lei@tju.edu.cn; lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn;
jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep embedding learning aims to learn a distance metric
for effective similarity measurement, which has achieved
promising performance in various tasks. As the vast majority of training samples produce gradients with magnitudes
close to zero, hard example mining is usually employed
to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the training
procedure. However, most existing sampling methods are
designed by hand, which ignores the dependence between
examples and suffer from exhaustive searching. In this
paper, we propose a deep embedding with discriminative sampling policy (DE-DSP) learning framework by
simultaneously training two models: a deep sampler
network that learns effective sampling strategies, and a
feature embedding that maps samples to the feature space.
Rather than exhaustively calculating the hardness of all
the examples for mining through forward-propagation, the
deep sampler network exploits the strong prior of relations
among samples to learn discriminative sampling policy in
a more efficient manner. Experimental results demonstrate
faster convergence and stronger discriminative power
of our DE-DSP framework under different embedding
objectives.

1. Introduction
Embedding learning for effective distance metric estimation has aroused much attention over the past few
decades [5, 10, 36, 16]. With the recent success of deep
learning [18, 23, 12, 15], deep embedding learning methods
present strong discriminative power in various tasks due to
the high nonlinearity, such as visual search [31, 30, 35], biometric verification [3, 25, 1] and zero-shot learning [2, 41].
The basic goal of deep embedding learning is to minimize
* Corresponding author

intra-class variations and maximize inter-class distances,
where numbers of objectives have been presented in the literature [3, 25, 33, 4, 29, 31, 30, 22, 35], including the most
commonly-used contrastive loss [3] and triplet loss [25].
While the sample sizes are usually quadratic or cubic in
deep embedding learning, the meaningful hard examples
only account for the tiny minority. Training with numerous easy examples may suffer from inefficiency and poor
performance as they contribute little to the training process by producing gradients with magnitudes close to zero [29, 14]. To this end, several hard example mining approaches have been proposed for effective sample selection [25, 42, 38, 11, 40, 39]. Recent studies have shown
that sampling plays an equal or even more crucial role than
the objective function in deep embedding learning [38].
An ideal sampling strategy should be targeted and adaptive. On one hand, the selected samples should target at
the requirements of the current state of embedding. On
the other hand, the sampling strategy should be adaptively updated during the training process of deep embedding
learning. Unfortunately, it is not easy to achieve the goals
for most existing sampling methods designed by hand as a
huge number of candidates are required to perform forwardpropagation and exhaustive search (to be targeted) at every step (to be adaptive) of deep embedding learning. To
avoid the infeasible computation, most exsiting sampling
strategies employ an online method by selecting effective
examples within a small mini-batch as a suboptimal solution [25, 38]. However, limited sampling space may lead to
slow convergence and poor local optima.
In this paper, we consider that exhaustive search is far
from required for sampling. For example, our humans only
need a few attempts to acquire that there are large inter-class
distances between two specific classes with 100 samples in
each class, which are not probably able to construct hard
triplets. However, exhaustive search suffers from 1,980,000
(200 × 99 × 100) hardness calculations. It should be noted
14964

