Video Action Transformer Network
*

Rohit Girdhar1 João Carreira2
1
Carnegie Mellon University

Carl Doersch2 Andrew Zisserman2,3
2
DeepMind 3 University of Oxford

http://rohitgirdhar.github.io/ActionTransformer

Input Video Clip

Abstract

* Work done during an internship at DeepMind

action class

In this paper, our objective is to both localize and recognize human actions in video clips. One reason that human actions remain so difficult to recognize is that inferring
a person’s actions often requires understanding the people
and objects around them. For instance, recognizing whether
a person is ‘listening to someone’ is predicated on the existence of another person in the scene saying something.
Similarly, recognizing whether a person is ‘pointing to an
object’, or ‘holding an object’, or ‘shaking hands’; all require reasoning jointly about the person and the animate and
inanimate elements of their surroundings. Note that this is
not limited to the context at a given point in time: recognizing the action of ‘watching a person’, after the watched person has walked out of frame, requires reasoning over time
to understand that our person of interest is actually looking
at someone and not just staring into the distance.
Thus we seek a model that can determine and utilize such
contextual information (other people, other objects) when
determining the action of a person of interest. The Transformer architecture from Vaswani et al. [43] is one suitable

Person-specific self-attention

!=0

! = $/2

…

1. Introduction

! = −$/2

…

We introduce the Action Transformer model for recognizing and localizing human actions in video clips. We repurpose a Transformer-style architecture to aggregate features
from the spatiotemporal context around the person whose
actions we are trying to classify. We show that by using
high-resolution, person-specific, class-agnostic queries, the
model spontaneously learns to track individual people and
to pick up on semantic context from the actions of others.
Additionally its attention mechanism learns to emphasize
hands and faces, which are often crucial to discriminate an
action – all without explicit supervision other than boxes
and class labels. We train and test our Action Transformer
network on the Atomic Visual Actions (AVA) dataset, outperforming the state-of-the-art by a significant margin using only raw RGB frames as input.

Context Embeddings

keyframe

Figure 1: Action Transformer in action. Our proposed multihead/layer Action Transformer architecture learns to attend to relevant regions of the person of interest and their context (other people, objects) to recognize the actions they are doing. Each head
computes a clip embedding, which is used to focus on different
parts like the face, hands and the other people to recognize that the
person of interest is ‘holding hands’ and ‘watching a person’.

model for this, since it explicitly builds contextual support
for its representations using self-attention. This architecture
has been hugely successful for sequence modelling tasks
compared to traditional recurrent models. The question,
however, is: how does one build a similar model for human
action recognition?
Our answer is a new video action recognition network,
the Action Transformer, that uses a modified Transformer
architecture as a ‘head’ to classify the action of a person
of interest. It brings together two other ideas: (i) a spatiotemporal I3D model that has been successful in previous
approaches for action recognition in video [7] – this provides the base features; and (ii) a region proposal network
(RPN) [33] – this provides a sampling mechanism for localizing people performing actions. Together the I3D features
and RPN generate the query that is the input for the Transformer head that aggregates contextual information from
other people and objects in the surrounding video. We describe this architecture in detail in section 3. We show in
section 4 that the trained network is able to learn both to
track individual people and to contextualize their actions in
terms of the actions of other people in the video. In addition,
the transformer attends to hand and face regions, which is
reassuring because we know they have some of the most relevant features when discriminating an action. All of this is
1244

