Enhancing Diversity of Defocus Blur Detectors via Cross-Ensemble Network
Wenda Zhao, Bowen Zheng, Qiuhua Lin, Huchuan Lu
Dalian University of Technology, China
zhaowenda@dlut.edu.cn, sltk@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {qhlin, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

Widening network

Abstract

Defocus blur detection (DBD) is a fundamental topic in
computer vision. The goal is to highlight the defocus blur or
focus region in an image. DBD is of broad interest for potential applications of autofocus [32], depth detection [19],
image retargeting [10], blur reconstruction [26], etc.
Conventional DBD methods usually utilize hand-crafted
low-level features such as gradient [5, 11, 27], contrast [28]
and frequency [22, 25] to distinguish defocus blur. However, it is of great difficulty for these low-level features-based
methods to discriminate defocus blur regions in complex
scenarios, especially in the presence of the homogeneous
regions (e.g., such regions show almost no difference in ap-

Detector

Label

...
Lw

...
...

Detector 1
Label
Ensemble
Label

...

1. Introduction

...
...
...

Defocus blur detection (DBD) is a fundamental yet challenging topic, since the homogeneous region is obscure and
the transition from the focused area to the unfocused region
is gradual. Recent DBD methods make progress through exploring deeper or wider networks with the expense of high
memory and computation. In this paper, we propose a novel learning strategy by breaking DBD problem into multiple smaller defocus blur detectors and thus estimate errors
can cancel out each other. Our focus is the diversity enhancement via cross-ensemble network. Specifically, we design an end-to-end network composed of two logical parts:
feature extractor network (FENet) and defocus blur detector cross-ensemble network (DBD-CENet). FENet is constructed to extract low-level features. Then the features are
fed into DBD-CENet containing two parallel-branches for
learning two groups of defocus blur detectors. For each individual, we design cross-negative and self-negative correlations and an error function to enhance ensemble diversity
and balance individual accuracy. Finally, the multiple defocus blur detectors are combined with a uniformly weighted
average to obtain the final DBD map. Experimental results
indicate the superiority of our method in terms of accuracy and speed when compared with several state-of-the-art
methods.

...
Lc

Label
Detector K
Diversity

Figure 1. Motivation for our method. The first row expresses a
representative model (e.g., [33]) with wider and deeper network to
achieve progress for DBD. However, one detector lacks diversity.
We adopt the division of labor method by breaking it into multiple
smaller defocus blur detectors (the number of convolutional layer Lc < Lw ). Our concern is mainly how to enhance diversity
of these defocus blur detectors (green rectangle box) and how to
implement network with less parameters (red rectangle box).

pearance when they are in-focus or out-of-focus) and the
obscure boundaries between focused and unfocused areas.
Recently, Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs), which intelligently learn hierarchical representation
of the input directly, have achieved superior performance
in many vision tasks. There have been fairly large efforts to enhance DCNNs with greater capacity, e.g., increased depth [24, 6], enlarged width [29, 2, 7], novel layers [30, 8, 13], etc. Inspired by this, several DCNNs-based
DBD models have been proposed. [16, 9] measure defocus
blur in a patch-by-patch scanning manner, leading to numerous redundant computations. Despite the progress for
DBD has been achieved later by exploring deeper or wider
networks [33, 31], their single detectors lack diversity and
large number of parameters cause large computation cost.
18905

