SpotTune: Transfer Learning through Adaptive Fine-tuning
Yunhui Guo∗1,2 , Honghui Shi1 , Abhishek Kumar† , Kristen Grauman3 , Tajana Rosing2 , Rogerio Feris1
1
IBM Research & MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 2 University of California, San Diego, 3 The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Transfer learning, which allows a source task to affect
the inductive bias of the target task, is widely used in computer vision. The typical way of conducting transfer learning with deep neural networks is to fine-tune a model pretrained on the source task using data from the target task.
In this paper, we propose an adaptive fine-tuning approach,
called SpotTune, which finds the optimal fine-tuning strategy per instance for the target data. In SpotTune, given
an image from the target task, a policy network is used
to make routing decisions on whether to pass the image
through the fine-tuned layers or the pre-trained layers. We
conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. Our method outperforms
the traditional fine-tuning approach on 12 out of 14 standard datasets. We also compare SpotTune with other stateof-the-art fine-tuning strategies, showing superior performance. On the Visual Decathlon datasets, our method
achieves the highest score across the board without bells
and whistles.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has shown remarkable success in many
computer vision tasks, but current methods often rely on
large amounts of labeled training data [22, 15, 16]. Transfer learning, where the goal is to transfer knowledge from
a related source task, is commonly used to compensate for
the lack of sufficient training data in the target task [35, 3].
Fine-tuning is arguably the most widely used approach for
transfer learning when working with deep learning models. It starts with a pre-trained model on the source task
and trains it further on the target task. For computer vision
tasks, it is a common practice to work with ImageNet pretrained models for fine-tuning [20]. Compared with training
from scratch, fine-tuning a pre-trained convolutional neural
network on a target dataset can significantly improve performance, while reducing the target labeled data requirements [14, 51, 44, 20].
∗ This work was done when Yunhui Guo was an intern at IBM Research.
† Abhishek Kumar is now with Google Brain. The work was done when he

was at IBM Research.

Figure 1: Given a deep neural network pre-trained on a
source task, we address the question of where to fine-tune
its parameters with examples of the target task. We propose
a novel method that decides, per training example, which
layers of the pre-trained model should have their parameters fixed, i.e., shared with the source task, and which layers
should be fine-tuned to improve the accuracy of the model
in the target domain.

There are several choices when it comes to realizing the
idea of fine-tuning of deep networks in practice. A natural
approach is to optimize all the parameters of the deep network using the target training data (after initializing them
with the parameters of the pre-trained model). However, if
the target dataset is small and the number of parameters is
huge, fine-tuning the whole network may result in overfitting [51]. Alternatively, the last few layers of the deep network can be fine-tuned while freezing the parameters of the
remaining initial layers to their pre-trained values [44, 1].
This is driven by a combination of limited training data in
the target task and the empirical evidence that initial layers
learn low-level features that can be directly shared across
various computer vision tasks. However, the number of initial layers to freeze during fine-tuning still remains a man-

4805

