Multispectral Imaging for Fine-Grained Recognition of Powders
on Complex Backgrounds
Tiancheng Zhi, Bernardo R. Pires, Martial Hebert and Srinivasa G. Narasimhan
Carnegie Mellon University
{tzhi,bpires,hebert,srinivas}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Hundreds of materials, such as drugs, explosives,
makeup, food additives, are in the form of powder. Recognizing such powders is important for security checks, criminal identification, drug control, and quality assessment.
However, powder recognition has drawn little attention in
the computer vision community. Powders are hard to distinguish: they are amorphous, appear matte, have little color
or texture variation and blend with surfaces they are deposited on in complex ways. To address these challenges,
we present the first comprehensive dataset and approach for
powder recognition using multi-spectral imaging. By using
Shortwave Infrared (SWIR) multi-spectral imaging together
with visible light (RGB) and Near Infrared (NIR), powders
can be discriminated with reasonable accuracy. We present
a method to select discriminative spectral bands to significantly reduce acquisition time while improving recognition
accuracy. We propose a blending model to synthesize images of powders of various thickness deposited on a wide
range of surfaces. Incorporating band selection and image synthesis, we conduct fine-grained recognition of 100
powders on complex backgrounds, and achieve 60%∼70%
accuracy on recognition with known powder location, and
over 40% mean IoU without known location.

1. Introduction
In the influential paper “on seeing stuff” [1], Adelson
argues about the importance of recognizing materials that
are ubiquitous around us. The paper explains how humans visually perceive materials using a combination of
many factors including shape, texture, shading, context,
lighting, configuration and habits. This has since lead to
many computer vision approaches to recognize materials
[3, 10, 17, 32, 39, 41, 44, 45]. Similarly, this work has
inspired methods for fine-grained recognition of “things”
[2, 18, 22, 26, 40, 42] that exhibit subtle appearance variations, which only field experts could achieve before.

RGB

SWIR Band I

SWIR Band II

NIR

SWIR Band III

SWIR Band IV

Figure 1. White powders that are not distinguishable in visible light (RGB) and Near Infrared (NIR) show significantly
different appearances in Shortwave Infrared (SWIR). The
leftmost sample is a white patch for white balance while the
others are powders. Row 1 (left to right): Cream of Rice,
Baking Soda, Borax Detergent, Ajinomoto, Aspirin; Row 2:
Iodized Salt, Talcum, Stevia, Sodium Alginate, Cane Sugar;
Row 3: Corn Starch, Cream of Tartar, Blackboard Chalk,
Boric Acid, Smelly Foot Powder; Row 4: Fungicide, Calcium Carbonate, Vitamin C, Meringue, Citric Acid.
But there is a large class of materials — powders — that
humans (even experts) cannot visually perceive without further testing by other sensory means (taste, smell, touch). We
often wonder: ”Is the dried red smudge ketchup or blood? Is
the powder in this container sugar or salt?” In fact, hundreds
of materials such as drugs, explosives, makeup, food or
other chemicals are in the form of powder. It is important to
detect and recognize such powders for security checks, drug
control, criminal identification, and quality assessment. Despite their importance, however, powder recognition has received little attention in the computer vision community.
Visual powder recognition is challenging for many reasons. Powders have deceptively simple appearances — they
are amorphous and matte with little texture. Figure 1 shows
20 powders that exhibit little color or texture variation in
the Visible (RGB, 400-700nm) or Near-Infrared (NIR, 7001000nm) spectra but are very different chemically (food
ingredients to poisonous cleaning supplies). Unlike materials like grass and asphalt, powders can be present anywhere (smudges on keyboards, kitchens, bathrooms, out-

8699

