Feature-level Frankenstein:
Eliminating Variations for Discriminative Recognition
Xiaofeng Liu1,2,4† , Site Li1† , Lingsheng Kong2 , Wanqing Xie3,4∗ , Ping Jia2 , Jane You5 , B.V.K. Kumar1
1. Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2. CIOMP, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, China
3. Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China
4. Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
5. Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
†contribute equally {liuxiaofeng, site} cmu@gmail.com, *corresponding author

Abstract
Recent successes of deep learning-based recognition
rely on maintaining the content related to the main-task
label. However, how to explicitly dispel the noisy signals for better generalization remains an open issue. We
systematically summarize the detrimental factors as taskrelevant/irrelevant semantic variations and unspecified latent variation. In this paper, we cast these problems as an
adversarial minimax game in the latent space. Specifically,
we propose equipping an end-to-end conditional adversarial network with the ability to decompose an input sample
into three complementary parts. The discriminative representation inherits the desired invariance property guided by
prior knowledge of the task, which is marginally independent to the task-relevant/irrelevant semantic and latent variations. Our proposed framework achieves top performance
on a serials of tasks, including digits recognition, lighting,
makeup, disguise-tolerant face recognition, and facial attributes recognition.

1. Introduction
Extracting a discriminative representation for the task at
hand is an important research goal of recognition. We targeting for the problem of explicitly eliminating the detrimental variations following the prior knowledge of our task
to achieve better generalization. It is challenging since the
training set contains images annotated with multiple semantic variations of interest, but there is no example of the transformation (e.g., gender) as the unsupervised image translation [33, 6], and the latent variation is totally unspecified.
Following the terminology used in previous multi-class
dataset (including a main-task label and several side-labels)
[20, 46, 44], we propose to define three complementary

Independent to

Eqn. (3)

𝑑
Eqn. (3)

𝑙

Eqn. (4)+
Bottleneck
Definition of 𝑠

𝑦

Eqn. (2)

𝑠
Task𝑠
irrelevant
Taskrelevant

Figure 1. Illustration of the expected separations of the observation x, which associated with the discriminative representation d
(red), latent variation l (green) and semantic variations s (blue).
Our framework explicitly enforces them marginally independent
to each other. The d and task-dependent s are related to the mainrecognition task label y.

parts as in Fig 1.
The factors relate to the side-labels is named as the
semantic variations (s), which can be either task −
relevant/irrelevant depending on whether they are
marginally independent to the main recognition task or not
[59]. The latent variation (l) summarizes the remaining properties unspecified by main and semantic labels.
How the DNN can systematically learn a discriminative
representation (d) to be informative for the main recognition task, while marginally independent to both multiple s
and unspecified l remains challenging.
Several efforts have been made to enforce the main task
representation invariant to a single task-irrelevant (independent) semantic factor, such as pose, expression or
1637

