Data augmentation using learned transformations
for one-shot medical image segmentation
Amy Zhao
MIT

Guha Balakrishnan
MIT

Frédo Durand
MIT

xamyzhao@mit.edu

balakg@mit.edu

fredo@mit.edu

John V. Guttag
MIT

Adrian V. Dalca
MIT, MGH

guttag@mit.edu

adalca@mit.edu

Abstract
Image segmentation is an important task in many medical applications. Methods based on convolutional neural networks attain state-of-the-art accuracy; however, they
typically rely on supervised training with large labeled
datasets. Labeling medical images requires significant expertise and time, and typical hand-tuned approaches for
data augmentation fail to capture the complex variations
in such images.
We present an automated data augmentation method for
synthesizing labeled medical images. We demonstrate our
method on the task of segmenting magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain scans. Our method requires only a single segmented scan, and leverages other unlabeled scans
in a semi-supervised approach. We learn a model of transformations from the images, and use the model along with
the labeled example to synthesize additional labeled examples. Each transformation is comprised of a spatial deformation field and an intensity change, enabling the synthesis
of complex effects such as variations in anatomy and image acquisition procedures. We show that training a supervised segmenter with these new examples provides significant improvements over state-of-the-art methods for oneshot biomedical image segmentation.

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation is crucial to many
biomedical imaging applications, such as performing population analyses, diagnosing disease, and planning treatments. When enough labeled data is available, supervised
deep learning-based segmentation methods produce stateof-the-art results. However, obtaining manual segmentation
labels for medical images requires considerable expertise
and time. In most clinical image datasets, there are very

Figure 1: Biomedical images often vary widely in anatomy,
contrast and texture (top row). Our method enables more
accurate segmentation of anatomical structures compared to
other one-shot segmentation methods (bottom row).

few manually labeled images. The problem of limited labeled data is exacerbated by differences in image acquisition procedures across machines and institutions, which can
produce wide variations in resolution, image noise, and tissue appearance [45].
To overcome these challenges, many supervised biomedical segmentation methods focus on hand-engineered preprocessing steps and architectures [53, 57]. It is also common to use hand-tuned data augmentation to increase the
number of training examples [2, 55, 57, 63, 65]. Data augmentation functions such as random image rotations or random nonlinear deformations are easy to implement, and are
effective at improving segmentation accuracy in some settings [55, 57, 63, 65]. However, these functions have limited ability to emulate real variations [26], and can be highly
sensitive to the choice of parameters [25].
We address the challenges of limited labeled data by
learning to synthesize diverse and realistic labeled examples. Our novel approach to data augmentation leverages
unlabeled images. Using learning-based registration methods, we model the set of spatial and appearance transforma18543

