Discovering Fair Representations in the Data Domain
Novi Quadrianto‡∗, Viktoriia Sharmanska§ , Oliver Thomas‡
‡Predictive Analytics Lab (PAL), University of Sussex, Brighton, United Kingdom
§Department of Computing, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
Abstract
Interpretability and fairness are critical in computer vision and machine learning applications, in particular when
dealing with human outcomes, e.g. inviting or not inviting
for a job interview based on application materials that may
include photographs. One promising direction to achieve
fairness is by learning data representations that remove
the semantics of protected characteristics, and are therefore able to mitigate unfair outcomes. All available models
however learn latent embeddings which comes at the cost
of being uninterpretable. We propose to cast this problem
as data-to-data translation, i.e. learning a mapping from
an input domain to a fair target domain, where a fairness
definition is being enforced. Here the data domain can be
images, or any tabular data representation. This task would
be straightforward if we had fair target data available, but
this is not the case. To overcome this, we learn a highly
unconstrained mapping by exploiting statistics of residuals
– the difference between input data and its translated version – and the protected characteristics. When applied to
the CelebA dataset of face images with gender attribute as
the protected characteristic, our model enforces equality of
opportunity by adjusting the eyes and lips regions. Intriguingly, on the same dataset we arrive at similar conclusions
when using semantic attribute representations of images for
translation. On face images of the recent DiF dataset, with
the same gender attribute, our method adjusts nose regions.
In the Adult income dataset, also with protected gender
attribute, our model achieves equality of opportunity by,
among others, obfuscating the wife and husband relationship. Analyzing those systematic changes will allow us to
scrutinize the interplay of fairness criterion, chosen protected characteristics, and prediction performance.

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems are increasingly used by government agencies, businesses, and other organisations to as∗ Also with Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia

sist in making life-changing decisions such as whether or
not to invite a candidate to a job interview, or whether to
give someone a loan. The question is how can we ensure
that those systems are fair, i.e. they do not discriminate
against individuals because of their gender, disability, or
other personal (“protected”) characteristics? For example,
in building an automated system to review job applications,
a photograph might be used in addition to other features to
make an invite decision. By using the photograph as is, a
discrimination issue might arise, as photographs with faces
could reveal certain protected characteristics, such as gender, race, or age (e.g. [14, 5, 4, 29]). Therefore, any automated system that incorporates photographs into its decision process is at risk of indirectly conditioning on protected
characteristics (indirect discrimination). Recent advances
in learning fair representations suggest adversarial training
as the means to hide the protected characteristics from the
decision/prediction function [2, 49, 33]. All fair representation models, however, learn latent embeddings. Hence,
the produced representations cannot be easily interpreted.
They do not have the semantic meaning of the input that
photographs, or education and training attainments, provide
when we have job application data. If we want to encourage
public conversations and productive public debates regarding fair machine learning systems [18], interpretability in
how fairness is met is an integral yet overlooked ingredient.
In this paper we focus on representation learning models
that can transform inputs to their fair representations and
retain the semantics of the input domain in the transformed
space. When we have image data, our method will make a
semantic change to the appearance of an image to deliver
a certain fairness criterion1 . To achieve this, we perform a
data-to-data translation by learning a mapping from data in
a source domain to a target domain. Mapping from source
to target domain is a standard procedure, and many methods are available. For example, in the image domain, if
we have aligned source/target as training data, we can use
the pix2pix method of [24], which is based on conditional
generative adversarial networks (cGANs) [36]. Zhu et al.’s
1 Examples of fairness criteria are equality of true positive rates (TPR),
also called equality of opportunity [22, 47], between males and females.

8227

