Revealing Scenes by Inverting Structure from Motion Reconstructions
Francesco Pittaluga1
1

Sanjeev J. Koppal1

Sing Bing Kang2
2

University of Florida

(a) SfM point cloud (top view)

Sudipta N. Sinha2

Microsoft Research

(b) Projected 3D points

(c) Synthesized Image

(d) Original Image

Figure 1: S YNTHESIZING IMAGERY FROM A S F M POINT CLOUD : From left to right: (a) Top view of a SfM reconstruction
of an indoor scene, (b) 3D points projected into a viewpoint associated with a source image, (c) the image reconstructed using
our technique, and (d) the source image. The reconstructed image is very detailed and closely resembles the source image.

Abstract
Many 3D vision systems localize cameras within a scene
using 3D point clouds. Such point clouds are often obtained
using structure from motion (SfM), after which the images
are discarded to preserve privacy. In this paper, we show,
for the first time, that such point clouds retain enough information to reveal scene appearance and compromise privacy. We present a privacy attack that reconstructs color
images of the scene from the point cloud. Our method is
based on a cascaded U-Net that takes as input, a 2D multichannel image of the points rendered from a specific viewpoint containing point depth and optionally color and SIFT
descriptors and outputs a color image of the scene from
that viewpoint. Unlike previous feature inversion methods [46, 9], we deal with highly sparse and irregular 2D
point distributions and inputs where many point attributes
are missing, namely keypoint orientation and scale, the descriptor image source and the 3D point visibility. We evaluate our attack algorithm on public datasets [24, 39] and analyze the significance of the point cloud attributes. Finally,
we show that novel views can also be generated thereby enabling compelling virtual tours of the underlying scene.

1. Introduction
Emerging AR technologies on mobile devices based on
ARCore [2], ARKit [3], 3D mapping APIs [1], and new
devices such as HoloLens [15] have set the stage for deployment of devices with always-on cameras in our homes,

workplaces, and other sensitive environments. Image-based
localization techniques allow such devices to estimate their
precise pose within the scene [18, 37, 23, 25]. However,
these localization methods requires persistent storage of 3D
models of the scene which contains sparse 3D point clouds
reconstructed using images and SfM algorithms [38].
SfM source images are usually discarded to safeguard
privacy. Surprisingly, however, we show that the SfM point
cloud and the associated attributes such as color and SIFT
descriptors contain enough information to reconstruct detailed comprehensible images of the scene (see Fig. 1 and
Fig. 3). This suggests that the persistent point cloud storage
poses serious privacy risks that have been widely ignored
so far but will become increasingly relevant as localization
services are adopted by a larger user community.
While privacy issues for wearable devices have been
studied [16], to the best of our knowledge, a systematic
analysis of privacy risk of storing 3D point cloud maps has
never been reported. We illustrate the privacy concerns by
proposing the problem of synthesizing color images from
an SfM model of a scene. We assume that the reconstructed
model contains a sparse 3D point cloud with optional attributes such as descriptors, color, point visibility and associated camera poses but not the source images.
We make the following contributions: (1) We introduce the problem of inverting a sparse SfM point cloud
and reconstructing detailed views of the scene from arbitrary viewpoints. This problem differs from the previously
studied single-image feature inversion problem due to the
need to deal with highly sparse point distributions and a
1145

