Attention Branch Network:
Learning of Attention Mechanism for Visual Explanation
Hiroshi Fukui, Tsubasa Hirakawa, Takayoshi Yamashita, Hironobu Fujiyoshi
Chubu University
1200 Matsumotocho, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan
{fhiro@mprg.cs, hirakawa@mprg.cs, yamashita@isc, fujiyoshi@isc}.chubu.ac.jp

Attention map

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural network (CNN) [1, 17] models have been achieved the great performance on various
image recognition tasks [25, 9, 7, 34, 8, 12, 18]. However, despite CNN models performing well on such tasks,
it is difficult to interpret the decision making of CNN in
the inference process. To understand the decision making of CNN, methods of interpreting CNN have been proposed [39, 41, 26, 4, 24, 3, 22].
“Visual explanation” has been used to interpret the decision making of CNN by highlighting the attention loca1 https://github.com/machine-perception-robotics
-group/attention_branch_network

L(xi)

Great grey owl

Label

GAP & fc.

Feature map

Feature
extractor

Ruﬀed grouse

…

Input image
(a) Class Activation Mapping

Attention map

Attention branch

Feature
extractor

Input image

Latt(xi)
Label

Visual explanation enables humans to understand the decision making of deep convolutional neural network (CNN),
but it is insufficient to contribute to improving CNN performance. In this paper, we focus on the attention map for visual explanation, which represents a high response value as
the attention location in image recognition. This attention
region significantly improves the performance of CNN by
introducing an attention mechanism that focuses on a specific region in an image. In this work, we propose Attention
Branch Network (ABN), which extends a response-based visual explanation model by introducing a branch structure
with an attention mechanism. ABN can be applicable to
several image recognition tasks by introducing a branch for
the attention mechanism and is trainable for visual explanation and image recognition in an end-to-end manner. We
evaluate ABN on several image recognition tasks such as
image classification, fine-grained recognition, and multiple
facial attribute recognition. Experimental results indicate
that ABN outperforms the baseline models on these image
recognition tasks while generating an attention map for visual explanation. Our code is available 1 .

wc

Attention
mechanism

Perception branch

Lper(xi)

(b) Attention Branch Network

Figure 1. Network structures of class activation mapping and proposed attention branch network.

tion in a top-down manner during the inference process.
Visual explanation can be categorized into gradient-based
or response-based. Gradient-based visual explanation typically use gradients with auxiliary data, such as noise [4]
and class index [24, 3]. Although these methods can interpret the decision making of CNN without re-training and
modifying the architecture, they require the backpropagation process to obtain gradients. In contrast, responsebased visual explanation can interpret the decision making of CNN during the inference process. Class activation
mapping (CAM) [41], which is a representative responsebased visual explanation, can obtain an attention map in
each category using the response of the convolution layer.
CAM replaces the convolution and global average pooling (GAP) [20] and obtains an attention map that include
high response value positions representing the class, as
shown in Fig. 1(a). However, CAM requires replacing the
fully-connected layer with a convolution layer and GAP,
thus, decreasing the performance of CNN.
To avoid this problem, gradient-based methods are of0
10705

