Label Propagation for Deep Semi-supervised Learning
Ahmet Iscen1

Giorgos Tolias1

1 VRG, FEE, CTU in Prague

Yannis Avrithis2

Ondřej Chum1

2 Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning is becoming increasingly important because it can combine data carefully labeled by
humans with abundant unlabeled data to train deep neural networks. Classic methods on semi-supervised learning that have focused on transductive learning have not
been fully exploited in the inductive framework followed by
modern deep learning. The same holds for the manifold
assumption—that similar examples should get the same prediction. In this work, we employ a transductive label propagation method that is based on the manifold assumption to
make predictions on the entire dataset and use these predictions to generate pseudo-labels for the unlabeled data and
train a deep neural network. At the core of the transductive
method lies a nearest neighbor graph of the dataset that
we create based on the embeddings of the same network.
Therefore our learning process iterates between these two
steps. We improve performance on several datasets especially in the few labels regime and show that our work is
complementary to current state of the art.

1. Introduction
Modern approaches to many computer vision problems
exploit deep neural networks. These are popular for being
very efficient and providing great performance at test time.
The downside is a requirement of large amounts of training
examples, which are labeled either by humans or automatically on proxy tasks.
Visual data are available in large quantities, however,
data reliably annotated by humans are still very scarce. Obtaining large amounts of annotated training data for every
single task is not only impractical, potentially costly, but it
also turns out to be error prone. The low quality of crowdsourced annotation is a common motivation to minimize the
need of annotation.
In the domain of metric learning, promising results have
been recently achieved by unsupervised methods for either
learning from scratch or fine-tuning a supervised network
for domain adaptation, which devise proxy tasks for learning. These tasks exploit the distribution of data in the original space, for instance pairwise relations of training ex-

Figure 1. Label propagation on manifolds toy example. Triangles
denote labeled, and circles un-labeled training data, respectively.
Top: color-coded ground truth for labeled points, and gray color
for unlabeled points. Bottom: color-coded pseudo-labels inferred
by diffusion that are used to train the CNN. The size reflects the
certainty of the pseudo-label prediction.

amples [42], relations between examples and cluster centroids [1], or considering the manifold structure of data [19].
Alternatively, in self-supervised learning, one can take advantage of additional information like spatial layout in images [5, 12] or temporal relation in videos [40, 28]; or mine
for such information in unstructured data by algorithmic supervision using conventional methods [13, 30]. However,
most such proxy tasks are inferior when directly compared
to laboriously annotated data by humans.
In classification, semi-supervised methods attempt to reduce the number of labeled examples, whereby the fully supervised performance on all data acts as an upper bound.
In transductive learning [43, 45], label inference restricted
to a given set of unlabeled examples is of interest. In inductive learning, the goal is generalization to new unseen
data, while the original training data are discarded. This
is achieved e.g. by combining classification loss on labeled
15070

