Greedy Structure Learning of Hierarchical Compositional Models
Adam Kortylewski Aleksander Wieczorek Mario Wieser Clemens Blumer
Sonali Parbhoo Andreas Morel-Forster Volker Roth Thomas Vetter
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Basel

Abstract
In this work, we consider the problem of learning a hierarchical generative model of an object from a set of images which show examples of the object in the presence
of variable background clutter. Existing approaches to
this problem are limited by making strong a-priori assumptions about the object’s geometric structure and require segmented training data for learning. In this paper, we propose a novel framework for learning hierarchical compositional models (HCMs) which do not suffer from the mentioned limitations. We present a generalized formulation of
HCMs and describe a greedy structure learning framework
that consists of two phases: Bottom-up part learning and
top-down model composition. Our framework integrates
the foreground-background segmentation problem into the
structure learning task via a background model. As a result, we can jointly optimize for the number of layers in the
hierarchy, the number of parts per layer and a foregroundbackground segmentation based on class labels only. We
show that the learned HCMs are semantically meaningful
and achieve competitive results when compared to other
generative object models at object classification on a standard transfer learning dataset.

1. Introduction
Object analysis in natural images requires generalization
from limited observations to a potentially infinite amount of
image patterns that are generated by variations of an objects
geometry, appearance and background clutter. Generative
object modeling [14, 41, 2] is a highly promising approach
to object analysis as it naturally integrates different analysis tasks, such as detection, segmentation and classification,
into a joint reasoning process. However, so far the learning of generative object models requires detailed human supervision during training, while posterior inference at test
time is slow. Hierarchical compositional generative models
[17, 9, 40] proposed to resolve these issues by enforcing a
more efficient representation that allows for fast inference,

feature sharing and contextual reasoning. Such hierarchical compositional models (HCMs) demonstrated impressive
generalization capabilities for a diverse set of applications
such as image classification [9], object parsing [40], domain
adaptation [5] and one-shot learning [34]. However, so far
HCMs can only be learned if their hierarchical structure is
either known a-priori [5] (Figure 1b) or if the objects in the
training data are segmented from the background [11, 22].
Therefore, a major open research question is:
How can the graph structure of hierarchical compositional
models be learned from natural images without detailed
human supervision?
The major challenge when learning the structure of
HCMs is that it requires the resolution of a fundamental
chicken-and-egg problem: In order to learn the graph structure of an HCM the object must be segmented from the
background, however, in order to segment the object from
the background an object model is needed. Existing structure learning approaches resolve this problem by taking one
of the following assumptions:
A1 The structure of the object is known a-priori, in terms
of the number of parts and their hierarchical relation
[40, 5] (Figure 1b).
A2 The object can be discriminated from the background
solely based on local image information [9, 40].
A3 The object in the training images is already segmented
from the background [11, 22].
The assumptions A1 and A3 are unsatisfying as they require detailed human supervision during training. Assumption A2 does not hold in general for natural images because the appearance of objects is locally highly ambiguous [19]. When learning from natural images this leads to
background structures becoming part of the object model,
or object parts being missed in the representation [31].
The major contribution of this paper is a framework for
learning the graph structure of hierarchical compositional
111612

