Adaptively Connected Neural Networks
Guangrun Wang
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou

Keze Wang
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles

Liang Lin
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou

wanggrun@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

kezewang@gmail.com

linliang@ieee.org

local inference : cow ×
global inference : sheep√

Abstract

1. Introduction
Artificial neural networks have been extensively studied
and applied over the past three decades, achieving remarkable accomplishments in artificial intelligence and computer
vision. Among such networks, two types of neural networks
have had a large impact on the research community. The
first type is the multi-layer perceptron (MLP), which first became popular and effective via the development of the backpropagation training algorithm [34, 17]. However, since
each neuron of the hidden layer in MLP is assigned with a
private weight, the network parameters of MLP usually have
a huge number and can be easily overfitted during the training phase. Moreover, MLP has difficulty in representing the
spatial structure of 2D data (e.g., images). The second type
1 In a computer vision domain, a node refers to a pixel of a feature map,
while in the graph domain, a node denotes a graph node.
2 Corresponding author: Liang Lin (linliang@ieee.org)

local inference : sofa ×
global inference: chair √
local inference : dog √
global inference : sheep×

(a)

50
45

45

40

40

35

35

ResNet

30

ACNet

25
20
0

(b)

50

val top-1 error (%)

training top-1 error (%)

This paper presents a novel adaptively connected neural
network (ACNet) to improve the traditional convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) in two aspects. First, ACNet employs a flexible way to switch global and local inference in
processing the internal feature representations by adaptively
determining the connection status among the feature nodes
(e.g., pixels of the feature maps) 1 . We can show that existing CNNs, the classical multilayer perceptron (MLP), and
the recently proposed non-local network (NLN) [48] are all
special cases of ACNet. Second, ACNet is also capable of
handling non-Euclidean data. Extensive experimental analyses on a variety of benchmarks (i.e., ImageNet-1k classification, COCO 2017 detection and segmentation, CUHK03
person re-identification, CIFAR analysis, and Cora document categorization) demonstrate that ACNet cannot only
achieve state-of-the-art performance but also overcome the
limitation of the conventional MLP and CNN 2 . The code
is available at https://github.com/wanggrun/
Adaptively-Connected-Neural-Networks.

20

40

(c)

60

epoch

30

ResNet

25

ACNet

20
0

20

40

(d)

60 epoch

Figure 1: Some pixels prefer global dependencies, while others
prefer local inference. For example, without global inference we
cannot recognize the chair in (a). While in (b), the representation
capacity of the dog is weakened by global information. Thanks
to the adaptively determining the global/local inference, our ACNet achieves lower top-1 training/validation error than ResNet on
ImageNet-1k shown in (c) and (d).

is convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [18]. Motivated by
the biological visual cortex model, CNNs propose to group
adjacent neurons to share identical weights and represent 2D
data by capturing the local pattern (i.e., receptive field) of
each neuron.
Although CNNs have been proven to be significantly superior over MLP, they have two drawbacks, as highlighted
by [36]. On one hand, due to only abstracting information
from local neighborhood pixels, the convolution operation
inside each layer of CNNs does not have the ability of global
inference. Consequently, convolution operations have difficulties in recognizing objects with similar appearances. For
example, a convolution operation cannot distinguish the difference between the chair and the sofa in Fig.1 (a) which
share the same appearance. In practice, CNN captures the
global dependencies by stacking a number of local convolution operations, which still have several limitations, such
as computational inefficiency, optimization difficulty, and

4321
1781

