Learning Regularity in Skeleton Trajectories for Anomaly Detection in Videos
Romero Morais1∗ , Vuong Le1 , Truyen Tran1 , Budhaditya Saha1 , Moussa Mansour2,3 , Svetha Venkatesh1
1
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute, Deakin University, Australia
2
iCetana, Inc. | 3 University of Western Australia, Australia
1

{ralmeidabaratad,vuong.le,truyen.tran,budhaditya.saha,svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au
2

moussa@icetana.com.au

Abstract
Appearance features have been widely used in video
anomaly detection even though they contain complex entangled factors. We propose a new method to model the normal patterns of human movements in surveillance video for
anomaly detection using dynamic skeleton features. We decompose the skeletal movements into two sub-components:
global body movement and local body posture. We model
the dynamics and interaction of the coupled features in our
novel Message-Passing Encoder-Decoder Recurrent Network. We observed that the decoupled features collaboratively interact in our spatio-temporal model to accurately
identify human-related irregular events from surveillance
video sequences. Compared to traditional appearancebased models, our method achieves superior outlier detection performance. Our model also offers “open-box” examination and decision explanation made possible by the
semantically understandable features and a network architecture supporting interpretability.

1. Introduction
Video anomaly detection is a core problem of unsupervised video modeling. An effective solution is learning
the regular patterns in normal training video sequences in
an unsupervised setting, based on which irregular events
in test videos can be detected as outliers. The problem is
challenging due to the lack of human supervision and the
ambiguous definition of human-perceivable abnormality in
video events. Most current approaches operate on pixelbased appearance and motion features. These features are
usually extracted from whole frames [5, 13, 18, 20, 25], localized on a grid of image patches [24], or concentrated on
pre-identified regions [6, 14]. Unfortunately, pixel-based
features are high-dimensional unstructured signals sensitive
to noise, that mask important information about the scene
[28]. Furthermore, the redundant information present in
these features increases the burden on the models trained

Figure 1. We detect human-related anomalies in video by learning regular spatio-temporal patterns of skeleton features. In this
example, we detect the anomalous event of a person catching a
backpack. This anomaly is detected by using his unusual skeleton
pose and motion compared to those of normal activities. Skeletons in red denote high anomaly scores, while skeletons in green
denote low anomaly scores. The order of the frames is specified
by the blue arrows.

on them to discriminate between signal and noise.
Another key limitation of current methods is the lack of
interpretability due to the semantic gap between visual features and the real meaning of the events. This limitation can
be amplified through processing in deep neural networks
[3]. This lack of understanding prevents practitioners from
using domain knowledge to customize model architectures
and obstructs error analysis.
In this paper, we propose to leverage 2D human skeleton
trajectories for detecting abnormal events related to human
behavior in surveillance videos. The skeleton trajectories
contain the locations of a collection of body joints in the
spatio-temporal domain of video sequences, as illustrated
in Figure 1. By using skeleton features we explicitly exploit
the common structure of surveillance videos, which consists of humans and objects attached to them moving on top
of a static background. Compared to appearance-based rep-

11996

