Eliminating Exposure Bias and Metric Mismatch in Multiple Object Tracking
Andrii Maksai
Pascal Fua
Computer Vision Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
{andrii.maksai, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Identity Switching remains one of the main difficulties
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) algorithms have to deal
with. Many state-of-the-art approaches now use sequence
models to solve this problem but their training can be affected by biases that decrease their efficiency. In this paper, we introduce a new training procedure that confronts
the algorithm to its own mistakes while explicitly attempting to minimize the number of switches, which results in
better training.
We propose an iterative scheme of building a rich training set and using it to learn a scoring function that is an
explicit proxy for the target tracking metric. Whether using
only simple geometric features or more sophisticated ones
that also take appearance into account, our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art on several MOT benchmarks.

1. Introduction
A common concern in Multi Object Tracking (MOT)
approaches is to prevent identity switching, the erroneous
merging of trajectories corresponding to different targets
into a single one. This is difficult in crowded scenes, especially when the appearances of the individual target objects

are not distinctive enough. Many recent approaches rely on
tracklets—short trajectory segments—rather than individual detections, to keep track of the target objects. Tracklets
can be merged into longer trajectories, which can be split
again when an identity switch occurs.
Most state-of-the-art approachess [33, 18, 24, 56, 26] operate on sequences or clusters of detections, often with the
help of deep, recurrent neural networks. This requires training the sequence models and is subject to one or both of two
well-known problems, which our approach overcomes:
• Metric mismatch. It occurs when training by optimizing a metric poorly aligned with the actual desired performance during inference. In MOT, one example is
the use of a classification loss to create trajectories optimal for a tracking-specific metric, such as MOTA [7]
or IDF [45]. To eliminate this mismatch, we introduce an
original way to score tracklets that is an explicit proxy for
the IDF metric and can be computed without the ground
truth. We use it to identify how confidently the person
is tracked, predict tighter bounding box locations, and
estimate whether the real trajectory extends beyond the
observed tracklet.
• Exposure bias. It stems from the model not being exposed to its own errors during training and results in very

Figure 1. Keeping track in a difficult situation. Top row: Because of the occlusion created by the passing car, a tracker can easily return
a trajectory that includes several identity switches. The corresponding bounding boxes inside camera’s field of view are shown on the
right. Bottom row: Our algorithm not only eliminates identity switches but also regresses to a set of much tighter bounding boxes. In this
example our algorithm did it solely on the basis of simple geometric features without requiring the use of appearance information.

4639

