Mixed Effects Neural Networks (MeNets) with Applications to Gaze Estimation∗
Yunyang Xiong∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Hyunwoo J. Kim∗
Korea University

yxiong43@wisc.edu

hyunwoojkim@korea.ac.kr

Vikas Singh
University of Wisconsin-Madison
vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

Abstract
There is much interest in computer vision to utilize commodity hardware for gaze estimation. A number of papers
have shown that algorithms based on deep convolutional
architectures are approaching accuracies where streaming
data from mass-market devices can offer good gaze tracking performance, although a gap still remains between what
is possible and the performance users will expect in real
deployments. We observe that one obvious avenue for improvement relates to a gap between some basic technical
assumptions behind most existing approaches and the statistical properties of the data used for training. Speciﬁcally,
most training datasets involve tens of users with a few hundreds (or more) repeated acquisitions per user. The non
i.i.d. nature of this data suggests better estimation may
be possible if the model explicitly made use of such “repeated measurements” from each user as is commonly done
in classical statistical analysis using so-called mixed effects
models. The goal of this paper is to adapt these “mixed effects” ideas from statistics within a deep neural network architecture for gaze estimation, based on eye images. Such a
formulation seeks to speciﬁcally utilize information regarding the hierarchical structure of the training data — each
node in the hierarchy is a user who provides tens or hundreds of repeated samples. This modiﬁcation yields an architecture that offers state of the art performance onvarious
publicly available datasets improving results by 10-20%.

1. Introduction
Gaze serves as an important cue in understanding human
attention, emotion and social interaction. Therefore, the
ability to estimate and track gaze is important for various
ﬁelds including psychology [19], neuroscience [13, 35, 8]
∗ YX and HJK are corresponding authors. Work performed by HJK
before joining Korea University.

and more recently, computer vision [45, 17, 21, 23]. While
specialized eye gaze tracking hardware from several vendors have been available and used in research experiments
for some time, in the last few years, many commodity products (such as [1]) can also be purchased that offer good realtime accuracy. Unfortunately, many of the high performing
devices remain quite expensive and so, there is intensive
work to come up with accurate computer-vision based gaze
estimation techniques. One of the ideas in this line of work
is appearance-based methods [48], using the appearance of
the eye images to predict human gaze direction.
Generally speaking, appearance-based 3D gaze estimation can be formulated as a regression f : x ∈ Rp → y ∈
R3 , where x is a set of features, e.g., image derived features
and estimates of head pose from images and y is a gaze
direction in 3D space. This problem can be approached
in various ways. For example, we may use a standard kNN regression estimator as in [46] or random forests for
person-independent gaze estimation in [46]. The authors
in [30] design adaptive linear regression whereas Schneider
et al.[39] used support-vector regression with a polynomial
kernel. More recently, deep neural networks have been successfully investigated for the problem in [60, 43]. For example, in [60], one provides an input eye image to a deep
convolutional neural network and the last layer encodes the
three-dimensional gaze vector. The parameters of the network can be trained with sufﬁcient training data.
Are assumptions satisﬁed? Observe that independent
of which scheme we use for inference, gaze estimation is
a statistical ﬁtting problem and understanding some of the
basic assumptions and properties may suggest natural avenues of improvement. One of the basic assumptions most
regression models make is that the samples are independent
identically distributed (i.i.d.) [50]. It is meaningful to assess how (and whether) the common datasets used in many
gaze estimation works satisfy (or violate) this property. (A)
The Eyediap dataset [32] includes 94 video sequences of 16
17743

