The Alignment of the Spheres:
Globally-Optimal Spherical Mixture Alignment for Camera Pose Estimation

1

Dylan Campbell1 , Lars Petersson1,2 , Laurent Kneip3 , Hongdong Li1 and Stephen Gould1
3
2
ShanghaiTech
Data61/CSIRO
Australian National University

firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

lars.petersson@data61.csiro.au

lkneip@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
I−
→F

Determining the position and orientation of a calibrated
camera from a single image with respect to a 3D model is
an essential task for many applications. When 2D–3D correspondences can be obtained reliably, perspective-n-point
solvers can be used to recover the camera pose. However,
without the pose it is non-trivial to find cross-modality correspondences between 2D images and 3D models, particularly when the latter only contains geometric information.
Consequently, the problem becomes one of estimating pose
and correspondences jointly. Since outliers and local optima are so prevalent, robust objective functions and global
search strategies are desirable. Hence, we cast the problem
as a 2D–3D mixture model alignment task and propose the
first globally-optimal solution to this formulation under the
robust L2 distance between mixture distributions. We derive
novel bounds on this objective function and employ branchand-bound to search the 6D space of camera poses, guaranteeing global optimality without requiring a pose estimate.
To accelerate convergence, we integrate local optimization,
implement GPU bound computations, and provide an intuitive way to incorporate side information such as semantic
labels. The algorithm is evaluated on challenging synthetic
and real datasets, outperforming existing approaches and
reliably converging to the global optimum.

1. Introduction
Estimating the pose of a calibrated camera given a single image and a 3D model, is useful for many applications,
including localization and tracking [20, 33], augmented reality [41], motion segmentation [44] and object recognition
[3]. The problem can be cast as a 2D–3D alignment problem in the image plane or on the unit sphere. The task is to
find the rotation and translation that aligns the projection of
a 3D model with the 2D image data, using points [16, 12],
lines [7], silhouettes [14], or mixture models [4]. This is visualized in Figure 1 for mixture models on the unit sphere.

P−
→ GMM

qPNMM
O

R, t

t

vMFMM
Figure 1. Spherical mixture alignment for estimating the 6-DoF
absolute pose (R, t) of a camera from a single image I, relative to
a 3D model (e.g. point-set P), without 2D–3D correspondences.
Our algorithm recovers the transformation by generating mixture
distributions from the data — a von Mises–Fisher Mixture Model
(vMFMM) from the image via a bearing vector set F and a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) from the 3D model, projected onto
the sphere as a quasi-Projected Normal Mixture Model (qPNMM)
— and applying branch-and-bound with tight novel bounds to find
R and t that optimally aligns these spherical mixtures.

When 2D–3D correspondences are known, this becomes
the well-studied Perspective-n-Point (PnP) problem [37,
25]. However, correspondences between 2D and 3D modalities can be difficult to estimate, not least for the general
case of aligning an image with a texture-less 3D model.
Even when the model contains visual information, such as
SIFT features [40], repetitive elements, occlusions, and appearance variations due to lighting and weather make the
correspondence problem non-trivial. Methods that solve
for pose and correspondences jointly avoid these problems.
They include local optimization approaches [16, 43], which
can only yield correct results when a good pose prior is provided, and randomized global search [20], which becomes
computationally intractable as the problem size increases.
In contrast, globally-optimal approaches [7, 12] obviate the
need for pose priors and guarantee optimality.
111796

