Learning to Reconstruct People in Clothing from a Single RGB Camera
Thiemo Alldieck1,2,*
Marcus Magnor1
Bharat Lal Bhatnagar2
Christian Theobalt2
Gerard Pons-Moll2
1

2

Computer Graphics Lab, TU Braunschweig, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany

{alldieck,magnor}@cg.cs.tu-bs.de {bbhatnag,theobalt,gpons}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Figure 1: We present a deep learning based approach to estimate personalized body shape, including hair and clothing, using a single
RGB camera. The shapes shown above have been calculated using only 8 input images, and re-posed using SMPL.

Abstract
We present Octopus, a learning-based model to infer the
personalized 3D shape of people from a few frames (1-8)
of a monocular video in which the person is moving with
a reconstruction accuracy of 4 to 5mm, while being orders
of magnitude faster than previous methods. From semantic
segmentation images, our Octopus model reconstructs a 3D
shape, including the parameters of SMPL plus clothing and
hair in 10 seconds or less. The model achieves fast and accurate predictions based on two key design choices. First,
by predicting shape in a canonical T-pose space, the network learns to encode the images of the person into poseinvariant latent codes, where the information is fused. Second, based on the observation that feed-forward predictions
are fast but do not always align with the input images, we
predict using both, bottom-up and top-down streams (one
per view) allowing information to flow in both directions.
Learning relies only on synthetic 3D data. Once learned,
Octopus can take a variable number of frames as input, and
is able to reconstruct shapes even from a single image with
an accuracy of 5mm. Results on 3 different datasets demonstrate the efficacy and accuracy of our approach. Code is
available at [2].

* Work partly conducted during an internship at the Real Virtual Humans group of Max Planck for Informatics.

1. Introduction
The automatic acquisition of detailed 3D human shape
and appearance, including clothing and facial details is required for many applications such as VR/AR, gaming, virtual try-on, and cinematography.
A common way to acquire such models is with a scanner or a multi-view studio [3, 46]. The cost and size prevent the wide-spread use of such setups. Therefore, numerous works address capturing body shape and pose with
more practical setups, e.g. from a low number of video
cameras [60], or using one or more depth cameras, either
specifically for the human body [9, 77, 84] or for general
free-form surfaces [88, 51, 54, 37, 26, 70]. The most practical but also challenging setting is capturing from a single
monocular RGB camera. Some methods attempt to infer
the shape parameters of a body model from a single image [41, 53, 10, 24, 8, 32, 86, 39, 55], but reconstructed detail is constrained to the model shape space, and thus does
not capture personalized shape detail and clothing geometry. Recent work [6, 5] estimates more detailed shape, including clothing, from a video sequence of a person rotating
in front of a camera while holding a rough A-pose. While
reconstructed models have high quality, the optimization
approach takes around 2 minutes only for the shape component. More importantly, the main bottleneck is the preprocessing step, which requires fitting the SMPL model to
each of the frame silhouettes using time-consuming non11175

