On the Intrinsic Dimensionality of Image Representations
Sixue Gong
Vishnu Naresh Boddeti
Anil K. Jain
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{gongsixu, vishnu, jain}@msu.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the following questions pertaining
to the intrinsic dimensionality of any given image representation: (i) estimate its intrinsic dimensionality, (ii) develop
a deep neural network based non-linear mapping, dubbed
DeepMDS, that transforms the ambient representation to
the minimal intrinsic space, and (iii) validate the veracity of the mapping through image matching in the intrinsic
space. Experiments on benchmark image datasets (LFW,
IJB-C and ImageNet-100) reveal that the intrinsic dimensionality of deep neural network representations is significantly lower than the dimensionality of the ambient features. For instance, SphereFace’s [26] 512-dim face representation and ResNet’s [16] 512-dim image representation
have an intrinsic dimensionality of 16 and 19 respectively.
Further, the DeepMDS mapping is able to obtain a representation of significantly lower dimensionality while maintaining discriminative ability to a large extent, 59.75% TAR
@ 0.1% FAR in 16-dim vs 71.26% TAR in 512-dim on IJBC [29] and a Top-1 accuracy of 77.0% at 19-dim vs 83.4%
at 512-dim on ImageNet-100.

1. Introduction
An image representation is an embedding function that
transforms the raw pixel representation of the image to a
point in a high-dimensional vector space. Learning or estimating such a mapping is motivated by two goals: (a)
the compactness of the representation, and (2) the effectiveness of the mapping for the task at hand. While the latter
topic has received substantial attention, ranging from PCA
based Eigenfaces [42] to deep neural network (DNN) based
feature representations, there has been relatively little focus on the dimensionality of the representation itself. The
dimensionality of image representations has ranged from
hundreds to thousands of dimensions. For instance, current state-of-the-art image representations have 128, 512,
1024 and 4096 dimensions for FaceNet [35], ResNet [16],
SphereFace [26] and VGG [36], respectively. The choice
of dimensionality is often determined by practical consid-

erations, such as, ease of learning the embedding function
[38], constraints on system memory, etc. instead of the effective dimensionality necessary for image representation.
This naturally raises the following fundamental but related
questions, How compact can the representation be without
any loss in recognition performance? In other words, what
is the intrinsic dimensionality of the representation? And,
how can one obtain such a compact representation? Addressing these questions is the primary goal of this paper.
The intrinsic dimensionality (ID) of a representation
refers to the minimum number of parameters (or degrees of
freedom) necessary to capture the entire information present
in the representation [4]. Equivalently, it refers to the dimensionality of the m-dimensional manifold M embedded
within the d-dimensional ambient (representation) space P
where m ≤ d. This notion of intrinsic dimensionality is
notably different from common linear dimensionality estimates obtained through e.g., principal component analysis
(PCA). This linear dimension corresponds to the best linear
subspace necessary to retain a desired fraction of the variations in the data. In principle, linear dimensionality can
be as large as the ambient dimension if the variation factors are highly entangled with each other. An illustration of
these concepts is provided in Fig. 1.
The ability to estimate the intrinsic dimensionality of a
given image representation is useful in a number of ways.
At a fundamental level, the ID determines the true capacity and complexity of variations in the data captured by the
representation, through the embedding function. In fact,
the ID can be used to gauge the information content in the
representation, due to its linear relation with Shannon entropy [41, 9]. Also, it provides an estimate of the amount
of redundancy built into the representation which relates to
its generalization capability. On a practical level, knowledge of the ID is crucial for devising optimal unsupervised
strategies to obtain image features that are minimally redundant, while retaining its full ability to categorize images
into different classes. Recognition in the intrinsic space can
provide significant savings, both in memory requirements
as well as processing time, across downstream tasks like
large-scale face matching in the encrypted domain [5], im-

3987

