Multi-Person Pose Estimation
with Enhanced Channel-wise and Spatial Information

1

Kai Su†,1,2 , Dongdong Yu†,2 , Zhenqi Xu2 , Xin Geng∗,1 , Changhu Wang∗,2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
{sukai,xgeng}@seu.edu.cn
2

ByteDance AI Lab, Beijing, China

{sukai,yudongdong,xuzhenqi,wangchanghu}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Multi-person pose estimation is an important but challenging problem in computer vision. Although current approaches have achieved significant progress by fusing the
multi-scale feature maps, they pay little attention to enhancing the channel-wise and spatial information of the
feature maps. In this paper, we propose two novel modules to perform the enhancement of the information for the
multi-person pose estimation. First, a Channel Shuffle Module (CSM) is proposed to adopt the channel shuffle operation on the feature maps with different levels, promoting
cross-channel information communication among the pyramid feature maps. Second, a Spatial, Channel-wise Attention Residual Bottleneck (SCARB) is designed to boost
the original residual unit with attention mechanism, adaptively highlighting the information of the feature maps both
in the spatial and channel-wise context. The effectiveness
of our proposed modules is evaluated on the COCO keypoint benchmark, and experimental results show that our
approach achieves the state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Multi-Person Pose Estimation aims to locate body parts
for all persons in an image, such as keypoints on the arms,
torsos, and the face. It is a fundamental yet challenging task
for many computer vision applications like activity recognition [22] and human re-identification [28]. Achieving ac† Equal contribution.
∗ X. Geng and C. Wang are the corresponding authors.

This work was performed while Kai Su worked as an intern at
ByteDance AI Lab.
This research was partially supported by the National Key Research &
Development Plan of China (No. 2017YFB1002801), the National Science
Foundation of China (61622203), the Collaborative Innovation Center of
Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, and the Collaborative
Innovation Center of Wireless Communications Technology.

Figure 1. The example of an input image (left) from the COCO
test-dev dataset [12] and its estimated pose (right) from our model.

curate localization results, however, is difficult due to the
close-interaction scenarios, occlusions and different human
scales.
Recently, due to the involvement of deep convolutional
neural networks [10, 7], there has been significant progress
on the problem of multi-person pose estimation [23, 16, 4,
3, 1, 15, 26]. Existing approaches for multi-person pose estimation can be roughly classified into two frameworks, i.e.,
top-down framework [23, 16, 4, 3] and bottom-up framework [1, 15, 26]. The former one first detects all human
bounding boxes in the image and then estimates the pose
within each box independently. The latter one first detects
all body keypoints independently and then assembles the
detected body joints to form multiple human poses.
Although great progress has been made, it is still an open
problem to achieve accurate localization results. First, on
the one hand, high-level feature maps with larger receptive
fields are required in some challenging cases to infer the invisible and occluded keypoints, e.g., the right knee of the
human in Fig. 1. On the other hand, low-level feature maps
with larger resolutions are also helpful to the detailed refinement of the keypoints, e.g., the right ankle of the human in
Fig. 1. The trade-off between the low-level and high-level
feature maps is more complex in real scenarios. Second, the
feature fusion is even dynamic and the fused feature maps
always remain redundant. Therefore, the information which
is more important to the pose estimation should be adap-

5674

