Cascaded Partial Decoder for Fast and Accurate Salient Object Detection
Zhe Wu1,2 , Li Su1,2,3 , and Qingming Huang1,2,3
1

Existing state-of-the-art salient object detection networks rely on aggregating multi-level features of pretrained convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Compared
to high-level features, low-level features contribute less to
performance but cost more computations because of their
larger spatial resolutions. In this paper, we propose a novel
Cascaded Partial Decoder (CPD) framework for fast and
accurate salient object detection. On the one hand, the
framework constructs partial decoder which discards larger resolution features of shallower layers for acceleration.
On the other hand, we observe that integrating features of
deeper layers obtain relatively precise saliency map. Therefore we directly utilize generated saliency map to reﬁne
the features of backbone network. This strategy efﬁciently
suppresses distractors in the features and signiﬁcantly improves their representation ability. Experiments conducted
on ﬁve benchmark datasets exhibit that the proposed model
not only achieves state-of-the-art performance but also runs much faster than existing models. Besides, the proposed
framework is further applied to improve existing multi-level
feature aggregation models and signiﬁcantly improve their
efﬁciency and accuracy.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep learning has achieved surprising performance in salient object detection for it providing abundant and discriminative image representations. The early
deep saliency methods [15, 16, 32] utilize CNNs to predict
saliency scores of image regions and obtain accurate saliency maps with high computational complexity. In the following works, fully convolutional network (FCN) [24] based





7LPH

Abstract

PD[)

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS),
Beijing, China
2
Key Lab of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, UCAS, Beijing, China
3
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China
zhe.wu@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {suli, qmhuang}@usas.ac.cn















6LGH2XWSXW
D













6LGH2XWSXW
E





Figure 1: (a) Maximum F-measure of six side outputs of the original DSS [9] model in PASCAL-S [19] dataset. (b) We set inference
time of backbone network as 1, and show inference time of each
side output here. The performance growth is getting slower and
the inference time rapidly increases when gradually integrating
features from high-level 6 to low-level 1.

encoder-decoder architecture is widely applied for salient object detection. The encoder is the pre-trained image
classiﬁcation model (e.g. VGG [29] and ResNet [8]) which
provides multi-level deep features: the high-level features
with low resolutions represent semantic information, and
the low-level features with high resolutions represent spatial details. In the decoder, these features are combined to
generate accurate saliency maps. Researchers have developed various decoders [9, 17, 20, 21, 25, 41, 42] to integrate
low-level and high-level features.
However, two drawbacks exist in these deep aggregation
methods. On the one hand, compared to high-level features, low-level features contribute less to the performance
of deep aggregation methods. In Fig. 1(a), we present performances of different side outputs of the DSS [9] model.
It is obvious that the performance tends to saturate quickly when gradually aggregating features from high-level to
low-level. On the other hand, due to the large resolutions

3907

