Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for ToF Data Denoising with Adversarial Learning
Gianluca Agresti
University of Padova

Henrik Schaefer
Sony Europe B.V.

agrestig@dei.unipd.it henrik.schaefer@sony.com

Abstract
Time-of-Flight data is typically affected by a high level
of noise and by artifacts due to Multi-Path Interference
(MPI). While various traditional approaches for ToF data
improvement have been proposed, machine learning techniques have seldom been applied to this task, mostly due
to the limited availability of real world training data with
depth ground truth. In this paper, we avoid to rely on labeled real data in the learning framework. A Coarse-Fine
CNN, able to exploit multi-frequency ToF data for MPI correction, is trained on synthetic data with ground truth in a
supervised way. In parallel, an adversarial learning strategy, based on the Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN)
framework, is used to perform an unsupervised pixel-level
domain adaptation from synthetic to real world data, exploiting unlabeled real world acquisitions. Experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed approach is able to
effectively denoise real world data and to outperform stateof-the-art techniques.

1. Introduction
Among the various solutions for depth data acquisition,
Time-of-Flight (ToF) sensors have attracted a large interest
since they are able to reliably get the depth information at
interactive frame rates. These sensors estimate the depth by
illuminating a scene with a periodic, amplitude modulated
light signal and by estimating the time taken by the signal
to reach the scene points and come back from the phase displacement between the transmitted and received signal [33].
Even if the technology behind these sensors has improved a
lot since their introduction, it is still affected by several critical issues, including limited spatial resolution, relatively
high noise levels (specially on dark surfaces) and inaccuracies on the edges due to the mixed pixel effect. A particularly critical issue is the so-called Multi-Path Interference
(MPI), due to the fact that the emitted light can bounce multiple times in the scene before reaching to the sensor. This
leads to a depth overestimation that is scene dependent and
related to both the geometry and the material properties.

Piergiorgio Sartor
Sony Europe B.V.

Pietro Zanuttigh
University of Padova

sartor@sony.de

zanuttigh@dei.unipd.it

Since the MPI error is related to the modulation frequency of the ToF signal, by using multi-frequency ToF
(MF-ToF) sensors, useful clues for its estimation can be
extracted and used for ToF data denoising. However, traditional approaches based on this idea do not have completely satisfactory performances. Recently, machine learning techniques and in particular Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have been exploited for this task [5, 30, 14].
Even if these approaches have obtained reasonable performances in some simple situations, they are not able to completely remove the MPI corruption and their generalization
capabilities are limited. The main issue in using deep learning techniques for this task is the limited amount of available training data. There are no large public datasets, like
for image classification or semantic segmentation. Furthermore, while ToF depth data can be easily acquired, getting
the corresponding ground truth information is a very time
consuming task, requiring the acquisition of the scene with
highly accurate scanning equipments and the registration of
ground truth data with the ToF acquisition.
A possible solution to overcome this issue, is to train the
deep network with synthetic data produced by a Time-ofFlight simulator. The approach of [5] exploits this idea and
obtains impressive performances on synthetic data. On the
other hand, the differences between the real world and simulated data, reduce the performances on real sensors, where
the approach is able to reduce the MPI corruption but does
not completely remove it.
This paper introduces a novel transfer learning architecture able to properly denoise real world data by exploiting unlabeled real world ToF acquisitions (i.e., without the
ground truth data) to adapt the training performed on synthetic data to the real world setting. More in detail, a
Coarse-Fine CNN exploiting MF-ToF data derived from the
one introduced in [5] is jointly trained in a supervised way
on a dataset composed by synthetic scenes, for which the
ground truth depth is known and in an unsupervised way on
a real dataset, for which the depth ground truth is unknown.
For the unsupervised training, we use an adversarial loss
and a learning framework based on the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) model. The generator network performing ToF data denoising is trained along with a discrim15584

