Self-Supervised GANs via Auxiliary Rotation Loss
Ting Chen∗
University of California, Los Angeles

Xiaohua Zhai
Google Brain

Marvin Ritter
Google Brain

tingchen@cs.ucla.edu

xzhai@google.com

marvinritter@google.com

Mario Lucic
Google Brain

Neil Houlsby
Google Brain

lucic@google.com

neilhoulsby@google.com

Abstract
Conditional GANs are at the forefront of natural image
synthesis. The main drawback of such models is the necessity for labeled data. In this work we exploit two popular
unsupervised learning techniques, adversarial training and
self-supervision, and take a step towards bridging the gap
between conditional and unconditional GANs. In particular,
we allow the networks to collaborate on the task of representation learning, while being adversarial with respect to
the classic GAN game. The role of self-supervision is to
encourage the discriminator to learn meaningful feature representations which are not forgotten during training. We test
empirically both the quality of the learned image representations, and the quality of the synthesized images. Under
the same conditions, the self-supervised GAN attains a similar performance to state-of-the-art conditional counterparts.
Finally, we show that this approach to fully unsupervised
learning can be scaled to attain an FID of 23.4 on unconditional IMAGENET generation.1

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are a class of
unsupervised generative models [1]. GANs involve training a generator and discriminator model in an adversarial
game, such that the generator learns to produce samples from
a desired data distribution. Training GANs is challenging
because it involves searching for a Nash equilibrium of a nonconvex game in a high-dimensional parameter space. In practice, GANs are typically trained using alternating stochastic
gradient descent which is often unstable and lacks theoretical
guarantees [2]. Consequently, training may exhibit instability, divergence, cyclic behavior, or mode collapse [3]. As a
result, many techniques to stabilize GAN training have been
∗ Work done at Google.
1 Code at https://github.com/google/compare_gan.

proposed [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. A major contributor to training instability is the fact that the generator and discriminator
learn in a non-stationary environment. In particular, the discriminator is a classifier for which the distribution of one
class (the fake samples) shifts as the generator changes during training. In non-stationary online environments, neural
networks forget previous tasks [11, 12, 13]. If the discriminator forgets previous classification boundaries, training may
become unstable or cyclic. This issue is usually addressed
either by reusing old samples or by applying continual learning techniques [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. These issues become
more prominent in the context of complex data sets. A key
technique in these settings is conditioning [9, 20, 21, 22]
whereby both the generator and discriminator have access to
labeled data. Arguably, augmenting the discriminator with
supervised information encourages it to learn more stable
representations which opposes catastrophic forgetting. Furthermore, learning the conditional model for each class is
easier than learning the joint distribution. The main drawback in this setting is the necessity for labeled data. Even
when labeled data is available, it is usually sparse and covers
only a limited amount of high level abstractions.
Motivated by the aforementioned challenges, our goal is
to show that one can recover the benefits of conditioning,
without requiring labeled data. To ensure that the representations learned by the discriminator are more stable and useful,
we add an auxiliary, self-supervised loss to the discriminator.
This leads to more stable training because the dependence
of the discriminator’s representations on the quality of the
generator’s output is reduced. We introduce a novel model –
the self-supervised GAN – in which the generator and discriminator collaborate on the task of representation learning,
and compete on the generative task.
Our contributions We present an unsupervised generative model that combines adversarial training with selfsupervised learning. Our model recovers the benefits of
conditional GANs, but requires no labeled data. In particu112154

