ABC: A Big CAD Model Dataset For Geometric Deep Learning
Sebastian Koch
TU Berlin

Albert Matveev
Skoltech, IITP

Zhongshi Jiang
New York University

s.koch@tu-berlin.de

albert.matveev@skoltech.ru

jiangzs@nyu.edu

Francis Williams
New York University

Alexey Artemov
Skoltech

Evgeny Burnaev
Skoltech

francis.williams@nyu.edu

a.artemov@skoltech.ru

e.burnaev@skoltech.ru

Marc Alexa
TU Berlin

Denis Zorin
New York University

Daniele Panozzo
New York University

marc.alexa@tu-berlin.de

dzorin@cs.nyu.edu

panozzo@nyu.edu

Abstract
We introduce ABC-Dataset, a collection of one million
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) models for research of geometric deep learning methods and applications. Each
model is a collection of explicitly parametrized curves and
surfaces, providing ground truth for differential quantities,
patch segmentation, geometric feature detection, and shape
reconstruction. Sampling the parametric descriptions of
surfaces and curves allows generating data in different formats and resolutions, enabling fair comparisons for a wide
range of geometric learning algorithms. As a use case for
our dataset, we perform a large-scale benchmark for estimation of surface normals, comparing existing data driven
methods and evaluating their performance against both the
ground truth and traditional normal estimation methods.

1. Introduction
The combination of large data collections and deep
learning algorithms is transforming many areas of computer
science. Large data collections are an essential part of this
transformation. Creating these collections for many types
of data (image, video, and audio) has been boosted by the
ubiquity of acquisition devices and mass sharing of these
types of data on social media. In all these cases, the data
representation is based on regular discretization in space
and time providing structured and uniform input for deep
learning algorithms.
The situation is different for three-dimensional geometric models. Acquiring or creating high-quality models of
this type is still difficult, despite growing availability of 3D
sensors, and improvements in 3D design tools. Inherent ir-

Figure 1: Random CAD models from the ABC-Dataset: https://deep-geometry.github.io/abc-dataset

9601

