Point-to-Pose Voting based Hand Pose Estimation using Residual Permutation
Equivariant Layer
Shile Li
Technical University of Munich

Dongheui Lee
Technical University of Munich, German Aerospace Center

li.shile@mytum.de

dhlee@tum.de

Abstract
Recently, 3D input data based hand pose estimation
methods have shown state-of-the-art performance, because
3D data capture more spatial information than the depth
image. Whereas 3D voxel-based methods need a large
amount of memory, PointNet based methods need tedious
preprocessing steps such as K-nearest neighbour search for
each point. In this paper, we present a novel deep learning
hand pose estimation method for an unordered point cloud.
Our method takes 1024 3D points as input and does not require additional information. We use Permutation Equivariant Layer (PEL) as the basic element, where a residual network version of PEL is proposed for the hand pose estimation task. Furthermore, we propose a voting-based scheme
to merge information from individual points to the final pose
output. In addition to the pose estimation task, the votingbased scheme can also provide point cloud segmentation result without ground-truth for segmentation. We evaluate our
method on both NYU dataset and the Hands2017Challenge
dataset, where our method outperforms recent state-of-theart methods.

1. Introduction
Hand pose estimation plays an important role in humanrobot interaction tasks, such as gesture recognition and
learning grasping capability by human demonstration.
Since the emergence of consumer level depth sensing devices, a lot of depth image based hand pose estimation
methods appeared. Many state-of-the-art methods use depth
image as input, which provides the conveniences to use the
well developed convolutional neural networks or residual
networks. However, methods using 2D images as input cannot fully utilize 3D spatial information in the depth image.
Furthermore, the appearance of the depth image is dependent on the camera parameters, such that the trained model
using one camera’s image cannot generalize well to another
camera’s image. On the other hand, 3D data is more ”di-

input points

point-wise
pose predictions

hand pose

weighted
fusion

point-to-pose importance weight

segmentation

Figure 1. Our method takes point cloud as input. Then each point
predicts the hand pose and its importance weights for different
pose dimensions. The final pose is obtained through weighted
fusion from each point’s pose prediction. Using the importance
weight, the hand can be clearly segmented into different parts, although no segmentation ground-truth was used during training.

rect” and ”distinctive” than depth image because the appearance of 3D data is unique and invariant to camera parameters.
Recently, methods using 3D data as input have shown
the outperformance over depth image based methods [36].
One way to use 3D input data is to convert 2D depth image
to volumetric representation, such as 3D voxels [15] [4],
where occupied 3D voxel is set to 1 and voxels with empty
space is set to 0. Using the voxelized data brings the convenience to directly use 3-dimensional CNN learning structure. However, the voxelization requires large amount of
memory to represent the input and output data, which prevents the deployment of a very deep structure.
Another way to use 3D input data is to use unordered
point cloud as input [6][9][3]. Recently, PointNet, a deep
learning structure for point cloud, has shown its success in
different tasks. The PointNet estimates point-wise features
for individual points and extract global feature from individual points using a max-pooling layer, such that the network is invariant to the order of points. Ge et al. use Point-

11927

