Sliced Wasserstein Discrepancy for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Chen-Yu Lee

Tanmay Batra

Mohammad Haris Baig
Apple Inc

Abstract
In this work, we connect two distinct concepts for unsupervised domain adaptation: feature distribution alignment between domains by utilizing the task-specific decision
boundary [57] and the Wasserstein metric [72]. Our proposed sliced Wasserstein discrepancy (SWD) is designed to
capture the natural notion of dissimilarity between the outputs of task-specific classifiers. It provides a geometrically
meaningful guidance to detect target samples that are far
from the support of the source and enables efficient distribution alignment in an end-to-end trainable fashion. In the
experiments, we validate the effectiveness and genericness
of our method on digit and sign recognition, image classification, semantic segmentation, and object detection.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks [30] is a milestone
technique in the development of modern machine perception systems solving various tasks such as classification,
semantic segmentation, object detection, etc. However, in
spite of the exceptional learning capacity and the improved
generalizability, deep learning models still suffer from the
challenge of domain shift – a shift in the relationship between data collected in two different domains [3, 2] (e.g.
synthetic and real). Models trained on data collected in
one domain can perform poorly on other domains. Domain
shift can exist in multiple forms: covariate shift (distribution shift in attributes), prior probability shift (shift in labels), and concept shift (shift in the relationship between
attributes and labels) [61, 66, 44].
In this paper, we focus on the covariate shift problem
for the case where we have access to labeled data from one
domain (source) and unlabeled data from another domain
(target). This setup is commonly called unsupervised domain adaptation. Most of the work done in this field has focused on establishing a direct alignment between the feature
distribution of source and target domains. Such alignment
involves minimizing some distance measure of the feature
distribution learned by the models [56, 17, 38]. More sophisticated methods use adversarial training [19] to fur-

Daniel Ulbricht

ther improve the quality of alignment between distributions
by adapting representations at feature-level [24, 18], pixellevel [36, 70, 5], or output-level [69] across domains.
A recent advance that moves beyond the direction of
plain distribution matching was presented by Saito et
al. in [57]. They propose a within-network adversarial
learning-based method containing a feature generator and
two (task-specific) classifiers, which uses the task-specific
decision boundary for aligning source and target samples.
Their method defines a new standard in developing generic
domain adaptation frameworks. However, the system does
have some limitations. For instance, their discrepancy loss
(L1 in this case) is only helpful when the two output probability measures from the classifiers overlap.
Inspired by the framework in [57], we focus our efforts on improving the discrepancy measure which plays
a central role in such within-network adversarial learningbased approach. Our method aims to minimize the cost of
moving the marginal distributions between the task-specific
classifiers by utilizing the Wasserstein metric [43, 27, 1],
which provides a more meaningful notion of dissimilarity
for probability distributions. We make several key contributions in this work: (1) a novel and principled method
for aligning feature distributions between domains via optimal transport theory (i.e.,Wasserstein distance) and the
task-specific decision boundary. (2) enable efficient end-toend training using sliced Wasserstein discrepancy (a variational formulation of Wasserstein metric). (3) effectively
harness the geometry of the underlying manifold created by
optimizing the sliced Wasserstein discrepancy in an adversarial manner. (4) the method advances the state-of-the-art
across several tasks and can be readily applied to any domain adaptation problem such as image classification, semantic segmentation, and object detection.

2. Related Work
A rich body of approaches to unsupervised domain adaptation aim to reduce the gap between the source and target domains by learning domain-invariant feature representations, through various statistical moment matching techniques. Some methods utilize maximum mean discrepancy
(MMD) [38, 39] to match the hidden representations of cer110285

