Multi-task Learning of Hierarchical Vision-Language Representation
Duy-Kien Nguyen1 and Takayuki Okatani1,2
1
Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University 2 RIKEN Center for AIP
{kien, okatani}@vision.is.tohoku.ac.jp

Abstract
It is still challenging to build an AI system that can perform tasks that involve vision and language at human level.
So far, researchers have singled out individual tasks separately, for each of which they have designed networks and
trained them on its dedicated datasets. Although this approach has seen a certain degree of success, it comes with
difficulties of understanding relations among different tasks
and transferring the knowledge learned for a task to others.
We propose a multi-task learning approach that enables to
learn vision-language representation that is shared by many
tasks from their diverse datasets. The representation is hierarchical, and prediction for each task is computed from the
representation at its corresponding level of the hierarchy.
We show through experiments that our method consistently
outperforms previous single-task-learning methods on image caption retrieval, visual question answering, and visual
grounding. We also analyze the learned hierarchical representation by visualizing attention maps generated in our
network.

1. Introduction
Since the recent successes of deep learning on single
modality tasks, multi-modal tasks lying on the intersection
of vision and language, such as image captioning [20, 38],
visual question answering (VQA) [13, 3], visual grounding
[29] etc., have attracted increasing attention in the related
fields. Despite the fact that each of these tasks has basically
been studied independently of others, there must be close
connections among them. For instance, each task may occupy a different level in a hierarchy of sub-tasks comprising the cognitive function associated with vision and language. To gain deeper understanding of such hidden relations among these vision-language tasks, we think that
multi-task learning of these tasks will be a promising direction of research.
Although we have seen significant progresses in multitask learning of unimodal tasks of vision [17, 30] or language [24, 1, 33] so far, there has been only a lim-

ited amount of progress in multi-task learning of visionlanguage tasks. This may be attributable to the diversity of
these tasks. In addition to differences in inputs and outputs
of the tasks, their level of complexity differs, too. Even
though these tasks share some structures in common, it is
unclear how to learn them in the framework of multi-task
learning.
A solution to this difficulty is to create and use a dataset
designed for multi-task learning, where multiple objectives
are given to identical inputs. Indeed, recent studies follow
this approach, in which they have gained early successes by
joint training of different vision-language tasks using multiple objectives, such as answer and question generation for
VQA [18], and caption and scene graph generation for image captioning [19]. However, this approach cannot be employed when such dedicated datasets are not available. It
may be impossible to create such datasets for arbitrary combinations of vision-language tasks. To do this, we need to
limit the range of tasks, which makes it hard for the learned
results to generalize to other tasks or datasets.
In this paper, aiming to resolve these issues, we propose
a framework for joint learning of multiple vision-language
tasks. Our goal is to enable to learn vision-language representation that is shared by many tasks from their diverse
data sources. To make this possible, we employ Dense Coattention layers, which were developed for VQA and shown
to perform competitively with existing methods [27]. Using
a stack of Dense Co-attention layers, we can gradually update the visual and linguistic features at each layer, in which
their fine-grained interaction is considered at the level of individual image regions and words. We utilize this property
to learn hierarchical vision-language representation such
that each individual task takes the learned representation at
a different level of the hierarchy corresponding to its complexity. We design a network consisting of an encoder for
computing shared hierarchical representation and multiple
task-specific decoders for making prediction from the representation; see Fig. 1. This design enables multi-task learning from diverse data sources; to be rigorous, we train the
same network alternately on each task/dataset based on a
scheduling algorithm.

10492

