High-level Semantic Feature Detection:
A New Perspective for Pedestrian Detection

1

Wei Liu1,2∗, Shengcai Liao3†, Weiqiang Ren4 , Weidong Hu1 , Yinan Yu4
ATR, College of Electronic Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
CBSR & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing ,China
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
4
Horizon Robotics Inc., Beijing ,China
{liuwei16, wdhu}@nudt.edu.cn, scliao@ieee.org, {weiqiang.ren, yinan.yu}@hobot.cc

Abstract
Object detection generally requires sliding-window classifiers in tradition or anchor-based predictions in modern
deep learning approaches. However, either of these approaches requires tedious configurations in windows or anchors. In this paper, taking pedestrian detection as an example, we provide a new perspective where detecting objects is motivated as a high-level semantic feature detection task. Like edges, corners, blobs and other feature detectors, the proposed detector scans for feature points all
over the image, for which the convolution is naturally suited. However, unlike these traditional low-level features, the
proposed detector goes for a higher-level abstraction, that
is, we are looking for central points where there are pedestrians, and modern deep models are already capable of such
a high-level semantic abstraction. Besides, like blob detection, we also predict the scales of the pedestrian points,
which is also a straightforward convolution. Therefore, in
this paper, pedestrian detection is simplified as a straightforward center and scale prediction task through convolutions. This way, the proposed method enjoys an anchorfree setting. Though structurally simple, it presents competitive accuracy and good speed on challenging pedestrian
detection benchmarks, and hence leading to a new attractive pedestrian detector. Code and models will be available
at https://github.com/liuwei16/CSP.

1. Introduction
Feature detection is one of the most fundamental problems in computer vision. It is usually viewed as a low-level
technique, with typical tasks including edge detection (e.g.
∗ Wei Liu finished his part of work during his visit in CASIA.
† Shengcai Liao is the corresponding author. He was previously in CASIA.

Figure 1. The overall pipeline of the proposed CSP detector. The
final convolutions have two channels, one is a heatmap indicating the locations of the centers (red dots), and the other serves to
predict the scales (yellow dotted lines) for each detected center.

Canny [4], Sobel [41]), corner (or interest point) detection
(e.g. SUSAN [40], FAST [37]), and blob (or region of interest point) detection (e.g. LoG [25], DoG [31], MSER [33]).
Feature detection is of vital importance to a variety of computer vision tasks ranging from image representation, image
matching to 3D scene reconstruction, to name a few.
Generally speaking, a feature is defined as an ”interesting” part of an image, and so feature detection aims to compute abstractions of image information and make local decisions at every image point whether there is an image feature
of a given type at that point or not [1]. Regarding abstraction of image information, with the rapid development for
computer vision tasks, deep convolutional neural networks
(CNN) are believed to be of very good capability to learn
high-level image abstractions. Therefore, it has also been
applied for feature detection, and demonstrates attractive
successes even in low-level feature detections. For example,
there is a recent trend of using CNN to perform edge detection [39, 47, 2, 29], which has substantially advanced this
field. It shows that clean and continuous edges can be obtained by deep convolutions, which indicates that CNN has
a stronger capability to learn higher-level abstraction of natural images than traditional methods. This capability may
15187

