Deep Fitting Degree Scoring Network for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Lijie Liu1,2,3,4 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3,∗ , Chunjing Xu4 , Qi Tian4 , Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
4
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
liulj17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn,

{xuchunjing,tian.qi1}@huawei.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose to learn a deep fitting degree scoring network for monocular 3D object detection,
which aims to score fitting degree between proposals and
object conclusively. Different from most existing monocular
frameworks which use tight constraint to get 3D location,
our approach achieves high-precision localization through
measuring the visual fitting degree between the projected
3D proposals and the object. We first regress the dimension and orientation of the object using an anchor-based
method so that a suitable 3D proposal can be constructed.
We propose FQNet, which can infer the 3D IoU between
the 3D proposals and the object solely based on 2D cues.
Therefore, during the detection process, we sample a large
number of candidates in the 3D space and project these 3D
bounding boxes on 2D image individually. The best candidate can be picked out by simply exploring the spatial overlap between proposals and the object, in the form of the
output 3D IoU score of FQNet. Experiments on the KITTI
dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework.

1. Introduction
2D perception is far from the requirements for people’s
daily use as people live in a 3D world essentially. In many
applications such as autonomous driving [4, 7, 23, 2, 14]
and vision-based grasping [37, 31, 27], we usually need to
reason about the 3D spatial overlap between objects in order
to understand the realistic scene and take further action. 3D
object detection is one of the most important problems in
3D perception, which requires solving a 9 Degree of Freedom (DoF) problem including dimension, orientation, and
location. Although great progress has been made in stereo∗ Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Comparison between our proposed method and tightconstraint-based method. The upper part is the commonly used
approach by many existing methods, which neglects the spatial
relation between 3D projection and object, and is very sensitive to
the error brought by 2D detection. The lower part is our proposed
pipeline which reasons about the 3D spatial overlap between 3D
proposals and object so that it can get better detection result.

based [26, 9, 10], RGBD-based [30, 39, 21, 40, 35] and
point-cloud-based [41, 29, 16, 11, 28, 24, 1, 3, 47] 3D object detection methods, monocular-image-based approaches
have not been thoroughly studied yet, and most of existing
works focus on the sub-problem, such as orientation estimation [8, 43, 32]. The primary cause is that under monocular setting, the only cue is the appearance information in
the 2D image, and the real 3D information is not available, which makes the problem ill-conditioned. However, in
many cases, such as web images, mobile applications [15],
and gastroscopy, the information of depth or point-cloud is
not available or unaffordable. Moreover, in some extreme
scenarios, other sensors can be broken. Therefore, considering the rich source of monocular images and the robustness
requirements of the system, monocular 3D object detection
problem is of crucial importance.
In monocular 3D object detection problem, dimension
and orientation estimation are easier than location estima-

1057

