Deep Transfer Learning for Multiple Class Novelty Detection
Pramuditha Perera and Vishal M. Patel
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
pperera3@jhu.edu, vpatel36@rutgers.edu ∗

Abstract
We propose a transfer learning-based solution for the
problem of multiple class novelty detection. In particular,
we propose an end-to-end deep-learning based approach in
which we investigate how the knowledge contained in an
external, out-of-distribution dataset can be used to improve
the performance of a deep network for visual novelty detection. Our solution differs from the standard deep classification networks on two accounts. First, we use a novel
loss function, membership loss, in addition to the classical cross-entropy loss for training networks. Secondly, we
use the knowledge from the external dataset more effectively to learn globally negative filters, filters that respond
to generic objects outside the known class set. We show that
thresholding the maximal activation of the proposed network can be used to identify novel objects effectively. Extensive experiments on four publicly available novelty detection datasets show that the proposed method achieves
significant improvements over the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
In recent years, intelligent systems powered by artificial intelligence and computer vision that perform visual
recognition have gained much attention [8],[12],[1],[25].
These systems observe instances and labels of known object classes during training and learn association patterns
that can be used during inference. A practical visual recognition system should first determine whether an observed
instance is from a known class. If it is from a known class,
then the identity of the instance is queried through classification.
The former process is commonly known as novelty detection (or novel class detection) [14] in the literature.
Given a set of image instances from known classes, the
goal of novelty detection is to determine whether an observed image during inference belongs to one of the known
∗ This work was supported by the NSF grant 1801435.

Known Classes
(Dogs)

Novel
Known

Novel classes
(Dogs)

Out-ofdistributional
classes

Novelty
Detector

Out-of-distribution
samples

Figure 1. Novelty detection in dog-breed classification. Left:
Sample images. Right: Feature representation. Both known (first
row) and novel (second row) images are images of dogs. Given
known images, the goal of novelty detection is to reject novel images. In order to do so, the knowledge of out-of-distribution images (final row), in this case non-dog images, are used to learn a
suitable representation.

classes. Novelty detection is generally a more challenging
task than out-of-distribution detection [29], [9] since novel
object samples are expected to be from a similar distribution
to that of known samples.
In practice, the knowledge of unknown classes is not
entirely absent. Given a set of known classes from a certain problem domain, generally unknown class data from
the same problem domain is unavailable. However, in
some cases it is possible to obtain data outside the known
class from different problem domains, which we refer to as
out-of-distribution samples. For example, for a dog-breed
recognition application, ImageNet dataset [21] that contains
images of objects may be considered as out-of-distribution
data as shown as in Figure 1. However, since the out-ofdistribution data are from a different problem domain, they
do not approximate the distribution of the novel samples
well.
Nevertheless, since the deep-models produce generalizable features, the knowledge of out-of-distribution samples
can be transferred to the original problem to aid novelty detection. When the problem considered is a c class problem, and when the out-of-distribution data of C classes are
available, the following three strategies are used to transfer
knowledge for novelty detection in the literature:
111544

