Causes and Corrections for Bimodal Multi-path Scanning with Structured Light
Yu Zhang1 , Daniel L. Lau2 , Ying Yu2
1
Nanjing University
2
University of Kentucky
zhangyu606@gmail.com dllau@uky.edu ying.yu@uky.edu

Abstract
Structured light illumination is an active 3D scanning
technique based on projecting/capturing a set of striped
patterns and measuring the warping of the patterns as they
reflect off a target object’s surface. As designed, each pixel
in the camera sees exactly one pixel from the projector;
however, there are multi-path situations when the scanned
surface has a complicated geometry with step edges and
other discontinuities in depth or where the target surface
has specularities that reflect light away from the camera.
These situations are generally referred to multi-path where
a camera pixel sees light from multiple projector positions.
In the case of bimodal multi-path, the camera pixel receives light from exactly two positions which occurs along
a step edge where the edge slices through a pixel so that
the pixel sees both a foreground and background surface.
In this paper, we present a general mathematical model to
address the bimodal multi-path issue in a phase-measuringprofilometry scanner to measure the constructive and destructive interference between the two light paths, and by
taking advantage of this interesting cue, separate the paths
and make two decoupled phase measurements. We validate
our algorithm with a number of challenging real-world scenarios, outperforming the state-of-the-art method.

1. Introduction
Structured light illumination (SLI) refers to a method
of 3D scanning that uses a projector to project a series of
light striped patterns such that a camera can reconstruct
depth based on the warping of the pattern over the target
object’s surface [22, 11, 16, 14, 20, 13, 27, 26]. Example of SLI includes single pattern techniques which project
a static pattern that is continuously projected and from
which a 3D reconstruction can be made from a single snapshot [11, 2, 10, 8].
Multiple pattern SLI scanners, alternatively, project a series of patterns, trading temporal resolution for spatial resolution such that each pixel can be independently processed

from its neighbors to produce a single point for each pixel
in the camera. In Phase Measuring Profilometry (PMP), the
row coordinates of each pixel are encoded through phase
modulation [28, 20, 11, 3]. These PMP scanners are common for industrial metrology applications with resolutions
that can be below 10 microns.
As an active imaging technique, structured light is susceptible to errors and distortions caused by the redirection
of the projected light to form multiple paths from projector to camera besides the direct path of projector to target to
camera [29]. It is a common problem and one of great interest to researchers because of the potentially catastrophic effects on scans. The same problem can be found in a range of
3D imaging modalities such as time-of-flight (ToF) where
light will reflect off specular surfaces onto neighboring surface points before reflecting back to the camera.
Examples of how to deal with multi-path issues in ToF
include Dorrington et al. [7] as well as Bhandari et al. [1]
and Godbaz et al. [12] who take the common approach of
making multiple depth measurements over many different
modulation frequencies such that they derive a set of equations from which to fit the phase and magnitude of a multitude of possible component paths. Freedman et al. [9] assume sparsity in reflection and assume the problem is restricted to a small number of multi-path components, which
restrict further extension to other scenarios.
Naik et al. [23] take the approach of deriving a light
transport model [24] to combine the standard measurements
from a ToF camera with information from direct and global
light transport. By doing so, they separate the phase associated with the direct light path, placing all subsequent
paths into a single indirect light component. O’Toole et
al. [26, 25] employ the epipolar geometry constraint and
re-design the optical system to separate the direct and indirect light paths. They modify the optical system and block
the global component during the data capture procedure.
Gupta et al. [15] study temporal illumination and report that
global light transport vanishes at high frequencies. They
propose a ToF based shape recovery technique and a method
to separate direct and global light. Kadambi et al. [17] use

4431

