Towards Optimal Structured CNN Pruning via Generative Adversarial Learning
Shaohui Lin1 , Rongrong Ji1,2∗, Chenqian Yan1 , Baochang Zhang3 ,
Liujuan Cao1 , Qixiang Ye2,4 , Feiyue Huang5 , David Doermann6
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, School of Information Science
and Engineering, Xiamen University, China, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
Beihang University, China, 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
5
BestImage, Tencent Technology (Shanghai) Co.,Ltd, China, 6 University at Buffalo, USA
{Shaohuilin007, cherrycherryan}@gmail.com, {rrji, caoliujuan}@xmu.edu.cn
bczhang@buaa.edu.cn, qxye@ucas.ac.cn, garyhuang@tencent.com, doermann@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Structured pruning of filters or neurons has received increased focus for compressing convolutional neural networks. Most existing methods rely on multi-stage optimizations in a layer-wise manner for iteratively pruning and retraining which may not be optimal and may be computation
intensive. Besides, these methods are designed for pruning
a specific structure, such as filter or block structures without jointly pruning heterogeneous structures. In this paper,
we propose an effective structured pruning approach that
jointly prunes filters as well as other structures in an endto-end manner. To accomplish this, we first introduce a soft
mask to scale the output of these structures by defining a
new objective function with sparsity regularization to align
the output of baseline and network with this mask. We then
effectively solve the optimization problem by generative adversarial learning (GAL), which learns a sparse soft mask
in a label-free and an end-to-end manner. By forcing more
scaling factors in the soft mask to zero, the fast iterative
shrinkage-thresholding algorithm (FISTA) can be leveraged
to fast and reliably remove the corresponding structures.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of GAL
on different datasets, including MNIST, CIFAR-10 and ImageNet ILSVRC 2012. For example, on ImageNet ILSVRC
2012, the pruned ResNet-50 achieves 10.88% Top-5 error
and results in a factor of 3.7× speedup. This significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved
state-of-the-art accuracy in computer vision tasks such as
image recognition [26, 47, 48, 13, 20] and object detection
∗ Corresponding author.

[5, 4, 44]. However, the success of CNNs is often accompanied by significant computation and memory consumption
that restricts their usage on resource-limited devices, such
as mobile or embedded devices. To address these issues,
techniques have been proposed for CNN compression such
as low-rank decomposition [3, 58, 33, 32], parameter quantization [42, 23, 59], knowledge distillation [17, 45] and network pruning [10, 31, 35, 60, 21, 15, 34]. Network pruning
has received a great deal of research focus demonstrating
significant compression and acceleration of CNNs.
Network pruning can be categorized into either nonstructured or structured. Non-structured pruning or finegrained pruning [11, 10, 30, 12], directly pruning weights
independently in each layer to achieve higher sparsity for
the remaining parameters. However, it generally causes irregular memory access that adversely impacts the efficiency
of online inference. Under such a circumstance, specialized
hardware [9] or software [40] accelerators are required to
further speedup the sparse CNNs. Structured or coarsegrained pruning [31, 49, 21, 37, 16, 36] aims to remove
structured weights, including 2D kernels, filters or layers,
and does not require specialized hardware/software packages to be efficiently implemented. However, there exists
several open issues in the existing structured pruning. (1)
Efficiency: The existing approaches typically adopt iterative pruning and retraining with multi-stage optimizations
in a layer-wise manner. For instance, Luo et al. [37] and He
et al. [16] proposed to prune filters and the corresponding
feature maps by considering statistics computed from the
next layer in a greedy layer-wise manner. Magnitude-based
pruning methods employ the ℓ1 -norm of filter [31] or the
sparsity of feature map [19] to determine the importance
of the filter. They then iteratively prune the “least important” filters and retrain the pruned network layer-by-layer.
(2) Slackness: Existing approaches lack slackness in hard
12790

