Attending to Discriminative Certainty for Domain Adaptation
Vinod Kumar Kurmi∗, Shanu Kumar∗, Vinay P. Namboodiri
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
India
{vinodkk,sshanu,vinaypn}@iitk.ac.in

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to solve for unsupervised domain
adaptation of classifiers where we have access to label information for the source domain while these are not available for a target domain. While various methods have been
proposed for solving these including adversarial discriminator based methods, most approaches have focused on the
entire image based domain adaptation. In an image, there
would be regions that can be adapted better, for instance,
the foreground object may be similar in nature. To obtain
such regions, we propose methods that consider the probabilistic certainty estimate of various regions and specify
focus on these during classification for adaptation. We observe that just by incorporating the probabilistic certainty
of the discriminator while training the classifier, we are able
to obtain state of the art results on various datasets as compared against all the recent methods. We provide a thorough empirical analysis of the method by providing ablation analysis, statistical significance test, and visualization
of the attention maps and t-SNE embeddings. These evaluations convincingly demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
With the advent of deep learning, there has been substantial progress for solving image classification tasks with state
of the art methods obtaining lesser than 3% error (on top five
results) on the imagenet dataset. However, it was observed
that these results do not transfer to other datasets [25] due
to the effect of dataset bias [44]. The classifiers trained on
one dataset (termed source dataset) show a significant drop
in accuracy when tested on another dataset (termed target
dataset). To address this issue, some methods have been
proposed for adapting domains [7, 50]. One of the more
successful approaches towards addressing this domain shift
has been based on the adversarial adaptation of features us∗ Equal contributions from both authors.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1: Visualization of the uncertainty and certainty
maps of the discriminator during the midst of training is
provided for the input image (a). The aleatoric and predictive uncertain regions of the discriminator are shown in
image (b) and (d). While aleatoric and predictive certain
regions of the discriminator are shown in (c) and (e). From
the figure, it is clear that the certain regions of the discriminator during training mostly corresponds to (f) classifier’s
activation map based on true label at the end of training.
ing an adversarial discriminator [12] that aims to distinguish
between samples drawn from the source and target datasets.
Due to the adversarial training, the feature representations
are brought close such that the discriminator is not able to
distinguish between samples from source and target dataset.
However, all approaches that are based on this idea consider
the whole image as being adapted. This usually is not the
case as there are predominant regions in an image that may
be better adapted and useful for improving classification on
target dataset. We address this issue and propose a simple
approach for solving this problem.
To specify regions that can be adapted we propose the
use of certainty of a probabilistic discriminator. During
training, we identify regions where the discriminator is certain, i.e., the probabilistic uncertainty for these regions is
1491

