Domain Generalization by Solving Jigsaw Puzzles
Fabio M. Carlucci1∗
Antonio D’Innocente2,3
Silvia Bucci3
Barbara Caputo3,4
Tatiana Tommasi4
1

2
Huawei, London
University of Rome Sapienza, Italy
3
4
Italian Institute of Technology
Politecnico di Torino, Italy

fabio.maria.carlucci@huawei.com

{antonio.dinnocente, silvia.bucci}@iit.it

{barbara.caputo, tatiana.tommasi}@polito.it

Abstract
What is
this object?

Human adaptability relies crucially on the ability to
learn and merge knowledge both from supervised and unsupervised learning: the parents point out few important
concepts, but then the children fill in the gaps on their own.
This is particularly effective, because supervised learning
can never be exhaustive and thus learning autonomously
allows to discover invariances and regularities that help
to generalize. In this paper we propose to apply a similar
approach to the task of object recognition across domains:
our model learns the semantic labels in a supervised fashion, and broadens its understanding of the data by learning
from self-supervised signals how to solve a jigsaw puzzle on
the same images. This secondary task helps the network to
learn the concepts of spatial correlation while acting as a
regularizer for the classification task. Multiple experiments
on the PACS, VLCS, Office-Home and digits datasets confirm our intuition and show that this simple method outperforms previous domain generalization and adaptation solutions. An ablation study further illustrates the inner workings of our approach.

1. Introduction
In the current gold rush towards artificial intelligent systems it is becoming more and more evident that there is
little intelligence without the ability to transfer knowledge
and generalize across tasks, domains and categories [11].
A large portion of computer vision research is dedicated
to supervised methods that show remarkable results with
convolutional neural networks in well defined settings, but
still struggle when attempting these types of generalizations. Focusing on the ability to generalize across domains,
∗ This work was done while at University of Rome Sapienza, Italy

...

And this
one?
horse!

Can you
recompose
these
images?

...

And
these
ones?

Figure 1. Recognizing objects across visual domains is a challenging task that requires high generalization abilities. Other tasks,
based on intrinsic self-supervisory image signals, allow to capture
natural invariances and regularities that can help to bridge across
large style gaps. With JiGen we learn jointly to classify objects and
solve jigsaw puzzles, showing that this supports generalization to
new domains.

the community has attacked this issue so far mainly by supervised learning processes that search for semantic spaces
able to capture basic data knowledge regardless of the specific appearance of input images. Existing methods range
from decoupling image style from the shared object content [3], to pulling data of different domains together and
imposing adversarial conditions [27, 28], up to generating
new samples to better cover the space spanned by any future
target [39, 46]. With the analogous aim of getting general
purpose feature embeddings, an alternative research direction has been recently pursued in the area of unsupervised
learning. The main techniques are based on the definition of
tasks useful to learn visual invariances and regularities captured by spatial co-location of patches [35, 10, 37], counting
primitives [36], image coloring [49], video frame ordering
[32, 47] and other self-supervised signals.
Since unlabeled data are largely available and by their
very nature are less prone to bias (no labeling bias issue

2229

