Direct Object Recognition Without Line-of-Sight Using Optical Coherence
Xin Lei1∗ Liangyu He1∗ Yixuan Tan1∗ Ken Xingze Wang1† Xinggang Wang2 Yihan Du2
Shanhui Fan3 Zongfu Yu4
1
Coherent AI LLC
2
Institute of AI, School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Ginzton Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison
†

ken@coherent.ai

Abstract
Visual object recognition under situations in which the
direct line-of-sight is blocked, such as when it is occluded
around the corner, is of practical importance in a wide
range of applications. With coherent illumination, the light
scattered from diffusive walls forms speckle patterns that
contain information of the hidden object. It is possible
to realize non-line-of-sight (NLOS) recognition with these
speckle patterns. We introduce a novel approach based
on speckle pattern recognition with deep neural network,
which is simpler and more robust than other NLOS recognition methods. Simulations and experiments are performed
to verify the feasibility and performance of this approach.

1. Introduction
Object recognition is essential for various applications
such as face recognition, industrial inspection, medical
imaging, and autonomous driving. One intriguing area of
research is the recognition of objects without direct line-ofsight [1, 3, 4, 13, 17, 19, 20, 27, 28, 39]. The ability to
carry out recognition without line-of-sight has practical significance; for example, in autonomous driving, if the imaging system can recognize pedestrians and vehicles that are
“hidden” around the corner or behind other obstacles, the
vehicle can prevent potential hazards and greatly increase
the safety level of driving.
In this paper, we report an approach to perform recognition without direct line-of-sight by exploiting the coherent light. Objects illuminated by coherent light sources
such as lasers form speckle patterns due to interference.
In a non-line-of-sight situation, for example, as shown
in Figure 1, the object itself is occluded from the cam∗ Equal contribution † Corresponding author

Figure 1. Object recognition without direct line-of-sight. Coherent
light source such as laser is used to illuminate the hidden object,
which is a car in this example. Light scattered by the object forms
speckle patterns on the wall which is captured by the camera for
recognition.

era; however, the speckle patterns on the wall are a result of the interference of light scattered owing to the object [2, 15, 18, 23, 29, 32, 35, 36, 38, 41]. The information in these patterns is not obvious to a human, but with an
appropriate deep network, one can retrieve the information
necessary to identify the object. Compared to current computer vision algorithms that are primarily based on direct
visual images, this approach is applicable to a wide range
of situations in which visual images of the objects cannot
be obtained.
Our primary contribution is a novel NLOS object recognition method that uses the information contained in speckle
patterns under coherent illumination. We use this method to
realize direct recognition of object without line-of-sight by
employing inexpensive electronic devices. In addition to the

11737

