3D Local Features for Direct Pairwise Registration
Haowen Deng ✝, *, ✣
✝

Tolga Birdal ✝, *

Slobodan Ilic ✝, *

Technische Universität München, Germany, * Siemens AG, München, Germany
✣
National University of Defense Technology, China

Abstract
We present a novel, data driven approach for solving
the problem of registration of two point cloud scans. Our
approach is direct in the sense that a single pair of corresponding local patches already provides the necessary
transformation cue for the global registration. To achieve
that, we first endow the state of the art PPF-FoldNet [18]
auto-encoder (AE) with a pose-variant sibling, where the
discrepancy between the two leads to pose-specific descriptors. Based upon this, we introduce RelativeNet, a relative
pose estimation network to assign correspondence-specific
orientations to the keypoints, eliminating any local reference frame computations. Finally, we devise a simple yet effective hypothesize-and-verify algorithm to quickly use the
predictions and align two point sets. Our extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments suggests that our approach outperforms the state of the art in challenging real
datasets of pairwise registration and that augmenting the
keypoints with local pose information leads to better generalization and a dramatic speed-up.

1. Introduction
Learning and matching local features have fueled computer vision for many years. Scholars have first handcrafted their descriptors [36] and with the advances in deep
learning, devised data driven methods that are more reliable, robust and practical [34, 52]. These developments in
the image domain have quickly escalated to 3D where 3D
descriptors [44, 53, 19] have been developed.
Having 3D local features at hand is usually seen as an
intermediate step towards solving more challenging 3D vision problems. One of the most prominent of such problems
is 3D pose estimation, where the six degree-of-freedom
(6DoF) rigid transformations relating 3D data pairs are
sought. This problem is also known as pairwise 3D registration. While the quality of the intermediary descriptors
is undoubtedly an important aspect towards good registra-

𝐓𝟏

𝐓𝟐
𝐓𝟑
𝐓𝟒
𝐓𝟓

{𝐓𝟏 , 𝐓𝟐 , 𝐓𝟑 , 𝐓𝟒 , 𝐓𝟓 }

Verify
Hypotheses

෩
𝐓

Transform

Figure 1. Our method provides not only powerful features for establishing correspondences, but also directly predicts a rigid transformation attached to each correspondence. Final estimation of
the rigid pose between fragment pairs can then be made efficiently
by operating on the pool of pose predictions.

tion performance [25], directly solving the final problem
at hand is certainly more critical. Unfortunately, contrary
to 2D descriptors, the current deeply learned 3D descriptors [53, 19, 18] are still not tailored for the task we consider, i.e. they lack any kind of local orientation assignment
and hence, any subsequent pose estimator is coerced to settle for nearest neighbor queries and exhaustive RANSAC
iterations to robustly compute the aligning transformation.
This is neither reliable nor computationally efficient.
In this paper, we argue that descriptors that are good
for pairwise registration should also provide cues for direct
computation of local rotations and propose a novel, robust
and end-to-end algorithm for local feature based 3D registration of two point clouds (See Fig. 1). We begin by augmenting the state-of-the-art unsupervised, 6DoF-invariant
local descriptor PPF-FoldNet [18] with a deeply learned orientation. Via our pose-variant orientation learning, we can
decouple the 3D structure from 6DoF motion. This can result in features solely explaining the pose variability up to
13244

