Attention-aware Multi-stroke Style Transfer
Yuan Yao1 , Jianqiang Ren2 , Xuansong Xie2 , Weidong Liu1 , Yong-Jin Liu1 , Jun Wang3
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Alibaba Group, 3 University College London

Abstract
Neural style transfer has drawn considerable attention
from both academic and industrial field. Although visual
effect and efficiency have been significantly improved, existing methods are unable to coordinate spatial distribution
of visual attention between the content image and stylized
image, or render diverse level of detail via different brush
strokes. In this paper, we tackle these limitations by developing an attention-aware multi-stroke style transfer model.
We first propose to assemble self-attention mechanism into a
style-agnostic reconstruction autoencoder framework, from
which the attention map of a content image can be derived.
By performing multi-scale style swap on content features
and style features, we produce multiple feature maps reflecting different stroke patterns. A flexible fusion strategy is
further presented to incorporate the salient characteristics
from the attention map, which allows integrating multiple
stroke patterns into different spatial regions of the output
image harmoniously. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method, as well as generate comparable stylized images with multiple stroke patterns against the state-of-theart methods.

1. Introduction
Style transfer is a powerful technique for art creation and
image editing that enables recomposing the images in the
style of other images. Recently, inspired by the power of
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) in visual perception
tasks, Gatys et al. [4, 5] opens up a new field named Neural
Style Transfer, which first introduces neural representations
to separate and recombine content and style of arbitrary images. They propose to extract the content features and style
correlations (Gram matrix) along the processing hierarchy
of a pretrained network classifier. Based on this work, several algorithms have been proposed to accelerate the development in terms of the generalization and efficiency issues,
through optimization-based methods [5, 14, 19] and feedforward networks [10, 12, 23]. The success of style transfer
makes it possible to deploy service upon mobile applications (e.g., Prisma, Artify), allowing users to create an art-

Content & Style

Style-Swap

AdaIN

WCT

Avatar-Net

StrokePyramid

Attention Map

Our Result

Figure 1. Existing methods are unable to coordinate spatial distribution of visual attention between content image and stylized
image, misleading the stylized rendering on diverse content regions in an indiscriminate way, resulting in insufficient stylization (Style-Swap), unexpected patterns (AdaIN, StrokePyramid)
or distorted attention regions (WCT, Avatar-Net). Due to attention mechanism and multi-stroke fusion strategy, our method can
achieve faithful transfer of style and attention consistency with
content image simultaneously.

work out of a picture they took with their phones.
In spite of significant progress already achieved, these
methods suffer from the restricted binding between the
model and specific styles. Recently, Arbitrary-Style-PerModel Fast Style Transfer Methods (ASPM) [9] are proposed to conquer this dilemma. One possible solution is to
coordinate high-level statistical distribution between content features and style features. Although visual quality and
efficiency can be greatly improved, they unexpectedly introduce unexpected or distorted patterns to the stylized result
because of treating diverse image regions in an indiscriminate way, such as AdaIN [7] and WCT [13] in Figure 1.
Another solution is to swap the content feature patch with
the closest style feature patch at the intermediate layer of
a trained autoencoder. However, this method may generate insufficient stylized results when huge difference exists between content and style images, such as the StyleSwap [2] method shown in Figure 1. Compared with StyleSwap, Avatar-Net [21] further dispels the domain gap between content and style features, leading to better stylized
results, but it still maintains inconsistent spatial distribution

1467

