Bottom-up Object Detection by Grouping Extreme and Center Points
Xingyi Zhou
UT Austin

Jiacheng Zhuo
UT Austin

Philipp Krähenbühl
UT Austin

zhouxy@cs.utexas.edu

jzhuo@cs.utexas.edu

philkr@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
With the advent of deep learning, object detection drifted
from a bottom-up to a top-down recognition problem. State
of the art algorithms enumerate a near-exhaustive list of
object locations and classify each into: object or not. In
this paper, we show that bottom-up approaches still perform
competitively. We detect four extreme points (top-most, leftmost, bottom-most, right-most) and one center point of objects using a standard keypoint estimation network. We
group the five keypoints into a bounding box if they are
geometrically aligned. Object detection is then a purely
appearance-based keypoint estimation problem, without region classification or implicit feature learning. The proposed method performs on-par with the state-of-the-art region based detection methods, with a bounding box AP of
43.7% on COCO test-dev. In addition, our estimated extreme points directly span a coarse octagonal mask, with a
COCO Mask AP of 18.9%, much better than the Mask AP
of vanilla bounding boxes. Extreme point guided segmentation further improves this to 34.6% Mask AP.

1. Introduction
Top-down approaches have dominated object detection
for years. Prevalent detectors convert object detection into
rectangular region classification, by either explicitly cropping the region [12] or region feature [11,41] (two-stage object detection) or implicitly setting fix-sized anchors for region proxies [25, 28, 38] (one-stage object detection). However, top-down detection is not without limits. A rectangular bounding box is not a natural object representation.
Most objects are not axis-aligned boxes, and fitting them
inside a box includes many distracting background pixels
(Figure. 1). In addition, top-down object detectors enumerate a large number of possible box locations without truly
understanding the compositional visual grammars [9, 13] of
objects themselves. This is computationally expensive. Finally, boxes are a bad proxy for the object themselves. They
convey little detailed object information, e.g., object shape
and pose.

Figure 1: We propose to detect objects by finding their extreme points. They directly form a bounding box , but also
give a much tighter octagonal approximation of the object.

In this paper, we propose ExtremeNet, a bottom-up object detection framework that detects four extreme points
(top-most, left-most, bottom-most, right-most) of an object. We use a state-of-the-art keypoint estimation framework [3, 5, 30, 31, 49] to find extreme points, by predicting
four multi-peak heatmaps for each object category. In addition, we use one heatmap per category predicting the object center, as the average of two bounding box edges in
both the x and y dimension. We group extreme points into
objects with a purely geometry-based approach. We group
four extreme points, one from each map, if and only if their
geometric center is predicted in the center heatmap with a
score higher than a pre-defined threshold. We enumerate all
O(n4 ) combinations of extreme point prediction, and select
the valid ones. The number of extreme point prediction n
is usually quite small, for COCO [26] n  40, and a brute
force algorithm implemented on GPU is sufficient. Figure 2
shows an overview of the proposed method.
We are not the first to use deep keypoint prediction
for object detection. CornerNet [22] predicts two opposing corners of a bounding box. They group corner points
into bounding boxes using an associative embedding feature [30]. Our approach differs in two key aspects: key1850

