Double Nuclear Norm based Low Rank Representation on Grassmann
Manifolds for Clustering

∗

Xinglin Piao1 , Yongli Hu2, , Junbin Gao3 , Yanfeng Sun2 and Baocai Yin1,2,4
1

Faculty of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2

Beijing Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Intelligent Software Technology,

Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing University of Technology, China
3

Discipline of Business Analytics, The University of Sydney Business School,
The University of Sydney, Camperdown NSW 2006, Australia
4

Peng Cheng Laboratory, China

piaoxinglin@dlut.edu.cn; huyongli@bjut.edu.cn; junbin.gao@sydney.edu.au;
yfsun@bjut.edu.cn; ybc@bjut.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised clustering for high-dimension data (such
as imageset or video) is a hard issue in data processing and
data mining area since these data always lie on a manifold
(such as Grassmann manifold). Inspired of Low Rank representation theory, researchers proposed a series of effective
clustering methods for high-dimension data with non-linear
metric. However, most of these methods adopt the traditional single nuclear norm as the relaxation of the rank function, which would lead to suboptimal solution deviated from
the original one. In this paper, we propose a new low rank
model for high-dimension data clustering task on Grassmann manifold based on the Double Nuclear norm which
is used to better approximate the rank minimization of matrix. Further, to consider the inner geometry or structure of
data space, we integrated the adaptive Laplacian regularization to construct the local relationship of data samples.
The proposed models have been assessed on several public
datasets for imageset clustering. The experimental results
show that the proposed models outperform the state-of-theart clustering ones.

1. Introduction
As an active topic in data processing and data mining,
data clustering has attracted great interests [2, 13]. A large
number of clustering methods [10, 20] have been proposed
∗ Corresponding author: Yongli Hu (huyongli@bjut.edu.cn)

and successfully used in many applications [41, 17]. In
all the clustering methods, the spectral clustering methods
[41, 16] based on subspace assumption are considered stateof-the-art methods with promising performance. It is generally assumed that data have intrinsic subspace structures
[32] or the data are generated from multiple subspaces.
Thus, the datum in a subspace could be linearly represented by a smaller number of other data samples from the
same subspace. The key problem of these methods is to obtain a good affinity matrix which usually describes the data
similarity determined by the underlying subspace structure.
To this end, various subspace clustering methods are proposed. The most representative methods are Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC) [7] and Low-Rank Representation
(LRR) [16], which use sparse and low rank constraints to
construct affinity matrix, respectively. Later, researchers utilize the local geometry or structure of the raw data as regularizers such as the Laplacian regularizer, and propose the
Non-negative Sparse Laplacian regularized Low Rank Representation (NSLLRR) [40]. From the representation matrix, clustering results can be obtained by using a spectral
clustering algorithm such as Normalized Cuts (NCut)[28].
In the aforementioned methods, the data is usually formulated as vectors with Euclidean distance. However, one
often faces high dimensional data following nonlinear constraints, especially for imagesets and videos data [39, 34].
Since these high-dimension data are always lie on nonlinear manifold space, the traditional linear methods are no
longer valid. For example, an imageset or a video is actually modeled as a data sample on Grassmann manifold. Thus,

12075

