Complete the Look: Scene-based Complementary Product Recommendation
Wang-Cheng Kang†∗, Eric Kim‡ , Jure Leskovec‡§ , Charles Rosenberg‡ , Julian McAuley†
‡
Pinterest, § Stanford University, † UC San Diego
{wckang,jmcauley}@ucsd.edu, {erickim,jure,crosenberg}@pinterest.com

Abstract
Modeling fashion compatibility is challenging due to its
complexity and subjectivity. Existing work focuses on predicting compatibility between product images (e.g. an image
containing a t-shirt and an image containing a pair of jeans).
However, these approaches ignore real-world ‘scene’ images (e.g. selfies); such images are hard to deal with due
to their complexity, clutter, variations in lighting and pose
(etc.) but on the other hand could potentially provide key context (e.g. the user’s body type, or the season) for making more
accurate recommendations. In this work, we propose a new
task called ‘Complete the Look’, which seeks to recommend
visually compatible products based on scene images. We
design an approach to extract training data for this task, and
propose a novel way to learn the scene-product compatibility
from fashion or interior design images. Our approach measures compatibility both globally and locally via CNNs and
attention mechanisms. Extensive experiments show that our
method achieves significant performance gains over alternative systems. Human evaluation and qualitative analysis are
also conducted to further understand model behavior. We
hope this work could lead to useful applications which link
large corpora of real-world scenes with shoppable products.

1. Introduction
Visual signals are a key feature for fashion analysis. Recent advances in deep learning have been adopted by both
academia [17, 26, 43] and industry [15, 51, 52, 55] to realize
various fashion-related applications, ranging from clothing
recognition to fashion retrieval. Fashion images can be categorized into scene images (fashion images in the wild)
and product images (fashion item images from shopping
websites, usually containing a single product on a plain background). Generally speaking, the former (e.g. selfies, street
photos) predominate on image sharing applications, whereas
the latter are more common on online shopping websites.
We seek to bridge the gap between these two types of
images, via a new task called Complete the Look (CTL), in
∗ Work done while intern at Pinterest.

Product-based Complementary Recommendation

Complete the Look
Scene-based Complementary Recommendation

Figure 1: A comparison of the use cases of product-based
and scene-based complementary product recommendation.
Our approach (bottom) seeks to recommend compatible fashion items based on a real-world scene, while product-based
approaches (top) consider compatibility between products.

which we seek to recommend fashion products from various
categories that complement (or ‘go well with’) the given
scene (Figure 1). Compared to existing approaches, this
setting corresponds more closely to real-world use-cases in
which users might seek recommendations of complementary
items, based on images they upload ‘in the wild.’
Fashion compatibility has been studied previously [40,
11], though existing approaches mainly consider only product images (Figure 1). In comparison, our scene-based CTL
task has three significant features: 1) scene images contain
not only the fashion items worn by the subject (or user), but
also rich context like their body type, the season, etc. By
exploiting this side-information, we can potentially provide
more accurate and customized recommendations; 2) our system can be adopted by users to give fashion advice (e.g. shoes
that go well with your outfit) simply by uploading (e.g.) a
selfie; 3) our system can be readily adapted to existing platforms to recommend products appearing in fashion images.
Learning scene-product compatibility is at the core of
the CTL task. However, constructing appropriate groundtruth data to learn the notion of compatibility is a signif-

10532

