Interpretable and Fine-Grained Visual Explanations for
Convolutional Neural Networks
Jörg Wagner1,2

Jan Mathias Köhler1
Tobias Gindele1,∗
Leon Hetzel1,∗
Jakob Thaddäus Wiedemer1,∗
Sven Behnke2
1
2
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI), Germany
University of Bonn, Germany
Joerg.Wagner3@de.bosch.com; behnke@cs.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
To verify and validate networks, it is essential to gain
insight into their decisions, limitations as well as possible
shortcomings of training data. In this work, we propose
a post-hoc, optimization based visual explanation method,
which highlights the evidence in the input image for a specific prediction. Our approach is based on a novel technique
to defend against adversarial evidence (i.e. faulty evidence
due to artefacts) by filtering gradients during optimization.
The defense does not depend on human-tuned parameters.
It enables explanations which are both fine-grained and
preserve the characteristics of images, such as edges and
colors. The explanations are interpretable, suited for visualizing detailed evidence and can be tested as they are valid
model inputs. We qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate
our approach on a multitude of models and datasets.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have proven
to produce state-of-the-art results on a multitude of vision benchmarks, such as ImageNet [34], Caltech [12] or
Cityscapes [9] which led to CNNs being used in numerous
real-world systems (e.g. autonomous vehicles) and services
(e.g. translation services). Though, the use of CNNs in
safety-critical domains presents engineers with challenges
resulting from their black-box character. A better understanding of the inner workings of a model provides hints for
improving it, understanding failure cases and it may reveal
shortcomings of the training data. Additionally, users generally trust a model more when they understand its decision
process and are able to anticipate or verify outputs [30].
To overcome the interpretation and transparency disadvantage of black-box models, post-hoc explanation meth∗ contributed while working at BCAI. We additionally thank Volker
Fischer, Michael Herman, Anna Khoreva for discussions and feedback.

Figure 1: Fine-grained explanations computed by removing irrelevant pixels. a) Input image with softmax score
p(cml ) of the most-likely class. Our method tries to find
a sparse mask (c) with irrelevant pixels set to zero. The resulting explanation (b), i.e.: ’image × mask’, is optimized
in the image space and, thus, can directly be used as model
input. The parameter λ is optimized to produce an explanation with a softmax score comparable to the image.
ods have been introduced [53, 35, 42, 49, 32, 17, 11]. These
methods provide explanations for individual predictions and
thus help to understand on which evidence a model bases its
decisions. The most common form of explanations are visual, image-like representations, which depict the important
pixels or image regions in a human interpretable manner.
In general, an explanation should be easily interpretable
(Sec. 4.1). Additionally, a visual explanation should be
class discriminative and fine-grained [35] (Sec. 4.2). The
latter property is particularly important for classification
tasks in the medical [20, 18] domain, where fine structures
(e.g. capillary hemorrhages) have a major influence on the
classification result (Sec. 5.2). Besides, the importance of
different color channels should be captured, e.g. to uncover

9097

