Inverse Procedural Modeling of Knitwear
Elena Trunz, Sebastian Merzbach, Jonathan Klein, Thomas Schulze
Michael Weinmann, Reinhard Klein
Institute of Computer Science II, University of Bonn, Germany
{trunz,merzbach,kleinj,mw,rk}@cs.uni-bonn.de, s6tsschu@uni-bonn.de

Abstract
The analysis and modeling of cloth has received a lot
of attention in recent years. While recent approaches are
focused on woven cloth, we present a novel practical approach for the inference of more complex knitwear structures as well as the respective knitting instructions from only
a single image without attached annotations. Knitwear is
produced by repeating instances of the same pattern, consisting of grid-like arrangements of a small set of basic
stitch types. Our framework addresses the identification
and localization of the occurring stitch types, which is challenging due to huge appearance variations. The resulting
coarsely localized stitch types are used to infer the underlying grid structure as well as for the extraction of the knitting instruction of pattern repeats, taking into account principles of Gestalt theory. Finally, the derived instructions
allow the reproduction of the knitting structures, either as
renderings or by actual knitting, as demonstrated in several
examples.

1. Introduction
Fabrics are an essential matter in our daily life. In contrast to their woven counterparts, knitted clothing visually
sticks out due to complicated underlying stitch structures
formed by various knitting operations, each inducing a characteristic appearance. Furthermore, knitting clothing of various types still belongs to a handcraft mastered by a rather
large group of our society covering all ages. One reason for
this may be the interest in manufacturing one’s own clothing
with knitting patterns following the individual subjective
preferences. While there are books and websites that provide a wide range of patterns together with their respective
construction instructions, it would be desirable to be able to
reproduce patterns from images provided e.g. by standard
search engines such as Google, which lack the corresponding knitting instruction.
Unfortunately, inferring the underlying knitting patterns
by only ”reading” a single image is particularly challenging,

even for experts. The visual appearance of stitches exhibits
a large variety as neighboring stitches may occlude them or
cast shadows. The variability in the appearance of the basic stitch types is further increased by the properties of the
used yarns, such as their thickness, type of yarns, etc., or
the individual knitting styles of different people leading to
various deformations, such as stretchings, holes and tight
or loose stitches. Therefore, even experts often prefer analyzing the respective physical clothing pieces by stretching
it and performing the inspection from both sides, in order
to reliably infer the knitting instructions, including otherwise covered stitches. These manipulations are not possible
when analyzing knitted fabrics in single photos.
Inverse procedural modeling of objects from only a few
or even single examples has received a lot of attention in
the last decade. Corresponding applications encompass the
derivation of production rules for plants, woven fabrics,
buildings and facades. However, the developed approaches
are custom tailored for the corresponding applications and
cannot be easily transformed to infer knitting patterns.
In this paper, we direct our attention to the inference
of the complicated structures of knitwear and the derivation of the respective knitting instructions, to the best of our
knowledge, for the first time from only a single image without annotations. This implies solving the labeling problem,
i.e. the identification of the occurring stitch types as well as
their proper localization from the visually complex appearance depicted in the input photographs. For this purpose, we
introduce a novel pipeline that involves four major components represented by (1) the search for the individual stitch
types across the image, (2) the inference of the underlying
grid structure from the coarsely localized stitches from the
previous step, (3) an error correction and pattern size detection step that determines the size of the desired pattern and
corrects the labeling errors from the first step, and, finally,
(4) the derivation of the final knitting instruction (in analogy to instructions in knitting books), based on the found
pattern size and corrected underlying grid structure, taking
into account the intuition of human perception by applying
the Law of Symmetry and the Law of Prägnanz [5]. These

8630

