Learning Individual Styles of Conversational Gesture
Shiry Ginosar∗
UC Berkeley

Amir Bar∗
Zebra Medical Vision

Gefen Kohavi
UC Berkeley

Andrew Owens
UC Berkeley

Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley

Caroline Chan
MIT

Figure 1: Speech-to-gesture translation example. In this paper, we study the connection between conversational gesture and speech.
Here, we show the result of our model that predicts gesture from audio. From the bottom upward: the input audio, arm and hand pose
predicted by our model, and video frames synthesized from pose predictions using [10]. (See http://people.eecs.berkeley.
edu/˜shiry/gestures.html for video results.)

Abstract
Human speech is often accompanied by hand and arm
gestures. We present a method for cross-modal translation
from “in-the-wild” monologue speech of a single speaker
to their conversational gesture motion. We train on unlabeled videos for which we only have noisy pseudo ground
truth from an automatic pose detection system. Our proposed model significantly outperforms baseline methods in
a quantitative comparison. To support research toward
obtaining a computational understanding of the relationship between gesture and speech, we release a large video
dataset of person-specific gestures.

1. Introduction
When we talk, we convey ideas via two parallel channels
of communication — speech and gesture. These conversational, or co-speech, gestures are the hand and arm motions
we spontaneously emit when we speak [30]. They complement speech and add non-verbal information that help our
∗ Indicates equal contribution.

listeners comprehend what we say [6]. Kendon [22] places
conversational gestures at one end of a continuum, with sign
language, a true language, at the other end. In between the
two extremes are pantomime and emblems like “Italianite”,
with an agreed-upon vocabulary and culture-specific meanings. A gesture can be subdivided into phases describing
its progression from the speaker’s rest position, through the
gesture preparation, stroke, hold and retraction back to rest.
Is the information conveyed in speech and gesture correlated? This is a topic of ongoing debate. The hand-in-hand
hypothesis claims that gesture is redundant to speech when
speakers refer to subjects and objects in scenes [38]. In
contrast, according to the trade-off hypothesis, speech and
gesture are complementary since people use gesture when
speaking would require more effort and vice versa [15]. We
approach the question from a data-driven learning perspective and ask to what extent can we predict gesture motion
from the raw audio signal of speech.
We present a method for temporal cross-modal translation. Given an input audio clip of a spoken statement (Figure 1 bottom), we generate a corresponding motion of the
speaker’s arms and hands which matches the style of the
13497

