Reasoning Visual Dialogs with Structural and Partial Observations
Zilong Zheng∗ 1 , Wenguan Wang∗ 2,1 , Siyuan Qi∗ 1,3 , Song-Chun Zhu 1,3
1

University of California, Los Angeles, USA
3

2

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

International Center for AI and Robot Autonomy (CARA)

zilongzheng0318@ucla.edu, wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com, syqi@cs.ucla.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu
https://github.com/zilongzheng/visdial-gnn

Abstract
We propose a novel model to address the task of Visual
Dialog which exhibits complex dialog structures. To obtain
a reasonable answer based on the current question and the
dialog history, the underlying semantic dependencies between dialog entities are essential. In this paper, we explicitly formalize this task as inference in a graphical model
with partially observed nodes and unknown graph structures (relations in dialog). The given dialog entities are
viewed as the observed nodes. The answer to a given question is represented by a node with missing value. We first
introduce an Expectation Maximization algorithm to infer
both the underlying dialog structures and the missing node
values (desired answers). Based on this, we proceed to propose a differentiable graph neural network (GNN) solution
that approximates this process. Experiment results on the
VisDial and VisDial-Q datasets show that our model outperforms comparative methods. It is also observed that our
method can infer the underlying dialog structure for better
dialog reasoning.

1. Introduction
Visual Dialog has drawn increasing research interests at
the intersection of computer vision and natural language
processing. In such tasks, an image is given as context
input, associated with a summarizing caption and a dialog history of question-answer pairs. The goal is to answer questions posed in natural language about images [9],
or recover a follow-up question based on the dialog history [22]. Despite its significance to artificial intelligence
and human-computer interaction, it poses a richer set of
challenges (see an example in Fig. 1) – requiring representing/understanding a series of multi-modal entities , and reasoning the rich semantic relations/structures among them.
An ideal inference algorithm should be able to find out the
∗ Equal contribution.

Figure 1. An illustration of the visual dialog task. Left: context
image. Middle: image caption, dialog history, current query question, and the predicted answer. Right: the underlying semantic
dependencies between nodes in the dialog (darker green links indicate higher dependencies).

underlying semantic structure and give a reasonable answer
based on this structure.
Previous studies have explored this task through embedding rich features from image representation learned from
convolutional neural networks and language (i.e., questionanswer pairs, caption) representations learned from recurrent sequential models. Their impressive results well
demonstrate the importance of mining and fusing multimodal information in this area. However, they largely neglect the key role of the rich relational information in dialog. Although a few [67, 62] leveraged co-attention mechanisms to capture cross-modal correlations, their reasoning
ability is still quite limited. They typically concatenate the
multi-modal features together and directly project the concatenated feature into the answer feature space by a neural network. On one hand, their reasoning process does
not fully utilize the rich relational information in this task
due to their monolithic vector representations of dialog. On
the other hand, their feed-forward network designs fail to
deeply and iteratively mine and reason the information from
different dialog entities over the inherent dialog structures.
In this work, we consider the problem of recovering the
dialog structure and reasoning about the question/answer si-

6669

