Camera Lens Super-Resolution
Chang Chen

Zhiwei Xiong∗ Xinmei Tian Zheng-Jun Zha
University of Science and Technology of China

Feng Wu

Abstract
Existing methods for single image super-resolution (SR)
are typically evaluated with synthetic degradation models
such as bicubic or Gaussian downsampling. In this paper,
we investigate SR from the perspective of camera lenses,
named as CameraSR, which aims to alleviate the intrinsic
tradeoff between resolution (R) and field-of-view (V) in realistic imaging systems. Specifically, we view the R-V degradation as a latent model in the SR process and learn to reverse it with realistic low- and high-resolution image pairs.
To obtain the paired images, we propose two novel data acquisition strategies for two representative imaging systems
(i.e., DSLR and smartphone cameras), respectively. Based
on the obtained City100 dataset, we quantitatively analyze
the performance of commonly-used synthetic degradation
models, and demonstrate the superiority of CameraSR as
a practical solution to boost the performance of existing
SR methods. Moreover, CameraSR can be readily generalized to different content and devices, which serves as an
advanced digital zoom tool in realistic imaging systems.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR) is a typical inverse
problem in computer vision. Generally, SR methods assume bicubic or Gaussian downsampling as the degradation
model [33]. Based on this assumption, continuous progress
has been achieved to restore a better high-resolution (HR)
image from its low-resolution (LR) version, in terms of reconstruction accuracy [9, 13, 15, 17, 23, 25, 27, 31, 32, 35, 36]
or perceptual quality [2, 3, 5, 12, 16, 22, 28]. However, these
synthetic degradation models may deviate from the ones in
realistic imaging systems, which results in a significant deterioration on the SR performance [20]. To better simulate
the challenging real-world conditions, additional factors including noise, motion blur, and compression artifacts are integrated to characterize the LR images in either a synthetic
[26] or a data-driven [4] manner. These modified degradation models promote the SR performance of learning-based
∗ Correspondence should be addressed to zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

(a)
(b)
Figure 1. (a) Resolution-FoV (R-V) degradation. Zooming out the
optical lens in a DSLR camera, the FoV is enlarged at the cost
of resolution loss. (b) Aligned realistic LR-HR image pair after
rectification. LR image is displayed after interpolation for a sideby-side comparison. (Bicubic interpolation is used throughout this
paper unless noted otherwise.)

methods when the LR images indeed have corresponding
degradations.
In this paper, we investigate SR from the perspective of
camera lenses, named as CameraSR, which aims to alleviate
the intrinsic tradeoff between resolution (R) and field-ofview (FoV, V for short hereafter) in realistic imaging systems. An instance of the R-V tradoff is shown in Fig. 1(a).
When zooming out the optical lens in a DSLR camera, the
obtained image has a larger FoV but loses details on subjects; when zooming in the lens, the details of subjects show
up at the cost of a reduced FoV. This R-V tradeoff also applies to cameras with fixed focal lenses such as those on
smartphones when the shooting distance changes. Inspired
by learning-based single image SR, we view the R-V degradation (i.e., resolution loss due to enlarged FoV) as a latent
model in the SR process and learn to reverse it with a number of LR-HR image pairs. Specifically, we define a subject
captured at a long focal length or a short distance as the
HR ground truth, and the same one captured at a short focal
length or a long distance as its paired LR observation.
To obtain such paired images, we first use a DSLR camera mounted on a tripod with a zoom lens. To avoid the outof-focus blur, we adopt a small aperture size and capture
11652

