Spatio-Temporal Dynamics and Semantic Attribute Enriched
Visual Encoding for Video Captioning
Nayyer Aafaq

Naveed Akhtar Wei Liu Syed Zulqarnain Gilani
Computer Science and Software Engineering,
The University of Western Australia.

Ajmal Mian

nayyer.aafaq@research.uwa.edu.au,{naveed.akhtar, wei.liu, syed.gilani, ajmal.mian}@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
Automatic generation of video captions is a fundamental challenge in computer vision. Recent techniques typically employ a combination of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recursive Neural Networks (RNNs) for
video captioning. These methods mainly focus on tailoring sequence learning through RNNs for better caption generation, whereas off-the-shelf visual features are borrowed
from CNNs. We argue that careful designing of visual features for this task is equally important, and present a visual
feature encoding technique to generate semantically rich
captions using Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs). Our method
embeds rich temporal dynamics in visual features by hierarchically applying Short Fourier Transform to CNN features of the whole video. It additionally derives high level
semantics from an object detector to enrich the representation with spatial dynamics of the detected objects. The final
representation is projected to a compact space and fed to a
language model. By learning a relatively simple language
model comprising two GRU layers, we establish new stateof-the-art on MSVD and MSR-VTT datasets for METEOR
and ROUGEL metrics.

1. Introduction
Describing videos in natural language is trivial for humans, however it is a very complex task for machines. To
generate meaningful video captions, machines are required
to understand objects, their interaction, spatio-temporal
order of events and other such minutiae in videos; yet,
have the ability to articulate these details in grammatically correct and meaningful natural language sentences [1].
The bicephalic nature of this problem has recently led researchers from Computer Vision and Natural Language Processing (NLP) to combine efforts in addressing its challenges [3, 4, 5, 30]. Incidentally, wide applications of video
captioning in emerging technologies, e.g. procedure generation from instructional videos [2], video indexing and re-

trieval [45, 55]; have recently caused it to receive attention
as a fundamental task in Computer Vision.
Early methods in video captioning and description,
e.g. [26, 9] primarily aimed at generating the correct Subject, Verb and Object (a.k.a. SVO-Triplet) in the captions. More recent methods [50, 39] rely on Deep Learning [28] to build frameworks resembling a typical neural
machine translation system that can generate a single sentence [57, 33] or multiple sentences [38, 43, 60] to describe
videos. The two-pronged problem of video captioning provides a default division for the deep learning methods to
encode visual contents of videos using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [44, 48] and decode those into captions using language models. Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) [16, 14, 22] are the natural choice for the latter
component of the problem.
Since semantically correct sentence generation has a
longer history in the field of NLP, deep learning based
captioning techniques mainly focus on language modelling [51, 34]. For visual encoding, these methods forward pass video frames through a pre-trained 2D CNN;
or a video clip through a 3D CNN, and extract features
from an inner layer of the network - referred as ‘extraction
layer’. Features of frames/clips are commonly combined
with mean pooling to compute the final representation of
the whole video. This, and similar other visual encoding
techniques [33, 51, 18, 34] - due to the nascency of video
captioning research - grossly under-exploit the prowess of
visual representation for the captioning task. To the best of
our knowledge, this paper presents the first work that concentrates on improving the visual encoding mechanism for
the captioning task.
We propose a visual encoding technique to compute representations enriched with spatio-temporal dynamics of the
scene, while also accounting for the high-level semantic
attributes of the videos. Our visual code (‘v’ in Fig. 1)
fuses information from multiple sources. We process activations of 2D and 3D CNN extraction layers by hierarchically applying Short Fourier Transform [31] to them,
112487

