Learning to Minify Photometric Stereo
Junxuan Li1,2

Antonio Robles-Kelly3

Shaodi You1,2

Yasuyuki Matsushita4

1

Australian National University, College of Eng. and Comp. Sci., Acton, ACT 2601, Australia
2
Data61-CSIRO, Black Mountain Laboratories, Acton, ACT 2601, Australia
3
Deakin University, Faculty of Sci., Eng. and Built Env., Waurn Ponds, VIC 3216, Australia
4
Osaka University, Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka 565-0871, Japan

Abstract
Photometric stereo estimates the surface normal given
a set of images acquired under different illumination conditions. To deal with diverse factors involved in the image
formation process, recent photometric stereo methods demand a large number of images as input. We propose a
method that can dramatically decrease the demands on the
number of images by learning the most informative ones under different illumination conditions. To this end, we use a
deep learning framework to automatically learn the critical illumination conditions required at input. Furthermore,
we present an occlusion layer that can synthesize cast shadows, which effectively improves the estimation accuracy. We
assess our method on challenging real-world conditions,
where we outperform techniques elsewhere in the literature
with a significantly reduced number of light conditions.

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo is a technique that estimates the surface normal of an object from numbers of photographs
taken under different illumination conditions from a fixed
viewpoint. Due to the diverse appearances of real-world
materials, a method for dealing with general reflectances is
desired. Recent methods toward this direction improve the
estimation accuracy by robust estimation at the cost of increasing the number of images, such as [21]; however, it
complicates the data acquisition setup and calibration procedure.
Recently, deep learning-based methods appeared in the
context of photometric stereo [16, 8, 3]. These methods are
shown effective for surfaces with diverse reflectances, indicating that the mapping from input images to surface normal
can be well established even with the diversity. Unlike these
methods that primarily focus on the estimation accuracy, we
study the problem of reducing the number of required im-

GT

Ours

PS-FCN

CNN-PS

Figure 1. Performance with only 8 inputs for our method, PSFCN [3] and CNN-PS [8] on the “pot1” from DiLiGenT [17]. Note
we outperform the alternatives.

ages so as to minify the photometric stereo input. We approach this problem by learning the relative importance of
different illuminant directions, which opens up a possibility
of optimally selecting input illuminant directions for lightweight data acquisition.
However, reducing the number of input illuminant directions without loss in performance is a non-trivial task because the surface radiance is determined by the illumination
intensity, illuminant direction, surface normal and BRDF
function. For instance, Argyriou et al. [2] use a sparse representation of illuminations for reducing the required number of lights to 5 under the assumption of Lambertian surfaces. The task is further complicated by the presence of
cast shadows, specularities, and inter-reflections.
In this paper, we propose a deep learning approach,
which applies a connection table that can select those illuminant directions that are most relevant to the surface normal prediction process. To this end, we employ a connection table so as to introduce a trainable input mapping. This
mapping is trained by making use of the ℓ1 -norm and a
sparsity-loss. Once the model is trained, it can efficiently
estimate the surface normal only given a much-reduced
number of input images without loss in accuracy. For the
sake of the scalability of our method, here we select the illuminant directions making use of an observation map [8]
and estimate the surface normal in a pixel-wise fashion.
17568

