DSFD: Dual Shot Face Detector
Jian Li† Yabiao Wang‡ Changan Wang‡ Ying Tai‡
Jianjun Qian†∗ Jian Yang†∗ Chengjie Wang‡ Jilin Li‡ Feiyue Huang‡
†

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education
†
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security
†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
‡
Youtu Lab, Tencent
†
‡

lijiannuist@gmail.com, {csjqian, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

{casewang, changanwang, yingtai, jasoncjwang, jerolinli, garyhuang}@tencent.com

Scale

Blurry

Illumination

Pose & Occlusion

Reflection

Makeup

Figure 1: Visual results. Our method is robust to various variations on scale, blurry, illumination, pose, occlusion, reflection and makeup.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel face detection network
with three novel contributions that address three key aspects
of face detection, including better feature learning, progressive loss design and anchor assign based data augmentation, respectively. First, we propose a Feature Enhance
Module (FEM) for enhancing the original feature maps to
extend the single shot detector to dual shot detector. Second, we adopt Progressive Anchor Loss (PAL) computed by
two different sets of anchors to effectively facilitate the features. Third, we use an Improved Anchor Matching (IAM)
by integrating novel anchor assign strategy into data aug∗ Jianjun Qian and Jian Yang are corresponding authors.

This work
was supported by the National Science Fund of China under Grant Nos.
61876083, U1713208, and Program for Changjiang Scholars. This work
was done when Jian Li was an intern at Tencent Youtu Lab.

mentation to provide better initialization for the regressor.
Since these techniques are all related to the two-stream design, we name the proposed network as Dual Shot Face Detector (DSFD). Extensive experiments on popular benchmarks, WIDER FACE and FDDB, demonstrate the superiority of DSFD over the state-of-the-art face detectors.

1. Introduction
Face detection is a fundamental step for various facial
applications, like face alignment [26], parsing [3], recognition [34], and verification [6]. As the pioneering work
for face detection, Viola-Jones [29] adopts AdaBoost algorithm with hand-crafted features, which are now replaced by
deeply learned features from the convolutional neural network (CNN) [10] that achieves great progress. Although
15060

