A Cross-Season Correspondence Dataset for Robust Semantic Segmentation
Måns Larsson1

Erik Stenborg1,3

Lars Hammarstrand1 Mark Pollefeys2,4 Torsten Sattler1
Fredrik Kahl1
2
1
Chalmers University of Technology
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
3
4
Zenuity
Microsoft

Abstract
In this paper, we present a method to utilize 2D-2D point
matches between images taken during different image conditions to train a convolutional neural network for semantic segmentation. Enforcing label consistency across the
matches makes the final segmentation algorithm robust to
seasonal changes. We describe how these 2D-2D matches
can be generated with little human interaction by geometrically matching points from 3D models built from images.
Two cross-season correspondence datasets are created providing 2D-2D matches across seasonal changes as well as
from day to night. The datasets are made publicly available to facilitate further research. We show that adding the
correspondences as extra supervision during training improves the segmentation performance of the convolutional
neural network, making it more robust to seasonal changes
and weather conditions.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is the task of assigning a class
label to each pixel in an image and is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision. Semantic segmentation has also been used to integrate higher-level scene
understanding into other computer vision problems, e.g.,
dense 3D reconstruction [6, 13, 14, 23, 28, 31, 55, 56, 61],
SLAM [7, 35], Structure-from-Motion [3], 3D model alignment [15, 16, 73], and location recognition [1, 42, 60].
Visual localization is the problem of estimating the camera pose of an image [8, 34], typically from a set of 2D-3D
matches between image pixels and 3D scene points. In the
context of long-term visual localization [58, 63–65, 74], semantics are proven useful to be able to handle variations
in scene geometry and appearance, e.g., due to seasonal
changes. These methods are based on the idea that the semantic meaning of a scene part is invariant to such changes.
Semantics are thus used to establish the 2D-3D matches required for pose estimation when matching solely based on
image appearance fails.

Figure 1. 2D-2D matches between images taken under different
conditions, established using matches against a 3D point cloud.

As of yet, however, the assumption that the same semantic segmentation can be reliably reproduced under different
conditions does not hold. This is mainly due to that the
labeled datasets used to train the semantic segmentation algorithm itself are limited to only a few conditions. As the
pixel-level annotations are performed by hand, adding more
training data is both time consuming and expensive [17,44].
However, even rather noisy segmentations improve localization performance compared to not using semantic information [58,65]. This naturally leads to the question whether
it is possible to build a feedback loop: Can semantic segmentation algorithms be improved via visual localization?
Can this in turn lead to more robust localization results?
As part of estimating the camera pose of an image taken
under one condition against a 3D model built from images, a
set of 2D-3D matches is established. Usually, the reference
3D model is built from images [54]. Thus, the 2D-3D correspondences lead to a set of 2D-2D matches between images
taken under different conditions, as depicted in Fig. 1. In
this paper, we show that these pixel-level matches can be
used to improve semantic segmentation algorithms.
In detail, this paper makes the following contributions:
1) A 2D-2D match between two images taken under differ-

9532

