GeoNet: Deep Geodesic Networks for Point Cloud Analysis
Tong He1 , Haibin Huang2,† , Li Yi3 , Yuqian Zhou4 , Chihao Wu2 , Jue Wang2 , Stefano Soatto1
1
UCLA 2 Megvii (Face++) 3 Stanford 4 UIUC † Corresponding Author

Abstract
Surface-based geodesic topology provides strong cues
for object semantic analysis and geometric modeling. However, such connectivity information is lost in point clouds.
Thus we introduce GeoNet, the first deep learning architecture trained to model the intrinsic structure of surfaces
represented as point clouds. To demonstrate the applicability of learned geodesic-aware representations, we propose fusion schemes which use GeoNet in conjunction with
other baseline or backbone networks, such as PU-Net and
PointNet++, for down-stream point cloud analysis. Our
method improves the state-of-the-art on multiple representative tasks that can benefit from understandings of the underlying surface topology, including point upsampling, normal estimation, mesh reconstruction and non-rigid shape
classification.

1. Introduction
Determining neighborhood relationship among points in a
point cloud, known as topology estimation, is an important
problem since it indicates the underlying point cloud structure, which could further reveal the point cloud semantics
and functionality. Consider the red inset in Fig. 1: the two
clusters of points, though seemingly disconnected, should
indeed be connected to form a chair leg, which supports the
whole chair. On the other hand, the points on opposite sides
of a chair seat, though spatially very close to each other,
should not be connected to avoid confusing the sittable upper surface with the unsittable lower side. Determining such
topology appears to be a very low-level endeavor but in reality it requires global, high-level knowledge, making it a very
challenging task. Still, from the red inset in Fig. 1, we could
draw the conclusion that the two stumps are connected only
after we learn statistical regularities from a large number
of point clouds and observe many objects of this type with
connected elongated vertical elements extending from the
body to the ground. This motivates us to adopt a learning
approach to capture the topological structure within point
clouds.
Our primary goals in this paper are to develop representations of point cloud data that are informed by the under-

Figure 1. Our method takes a point cloud as input, and outputs representations used for multiple tasks including upsampling, normal
estimation, mesh reconstruction, and shape classification.

lying surface topology as well as object geometry, and propose methods that leverage the learned topological features
for geodesic-aware point cloud analysis. The representation should capture various topological patterns of a point
cloud and the method of leveraging these geodesic features
should not alter the data stream, so our representation can
be learned jointly and used in conjunction with the state-ofthe-art baseline or backbone models (e.g. PU-Net, PointNet++ [45, 32, 33, 7]) that feed the raw data through, with
no information loss to further stages of processing.
For the first goal, we propose a geodesic neighborhood
estimation network (GeoNet) to learn deep geodesic representations using the ground truth geodesic distance as supervision signals. As illustrated in Fig. 2, GeoNet consists
of two modules: an autoencoder that extracts a feature vector for each point and a geodesic matching (GM) layer that
acts as a learned kernel function for estimating geodesic
neighborhoods using the latent features. Due to the supervised geodesic training process, intermediates features of
the GM layer contain rich information of the point cloud
topology and intrinsic surface attributes. We note that the
representation, while trained on geodesic distances, does
not by construction produce geodesics (e.g. symmetry, triangle inequality, etc.). The goal of the representation is to
inform subsequent stages of processing of the global geometry and topology, and is not to conduct metric computations directly.
For the second task, as shown in Fig. 3, we propose
geodesic fusion schemes to integrate GeoNet into the state16888

