Learning to Remember:
A Synaptic Plasticity Driven Framework for Continual Learning
Oleksiy Ostapenko§,* , Mihai Puscas¶,* , Tassilo Klein* , Patrick Jähnichen§ , Moin Nabi*
§

Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, ¶ University of Trento, * SAP ML Research

Abstract
Models trained in the context of continual learning (CL)
should be able to learn from a stream of data over an undefined period of time. The main challenges herein are:
1) maintaining old knowledge while simultaneously benefiting from it when learning new tasks, and 2) guaranteeing
model scalability with a growing amount of data to learn
from. In order to tackle these challenges, we introduce
Dynamic Generative Memory (DGM) - synaptic plasticity
driven framework for continual learning. DGM relies on
conditional generative adversarial networks with learnable
connection plasticity realized with neural masking. Specifically, we evaluate two variants of neural masking: applied
to (i) layer activations and (ii) to connection weights directly. Furthermore, we propose a dynamic network expansion mechanism that ensures sufficient model capacity to accommodate for continually incoming tasks. The
amount of added capacity is determined dynamically from
the learned binary mask. We evaluate DGM in the continual
class-incremental setup on visual classification tasks.

1. Introduction
Conventional Deep Neural Networks (DNN) fail to continually learn from a stream of data while maintaining
knowledge. Specifically, reusing old knowledge in new
contexts poses a severe challenge. Generally, there are several fundamental obstacles on the way to a continually trainable AI system: the problem of forgetting when learning
from new data (catastrophic forgetting), lack of model scalability, i.e. the inability to scale up the model’s size with a
continuously growing amount of training data, and finally
inability to transfer knowledge across tasks.
Several recent approaches [9, 34, 2, 1] try to mitigate
forgetting in ANNs while simulating synaptic plasticity directly in the task solving network. It is noteworthy that these
methods topically tackle the task-incremental scenario, i.e.
a separate classifier is trained to make predictions about
each task. This further implies the availability of oracle
knowledge of the task label at inference time. Such eval-

uation is often referred to as multi-head evaluation in which
the task label is associated with a dedicated output head.
Alternatively, other approaches rely on single-head evaluation [22, 2]. Here, the model is evaluated on all classes observed during the training, no matter which task they belong
to. While single-head evaluation does not require oracle
knowledge of the task label, it also does not reduce the output space of the model to the output space of the task. Thus
single-head evaluation represents a harder, yet more realistic setup. Single-head evaluation is predominantly used in
class-incremental setup, in which every newly introduced
data batch contains examples of one to many new classes.
As opposed to the task-incremental situation, models
in class-incremental setup typically require the previously
learned information to be replayed when learning new categories [22, 2, 18]. The simplest way to accomplish this is
by retaining and replaying real samples of previously seen
categories to the task solver. However, retaining real samples has several intrinsic implications. First, it is very much
against the notion of bio-inspired design, as natural brains
do not feature the retrieval of information identical to originally exposed impressions [15]. Second, as pointed out by
[32, 22] storing raw samples of previous data can violate
data privacy and memory restrictions of real-world applications. Such restrictions are particularly relevant for the
vision domain with its continuously growing dataset sizes
and rigorous privacy constraints.
In this work, we address the “strict” class-incremental
setup. That is, we demand a classifier to learn from a
stream of data with different classes occurring at different
times with no access to previously seen data, i.e. no storing
of real samples is allowed. Such a scenario is solely addressed by methods relying on generative memory - a generative network is used to memorize previously seen data
distributions, samples of which can be replayed to the classifier at any time. Several strategies exist to avoid catastrophic forgetting in generative networks. The most successful approaches rely on deep generative replay (DGR)
[30] - repetitive retraining of the generator on a mix of synthesized samples of previous categories and real samples of
new classes. In this work we propose Dynamic Generative

11321

