Extreme Relative Pose Estimation for RGB-D Scans via Scene Completion
Zhenpei Yang
UT Austin

Jeffrey Z.Pan
Phillips Academy Andover

Linjie Luo
ByteDance AI Lab

Kristen Grauman
UT Austin

Xiaowei Zhou
Zhejiang University∗

Qixing Huang
UT Austin†

Abstract
Estimating the relative rigid pose between two RGB-D
scans of the same underlying environment is a fundamental
problem in computer vision, robotics, and computer graphics. Most existing approaches allow only limited relative
pose changes since they require considerable overlap between the input scans. We introduce a novel approach that
extends the scope to extreme relative poses, with little or
even no overlap between the input scans. The key idea is to
infer more complete scene information about the underlying environment and match on the completed scans. In particular, instead of only performing scene completion from
each individual scan, our approach alternates between relative pose estimation and scene completion. This allows us
to perform scene completion by utilizing information from
both input scans at late iterations, resulting in better results
for both scene completion and relative pose estimation. Experimental results on benchmark datasets show that our approach leads to considerable improvements over state-ofthe-art approaches for relative pose estimation. In particular, our approach provides encouraging relative pose estimates even between non-overlapping scans.

1. Introduction
Estimating the relative rigid pose between a pair of
RGB-D scans is a fundamental problem in computer vision, robotics, and computer graphics with applications to
systems such as 3D reconstruction [49], structure-frommotion [38], and simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) [41]. Most existing approaches [12, 17, 1, 30, 46]
follow a three-step paradigm (c.f. [49]): feature extraction, feature matching, and rigid transform fitting with the
most consistent feature correspondences. However, this
paradigm requires the input RGB-D scans to have considerable overlap, in order to establish sufficient feature correspondences for matching. For input scans of extreme rela∗ Xiaowei Zhou is affiliated with the StateKey Lab of CAD&CG and
the ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision.
† huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

Transform

Completion
Module

RGB-D Scan #1

Completed CubeMap #1

RGB-D Scan #2

Completed CubeMap #2
Transform

Completion
Module

Relative Pose
Module

Figure 1: Illustration of the work-flow of our approach. We align
two RGB-D scans by alternating between scene completion (completion module) and pose estimation (relative pose module).

tive poses with little or even no overlap, this paradigm falls
short since there are very few or no features to be found in
the overlapping regions. Nevertheless, such problem settings with minimal overlap are common in many applications such as solving jigsaw puzzles [5], early detection of
loop closure for SLAM [13], and reconstruction from minimal observations, e.g., a few snapshots of an indoor environment [26].
While the conventional paradigm breaks down in this
setting, we hypothesize that solutions are possible using
prior knowledge for typical scene structure and object
shapes. Intuitively, when humans are asked to perform pose
estimation for non-overlapping inputs, they utilize the prior
knowledge of the underlying geometry. For example, we
can complete a human model from two non-overlapping
scans of both the front and the back of a person; we can
also tell the relative pose of two non-overlapping indoor
scans by knowing that the layout of the room satisfies the
Manhattan world assumption [7]. This suggests that when
direct matching of non-overlapping scans is impossible, we
seek to match them by first performing scene completions
and then matching completed scans for their relative pose.
Inspired by this intuition, we introduce an approach that
takes a pair of RGB-D scans with little overlap as input
and outputs the relative pose between them. Key to our
approach are internal modules that infer the completion of
14531

