LP-3DCNN: Unveiling Local Phase in 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
Sudhakar Kumawat and Shanmuganathan Raman
Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar
Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
{sudhakar.kumawat, shanmuga}@iitgn.ac.in
Abstract
Traditional 3D Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
are computationally expensive, memory intensive, prone to
overfit, and most importantly, there is a need to improve
their feature learning capabilities. To address these issues,
we propose Rectified Local Phase Volume (ReLPV) block,
an efficient alternative to the standard 3D convolutional
layer. The ReLPV block extracts the phase in a 3D local
neighborhood (e.g., 3 × 3 × 3) of each position of the input map to obtain the feature maps. The phase is extracted
by computing 3D Short Term Fourier Transform (STFT) at
multiple fixed low frequency points in the 3D local neighborhood of each position. These feature maps at different
frequency points are then linearly combined after passing
them through an activation function. The ReLPV block provides significant parameter savings of at least, 33 to 133
times compared to the standard 3D convolutional layer with
the filter sizes 3 × 3 × 3 to 13 × 13 × 13, respectively. We
show that the feature learning capabilities of the ReLPV
block are significantly better than the standard 3D convolutional layer. Furthermore, it produces consistently better results across different 3D data representations. We
achieve state-of-the-art accuracy on the volumetric ModelNet10 and ModelNet40 datasets while utilizing only 11%
parameters of the current state-of-the-art. We also improve
the state-of-the-art on the UCF-101 split-1 action recognition dataset by 5.68% (when trained from scratch) while
using only 15% of the parameters of the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, research in the area of 2D CNNs
has led to unprecedented advances in a number of computer
vision tasks such as image classification, semantic segmentation, and image super-resolution. Apart from performance
results, 2D CNNs have also made good progress in other
complementary areas such as network compression, binarization, quantization, regularization, etc. Unfortunately,
unlike their 2D counterparts, 3D CNNs have not enjoyed

the same level of performance jumps on the problems in
their domain e.g., video classification and progress in the
above mentioned complementary areas. Recent works such
as [44] and [11], list down some of the fundamental barriers in modeling and training of deep 3D CNNs such as (1)
they are computationally very expensive, (2) they result in
large model size, both in terms of memory usage and disk
space, (3) they are prone to overfitting, due to a large number of parameters, (4) and there is a need to improve their
feature learning capabilities which may require fundamental changes to their network architecture or the standard 3D
convolutional layer [44, 25, 39]. Despite the above challenges, the current trend in the literature of deep 3D CNNs
is to train computationally expensive, memory intensive,
and very deep networks in order to achieve state-of-the-art
results [2, 8, 11].
In this work, we take a detour from this trend by proposing an alternative to the fundamental building block of the
3D CNNs, the 3D convolutional layer, which is the primary source of high space-time complexity in 3D CNNs.
More precisely, we propose Rectified Local Phase Volume
(ReLPV) block, an efficient alternative to the standard 3D
convolutional layer in 3D CNNs. The ReLPV block comprises of a local phase module, the ReLU activation function
and a set of trainable linear weights. The local phase module extracts the local phase information by computing 3D
Short Term Fourier Transform (STFT) [15] (at multiple low
frequency points) in a local n×n×n (e.g., 3×3×3) neighborhood/volume of each position of the input feature map.
The output of the local phase module is then passed through
the ReLU activation function in order to obtain the activated response maps of the local phase information at the
fixed low frequency points. Finally, a set of trainable linear
weights computes the weighted combinations of these activated response maps. The ReLPV block provides significant parameter savings along with computational and memory savings. The ReLPV block based 3D CNNs have much
lower model complexity and are less prone to overfitting.
Most importantly, its feature learning capabilities are significantly better than the standard 3D convolutional layer.

4903

