Scene Memory Transformer for Embodied Agents in Long-Horizon Tasks
Kuan Fang1
1

Alexander Toshev2

Li Fei-Fei1
2

Stanford University

Silvio Savarese1

Google Brain

Abstract

SMT Policy
Scene Memory

Many robotic applications require the agent to perform
long-horizon tasks in partially observable environments. In
such applications, decision making at any step can depend
on observations received far in the past. Hence, being
able to properly memorize and utilize the long-term history is crucial. In this work, we propose a novel memorybased policy, named Scene Memory Transformer (SMT).
The proposed policy embeds and adds each observation
to a memory and uses the attention mechanism to exploit
spatio-temporal dependencies. This model is generic and
can be efficiently trained with reinforcement learning over
long episodes. On a range of visual navigation tasks, SMT
demonstrates superior performance to existing reactive and
memory-based policies by a margin.

1. Introduction
Autonomous agents, controlled by neural network policies and trained with reinforcement learning algorithms,
have been used in a wide range of robot navigation applications [1, 2, 3, 22, 27, 31, 46, 49, 50]. In many of
these applications, the agent needs to perform tasks over
long time horizons in unseen environments. Consider a
robot patrolling or searching for an object in a large unexplored building. Typically, completing such tasks requires
the robot to utilize the received observation at each step
and to grow its knowledge of the environment, e.g. building
structures, object arrangements, explored area , etc. Therefore, it is crucial for the agent to maintain a detailed memory
of past observations and actions over the task execution.
The most common way of endowing an agent’s policy
with memory is to use recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
with LSTM [5] as a popular choice. An RNN stores the
information in a fixed-size state vector by combining the
input observation with the state vector at each time step.
The policy outputs actions for the agent to take given the
updated state vector. Unfortunately, however, RNNs often
fail to capture long-term dependencies [33].
To enhance agent’s ability to plan and reason, neural
network policies with external memories have been pro-

1
2
t

Policy Network

Tasks
Roaming
Coverage
Search

Figure 1. The Scene Memory Transformer (SMT) policy embeds
and adds each observation to a memory. Given the current observation, the attention mechanism is applied over the memory to
produce an action. SMT is demonstrated successfully in several
visual navigation tasks, all of which has long time horizons.

posed [31, 48]. Such memory-based policies have been primarily studied in the context of robot navigation in partially
observable environments, where the neural network learns
to encode the received observations and write them into a
map-like memory [15, 16, 18, 32, 43]. Despite their superior performance compared to reactive and RNN policies,
existing memory-based policies suffer from limited flexibility and scalability. Specifically, strong domain-specific inductive biases go into the design of such memories, e.g. 2D
layout of the environment, predefined size of this layout,
geometry-based memory updates, etc. Meanwhile, RNNs
are usually critical components for these memory-based
policies for exploiting spatio-temporal dependencies. Thus
they still suffer from the drawbacks of RNN models.
In this work, we present Scene Memory Transformer
(SMT), a memory-based policy using attention mechanisms, for understanding partially observable environments
in long-horizon robot tasks. This policy is inspired by the
Transformer model [42], which has been successfully applied to multiple natural language processing problems recently. As shown in Fig. 1, SMT consists of two modules: a
scene memory which embeds and stores all encountered observations and a policy network which uses attention mechanism over the scene memory to produce an action.
The proposed SMT policy is different from existing
methods in terms of how to utilize observations received
in the previous steps. Instead of combining past observations into a single state vector, as commonly done by RNN
policies, SMT separately embeds the observations for each
time step in the scene memory. In contrast to most existing
1538

