Generalizing Eye Tracking with Bayesian Adversarial Learning
Kang Wang
Rui Zhao
RPI

Hui Su
RPI and IBM

Qiang Ji
RPI

{kangwang.kw, zhaorui.zju}@gmail.com

huisuibmres@us.ibm.com

qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Existing appearance-based gaze estimation approaches with CNN have poor generalization performance. By
systematically studying this issue, we identify three major
factors: 1) appearance variations; 2) head pose variations
and 3) over-fitting issue with point estimation. To improve
the generalization performance, we propose to incorporate
adversarial learning and Bayesian inference into a unified
framework. In particular, we first add an adversarial component into traditional CNN-based gaze estimator so that we
can learn features that are gaze-responsive but can generalize to appearance and pose variations. Next, we extend the
point-estimation based deterministic model to a Bayesian
framework so that gaze estimation can be performed using
all parameters instead of only one set of parameters. Besides
improved performance on several benchmark datasets, the
proposed method also enables online adaptation of the model to new subjects/environments, demonstrating the potential
usage for practical real-time eye tracking applications.

1. Introduction
Eye gaze represents human’s focus of attention or interests. The eye gaze for ourselves can help us better understand
the visual world, and help us better interact with computers
or large systems [1, 2, 3]. Furthermore, eye gaze also plays
a crucial rule in understanding human’s cognitive and emotional status, which have been used for marketing and advertising [4], social network [5, 7, 8, 6], web search [9, 11, 10],
psychology study and medical research [12], etc.
Various techniques have been proposed to estimate eye
gaze. Model-based methods [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]
rely on a geometric eye model to estimate eye gaze. The
idea is to represent 3D eye gaze to two 3D points and their
goal is to recover the 3D points. Despite their simplicity
and good accuracy, the system is sensitive to key point detections and may not work in outdoor environments. Early
appearance-based methods [21, 22, 23] try to extract handcrafted features from eye images and map the features to eye
gaze. However, they cannot handle large head poses and are

Appearance
variations

x

Head pose
variations

CNN(θ )

Over-ﬁtting
issues with
point estimation

y

Figure 1. Three factors that affect the generalization performance
of appearance-based gaze estimation methods.

restricted to controlled environments.
More recently, appearance-based methods [24, 25, 26,
27, 28] with deep learning [29, 30, 31, 32] are the dominant approaches because of their improved performance over
traditional model-based/appearance-based methods. However, researchers also begin challenging the generalization
performance of deep learning-based approaches, since the
trained model may totally fail for an unseen subject or in
a new environment. This significantly limits the usage of
appearance-based methods in practical eye tracking systems.
In this work, we study the following problem. Suppose
we have a gaze estimator trained with data from a source
domain, how can we generalize this gaze estimator to a
target domain with few labeled data or no labeled data? we
systematically study the factors that affect the generalization
performance, and identify three major factors as in Fig. 1.
The first factor is the appearance variation, which is resulted from different combinations of illumination, skin color, eye texture, eye shape, imaging condition, glasses, etc.
The example images in Fig. 1 come from different subjects/datasets with close to frontal eye gaze directions. It is
difficult to model these individual factors separate, we therefore only model the coupled appearance variations.
The second factor is the head pose variation. Fig. 1 shows
the images from the same subject looking at the same target
but with different head poses. The head pose variations may
not be obvious in the example images because we cut the eye
images, however we can get a sense of head pose variations
111907

