Dense 3D Face Decoding over 2500FPS: Joint Texture & Shape Convolutional
Mesh Decoders
Yuxiang Zhou * 1
Jiankang Deng * 1,3
Irene Kotsia2
Stefanos Zafeiriou1,3
1
2
3
Imperial College London
University of Middlesex
FaceSoft
{yuxiang.zhou10, j.deng16, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk , i.kotsia@mdx.ac.uk

Abstract
3D Morphable Models (3DMMs) are statistical models
that represent facial texture and shape variations using a set
of linear bases and more particular Principal Component
Analysis (PCA). 3DMMs were used as statistical priors for
reconstructing 3D faces from images by solving non-linear
least square optimization problems. Recently, 3DMMs were
used as generative models for training non-linear mappings
(i.e., regressors) from image to the parameters of the models
via Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs). Nevertheless, all of the above methods use either fully connected layers or 2D convolutions on parametric unwrapped
UV spaces leading to large networks with many parameters. In this paper, we present the first, to the best of our
knowledge, non-linear 3DMMs by learning joint texture
and shape auto-encoders using direct mesh convolutions.
We demonstrate how these auto-encoders can be used to
train very light-weight models that perform Coloured Mesh
Decoding (CMD) in-the-wild at a speed of over 2500 FPS.

1. Introduction
Twenty years ago, Blanz and Vetter demonstrated a remarkable achievement [2]. They showed that it is possible
to reconstruct 3D facial geometry from a single image. This
was possible by solving a non-linear optimization problem
whose solution space was confined by a linear statistical
model of the 3D facial shape and texture, the so-called 3D
Morphable Model (3DMM). Methods based on 3DMMs are
still among the state-of-the-art for 3D face reconstruction,
even from images captured in-the-wild [6, 4, 5].
During the past two years, a lot of works have been conducted on how to harness the power of Deep Convolutional
Neural Networks (DCNNs) for 3D shape and texture estimation from 2D facial images. The first such methods either trained regression DCNNs from image to the parame* Equal contributions.

Figure 1. A typical non-linear 3DMM [38] is a DCNN trained to
recover shape and texture separately when given one or more 2D
images. We propose a non-linear 3DMM to jointly model shape
and texture by geometric convolutional networks. Our coloured
mesh decoder can run over 2500 FPS with compact model size,
thus being significantly faster and smaller (in terms of parameters)
when compared to the PCA model.

ters of a 3DMM [36] or used a 3DMM to synthesize images
and formulate an image-to-image translation problem in order to estimate the depth, using DCNNs [31]. The recent,
more sophisticated, DCNN-based methods were trained using self-supervised techniques [17, 37, 38] and made use
of differentiable image formation architectures and differentiable renderers [17]. The most recent methods such as
[37, 38] and [34] used self-supervision to go beyond the
standard 3DMMs in terms of texture and shape. In particular, [34] used both the 3DMMs model, as well as additional
network structures (called correctives) that can capture information outside the space of 3DMMs, in order to represent the shape and texture. The method in [37, 38] tried
to learn non-linear spaces (i.e., decoders, which are called
non-linear 3DMMs) of shape and texture directly from the
data. Nevertheless, in order to avoid poor training performance, these methods used 3DMMs fittings for the model
pre-training.
11097

