Learning Non-volumetric Depth Fusion using Successive Reprojections
Simon Donné
Andreas Geiger
Autonomous Vision Group
MPI for Intelligent Systems and University of Tübingen
{simon.donne,andreas.geiger}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Given a set of input views, multi-view stereopsis techniques estimate depth maps to represent the 3D reconstruction of the scene; these are fused into a single, consistent,
reconstruction – most often a point cloud. In this work we
propose to learn an auto-regressive depth refinement directly
from data. While deep learning has improved the accuracy
and speed of depth estimation significantly, learned MVS
techniques remain limited to the planesweeping paradigm.
We refine a set of input depth maps by successively reprojecting information from neighbouring views to leverage multiview constraints. Compared to learning-based volumetric
fusion techniques, an image-based representation allows
significantly more detailed reconstructions; compared to traditional point-based techniques, our method learns noise
suppression and surface completion in a data-driven fashion.
Due to the limited availability of high-quality reconstruction
datasets with ground truth, we introduce two novel synthetic
datasets to (pre-)train our network. Our approach is able to
improve both the output depth maps and the reconstructed
point cloud, for both learned and traditional depth estimation front-ends, on both synthetic and real data.

neighbour
depth estimate

neighbour
conﬁdence

center
depth estimate

center
conﬁdence

reprojection
onto center

DeFuSR

reﬁned center
depth estimate

reﬁned center
conﬁdence

1. Introduction

Figure 1: The center view depth estimate is inaccurate
around the center of the Buddha, even though the neighbouring view has a confident estimate for these areas. By
reprojecting the neighbour’s information onto the center image, we efficiently encode this information for the refinement
network to resolve the uncertain areas. Iteratively performing this refinement further improves the estimates.

Multi-view stereopsis techniques constitute the current
state-of-the-art in 3D point cloud reconstruction [21]. Given
a set of images and camera matrices, MVS techniques estimate depth maps for all input views and subsequently merge
them into a consistent 3D reconstruction. While the deep
learning paradigm has led to drastic improvements in the
depth estimation step itself, the existing learned MVS approaches [11, 38] consist of plane-sweeping, followed by
classical depth fusion approaches [7,30] (which mainly filter
out invalid estimates). Instead, we propose to learn depth
map fusion from data; by incorporating and fusing information from neighbouring views we refine the depth map
estimate of a central view. We dub our approach DeFuSR:
Depth Fusion Through Successive Reprojections.

In volumetric space, learned approaches [2, 16, 17, 29]
that fuse depth information from multiple views have shown
great promise but are inherently limited because of computation time and memory requirements. Working in the
image domain bypasses these scaling issues [8, 30, 38], but
existing image-based fusing techniques focus on filtering out
bad estimates in the fusion step rather than improving them.
However, neighbouring views often contain information that
is missing in the current view, as illustrated in Figure 1. We
show that there is still a significant margin for improvement
of the depth estimates by auto-regressively incorporating
information from neighbouring views.

7634

