Reflective and Fluorescent Separation under Narrow-Band Illumination
Koji Koyamatsu
Daichi Hidaka
Takahiro Okabe
Kyushu Institute of Technology

Hendrik P. A. Lensch
University of Tübingen

okabe@ai.kyutech.ac.jp

hendrik.lensch@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
In this paper, we address the separation of reﬂective
and ﬂuorescent components in RGB images taken under
narrow-band light sources such as LEDs. First, we show
that the ﬂuorescent color per pixel can be estimated from
at least two images under different light source colors, because the observed color at a surface point is represented
by a convex combination of the light source color and the
illumination-invariant ﬂuorescent color. Second, we propose a method for robustly estimating the ﬂuorescent color
via MAP estimation by taking the prior knowledge with respect to ﬂuorescent colors into consideration. We conducted
a number of experiments by using both synthetic and real
images, and confirmed that our proposed method works better than the closely related state-of-the-art method and enables us to separate reﬂective and ﬂuorescent components
even from a single image. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that our method is effective for applications such as imagebased material editing and relighting.

1. Introduction
Fluorescence is a very common phenomenon observed
both in natural objects such as minerals and plants and in
man-made objects such as papers and clothes [2]. Fluorescent materials emit light with longer wavelengths than
those of the absorbed light, in contrast to reﬂective materials
which reﬂect light with the same wavelengths as those of the
incident light. Separating reﬂective and ﬂuorescent components in images is important for preprocessing of various
computer vision techniques that assume reﬂective components such as diffuse and specular ones.
Recently, due to the progress of light-emitting diodes
(LEDs), narrow-band light sources are often used for illuminating an object of interest and capturing its images in
the ﬁelds of computer vision and computer graphics [21, 1,
8, 17, 15, 16]. The application domain of images taken under narrow-band light sources includes image-based spectral relighting [21, 16], raw material classiﬁcation [8], bidirectional texture function (BTF) classiﬁcation [17], and sur-

face normal and reﬂectance recovery [15]. Therefore, separating reﬂective and ﬂuorescent components under narrowband illumination is useful for preprocessing of such applications.
In this paper, we address the separation of reﬂective
and ﬂuorescent components in RGB images taken under
narrow-band light sources such as LEDs. First, we show
that the ﬂuorescent color is on the plane spanned by the light
source color and the observed pixel color in the RGB color
space, and then the ﬂuorescent color per pixel can be estimated from at least two images under different light source
colors as the intersection of the two planes. This is because
the pixel color is represented by a convex combination of
the light source color and the illumination-invariant ﬂuorescent color. Second, we take the prior knowledge with
respect to ﬂuorescent colors, i.e. the distribution of ﬂuorescent colors in the r-g chromaticity space into consideration,
and propose a method for robustly estimating the ﬂuorescent color via maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation.
Through a number of experiments by using both synthetic and real images, we conﬁrm that our proposed approach works better than the closely related state-of-theart method [26] based on independent component analysis
(ICA) [12]. In addition, we show that our method taking
account of the prior knowledge with respect to ﬂuorescent
colors enables us to separate reﬂective and ﬂuorescent components even from a single image. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our method is effective for applications such as
image-based material editing and relighting.
The main contribution of this study is threefold. First,
we explore the novel problem of separating reﬂective and
ﬂorescent components under narrow-band illumination, and
show that the ﬂuorescent color per pixel can be estimated
from at least two images. Second, we achieve the reﬂective and ﬂuorescent separation from a single image by taking the known space of potential ﬂuorescent colors into
consideration. Third, we show that our approach with
the improved model results in better ﬂuorescent separation than closely related state-of-the-art methods, e.g. ICAbased method [26], and is effective for applications such as
image-based material editing and relighting.

7577

