A Dataset and Benchmark for Large-scale Multi-modal Face Anti-spoofing
Shifeng Zhang1∗ , Xiaobo Wang2∗, Ajian Liu3 , Chenxu Zhao2 ,
Jun Wan1†, Sergio Escalera4 , Hailin Shi2 , Zezheng Wang5 , Stan Z. Li1,3
1
NLPR, CASIA, UCAS, China; 2 JD AI Research; 3 MUST, Macau, China
4
Universitat de Barcelona, Computer Vision Center, Spain; 5 JD Finance
{shifeng.zhang,jun.wan,szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, ajianliu92@gmail.com
{wangxiaobo8,zhaochenxu1,shihailin,wangzezheng1}@jd.com, sergio@maia.ub.es

Abstract
Face anti-spoofing is essential to prevent face recognition systems from a security breach. Much of the progresses have been made by the availability of face antispoofing benchmark datasets in recent years. However,
existing face anti-spoofing benchmarks have limited number of subjects (≤ 170) and modalities (≤ 2), which
hinder the further development of the academic community. To facilitate face anti-spoofing research, we introduce a large-scale multi-modal dataset, namely CASIASURF, which is the largest publicly available dataset for
face anti-spoofing in terms of both subjects and visual
modalities. Specifically, it consists of 1, 000 subjects with
21, 000 videos and each sample has 3 modalities (i.e., RGB,
Depth and IR). We also provide a measurement set, evaluation protocol and training/validation/testing subsets, developing a new benchmark for face anti-spoofing. Moreover, we present a new multi-modal fusion method as baseline, which performs feature re-weighting to select the
more informative channel features while suppressing the
less useful ones for each modal. Extensive experiments
have been conducted on the proposed dataset to verify
its significance and generalization capability. The dataset
is available at https://sites.google.com/qq.
com/chalearnfacespoofingattackdete/.

1. Introduction
Face anti-spoofing aims to determine whether the captured face of a face recognition system is real or fake.
With the development of deep convolutional neural network
(CNN), face recognition [2, 6, 34, 46, 52] has achieved nearperfect recognition performance and already has been applied in our daily life, such as phone unlock, access control,
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. The CASIA-SURF dataset. It is a large-scale and multimodal dataset for face anti-spoofing, consisting of 492, 522 images with 3 modalities (i.e., RGB, Depth and IR).

face payment, etc. However, these face recognition systems
are prone to be attacked in various ways, including print
attack, video replay attack and 2D/3D mask attack, which
cause the recognition result to become unreliable. Therefore, face presentation attack detection (PAD) [3, 4] is a vital step to ensure that face recognition systems are in a safe
reliable condition.
Recently, face PAD algorithms [20, 32] have achieved
great performances. One of the key points of this success
is the availability of face anti-spoofing datasets [5, 7, 10,
32, 48, 53]. However, compared to the large existing image
classification [14] and face recognition [51] datasets, face
anti-spoofing datasets have less than 170 subjects and 60, 00
video clips, see Table 1. The limited number of subjects
does not guarantee for the generalization capability required
in real applications. Besides, from Table 1, another problem

919

