Learning Correspondence from the Cycle-consistency of Time
Xiaolong Wang*
Carnegie Mellon University

Allan Jabri*
UC Berkeley

Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

xiaolonw@cs.cmu.edu

ajabri@eecs.berkeley.edu

efros@eecs.berkeley.edu

Input Masks (Instance-level)

(a) Instance Masks Propagation

Input Pose

Input Masks (Semantic-level)

(c) Semantic Masks Propagation

𝐼"

Input Texture

(b) Pose Propagation

(d) Flow I" → I#

𝐼#

Warping I" to I#

(e) Texture Propagation

Figure 1: We propose to learn a representation for visual correspondence from raw video. Without any fine-tuning, the acquired representation generalizes to various tasks involving visual correspondence, allowing for propagation of: (a) Multiple Instance Masks; (b) Pose; (c)
Semantic Masks; (d) Long-Range Optical Flow; (e) Texture.

Abstract
We introduce a self-supervised method for learning visual correspondence from unlabeled video. The main idea
is to use cycle-consistency in time as free supervisory signal
for learning visual representations from scratch. At training
time, our model learns a feature map representation to be
useful for performing cycle-consistent tracking. At test time,
we use the acquired representation to find nearest neighbors
across space and time. We demonstrate the generalizability
of the representation – without finetuning – across a range
of visual correspondence tasks, including video object segmentation, keypoint tracking, and optical flow. Our approach outperforms previous self-supervised methods and
performs competitively with strongly supervised methods.1

1. Motivation
It is an oft-told story that when a young graduate student asked Takeo Kanade what are the three most important problems in computer vision, Kanade replied: “Correspondence, correspondence, correspondence!” Indeed,
* Equal contribution.
1 Project page: http://ajabri.github.io/timecycle

most fundamental vision problems, from optical flow and
tracking to action recognition and 3D reconstruction, require some notion of visual correspondence. Correspondence is the glue that links disparate visual percepts into
persistent entities and underlies visual reasoning in space
and time.
Learning representations for visual correspondence,
from pixel-wise to object-level, has been widely explored,
primarily with supervised learning approaches requiring
large amounts of labelled data. For learning low-level correspondence, such as optical flow, synthetic computer graphics data is often used as supervision [10, 22, 50, 62], limiting generalization to real scenes. On the other hand, approaches for learning higher-level semantic correspondence
rely on human annotations [71, 19, 65], which becomes prohibitively expensive at large scale. In this work, our aim
is to learn representations that support reasoning at various
levels of visual correspondence (Figure 1) from scratch and
without human supervision.
A fertile source of free supervision is video. Because
the world does not change abruptly, there is inherent visual correspondence between observations adjacent in time.
The problem is how to find these correspondences and turn
12566

