MMFace: A Multi-Metric Regression Network for Unconstrained Face
Reconstruction
Hongwei Yi1∗, Chen Li2†, Qiong Cao2 , Xiaoyong Shen2 , Sheng Li3†, Guoping Wang3 , Yu-Wing Tai2
1
2
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking Univ.
Tencent
3
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking Univ.
{hongweiyi, lisheng, wgp}@pku.edu.cn {chaselli, freyaqcao, dylanshen, yuwingtai}@tencent.com

Figure 1. Face reconstruction and alignment in the wild. Our method estimates very accurate face geometries as well as 3D facial landmarks
under large variations of facial expressions, poses, illumination conditions, and partial occlusions. The ground truth landmarks are denoted
as red and our estimated landmarks are denoted as white.

Abstract
We propose to address the face reconstruction in the
wild by using a multi-metric regression network, MMFace,
to align a 3D face morphable model (3DMM) to an input image. The key idea is to utilize a volumetric subnetwork to estimate an intermediate geometry representation, and a parametric sub-network to regress the 3DMM
parameters. Our parametric sub-network consists of identity loss, expression loss, and pose loss which greatly improves the aligned geometry details by incorporating high
level loss functions directly defined in the 3DMM parametric spaces. Our high-quality reconstruction is robust under
large variations of expressions, poses, illumination conditions, and even with large partial occlusions. We evaluate
our method by comparing the performance with state-ofthe-art approaches on latest 3D face dataset LS3D-W and
Florence. We achieve significant improvements both quan1 This work was done while Hongwei Yi was an intern at Tencent.
2 Chen Li and Sheng Li are the joint corresponding authors.

titatively and qualitatively. Due to our high-quality reconstruction, our method can be easily extended to generate
high-quality geometry sequences for video inputs.

1. Introduction
Avatar digitization aims to produce a virtual avatar by
reconstructing one’s facial geometry and appearance from
individual or multiple images. In the real world scenarios,
face reconstruction from single unconstrained image is very
challenging, especially under large head pose orientations,
extreme facial expressions, severe partial occlusions, and
complex illumination conditions.
To address the aforementioned limitations, we propose to
train a novel neural network to align a 3D face morphable
model (3DMM) [2] with an input image by regressing the
corresponding model parameters. The 3DMM represents a
face geometry in a multiple PCA-based linear space counting for identity and expression variations. The PCA-based
linear face model has laid the foundations for the modern

7663

