LAF-Net: Locally Adaptive Fusion Networks for Stereo Confidence Estimation
Sunok Kim1,2 , Seungryong Kim1,2 , Dongbo Min3 , Kwanghoon Sohn1*
1
Yonsei University 2 École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) 3 Ewha Womans University
{kso428,khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr seungryong.kim@epfl.ch dbmin@ewha.ac.kr
Conceptual figure. (fig1)

1. Introduction
Stereo matching for reconstructing geometric configuration of a scene is one of the fundamental and essential problems in computer vision fields [36]. For decades, numerous methods have been proposed for this task by leveraging
handcrafted [43, 10] and/or machine learning based [45, 38]
techniques. However, because of its challenging elements
such as reflective surfaces, textureless regions, repeated pattern regions, occlusions [23, 13, 6], and photometric deformations incurred by illumination and camera specification variations [44, 9], the stereo matching still remains an
unsolved problem. To alleviate these inherent challenges,
This research was supported by Next-Generation Information Computing Development Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (NRF2017M3C4A7069370). ∗ Corresponding author

Confidence

LAF‐Net

Disparity
Color image

We present a novel method that estimates confidence map
of an initial disparity by making full use of tri-modal input, including matching cost, disparity, and color image
through deep networks. The proposed network, termed
as Locally Adaptive Fusion Networks (LAF-Net), learns
locally-varying attention and scale maps to fuse the trimodal confidence features. The attention inference networks encode the importance of tri-modal confidence features and then concatenate them using the attention maps
in an adaptive and dynamic fashion. This enables us to
make an optimal fusion of the heterogeneous features, compared to a simple concatenation technique that is commonly
used in conventional approaches. In addition, to encode
the confidence features with locally-varying receptive fields,
the scale inference networks learn the scale map and warp
the fused confidence features through convolutional spatial
transformer networks. Finally, the confidence map is progressively estimated in the recursive refinement networks to
enforce a spatial context and local consistency. Experimental results show that this model outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods on various benchmarks.

Matching Cost

Abstract

Figure 1. Illustration of LAF-Net: using tri-modal input, consisting of matching cost, disparity, and color image, LAF-Net estimates confidence of disparity.

most methods [39, 27, 29, 20, 18, 21] have adopted the
confidence estimation step that detects unreliable disparities
and refines them for improving the quality of stereo matching results.
Formally, the confidence estimation pipeline involves
first extracting the confidence features and then training the
confidence classifiers using ground-truth confidences [39,
27, 30]. Conventionally, there exist several handcrafted
confidence measures using different input modalities, such
as matching cost, disparity, and color image [12, 28]. Since
any single confidence measures cannot handle all failure
cases in stereo matching, various combination of handdesigned confidence measures extracted from the tri-modal
input [8, 39, 27, 29, 20] has been used to learn shallow classifiers, such as random decision forest [2, 22]. Despite performance improvement by the joint usage of the tri-modal
input, they still show a limited performance due to their low
discriminative power.
Recent approaches have attempted to estimate the confidence by leveraging deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) thanks to their high robustness [30, 37, 18, 21],
demonstrating the substantial accuracy gain over the handcrafted approaches. However, unlike handcrafted approaches [8, 39, 27] that make full use of the tri-modal input, CNN-based approaches have been formulated by par1205

