Semi-supervised Transfer Learning for Image Rain Removal
Wei Wei1,2 , Deyu Meng1∗, Qian Zhao1 , Zongben Xu1 , Ying Wu2
1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northwestern University, IL, USA

Abstract
Single image rain removal is a typical inverse problem in
computer vision. The deep learning technique has been verified to be effective for this task and achieved state-of-theart performance. However, previous deep learning methods
need to pre-collect a large set of image pairs with/without
synthesized rain for training, which tends to make the neural network be biased toward learning the specific patterns
of the synthesized rain, while be less able to generalize to
real test samples whose rain types differ from those in the
training data. To this issue, this paper firstly proposes a
semi-supervised learning paradigm toward this task. Different from traditional deep learning methods which only
use supervised image pairs with/without synthesized rain,
we further put real rainy images, without need of their clean
ones, into the network training process. This is realized by
elaborately formulating the residual between an input rainy
image and its expected network output (clear image without
rain) as a specific parametrized rain streaks distribution.
The network is therefore trained to adapt real unsupervised
diverse rain types through transferring from the supervised
synthesized rain, and thus both the short-of-training-sample
and bias-to-supervised-sample issues can be evidently alleviated. Experiments on synthetic and real data verify the
superiority of our model compared to the state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Rain streaks and rain drops often occlude or blur the key
information of the images captured outdoors. Thus the rain
removal task for an image or a video is useful and necessary,
which can be served as an important pre-processing step for
outdoor visual system. An effective rain removal technique
can often help an image/video better deliver more accurate
detection or recognition results [17].
Current rain removal tasks can be mainly divided into
two categories: video rain removal (VRR) and single image rain removal (SIRR). Compared to VRR, which could

Figure 1: The comparison of the synthesized rain and real
rain. (a) is a clean image; (b), (c) are two synthesized rainy
image samples. (d), (e), (f) are real world rainy images.
utilize the temporal correlation among consecutive frames,
SIRR is generally much more difficult and challenging
without the aid of much prior knowledge capable of being extracted from a single image. Since being firstly proposed by Kang et al. [17], the SIRR problem has been attracting much attention. Recently, deep learning methods
[9, 10, 29, 32, 31, 23, 12, 11, 8] have been empirically substantiated to achieve state-of-the-art performance for SIRR
by training an appropriate, carefully designed network to
detect and remove the rain streaks simultaneously.
Albeit achieving good performance on this task, current
deep learning approach still exists some limitations on the
methodology. First, for training data, since it is hard to obtain clean/rainy image pairs from real rainy scenarios, previous methods use synthesized data as an alternative, and
mainly adopt the strategy of adding the “fake” rain streaks
synthesized by the Photoshop software1 on the clean images. Two samples of such synthesized rainy images are
shown in Figure 1.(b) and (c) (the corresponding clean image is shown in Figure 1.(a)). Albeit being varied by the rain
streak direction and density, the synthesized rainy images
still cannot include sufficiently wider range of rain streak
patterns in real rainy images. For instance, in Figure 1.(d),
the rain streaks have multiple directions in a single frame influenced by the wind; in Figure 1.(e), the rain streaks have
1 https://www.photoshopessentials.com/photo-effects/rain/

∗ Deyu Meng is the corresponding author.

3877

