Timeception for Complex Action Recognition
Noureldien Hussein, Efstratios Gavves, Arnold W.M. Smeulders
QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam
{nhussein,egavves,a.w.m.smeulders}@uva.nl

Abstract
This paper focuses on the temporal aspect for recognizing human activities in videos; an important visual cue that
has long been undervalued. We revisit the conventional definition of activity and restrict it to “Complex Action”: a
set of one-actions with a weak temporal pattern that serves
a specific purpose. Related works use spatiotemporal 3D
convolutions with fixed kernel size, too rigid to capture the
varieties in temporal extents of complex actions, and too
short for long-range temporal modeling. In contrast, we
use multi-scale temporal convolutions, and we reduce the
complexity of 3D convolutions. The outcome is Timeception
convolution layers, which reasons about minute-long temporal patterns, a factor of 8 longer than best related works.
As a result, Timeception achieves impressive accuracy in
recognizing the human activities of Charades, Breakfast Actions, and MultiTHUMOS. Further, we demonstrate that
Timeception learns long-range temporal dependencies and
tolerate temporal extents of complex actions.

1. Introduction
In ordinary life, activities of daily living pop up frequently. Our conversations include actions like “cooking
a meal” or “cleaning the house” much more frequently than
actions like “jumping” or “cutting a cucumber”. The latter, which we call one-actions, exhibit one visual pattern,
possibly repetitive. They are usually short in time, homogeneous in motion and coherent in form. In contrast, cooking
a meal or cleaning the house are very different actions. We
refer to them as complex actions, characterized by: i. They
are typically composed of several one-actions, see figure 1.
ii. These one-actions, contained in a complex action, exhibit large variations in their temporal duration and temporal order. iii. As a consequence of the composition, a
complex action takes much longer to unfold. And, by the
in-homogeneity in composition, the complex action needs
to be sampled in full, not to miss crucial parts.
In the recent literature, the main focus is the recognition of short-range actions like in HMDB, UCF and Kinetics [1, 2, 3]. Few attention has been paid to the recogni-

𝑣1

𝑣2

𝑣3

Figure 1: Properties of complex action “Cooking a Meal”:
composition: consists of several one-actions (Cook, ...),
order: weak temporal order of one-actions (Get Î Wash),
extent: one-actions vary in their temporal extents.
tion of long-range and complex actions, as in Charades and
EventNet [4, 5], which we study here. The first challenge is
minute-long temporal modeling while maintaining attention
to seconds-long details. Statistical temporal pooling, as applied in [6, 7] falls short of learning temporal order. Neural
temporal modeling [8, 9] and spatio-temporal convolutions
of various types [10, 11, 12] successfully learns temporal
order of 8 [13] or 128 timesteps [14]. But the computational
cost is far beyond scaling up to 1000 timesteps needed for
complex actions. The second challenge is tolerating variations in temporal extent and temporal order of one-actions.
Related methods [11, 15] learn spatio-temporal convolutions with fixed-size kernels, which would be too rigid for
complex actions. To address these challenges, we present
Timeception, a novel convolutional layer dedicated only for
temporal modeling. It learns long-range temporal dependencies with attention to short-range details. Plus, it tolerates the differences in temporal extent of one-actions comprising the complex action. As a result, we demonstrate
success in recognizing the long and complex actions, and
achieving state-of-the-art-results in Charades [4], Breakfast
Actions [16] and MultiTHUMOS [17].
The novelties of of this paper are: i. We introduce a convolutional temporal layer effectively and efficiently learn
minute-long action ranges of 1024 timesteps, a factor of 8
longer than best related work. ii. We introduce multi-scale
temporal kernels to account for large variations in duration
of action components. iii. We use temporal-only convolu1254

