Unequal-training for Deep Face Recognition with Long-tailed Noisy Data
Yaoyao Zhong, Weihong Deng∗, Mei Wang, Jiani Hu
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{zhongyaoyao, whdeng, wangmei1, jnhu}@bupt.edu.cn

Jianteng Peng, Xunqiang Tao, Yaohai Huang
Canon Information Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd
{pengjianteng, taoxunqiang, huangyaohai}@canon-ib.com.cn

Abstract
Large-scale face datasets usually exhibit a massive number of classes, a long-tailed distribution, and severe label
noise, which undoubtedly aggravate the difficulty of training. In this paper, we propose a training strategy that treats
the head data and the tail data in an unequal way, accompanying with noise-robust loss functions, to take full
advantage of their respective characteristics. Specifically,
the unequal-training framework provides two training data
streams: the first stream applies the head data to learn discriminative face representation supervised by Noise Resistance loss; the second stream applies the tail data to learn
auxiliary information by gradually mining the stable discriminative information from confusing tail classes. Consequently, both training streams offer complementary information to deep feature learning. Extensive experiments
have demonstrated the effectiveness of the new unequaltraining framework and loss functions. Better yet, our
method could save a significant amount of GPU memory.
With our method, we achieve the best result on MegaFace
Challenge 2 (MF2) given a large-scale noisy training data
set.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neuron networks (DCNNs) have
achieved great success in computer vision [11,12,18,19,29],
significantly improving the state of art in face recognition [6, 7, 21, 28, 36, 37, 39]. Besides the evolving architectures, large-scale training datasets play a crucial role in deep
face recognition. It is worth to point out that real-world face
datasets are usually large-scale and exhibit a long-tailed distribution, which present three challenges for model training. First, there exists extremely imbalanced identities in
∗ Corresponding Author

such a large dataset, in which some identities have sufficient
samples, while for other hundreds of thousands identities,
only very few samples are available. Second, there is significant noise inherent in the long-tailed face datasets. As
reported in [35], the label noise percentage increases dramatically as the scale of data growing, and million level
datasets typically would even have a noise ratio higher than
30%. Third, with a massive number of identities, the fullyconnected layer connected with softmax loss will become
extremely large, thus the GPU memory will be congested
and the batch-size will be lowered, which will make the
training loss difficult to converge [34].
The three challenges, i.e. extremely unbalanced data,
million level identities, and inherent noise, undoubtedly aggravate the difficulty of training. The experiment of Zhang
et al. [44] indicates that, a model trained on the whole longtailed dataset will perform worse than that trained on a specific proportion of the whole dataset (cutting 50% tail in
their work). The phenomenon indicates that, it would be
sub-optimal to train on the whole face dataset without considering characteristics of the data. The tail identities cannot provide an accurate description with limited number of
training samples, thus the feature space of them will be
squeezed by the head identities. Moreover, overfitting to
noise would further deteriorate the model [35].
Unfortunately, current training methods cannot stably
make full use of discriminative information in the longtailed noisy dataset. Due to this complicated situation
of long-tailed noisy face dataset, traditional methods, e.g.
re-sampling [3] and cost-sensitive weighting [17], are no
longer feasible. Some recently proposed solutions attempted to alleviate long-tailed problem by compensating
the tail data [41, 43, 44]. Although they can treat the head
and tail data equally, these methods may by easily affected
by the label noise. Thus, we dedicate to tackling the longtailed problem in deep face recognition, improving the resistance of training models to noise, exploring effective
17812

