Adaptive NMS: Refining Pedestrian Detection in a Crowd
Songtao Liu1,2,3 Di Huang1,2,3∗ Yunhong Wang1,3
1
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University
2
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
{liusongtao, dhuang, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Pedestrian detection in a crowd is a very challenging issue. This paper addresses this problem by a novel NonMaximum Suppression (NMS) algorithm to better refine the
bounding boxes given by detectors. The contributions are
threefold: (1) we propose adaptive-NMS, which applies a
dynamic suppression threshold to an instance, according to
the target density; (2) we design an efficient subnetwork to
learn density scores, which can be conveniently embedded
into both the single-stage and two-stage detectors; and (3)
we achieve state of the art results on the CityPersons and
CrowdHuman benchmarks.

1. Introduction
During the last two decades, pedestrian detection, as a
special branch of general object detection, has received considerable attention. In the literature, many solutions have
been presented to handle such an issue, and similar as in
general object detection, the past several years have witnessed its technical development from models relying on
hand-crafted features [4, 5, 11, 48] to deep learning networks [45, 46, 50, 44, 49]. Due to the capability of learning
discriminative features, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) based approaches dominate this area, and the results on
public benchmarks are significantly promoted.
In recent years, pedestrian detection is urgently required
in the real-world scenario where the density of people is
high, i.e., airports, train stations, shopping malls etc. Despite great progress achieved, detecting pedestrians in those
scenes still remains difficult, evidenced by significant performance drops of state of the art methods. For example,
OR-CNN [49], a more recent work, reports a Miss Rate (MR) of 4.1% on the Caltech database [6], which does not consider this challenge. Its MR degrades to 11.0% on CityPersons [47], where 26.4% pedestrians are overlapped with an
∗ corresponding author

(a) original image

(b) prediction before NMS

(c) NMS threshold =0.5

(d) NMS threshold =0.7

Figure 1. Illustration of greedy-NMS results of different thresholds. The blue box shows the missing object, while the red ones
highlight false positives. The bounding boxes in (b) are generated using Faster R-CNN. In a crowd scene, a lower NMS threshold may remove true positives (c) while a higher NMS threshold
may increase false positives (d). The threshold for visualization is
above 0.3.

Intersection over Union (IoU) above 0.3 and the average of
pairwise overlap between two human instances (larger than
0.5 IoU) is 0.32 per image. Therefore, it becomes a necessity to work on pedestrian detection in a crowd. While one
may argue that this problem is the same as occlusion, they
are indeed different, as in a crowd scene, pedestrians whose
appearances are similar often occlude each other by a large
part, making it even more challenging.
This work focuses on this issue, and we start with the
analysis of deep learning based detectors. As we know, existing detectors either directly regress the default anchors
into detection boxes on the feature maps (single-stage detectors, e.g., SSD [23], YOLO [30, 31], RetinaNet [21]),
or first generate category independent region proposals
and then refine them (two-stage detectors, e.g., Faster RCNN [32], R-FCN [19]). All the methods produce large
numbers of false positives near the ground truth, and the
16459

