Depth from a polarisation + RGB stereo pair
Dizhong Zhu and William A. P. Smith
University of York, York, UK
{dz761,william.smith}@york.ac.uk

Estimated
specular mask
Estimated Albedo

Estimated Shape

Corrected normal
Section 4

Section 5

Section 6

Depth from stereo

(a) Setup and Input

(b) Local disambiguation

(c) Output

Figure 1: Overview: From a stereo pair of one polarisation image and one RGB image (a) we merge stereo depth with
polarisation normals using a higher order graphical model (b) before estimating an albedo map and the final geometry (c).

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a hybrid depth imaging system in which a polarisation camera is augmented by a second image from a standard digital camera. For this modest
increase in equipment complexity over conventional shapefrom-polarisation, we obtain a number of benefits that enable us to overcome longstanding problems with the polarisation shape cue. The stereo cue provides a depth map
which, although coarse, is metrically accurate. This is used
as a guide surface for disambiguation of the polarisation
surface normal estimates using a higher order graphical
model. In turn, these are used to estimate diffuse albedo.
By extending a previous shape-from-polarisation method to
the perspective case, we show how to compute dense, detailed maps of absolute depth, while retaining a linear formulation. We show that our hybrid method is able to recover dense 3D geometry that is superior to state-of-the-art
shape-from-polarisation or two view stereo alone.

1. Introduction
Surface reflection changes the polarisation state of light.
By measuring the polarisation state of reflected light, we are
able to infer information about the material properties and
geometry of the surface. Polarisation is a particularly attrac-

tive shape estimation cue because it is dense (surface orientation information is available at every pixel), can be applied
to smooth, featureless, glossy surfaces (on which multiview
methods would fail to find correspondences) and it can be
captured in a single shot (using a polarisation camera). For
this reason, the shape-from-polarisation cue has recently
been rediscovered and significant progress has been made
in the past three years [2, 7, 9, 15, 16, 18, 24, 28, 29, 34].
Recent work has posed shape-from-polarisation in terms
of direct estimation of orthographic surface height [27–29].
This is attractive because it halves the degrees of freedom
(one height value per pixel rather than two values to represent surface orientation) and avoids the two step process
of surface orientation estimation followed by surface integration to obtain a height map. However, polarisation cues
do not provide any direct constraints on metric depth, only
on local surface orientation. Hence, the surfaces recovered
by these methods are globally inaccurate and subject to low
frequency distortion. Moreover, the orthographic assumption is practically limiting.
For this reason, in this paper we consider a hybrid setup
in which a single polarisation image is augmented by a second image from a standard RGB camera. This provides us
with a conventional stereo cue from which we can compute
coarse but metrically accurate depth estimates. This serves
a number of purposes. First, this provides coarse guide nor-

7586

