Grounded Video Description
Luowei Zhou1,2 , Yannis Kalantidis1 , Xinlei Chen1 , Jason J. Corso2 , Marcus Rohrbach1
1
Facebook AI, 2 University of Michigan
github.com/facebookresearch/grounded-video-description

Abstract
Video description is one of the most challenging problems in vision and language understanding due to the large
variability both on the video and language side. Models,
hence, typically shortcut the difficulty in recognition and
generate plausible sentences that are based on priors but
are not necessarily grounded in the video. In this work, we
explicitly link the sentence to the evidence in the video by
annotating each noun phrase in a sentence with the corresponding bounding box in one of the frames of a video.
Our dataset, ActivityNet-Entities, augments the challenging ActivityNet Captions dataset with 158k bounding box
annotations, each grounding a noun phrase. This allows
training video description models with this data, and importantly, evaluate how grounded or “true” such model are
to the video they describe. To generate grounded captions,
we propose a novel video description model which is able
to exploit these bounding box annotations. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our model on our dataset, but also show
how it can be applied to image description on the Flickr30k
Entities dataset. We achieve state-of-the-art performance
on video description, video paragraph description, and image description and demonstrate our generated sentences
are better grounded in the video.

1. Introduction
Image and video description models are frequently not
well grounded [14] which can increase their bias [9] and
lead to hallucination of objects [24], i.e. the model mentions objects which are not in the image or video e.g. because they might have appeared in similar contexts during
training. This makes models less accountable and trustworthy, which is important if we hope such models will eventually assist people in need [2, 27]. Additionally, grounded
models can help to explain the model’s decisions to humans
and allow humans to diagnose them [20]. While researchers
have started to discover and study these problems for image
description [14, 9, 24, 20],1 they are even more pronounced
1 We use description instead of captioning as captioning is often used
to refer to transcribing the speech in the video, not describing the content.

A man is seen standing in a room speaking to the camera while holding a bike .
w/o grounding supervision: A man is standing in a gym .
[42]: A man is seen speaking to the camera while holding a piece of exercise equipment.
GT: A man in a room holds a bike and talks to the camera.

A group of people are in a raft down a river .
w/o grounding supervision: A group of people are in a river.
[42]: A large group of people are seen riding down a river and looking off into the distance.
GT: Several people are on a raft in the water.

Figure 1: Word-level grounded video descriptions generated by our model on two segments from our ActivityNetEntities dataset. We also provide the descriptions generated
by our model without explicit bounding box supervision,
the descriptions generated by [42] and the ground-truth descriptions (GT) for comparison.
for video description due to the increased difficulty and diversity, both on the visual and the language side.
Fig. 1 illustrates this problem. A video description approach (without grounding supervision) generated the sentence “A man standing in a gym” which correctly mentions
“a man” but hallucinates “gym” which is not visible in the
video. Although a man is in the video it is not clear if the
model looked at the bounding box of the man to say this
word [9, 24]. For the sentence “A man [...] is playing the
piano” in Fig. 2, it is important to understand that which
“man” in the image “A man” is referring to, to determine if
a model is correctly grounded. Such understanding is crucial for many applications when trying to build accountable
systems or when generating the next sentence or responding
to a follow up question of a blind person: e.g. answering “Is
he looking at me?” requires an understanding which of the
people in the image the model talked about.
The goal of our research is to build such grounded systems. As one important step in this direction, we col16578

