JSIS3D: Joint Semantic-Instance Segmentation of 3D Point Clouds with
Multi-Task Pointwise Networks and Multi-Value Conditional Random Fields
Quang-Hieu Pham†

Duc Thanh Nguyen‡
Binh-Son Hua⊲
Gemma Roig†
†
Singapore University of Technology and Design
‡
⊲
Deakin University
The University of Tokyo
⊳
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Deep learning techniques have become the to-go models for most vision-related tasks on 2D images. However,
their power has not been fully realised on several tasks in
3D space, e.g., 3D scene understanding. In this work, we
jointly address the problems of semantic and instance segmentation of 3D point clouds. Specifically, we develop a
multi-task pointwise network that simultaneously performs
two tasks: predicting the semantic classes of 3D points and
embedding the points into high-dimensional vectors so that
points of the same object instance are represented by similar embeddings. We then propose a multi-value conditional
random field model to incorporate the semantic and instance labels and formulate the problem of semantic and instance segmentation as jointly optimising labels in the field
model. The proposed method is thoroughly evaluated and
compared with existing methods on different indoor scene
datasets including S3DIS and SceneNN. Experimental results showed the robustness of the proposed joint semanticinstance segmentation scheme over its single components.
Our method also achieved state-of-the-art performance on
semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
The growing popularity of low-cost 3D sensors (e.g.,
Kinect) and light-field cameras has opened many 3D-based
applications such as autonomous driving, robotics, mobilebased navigation, virtual reality, and 3D games. This development also acquires the capability of automatic understanding of 3D data. In 2D domain, common scene understanding tasks including image classification, semantic
segmentation, or instance segmentation, have achieved notable results [13, 3]. However, the problem of 3D scene understanding poses much greater challenges, e.g., large-scale
and noisy data processing.
Literature has shown that the data of a 3D scene can

Sai-Kit Yeung⊳

be represented by a set of images capturing the scene at
different viewpoints [14, 46, 42], in a regular grid of volumes [47, 26, 28], or simply in a 3D point cloud [33, 16,
45, 17, 24]. Our work is inspired by the point-based representation for several reasons. Firstly, compared with multiview and volumetric representations, point clouds offer a
more compact and intuitive representation of 3D data. Secondly, recent neural networks directly built on point clouds
[33, 16, 24, 45, 17, 18, 22, 23, 48] have shown promising
results across multiple tasks such as object recognition and
semantic segmentation.
In this paper, we address two fundamental problems in
3D scene understanding: semantic segmentation and instance segmentation. Semantic segmentation aims to identify a class label or object category (e.g., chair, table) for
every 3D point in a scene while instance segmentation clusters the scene into object instances. These two problems
have often been tackled separately in which instance segmentation/detection is a post-processing task of semantic
segmentation [31, 30]. However, we have observed that object categories and object instances are mutually dependent.
For instance, shape and appearance features extracted on an
instance would help to identify the object category of that
instance. On the other hand, if two 3D points are assigned to
different object categories, they unlikely belong to the same
object instance. Therefore, it is desirable to couple semantic and instance segmentation into a single task. Towards the
above motivations, we make the following contributions in
our work.
• A network architecture namely multi-task pointwise
network (MT-PNet) that simultaneously performs two
tasks: predicting the object categories of 3D points in a
point cloud, and embedding these 3D points into highdimensional feature vectors that allow clustering the
points into object instances.
• A multi-value conditional random field (MV-CRF)
model that formulates the joint optimisation of class
labels and object instances into a unified framework,

8827

