Moving Object Detection under Discontinuous Change in Illumination Using
Tensor Low-Rank and Invariant Sparse Decomposition
Moein Shakeri, Hong Zhang
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
{shakeri,hzhang}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Although low-rank and sparse decomposition based
methods have been successfully applied to the problem of
moving object detection using structured sparsity-inducing
norms, they are still vulnerable to significant illumination
changes that arise in certain applications. We are interested in moving object detection in applications involving time-lapse image sequences for which current methods
mistakenly group moving objects and illumination changes
into foreground. Our method relies on the multilinear (tensor) data low-rank and sparse decomposition framework
to address the weaknesses of existing methods. The key to
our proposed method is to create first a set of prior maps
that can characterize the changes in the image sequence
due to illumination. We show that they can be detected by
a k-support norm. To deal with concurrent, two types of
changes, we employ two regularization terms, one for detecting moving objects and the other for accounting for illumination changes, in the tensor low-rank and sparse decomposition formulation. Through comprehensive experiments using challenging datasets, we show that our method
demonstrates a remarkable ability to detect moving objects
under discontinuous change in illumination, and outperforms the state-of-the-art solutions to this challenging problem.

1. Introduction
Moving object detection in an image sequence captured
under uncontrolled illumination conditions is a common
problem in computer vision applications such as visual
surveillance [26], traffic monitoring [5], and social signal
processing [28]. Although moving object detection and
background subtraction is a well established area of research and many solutions have been proposed, still most
of the existing solutions are vulnerable to complex illumination changes that frequently occur in practical situations,

Figure 1: First row of each sequence: images captured in a
industrial or wildlife monitoring system. Second row: results of our proposed method to detect foreground objects.
especially when the changes are discontinuous in time. In
such cases, current methods are often not able to distinguish between illumination changes (including those due
to shadow), and changes caused by moving objects in the
scene. In general, outdoor illumination conditions are uncontrolled, making moving object detection a difficult and
challenging problem. This is a common problem for many
surveillance systems in industrial or wildlife monitoring areas in which a motion triggered camera or a time-lapse photography system is employed for detecting objects of interest over time. Fig. 1 shows four image sequences under discontinuous changes in illumination, which illustrate these
applications. Due to significant and complex changes in illumination and independent changes of the moving objects
between images of the sequences, detection of the moving
objects is extremely challenging. The second row of each
sequence in Fig. 1 shows the sample results of our proposed
method with detected moving objects.
Among the leading methods for the problem addressed
in this paper is a group based on low-rank and sparse decomposition. This group of methods exploit the fact that
the background in an image sequence can be described as
a low-rank matrix whose columns are image pixels that are
correlated [20, 3]. However, image sequences with moving objects under discontinuous change in illumination and
object location using the timer-lapse photography are qual-

7221

