Not Using the Car to See the Sidewalk — Quantifying
and Controlling the Effects of Context in Classification and Segmentation
Rakshith Shetty1
1

Bernt Schiele1

Mario Fritz2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics 2 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
1

firstname.lastname@mpi-inf.mpg.de

2

lastname@cispa.saarland

Abstract
Importance of visual context in scene understanding
tasks is well recognized in the computer vision community.
However, to what extent the computer vision models are dependent on the context to make their predictions is unclear.
A model overly relying on context will fail when encountering objects in different contexts than in training data and
hence it is important to identify these dependencies before
we can deploy the models in the real-world. We propose a
method to quantify the sensitivity of black-box vision models to visual context by editing images to remove selected
objects and measuring the response of the target models.
We apply this methodology on two tasks, image classification and semantic segmentation, and discover undesirable
dependency between objects and context, for example that
“sidewalk” segmentation is very sensitive to the presence of
“cars” in the image. We propose an object removal based
data augmentation solution to mitigate this dependency and
increase the robustness of classification and segmentation
models to contextual variations. Our experiments show
that the proposed data augmentation helps these models
improve the performance in out-of-context scenarios, while
preserving the performance on regular data.

1. Introduction
Visual context of an object in an image is an important
source of information for scene understanding tasks in both
human and computer vision [22, 15]. Contextual cues such
as presence of frequently co-occurring objects can help resolve ambiguities between visually similar classes and improve performance in various vision tasks including object
detection [13, 3] and segmentation [25]. However, objects
can also appear in previously unseen context or be absent
from a very typical context. For example, we might find
a keyboard on a desk without a monitor (object-withoutcontext), or find a monitor without a keyboard (contextwithout-object). While humans can handle both these atypical scenarios gracefully, computer vision models often fail
by ignoring the visual evidence for the object in object-

Original(I)

Upernet [23]

Ours

I − car

Upernet [23]

Ours

Figure 1: An example of the sensitivity of road and sidewalk segmentation to the context object car. Removing car
from the image (second row) causes segmentation errors in
the baseline model which hallucinates a sidewalk (yellow)
when there is none. Our model trained with proposed dataaugmentation is more robust to these context changes.
without-context case or hallucinating objects which are not
actually present in the image in context-without-object case.
For example, in our experiments we find that keyboard is often not recognized without a nearby monitor, and semantic
segmentation of roads suffers without cars (see Figure 1).
While context can be an important cue, this kind of too
heavy or even pathological dependency on contextual signals is undesirable, and it is important to systematically
identify and ideally fix such cases. In this work, we analyze and quantify the effect contextual information on two
tasks, multi-label classification and semantic segmentation.
Context generally refers to different kinds of information including co-occurring objects, scene type and lighting. For our analysis, we limit context to only the set of
co-occurring objects in the image. While this might seem
restrictive, we find in our analysis that image classification and segmentation models learn many interesting and
undesirable dependencies between an object and other cooccurring objects (context) in the image. We use object re-

8218

