Topology Reconstruction of Tree-like Structure in Images via Structural
Similarity Measure and Dominant Set Clustering
Jianyang Xie1 , Yitian Zhao1* , Yonghuai Liu2 , Pan Su1 , Yifan Zhao3* ,
Jun Cheng1 , Yalin Zheng4 , Jiang Liu1
1

2

Ningbo Institute of Industrial Technology
Chinese Academy of Sciences

Department of Computer Science
Edge Hill University
liuyo@edgehill.ac.uk

yitian.zhao@nimte.ac.cn
3

School of Aerospace, Transport and Manufacturing
Cranfield University

The reconstruction and analysis of tree-like topological
structures in the biomedical images is crucial for biologists
and surgeons to understand biomedical conditions and plan
surgical procedures. The underlying tree-structure topology
reveals how different curvilinear components are anatomically connected to each other. Existing automated topology
reconstruction methods have great difficulty in identifying
the connectivity when two or more curvilinear components
cross or bifurcate, due to their projection ambiguity, imaging noise and low contrast. In this paper, we propose a
novel curvilinear structural similarity measure to guide a
dominant-set clustering approach to address this indispensable issue. The novel similarity measure takes into account
both intensity and geometric properties in representing the
curvilinear structure locally and globally, and group curvilinear objects at crossover points into different connected
branches by dominant-set clustering. The proposed method
is applicable to different imaging modalities, and quantitative and qualitative results on retinal vessel, plant root, and
neuronal network datasets show that our methodology is capable of advancing the current state-of-the-art techniques.

1. Introduction
Accurate reconstruction of the pervasive tree-like structures commonly encountered in biomedical imagery, such
as blood vessels in medical images, the roots of plants
in color photography, or neuronal arbors in optical microscopy images, is a fundamental step in providing valuable clinical information in diagnosis of pathological con-

Department of Eye and Vision Science
University of Liverpool
yzheng@liv.ac.uk

yifan.zhao@cranfield.ac.uk

Abstract

4

ditions [25, 30], revealing important information about the
delivery of nutrients to different plant tissues [14, 1], or
screening the neuronal connectivity to study the relation between neuronal structure and function [3, 26], respectively.
In consequence, extracting and representing the geometrical (radii, lengths or tortuosity) and topological (branching
connectivity) properties of these tree-like structures is critical for diagnosis, or other analytic purposes.
Rapid development has taken place in the automatic geometric extraction of the properties of tree-like structures,
as evidenced by extensive reviews [16, 32]: but automated
topology reconstruction from a single, two-dimensional (2D) image of a three-dimensional (3-D) tree-structure is relatively unexplored, and more challenging. The main reason
is that while a 3-D tree-structure projects readily to a 2-D
image plane, the problem of then reconstructing the topology of the tree-like structure from it is ill-posed and errorprone [14], due to their depth loss in projection, imaging
noise and low contrast in appearance and geometric structures.
The underlying tree-structure topology must be able to
identify and differentiate individual curvilinear objects from
the entire tree network. The top row of Figure 1 shows examples of tree-like structures in biomedical imagery: the
bottom row gives their derived topological information.
Manual reconstruction of these tree-structure topologies is
time consuming, and commercial software, e.g., Vaa3D1 ,
still largely relies on manual annotation and so is subject to
human error [11]. Thus, the catalyst for the development of
algorithms for accurate automatic topology reconstruction
has been primarily the need to overcome time constraints
and avoid human error.
1 http://home.penglab.com/proj/vaa3d/home

18505

