Context-Reinforced Semantic Segmentation
Yizhou Zhou∗1
Xiaoyan Sun2
Zheng-Jun Zha†1
Wenjun Zeng2
2
1
Microsoft Research Asia
University of Science and Technology of China
zyz0205@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

{xysun,wezeng}@microsoft.com

Abstract

Semantic image segmentation is a fundamental and challenging task in computer vision. It interprets an image by
assigning each pixel a semantic label. These semantic labels provide high-level semantic information varying from
the layout of a scene to the category, location, and shape of
each individual object in an image, which makes semantic
image segmentation essential for many intelligent systems,
such as autonomous driving and image editing.
Context is known to be essential for semantic segmentation [11]. Classifying a local region/pixel with regard to
its surroundings is super helpful for reducing local ambiguities. However, the fully convolutional network (FCN),
∗ This work was performed while Yizhou Zhou was an intern with
Microsoft Research Asia. † Corresponding author.

Ground-truth

Baseline

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

(b) P-maps

1. Introduction

Color map

Input

(a) Context maps

Recent efforts have shown the importance of context on
deep convolutional neural network based semantic segmentation. Among others, the predicted segmentation map (pmap) itself which encodes rich high-level semantic cues
(e.g. objects and layout) can be regarded as a promising
source of context. In this paper, we propose a dedicated
module, Context Net, to better explore the context information in p-maps. Without introducing any new supervisions,
we formulate the context learning problem as a Markov Decision Process and optimize it using reinforcement learning
during which the p-map and Context Net are treated as environment and agent, respectively. Through adequate explorations, the Context Net selects the information which
has long-term benefit for segmentation inference. By incorporating the Context Net with a baseline segmentation
scheme, we then propose a Context-reinforced Semantic
Segmentation network (CiSS-Net), which is fully end-to-end
trainable. Experimental results show that the learned context brings 3.9% absolute improvement on mIoU over the
baseline segmentation method, and the CiSS-Net achieves
the state-of-the-art segmentation performance on ADE20K,
PASCAL-Context and Cityscapes.

river
water
plant
earth
tree
floor
field
rock
fence

Figure 1. Visualized segmentation results (also denoted as predicted segmentation maps (p-map)) and context maps in our CiSSNet. (a) Context maps at 3 steps. Here the white areas denote
uncertain regions that are excluded from valid contextual information. The context map shown here upgrades gradually. (b) p-map
at 3 steps. The prediction improves gradually due to the contextreinforced learning. It can be observed that reflection of trees in
the water which easily deceives the baseline algorithm is well handled by our CiSS-Net based on the learned context.

which is the most popular baseline of current successful semantic segmentation methods, lacks suitable strategies to
utilize global information about an image. In order to include more information, dilated/atrous convolutions are employed in FCN to expand the receptive field of convolutions
and enable dense predictions [5, 34, 4, 6]. Also, multiscale/multi-stage features are assembled to exploit information from different scales/layers to improve the segmentation performance [21, 30, 16, 7, 13].
Recent efforts focus more on integrating global context
features in FCNs. Global average pooling is adopted to
pool a global context feature from one of the last few layers
of FCN, which is then fused with local features to provide

4046

