PlaneRCNN: 3D Plane Detection and Reconstruction from a Single Image
Chen Liu1,2∗

Kihwan Kim1
Jinwei Gu1,3∗
Yasutaka Furukawa4
1
2
NVIDIA
Washington University in St. Louis
3
4
SenseTime
Simon Fraser University

Jan Kautz1

Figure 1. This paper proposes a deep neural architecture, PlaneRCNN, that detects planar regions and reconstructs a piecewise planar
depthmap from a single RGB image. From left to right, an input image, segmented planar regions, estimated depthmap, and reconstructed
planar surfaces.

Abstract
This paper proposes a deep neural architecture, PlaneRCNN, that detects and reconstructs piecewise planar surfaces from a single RGB image. PlaneRCNN employs a
variant of Mask R-CNN to detect planes with their plane
parameters and segmentation masks. PlaneRCNN then
jointly refines all the segmentation masks with a novel
loss enforcing the consistency with a nearby view during
training. The paper also presents a new benchmark with
more fine-grained plane segmentations in the ground-truth,
in which, PlaneRCNN outperforms existing state-of-theart methods with significant margins in the plane detection, segmentation, and reconstruction metrics. PlaneRCNN makes an important step towards robust plane extraction, which would have an immediate impact on a wide
range of applications including Robotics, Augmented Reality, and Virtual Reality. Code and data are available at
https://research.nvidia.com/publication/2019-06 PlaneRCNN.

1. Introduction
Planar regions in 3D scenes offer important geometric
cues in a variety of 3D perception tasks such as scene understanding [42], scene reconstruction [3], and robot navigation [18, 56]. Accordingly, piecewise planar scene reconstruction has been a focus of computer vision research
∗ The authors contributed to this work when they were at NVIDIA.

for many years, for example, plausible recovery of planar
structures from a single image [16], volumetric piecewise
planar reconstruction from point clouds [3], and Manhattan
depthmap reconstruction from multiple images [11].
A difficult yet fundamental task is the inference of a
piecewise planar structure from a single RGB image, posing two key challenges. First, 3D plane reconstruction from
a single image is an ill-posed problem, requiring rich scene
priors. Second, planar structures abundant in man-made environments often lack textures, requiring global image understanding as opposed to local texture analysis. Recently,
PlaneNet [27] and PlaneRecover [49] made a breakthrough
by introducing the use of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) and formulating the problem as a plane segmentation task. While generating promising results, they suffer
from three major limitations: 1) Missing small surfaces; 2)
Requiring the maximum number of planes in a single image
a priori; and 3) Poor generalization across domains (e.g.,
trained for indoors images and tested outdoors).
This paper proposes a novel deep neural architecture,
PlaneRCNN, that addresses these issues and more effectively infers piecewise planar structure from a single RGB
image (Fig. 1). PlaneRCNN consists of three components.
The first component is a plane detection network built
upon Mask R-CNN [14]. Besides an instance mask for each
planar region, we also estimate the plane normal and perpixel depth values. With known camera intrinsics, we can
further reconstruct the 3D planes from the detected planar
regions. This detection framework is more flexible and can
14450

