Time-Conditioned Action Anticipation in One Shot
Qiuhong Ke1 , Mario Fritz2 , Bernt Schiele1
1

2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany
{qke, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de fritz@cispa.saarland

Abstract
The goal of human action anticipation is to predict future actions. Ideally, in real-world applications such as
video surveillance and self-driving systems, future actions
should not only be predicted with high accuracy but also
at arbitrary and variable time-horizons ranging from shortto long-term predictions. Current work mostly focuses on
predicting the next action and thus long-term prediction is
achieved by recursive prediction of each next action, which
is both inefficient and accumulates errors. In this paper, we
propose a novel time-conditioned method for efficient and
effective long-term action anticipation. There are two key
ingredients to our approach. First, by explicitly conditioning our anticipation network on time allows to efficiently
anticipate also long-term actions. And second, we propose
an attended temporal feature and a time-conditioned skip
connection to extract relevant and useful information from
observations for effective anticipation. We conduct extensive experiments on the large-scale Epic-Kitchen and the
50Salads Datasets. Experimental results show that the proposed method is capable of anticipating future actions at
both short-term and long-term, and achieves state-of-theart performance.

1. Introduction
Human action anticipation, which aims to predict future
unseen actions, is very important for many real-world applications. For example, in surveillance scenarios, early alert
can be produced if abnormal events are anticipated, and in
human-robot interaction scenario, the robots can provide
timely corresponding interactions if they are able to anticipate human actions [39, 18].
Most current works investigate anticipation of the next
action or actions after only one second [28, 29, 39, 4]. In

Figure 1. The proposed time-conditioned method for action anticipation. By incorporating the time parameter, the proposed method
is capable of anticipating long-term actions efficiently and effectively.

real-world applications such as video surveillance, the system is often expected to be able to anticipate long-term actions (e.g., the action after t seconds of the observation).
Long-term anticipations can be achieved by anticipating the
following actions one by one in an iterative way, e.g., using
RNN models [6]. This indicates that the anticipation at each
time step is achieved based on the anticipation results of the
previous time steps. This iterative method could be effective for certain scripted activities that contain fixed-order
actions. However, in many real-world activities, the actions
can be stochastic and not well structured. In this situation,
the anticipation may be inaccurate at some steps, and these
anticipation errors will accumulate during the iterative anticipation process. This often leads to performance degradation of anticipation, especially when anticipating long-term
actions. Besides, if we only want to anticipate an action at
the long-term, the iterative method is often time-consuming
by producing the intermediate anticipations.
In this paper, we introduce a novel method to achieve
accurate and efficient action anticipation. Specifically, our
method performs action anticipation by incorporating the
time parameter to the information of the observation (see
Figure 1). Therefore, it directly anticipates the action at fu-

9925

