Synthesizing Environment-Aware Activities via Activity Sketches
Yuan-Hong Liao1,2∗ , Xavier Puig3∗ , Marko Boben4,5 , Antonio Torralba3 , Sanja Fidler1,2
1
University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 MIT, 4 University of Ljubljana, 5 Abelium d.o.o
{andrew, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu, {xavierpuig,torralba}@csail.mit.edu, marko.boben@fri.uni-lj.si

Abstract
In order to learn to perform activities from demonstrations or descriptions, agents need to distill what the essence
of the given activity is, and how it can be adapted to new
environments. In this work, we address the problem of
environment-aware program generation. Given a visual
demonstration or a description of an activity, we generate program sketches representing the essential instructions
and propose a model to transform these into full programs
representing the actions needed to perform the activity under the presented environmental constraints. To this end,
we build upon VirtualHome [15] to create a new dataset
VirtualHome-Env, where we collect program sketches to
represent activities and match programs with environments
that can afford them. Furthermore, we construct a knowledge base to sample realistic environments and another
knowledge base to seek out the programs under the sampled
environments. Finally, we propose ResActGraph, a network
that generates a program from a given sketch and an environment graph and tracks the changes in the environment
induced by the program.

1. Introduction
We want agents to be able to perform everyday tasks
(such as setting up the table, preparing coffee, or even sit on
the couch and watch TV). An agent should learn to perform
these tasks from high-level descriptions or visual demonstrations. The challenge is on how to generalize the acquired knowledge to new environments. For instance, if we
want to learn to make coffee, an agent could first watch a
video of someone making coffee in order to extract the sequence of steps (program) that need to be executed. However, when trying to make coffee in an environment that differs from the environment in which the demonstration took
place, the agent has to adjust the program so that it can be
executed. For instance, the agent could find that the coffee
machine is unplugged, or that it is in the living room instead
∗ indicates equal contribution

Activity (a): Watch TV
Description (d a):
Go to the living room. Sit on the couch and watch TV.
Visual Demonstration (ia):

Activity Sketch (sa)
Sit

Couch

Watch

TV

(a)
New Environment (e)

Environment-aware
Program (p)
Walk

(b)

Changes: Cat on sofa

Living room

Find

TV

Find

Couch

Grab

Cat

Put

Cat

Sit

Couch

Watch

TV

Figure 1. Overview of the environment-aware program generation.
Our goal is (a) generating a sketch sa distilling the essential steps
of the given demonstration ia or description da and (b) given a
new environment e, generating a program p, adapting the sketch
to e. The program contains the instructions to perform the activity
(blue blocks) as well as instructions to deal with the environment
(red blocks, grabbing the cat to sit).

of in the kitchen, or that someone else is currently using it
and the agent needs to wait. Being able to perform these adjustments requires the access to a common-sense database
of knowledge that allows the agent to decide which steps
in the demonstration are essential in the task definition, and
how the program needs to be modified (by adding/removing
steps) in order to accomplish the task in a new environment.
To address the generalization problem we represent activities with sketches, representations inspired from work in
programming languages [16, 13]. Sketches are high-level
representations of the steps needed to perform a task but
leaving holes that need to be completed for the sketch to
become executable in a particular environment.
Fig. 1 illustrates our goal. Given a visual demonstration
or a description of someone going to watch TV, we want to
extract the sketch of the activity (fig. 1a). In this example,
the sketch consists of two steps: Sit Couch, Watch TV.
The fact that the demonstration had the person going to the

6291

