FA-RPN: Floating Region Proposals for Face Detection
Mahyar Najibi ∗

Bharat Singh ∗

Larry S. Davis

{najibi,bharat,lsd}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for generating region proposals for performing face detection. Instead of classifying
anchor boxes using features from a pixel in the convolutional feature map, we adopt a pooling-based approach for
generating region proposals. However, pooling hundreds
of thousands of anchors which are evaluated for generating
proposals becomes a computational bottleneck during inference. To this end, an efficient anchor placement strategy
for reducing the number of anchor-boxes is proposed. We
then show that proposals generated by our network (Floating Anchor Region Proposal Network, FA-RPN) are better
than RPN for generating region proposals for face detection. We discuss several beneficial features of FA-RPN proposals (which can be enabled without re-training) like iterative refinement, placement of fractional anchors and changing size/shape of anchors. Our face detector based on FARPN obtains 89.4% mAP with a ResNet-50 backbone on the
WIDER dataset.

1. Introduction
Face detection is an important computer vision problem and has multiple applications in surveillance, tracking, consumer-facing devices like iPhones etc. Hence,
various approaches have been proposed towards solving it
[41, 43, 17, 45, 19, 36, 44, 29, 25] and successful solutions
have also been deployed in practice. So, expectations from
face detection algorithms are much higher and error rates
today are quite low. Algorithms need to detect faces which
are as small as 5 pixels to 500 pixels in size. As localization
is essential for detection, evaluating every small region of
the image is important. Face detection datasets can have up
to a thousand faces in a single image, which is not common
in generic object detection.
Detectors like Faster-RCNN [30] employ a region proposal network (RPN) which places anchor boxes of different sizes and aspect ratios uniformly on the image and
classifies them for generating object-like regions. However,
RPN only uses a single pixel in the convolutional feature
∗ Equal Contribution

Figure 1: Difference between RPN and FA-RPN in terms of
weight configuration. For simplicity we show 2x2 pooling
for FA-RPN.

map for evaluating the proposal hypotheses, independent
of the size of the object. Therefore, the feature representation in RPN entirely relies on the contextual information
encoded in the high-dimensional feature representation generated at the pixel. It does not pool features from the entire
extent of an object while generating the feature representation, see Fig. 1. Thus, it can miss object regions or generate proposals which are not well localized. Further, it is
not possible to iterate and refine the positions of the anchorboxes as part of the proposal network. If objects of different
scale/aspect-ratios are to be learned or if we want to place
anchors at sub-pixel resolution, filters specific to each of
these conditions need to be added during training. Generating proposals using a pooling-based algorithm can alleviate
such problems easily.
There are predominantly two pooling-based methods for
the final classification of RoIs in an image - Fast-RCNN
[13] and R-FCN [10]. Fast-RCNN projects the regionproposals to the convolutional feature map, and pools the
features inside the region of interest (RoI) to a fixed size
grid (typically 7×7) and applies two fully connected layers
which perform classification and regression. Due to computational constraints, this approach is practically infeasible for proposal generation as one would need to apply it to
hundreds of thousands of regions - which is the number of

7723

