A Theory of Fermat Paths for Non-Line-of-Sight Shape Reconstruction
Shumian Xin1 , Sotiris Nousias2,3 , Kiriakos N. Kutulakos2 , Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan1 ,
Srinivasa G. Narasimhan1 , and Ioannis Gkioulekas1
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Toronto 3 University College London

Abstract
We present a novel theory of Fermat paths of light between a known visible scene and an unknown object not in
the line of sight of a transient camera. These light paths either obey specular reflection or are reflected by the object’s
boundary, and hence encode the shape of the hidden object.
We prove that Fermat paths correspond to discontinuities
in the transient measurements. We then derive a novel constraint that relates the spatial derivatives of the path lengths
at these discontinuities to the surface normal. Based on this
theory, we present an algorithm, called Fermat Flow, to estimate the shape of the non-line-of-sight object. Our method
allows, for the first time, accurate shape recovery of complex objects, ranging from diffuse to specular, that are hidden around the corner as well as hidden behind a diffuser.
Finally, our approach is agnostic to the particular technology used for transient imaging. As such, we demonstrate
mm-scale shape recovery from pico-second scale transients
using a SPAD and ultrafast laser, as well as micron-scale
reconstruction from femto-second scale transients using interferometry. We believe our work is a significant advance
over the state-of-the-art in non-line-of-sight imaging.

1. Introduction
Most computer vision research assumes that the scene of
interest is directly visible to the camera. In other words,
the photons from a source that reach a camera are assumed
to have interacted with only the visible scene. However,
some of the source photons are reflected by the visible scene
toward parts—say, the back of an object facing a camera,
an object around a corner, or an object viewed through a
diffuser — that are hidden from the direct line of sight of
the camera. In turn, the hidden scene scatters the photons
back toward the visible scene, which then redirects photons
toward the camera. Imaging and understanding the scene
hidden from the camera’s view is of significant importance
to many security and safety applications.
Capturing non-line-of-sight (NLOS) photons is chal-

lenging as they are vastly outnumbered by line-of-sight
(LOS) photons. Passive approaches analyze the subtle umbra and penumbra of the shadow cast by the hidden scene
to estimate rough motion and structure [6, 2, 38], or use coherence properties of light to localize hidden objects [5, 3].
These approaches do not have sufficient information to
compute precise 3D shape of an unknown arbitrary hidden
scene. Extracting additional information about the hidden
scene is possible by using active illumination, including
coherent lighting [42, 21, 4, 22] and steady-state intensity
sources [25, 44, 51, 45]. The majority of approaches for
reconstructing hidden shape information employ fast modulated light sources together with time-resolved sensors (e.g.,
continuous-wave ToF [15, 20], ultrafast photodiodes [24],
streak cameras [49, 48, 13], and single-photon avalanche
photodetectors (SPADs) [11, 32]). These sensors record
not only the number of incident photons (intensity) but also
their arrival times, at a range of temporal resolutions (millito femto-seconds) [49, 12, 31, 32, 11, 18]. Such measurements are called transients and the approach is called transient NLOS imaging.
By measuring transients at various locations of a known
visible scene, most active techniques perform a volumetric 3D reconstruction by attempting to invert the timeresolved radiometric image formation process. Examples
include elliptic backprojection [48, 7, 1, 26, 36], regularized linear system approaches [13, 15, 14, 20], the lightcone transform [33], and analysis-by-synthesis using rendering [35, 47]. These methods have two fundamental disadvantages: (1) they rely on radiometric information and
existing SPADs produce poor intensity estimates due to effects such as pile-up and after-pulsing [16], as well as due
to extreme sensitivity to photon noise and ambient lighting;
and (2) to simplify the inverse problem, all existing reconstruction techniques rely on an assumption of Lambertian
reflectance for the NLOS object.
In this paper, we overcome the above limitations by developing techniques that use only geometric, rather than intensity, constraints derived from transient measurements of
an NLOS scene. For this, we present a new theory of NLOS
photons that follow specific geometric paths, called Fermat
16800

