Catastrophic Child’s Play:
Easy to Perform, Hard to Defend Adversarial Attacks
Chih-Hui Ho1∗

Brandon Leung1∗
Erik Sandström2
1
University of California, San Diego

{chh279,b7leung}@ucsd.edu

tfy14esa@student.lu.se

Abstract
The problem of adversarial CNN attacks is considered,
with an emphasis on attacks that are trivial to perform but
difficult to defend. A framework for the study of such attacks
is proposed, using real world object manipulations. Unlike
most works in the past, this framework supports the design
of attacks based on both small and large image perturbations, implemented by camera shake and pose variation. A
setup is proposed for the collection of such perturbations
and determination of their perceptibility. It is argued that
perceptibility depends on context, and a distinction is made
between imperceptible and semantically imperceptible perturbations. While the former survives image comparisons,
the latter are perceptible but have no impact on human object recognition. A procedure is proposed to determine the
perceptibility of perturbations using Turk experiments, and
a dataset of both perturbation classes which enables replicable studies of object manipulation attacks, is assembled.
Experiments using defenses based on many datasets, CNN
models, and algorithms from the literature elucidate the difficulty of defending these attacks – in fact, none of the existing
defenses is found effective against them. Better results are
achieved with real world data augmentation, but even this
is not foolproof. These results confirm the hypothesis that
current CNNs are vulnerable to attacks implementable even
by a child, and that such attacks may prove difficult to defend.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained on large
corpora such as ImageNet [5] have enabled significant advances in computer vision in recent years. While initially
popular for recognition, these models have shown to be remarkably easy to train and transfer across vision tasks, and
are now almost universally used across computer vision.
Recently, however, this robustness has been questioned by
∗ Equal contribution

2

Yen Chang1
Nuno Vasconcelos1
Lund University
{yec084,nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

some puzzling findings derived from adversarial CNN attacks [14, 20, 18, 3, 17, 23]. Although CNNs have excellent,
even superhuman [9], recognition performance on randomly
internet-collected test images, it is quite easy to generate
images where they fail dramatically [25, 8]. In fact, most images that a CNN classifies correctly can be transformed into
images that it cannot classify, by the addition of a very small
adversarial perturbation. Most interestingly, this perturbation can usually be made so small as to be imperceptible,
i.e. impossible to detect, by a human. This suggests that
the space of images correctly classified by most CNNs is, at
most, a countable dense subset of the space of images recognizable by humans, e.g. similar to the relationship between
rational and real numbers.
This problem is of great concern for many applications.
For example, smart cars depend on CNNs to make decisions
that could have life or death consequences, security and
surveillance systems rely on CNNs for identity verification,
etc. The existence of many images capable of fooling CNNs
poses a significant challenge to such applications. This has
spurred interest in adversarial attacks [7, 14] and a literature
has emerged in the area, with many variants of the problem
being proposed. In result, there are at least four fundamental
dimensions along which adversarial algorithms can differ:
they can be 1) “white” [25, 8, 14, 20, 18, 3, 17] or “black”box [4, 30, 23, 6, 11], depending on whether knowledge
of the CNN model to attack is required, 2) “targeted” or
“non-targeted,” depending on whether the goal is to induce
the network to make specific errors [25, 20, 3] or to simply
make an error [8, 14, 18, 17, 30], 3) “digital” or “real-world”
depending on whether the examples used in the attack are
produced by an algorithm [25, 8, 23] vs. object manipulation in the real world [14, 7, 1], and 4) “single model” or
“universal” depending on whether they aim to fool a single
network [14, 18, 3, 30] or many models [17]. Interestingly
enough, the relative difficulty of these problems does not always correlate with what would be intuitively expected. For
example, it appears that most of the attacks designed to fool
a particular CNN, e.g. AlexNet [13], also fool most other
CNNs [19, 26, 15, 16, 29], e.g. VGG [22], Inception [24],

9229

