Speech2Face: Learning the Face Behind a Voice
Tae-Hyun Oh∗†
William T. Freeman†

Tali Dekel∗
Changil Kim∗†
Michael Rubinstein
†

Inbar Mosseri
Wojciech Matusik†

MIT CSAIL

Abstract
Speech2face

How much can we infer about a person’s looks from the
way they speak? In this paper, we study the task of reconstructing a facial image of a person from a short audio
recording of that person speaking. We design and train a
deep neural network to perform this task using millions of
natural Internet/YouTube videos of people speaking. During training, our model learns voice-face correlations that
allow it to produce images that capture various physical
attributes of the speakers such as age, gender and ethnicity.
This is done in a self-supervised manner, by utilizing the
natural co-occurrence of faces and speech in Internet videos,
without the need to model attributes explicitly. We evaluate and numerically quantify how–and in what manner–our
Speech2Face reconstructions, obtained directly from audio,
resemble the true face images of the speakers.

True face
Face reconstructed
(for reference)
from speech

True face
Face reconstructed
(for reference)
from speech

1. Introduction
When we listen to a person speaking without seeing his/her
face, on the phone, or on the radio, we often build a mental
model for the way the person looks [23, 44]. There is a strong
connection between speech and appearance, part of which is
a direct result of the mechanics of speech production: age,
gender (which affects the pitch of our voice), the shape of the
mouth, facial bone structure, thin or full lips—all can affect
the sound we generate. In addition, other voice-appearance
correlations stem from the way in which we talk: language,
accent, speed, pronunciations—such properties of speech
are often shared among nationalities and cultures, which can
in turn translate to common physical features [12].
Our goal in this work is to study to what extent we can
infer how a person looks from the way they talk. Specifically,
from a short input audio segment of a person speaking, our
method directly reconstructs an image of the person’s face
in a canonical form (i.e., frontal-facing, neutral expression).
Fig. 1 shows sample results of our method. Obviously, there
is no one-to-one matching between faces and voices. Thus,
our goal is not to predict a recognizable image of the exact
face, but rather capture dominant facial traits of the person
that are correlated with the input speech.
∗ The three authors contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence: taehyun@csail.mit.edu
Supplementary material (SM): https://speech2face.github.io

Figure 1. Top: We consider the task of reconstructing an image
of a person’s face from a short audio segment of speech. Bottom:
Several results produced by our Speech2Face model, which takes
only an audio waveform as input; the true faces are shown just for
reference. Note that our goal is not to reconstruct an accurate image
of the person, but rather to recover characteristic physical features
that are correlated with the input speech. All our results including
the input audio, are available in the supplementary material (SM).

We design a neural network model that takes the complex spectrogram of a short speech segment as input and
predicts a feature vector representing the face. More specifically, the predicted face feature represents a 4096-D face
feature that is extracted from the penultimate layer (i.e., one
layer prior to the classification layer) of a pre-trained face
recognition network [39]. We decode the predicted face feature into a canonical image of the person’s face using a
separately-trained reconstruction model [10]. To train our
model, we use the AVSpeech dataset [13], comprised of
millions of video segments from YouTube with more than
100,000 different people speaking. Our method is trained
in a self-supervised manner, i.e., it simply uses the natural
co-occurrence of speech and faces in videos, not requiring
additional information, e.g., human annotations.
17539

