Improving Referring Expression Grounding
with Cross-modal Attention-guided Erasing
Xihui Liu1
Zihao Wang2
Jing Shao2
Xiaogang Wang1
Hongsheng Li1
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
SenseTime Research
{xihuiliu, xgwang, hsli}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

{wangzihao, shaojing}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Referring expression grounding aims at locating certain
objects or persons in an image with a referring expression,
where the key challenge is to comprehend and align various types of information from visual and textual domain,
such as visual attributes, location and interactions with surrounding regions. Although the attention mechanism has
been successfully applied for cross-modal alignments, previous attention models focus on only the most dominant
features of both modalities, and neglect the fact that there
could be multiple comprehensive textual-visual correspondences between images and referring expressions. To tackle
this issue, we design a novel cross-modal attention-guided
erasing approach, where we discard the most dominant information from either textual or visual domains to generate difficult training samples online, and to drive the model
to discover complementary textual-visual correspondences.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed method, which achieves state-of-the-art performance on three referring expression grounding datasets.

1. Introduction
The goal of referring expression grounding [13, 39, 22]
is to locate objects or persons in an image referred by natural language descriptions. Although much progress has
been made in bridging vision and language [5, 32, 25, 37,
6, 2, 18], grounding referring expressions remains challenging because it requires a comprehensive understanding of
complex language semantics and various types of visual information, such as objects, attributes, and relationships between regions.
Referring expression grounding is naturally formulated
as an object retrieval task, where we retrieve a region that
best matches the referring expression from a set of region proposals. Generally, it is difficult to trivially associate phrases and image regions in the embedding space
where features are separately extracted from each modality (i.e., vision and language). Previous methods [38, 10]

Most salient correspondence

A boy wearing
black glasses

with right foot on soccer ball.

Missing
correspondence

Query sentence
erase
A boy wearing

black <UNK>
with right foot on soccer ball.

Recovered
correspondence

Figure 1. Query sentence erasing as an example of our cross-modal
attention-guided erasing. The first row shows the original queryregion pair, and the second row shows the pair with erased query.

proposed modular networks to handle expressions with different types of information. Another line of research explored attention mechanism, which mines crucial cues of
both modalities [38, 4, 43]. By concentrating on the most
important aspects in both modalities, the model with attention mechanism is able to learn better correspondences between words/phrases and visual regions, thus benefits the
alignment between vision and language.
However, a common problem of deep neural networks
is that it tends to capture only the most discriminative information to satisfy the training constraints, ignoring other
rich complementary information [42, 34]. This issue becomes more severe when considering attention models for
referring expression grounding. By attending to both the
referring expression and the image, the attention model is
inclined to capturing the most dominant alignment between
the two modalities, while neglecting other possible crossmodal correspondences. A referring expression usually describe an object from more than one perspectives, such as
visual attributes, actions, and interactions with context objects, which cannot be fully explored by concentrating on
only the most significant phrase-region pair. For example,
people describe the image in Fig. 1 as “A boy wearing black
glasses with right foot on soccer ball”. We observe that the

1950

