Video Summarization by Learning from Unpaired Data
Mrigank Rochan and Yang Wang
University of Manitoba
{mrochan, ywang}@cs.umanitoba.ca

Abstract
We consider the problem of video summarization. Given
an input raw video, the goal is to select a small subset of
key frames from the input video to create a shorter summary video that best describes the content of the original
video. Most of the current state-of-the-art video summarization approaches use supervised learning and require
labeled training data. Each training instance consists of
a raw input video and its ground truth summary video curated by human annotators. However, it is very expensive
and difficult to create such labeled training examples. To
address this limitation, we propose a novel formulation to
learn video summarization from unpaired data. We present
an approach that learns to generate optimal video summaries using a set of raw videos (V ) and a set of summary
videos (S), where there exists no correspondence between
V and S. We argue that this type of data is much easier
to collect. Our model aims to learn a mapping function
F : V → S such that the distribution of resultant summary
videos from F (V ) is similar to the distribution of S with the
help of an adversarial objective. In addition, we enforce a
diversity constraint on F (V ) to ensure that the generated
video summaries are visually diverse. Experimental results
on two benchmark datasets indicate that our proposed approach significantly outperforms other alternative methods.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a phenomenal surge in
videos uploaded online everyday. With this remarkable
growth, it is becoming difficult for users to watch or browse
these online videos efficiently. In order to make this enormous amount of video data easily browsable and accessible,
we need automatic video summarization tools. The goal of
video summarization is to produce a short summary video
that conveys the important and relevant content of a given
longer video. Video summarization can be an indispensable
tool that has potential applications in a wide range of domains such as video database management, consumer video
analysis and surveillance [35].

Video summarization is often formulated as a subset selection problem. In general, there are two types of subset selection in video summarization: (i) key frames selection, where the goal is to identify a set of isolated frames
[8, 17, 20, 24, 25, 31, 39]; and (ii) key shots selection,
where the aim is to identify a set of temporally continuous interval-based segments or subshots [16, 22, 26, 27].
In this paper, we treat video summarization as a key frame
selection problem. A good summary video should contain
video frames that satisfy certain properties. For example,
the selected frames should capture the key content of the
video [8, 13, 27]. In addition, the selected frames should be
visually diverse [8, 24, 39].
Both supervised and unsupervised learning approaches
have been proposed for video summarization. Most unsupervised methods [13, 14, 17, 22, 24, 27, 29, 33, 47, 31, 40]
use hand-crafted heuristics to select frames in a video.
The limitation of such approaches is that it is difficult to
come up with the heuristics that are sufficient for generating good summary videos. In contrast, supervised methods
[8, 10, 11, 38, 39, 43] learn from training data with usergenerated summary videos. Each instance of the training
data consists of a pair of videos – a raw input video and its
corresponding ground truth summary video created by humans. From such training data, these supervised methods
learn to map from a raw input video to a summary video
by mimicking how humans create summary videos. Supervised methods can implicitly capture cues used by humans that are difficult to model via hand-crafted heuristics,
so they tend to outperform unsupervised methods.
A major limitation of supervised video summarization is
that it relies on labeled training data. Common datasets in
the community are usually collected by asking human annotators to watch the input video and select the key frames
or key shots. This annotation process is very expensive and
time-consuming. As a result, we only have very few benchmark datasets available for video summarization in the computer vision literature. Moreover, each dataset usually only
contains a small number of annotated data (see Table 1).
To address the flaws of supervised learning, we propose
a new formulation of learning video summarization from

7902

