Region Proposal by Guided Anchoring
Jiaqi Wang1∗ Kai Chen1∗ Shuo Yang2 Chen Change Loy3 Dahua Lin1
1
CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Amazon Rekognition 3 Nanyang Technological University
{wj017,ck015,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Region anchors are the cornerstone of modern object
detection techniques. State-of-the-art detectors mostly rely
on a dense anchoring scheme, where anchors are sampled
uniformly over the spatial domain with a predefined set of
scales and aspect ratios. In this paper, we revisit this foundational stage. Our study shows that it can be done much
more effectively and efficiently. Specifically, we present an
alternative scheme, named Guided Anchoring, which leverages semantic features to guide the anchoring. The proposed method jointly predicts the locations where the center of objects of interest are likely to exist as well as the
scales and aspect ratios at different locations. On top of
predicted anchor shapes, we mitigate the feature inconsistency with a feature adaption module. We also study
the use of high-quality proposals to improve detection performance. The anchoring scheme can be seamlessly integrated into proposal methods and detectors. With Guided
Anchoring, we achieve 9.1% higher recall on MS COCO
with 90% fewer anchors than the RPN baseline. We also
adopt Guided Anchoring in Fast R-CNN, Faster R-CNN
and RetinaNet, respectively improving the detection mAP
by 2.2%, 2.7% and 1.2%. Code is available at https:
//github.com/open-mmlab/mmdetection.

1. Introduction
Anchors are regression references and classification candidates to predict proposals (for two-stage detectors) or final
bounding boxes (for single-stage detectors). Modern object
detection pipelines usually begin with a large set of densely
distributed anchors. Take Faster RCNN [27], a popular object detection framework, for instance, it first generates region proposals from a dense set of anchors and then classifies them into specific classes and refines their locations via
bounding box regression.
There are two general rules for a reasonable anchor de∗ Equal contribution.

shuoy@amazon.com

ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

sign: alignment and consistency. Firstly, to use convolutional features as anchor representations, anchor centers
need to be well aligned with feature map pixels. Secondly,
the receptive field and semantic scope should be consistent
with the scale and shape of anchors on different locations of
a feature map. The sliding window is a simple and widely
adopted anchoring scheme following the rules. For most detection methods, the anchors are defined by such a uniform
scheme, where every location in a feature map is associated
with k anchors with predefined scales and aspect ratios.
Anchor-based detection pipelines have been shown effective in both benchmarks [6, 20, 7, 5] and real-world systems. However, the uniform anchoring scheme described
above is not necessarily the optimal way to prepare the anchors. This scheme can lead to two difficulties: (1) A neat
set of anchors of fixed aspect ratios has to be predefined for
different problems. A wrong design may hamper the speed
and accuracy of the detector. (2) To maintain a sufficiently
high recall for proposals, a large number of anchors are
needed, while most of them correspond to false candidates
that are irrelevant to the object of interests. Meanwhile, a
large number of anchors can lead to significant computational cost especially when the pipeline involves a heavy
classifier in the proposal stage.
In this work, we present a more effective method to prepare anchors, with the aim to mitigate the issues of handpicked priors. Our method is motivated by the observation
that objects are not distributed evenly over the image. The
scale of an object is also closely related to the imagery content, its location and geometry of the scene. Following this
intuition, our method generates sparse anchors in two steps:
first identifying sub-regions that may contain objects and
then determining the shapes at different locations.
Learnable anchor shapes are promising, but it breaks the
aforementioned rule of consistency, thus presents a new
challenge for learning anchor representations for accurate
classification and regression. Scales and aspect ratios of anchors are now variable instead of fixed, so different feature
map pixels have to learn adaptive representations that fit the
corresponding anchors. To solve this problem, we introduce

2965

