Unsupervised Visual Domain Adaptation:
A Deep Max-Margin Gaussian Process Approach
Minyoung Kim1,2,3 , Pritish Sahu1 , Behnam Gholami1 , and Vladimir Pavlovic1,3
1

2

Dept. of Computer Science, Rutgers University, NJ, USA
Dept. of Electronic Engineering, Seoul National University of Science & Technology, South Korea
3
Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK
mikim21@gmail.com, {ps851,bb510,vladimir}@cs.rutgers.edu, v.pavlovic@samsung.com

Abstract
For unsupervised domain adaptation, the target domain
error can be provably reduced by having a shared input representation that makes the source and target domains indistinguishable from each other. Very recently it has been
shown that it is not only critical to match the marginal input distributions, but also align the output class distributions. The latter can be achieved by minimizing the maximum discrepancy of predictors. In this paper, we take this
principle further by proposing a more systematic and effective way to achieve hypothesis consistency using Gaussian
processes (GP). The GP allows us to induce a hypothesis
space of classifiers from the posterior distribution of the
latent random functions, turning the learning into a largemargin posterior separation problem, significantly easier to
solve than previous approaches based on adversarial minimax optimization. We formulate a learning objective that
effectively influences the posterior to minimize the maximum discrepancy. This is shown to be equivalent to maximizing margins and minimizing uncertainty of the class predictions in the target domainEmpirical results demonstrate
that our approach leads to state-to-the-art performance superior to existing methods on several challenging benchmarks for domain adaptation.

1. Introduction
The success of deep visual learning largely relies on the
abundance of data annotated with ground-truth labels where
the main assumption is that the training and test data follow
from the same underlying distribution. However, in realworld problems this presumption rarely holds due to artifacts such as the different types of noise or sensors, changes
in object view or context, resulting in degradation of performance during inference on test data. One way to address this problem would be to collect labeled data in the
Pritish Sahu and Behnam Gholami contributed equally to this work.

test domain and learn a test-specific classifier while possibly leveraging the model estimated from the training data.
Nevertheless, this would typically be a highly costly effort.
Domain adaptation, a formalism to circumvent the aforementioned problem, is the task of adapting a model trained
in one domain, called the source, to another target domain,
where the source domain data is typically fully labeled but
we only have access to images from the target domain with
no (or very few) labels. Although there are several slightly
different setups for the problem, in this paper we focus on
the unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) with classification of instances as the ultimate objective. That is, given
the fully labeled data from the source domain and unlabeled
data from the target, the goal is to learn a classifier that performs well on the target domain itself.
One mainstream direction to tackle UDA is the shared
space embedding process. The idea is to find a latent space
shared by both domains such that the classifier learned on
it using the fully labeled data from the source will also perform well on the target domain. This is accomplished, and
supported in theory [3], by enforcing a requirement that the
distributions of latent points in the two domains be indistinguishable from each other. A large family of UDA approaches including [21, 19, 14, 1, 16, 35, 15, 28, 38, 18]
leverage this idea (see Sec. 4 for more details). However,
their performance remains unsatisfactory, in part because
the methods inherently rely on matching of marginal, classfree, distributions while using the underlying assumption
that the shift in the two distributions, termed covariate shift
[56], can be reduced without using the target domain labels.
To address this issue, as effective solution was proposed
in [51], which aims to take into account the class-specific
decision boundary. Its motivation follows the theorem in [2]
relating the target domain error to the maximal disagreement between any two classifiers, tighter than the former
bound in [3]. It implies that a provably small target error is
achievable by minimizing the maximum classifier discrepancy (MCD). The approach in [51], the MCD Algorithm
14380

