Cascaded Projection: End-to-End Network Compression and Acceleration
Breton Minnehan
Rochester Institute of Technology

Andreas Savakis
Rochester Institute of Technology

blm2144@rit.edu

andreas.savakis@rit.edu

Abstract
We propose a data-driven approach for deep convolutional neural network compression that achieves high accuracy with high throughput and low memory requirements.
Current network compression methods either find a lowrank factorization of the features that requires more memory, or select only a subset of features by pruning entire
filter channels. We propose the Cascaded Projection (CaP)
compression method that projects the output and input filter channels of successive layers to a unified low dimensional space based on a low-rank projection. We optimize
the projection to minimize classification loss and the difference between the next layer’s features in the compressed
and uncompressed networks. To solve this non-convex optimization problem we propose a new optimization method
of a proxy matrix using backpropagation and Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) with geometric constraints. Our
cascaded projection approach leads to improvements in all
critical areas of network compression: high accuracy, low
memory consumption, low parameter count and high processing speed. The proposed CaP method demonstrates
state-of-the-art results compressing VGG16 and ResNet
networks with over 4× reduction in the number of computations and excellent performance in top-5 accuracy on the
ImageNet dataset before and after fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
The compression of deep neural networks is gaining
attention due to the effectiveness of deep networks and
their potential applications on mobile and embedded devices. The powerful deep networks developed today are
often overparameterized [9] and require large amounts of
memory and computational resources [3]. Thus, efficient
network compression, that reduces the number of computations and memory required to process images, enables the
broader application of deep neural networks.
Methods for network compression can be categorized
into four types, based on quantization, sparsification, factorization and pruning. In this work we leverage the advan-

Figure 1. Visual representation of network compression methods
on a single CNN layer. Top row: Factorization compression with
a reprojection step that increases memory. Middle row: Pruning
compression where individual filters are removed. Bottom row:
Proposed CaP method which forms linear combinations of the filters without requiring reprojection.

tages of factorization and pruning methods, as they are the
most popular. Quantization methods accelerate deep networks and reduce storage by using mixed precision arithmetic and hashing codes [4, 6, 13]. However most of them
require mixed precision arithmetic, which is not always
available on standard hardware. Sparsification methods
eliminate individual connections between nodes that have
minimal impact on the network, however, they are not well
suited for current applications because most neural network
libraries are not optimized for sparse convolution operations
and fail to achieve significant speedup.
Factorization methods [10, 29, 33, 55] reduce computations by factorizing the network kernels, often by splitting
large kernels into a series of convolutions with smaller filters. These methods have the drawback of increasing memory consumption due to the intermediate convolution operations. Such memory requirements pose a problem for
mobile applications, where network acceleration is needed
most. Pruning methods [13, 19, 35, 37, 39, 44, 54, 56] compress layers of a network by removing entire convolutional

10715

