Single Image Reflection Removal Exploiting Misaligned Training Data and
Network Enhancements
Kaixuan Wei1 Jiaolong Yang2 Ying Fu1∗ David Wipf2 Hua Huang1
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Microsoft Research

Abstract
Removing undesirable reflections from a single image
captured through a glass window is of practical importance to visual computing systems. Although state-of-theart methods can obtain decent results in certain situations,
performance declines significantly when tackling more general real-world cases. These failures stem from the intrinsic difficulty of single image reflection removal – the fundamental ill-posedness of the problem, and the insufficiency of
densely-labeled training data needed for resolving this ambiguity within learning-based neural network pipelines. In
this paper, we address these issues by exploiting targeted
network enhancements and the novel use of misaligned
data. For the former, we augment a baseline network architecture by embedding context encoding modules that are capable of leveraging high-level contextual clues to reduce indeterminacy within areas containing strong reflections. For
the latter, we introduce an alignment-invariant loss function that facilitates exploiting misaligned real-world training data that is much easier to collect. Experimental results
collectively show that our method outperforms the state-ofthe-art with aligned data, and that significant improvements
are possible when using additional misaligned data.

1. Introduction
Reflection is a frequently-encountered source of image
corruption that can arise when shooting through a glass surface. Such corruptions can be addressed via the process of
single image reflection removal (SIRR), a challenging problem that has attracted considerable attention from the computer vision community [22, 25, 39, 2, 5, 47, 44, 38]. Traditional optimization-based methods often leverage manual
intervention or strong prior assumptions to render the problem more tractable [22, 25]. Recently, alternative learningbased approaches rely on deep Convectional Neural Networks (CNNs) in lieu of the costly optimization and handcrafted priors [5, 47, 44, 38]. But promising results notwith∗ Corresponding author: fuying@bit.edu.cn

standing, SIRR remains a largely unsolved problem across
disparate imaging conditions and varying scene content.
For CNN-based reflection removal, our focus herein, the
challenge originates from at least two sources: (i) The extraction of a background image layer devoid of reflection
artifacts is fundamentally ill-posed, and (ii) Training data
from real-world scenes, are exceedingly scarce because of
the difficulty in obtaining ground-truth labels.
Mathematically speaking, it is typically assumed that a
captured image I is formed as a linear combination of a
background or transmitted layer T and a reflection layer R,
i.e., I = T + R. Obviously, when given access only to I,
there exists an infinite number of feasible decompositions.
Further compounding the problem is the fact that both T
and R involve content from real scenes that may have overlapping appearance distributions. This can make them difficult to distinguish even for human observers in some cases,
and simple priors that might mitigate this ambiguity are not
available except under specialized conditions.
On the other hand, although CNNs can perform a wide
variety visual tasks, at times exceeding human capabilities,
they generally require a large volume of labeled training
data. Unfortunately, real reflection images accompanied
with densely-labeled, ground-truth transmitted layer intensities are scarce. Consequently, previous learning-based approaches have resorted to training with synthesized images
[5, 38, 47] and/or small real-world data captured from specialized devices [47]. However, existing image synthesis
procedures are heuristic and the domain gap may jeopardize
accuracy on real images. On the other hand, collecting sufficient additional real data with precise ground-truth labels
is tremendously labor-intensive.
This paper is devoted to addressing both of the aforementioned challenges. First, to better tackle the intrinsic
ill-posedness and diminish ambiguity, we propose to leverage a network architecture that is sensitive to contextual information, which has proven useful for other vision tasks
such as semantic segmentation [11, 48, 46, 13]. Note that
at a high level, our objective is to efficiently convert prior
information mined from labeled training data into network
structures capable of resolving this ambiguity. Within a tra-

8178

