DVC: An End-to-end Deep Video Compression Framework
Guo Lu1 , Wanli Ouyang2 , Dong Xu3 , Xiaoyun Zhang1 , Chunlei Cai1 , and Zhiyong Gao ∗1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, {luguo2014, xiaoyun.zhang, caichunlei, zhiyong.gao}@sjtu.edu.cn
2
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
3
The University of Sydney, {wanli.ouyang, dong.xu}@sydney.edu.au
Abstract

Conventional video compression approaches use the predictive coding architecture and encode the corresponding
motion information and residual information. In this paper,
taking advantage of both classical architecture in the conventional video compression method and the powerful nonlinear representation ability of neural networks, we propose the first end-to-end video compression deep model that
jointly optimizes all the components for video compression.
Specifically, learning based optical flow estimation is utilized to obtain the motion information and reconstruct the
current frames. Then we employ two auto-encoder style
neural networks to compress the corresponding motion and
residual information. All the modules are jointly learned
through a single loss function, in which they collaborate
with each other by considering the trade-off between reducing the number of compression bits and improving quality
of the decoded video. Experimental results show that the
proposed approach can outperform the widely used video
coding standard H.264 in terms of PSNR and be even on
par with the latest standard H.265 in terms of MS-SSIM.
Code is released at https://github.com/GuoLusjtu/DVC.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, video content contributes to more than 80%
internet traffic [26], and the percentage is expected to increase even further. Therefore, it is critical to build an efficient video compression system and generate higher quality
frames at given bandwidth budget. In addition, most video
related computer vision tasks such as video object detection
or video object tracking are sensitive to the quality of compressed videos, and efficient video compression may bring
benefits for other computer vision tasks. Meanwhile, the
techniques in video compression are also helpful for action
recognition [41] and model compression [16].
However, in the past decades, video compression algorithms [39, 31] rely on hand-crafted modules, e.g., block
based motion estimation and Discrete Cosine Transform
(DCT), to reduce the redundancies in the video sequences.
∗ Corresponding author

(a) Original frame (Bpp/MS-SSIM) (b) H.264 (0.0540Bpp/0.945)

(c) H.265 (0.082Bpp/0.960)

(d) Ours ( 0.0529Bpp/ 0.961)

Figure 1: Visual quality of the reconstructed frames from
different video compression systems. (a) is the original
frame. (b)-(d) are the reconstructed frames from H.264,
H.265 and our method. Our proposed method only consumes 0.0529pp while achieving the best perceptual quality (0.961) when measured by MS-SSIM. (Best viewed in
color.)
Although each module is well designed, the whole compression system is not end-to-end optimized. It is desirable to further improve video compression performance by
jointly optimizing the whole compression system.
Recently, deep neural network (DNN) based autoencoder for image compression [34, 11, 35, 8, 12, 19, 33,
21, 28, 9] has achieved comparable or even better performance than the traditional image codecs like JPEG [37],
JPEG2000 [29] or BPG [1]. One possible explanation is
that the DNN based image compression methods can exploit large scale end-to-end training and highly non-linear
transform, which are not used in the traditional approaches.
However, it is non-trivial to directly apply these techniques to build an end-to-end learning system for video
compression. First, it remains an open problem to learn
how to generate and compress the motion information tailored for video compression. Video compression methods
heavily rely on motion information to reduce temporal redundancy in video sequences. A straightforward solution
is to use the learning based optical flow to represent motion information. However, current learning based optical
flow approaches aim at generating flow fields as accurate
as possible. But, the precise optical flow is often not opti-

11006

