Gradient Matching Generative Networks for Zero-Shot Learning
Mert Bulent Sariyildiz
Bilkent University
Department of Computer Engineering

Ramazan Gokberk Cinbis
Middle East Technical University (METU)
Department of Computer Engineering

mert.sariyildiz@bilkent.edu.tr

gcinbis@metu.edu.tr

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is one of the most promising
problems where substantial progress can potentially be
achieved through unsupervised learning, due to distributional differences between supervised and zero-shot classes.
For this reason, several works investigate the incorporation
of discriminative domain adaptation techniques into ZSL,
which, however, lead to modest improvements in ZSL accuracy. In contrast, we propose a generative model that
can naturally learn from unsupervised examples, and synthesize training examples for unseen classes purely based
on their class embeddings, and therefore, reduce the zeroshot learning problem into a supervised classification task.
The proposed approach consists of two important components: (i) a conditional Generative Adversarial Network that
learns to produce samples that mimic the characteristics of
unsupervised data examples, and (ii) the Gradient Matching
(GM) loss that measures the quality of the gradient signal
obtained from the synthesized examples. Using our GM loss
formulation, we enforce the generator to produce examples
from which accurate classifiers can be trained. Experimental
results on several ZSL benchmark datasets show that our
approach leads to significant improvements over the state of
the art in generalized zero-shot classification.

1. Introduction
There has been tremendous progress in visual recognition
models over the past several years, primarily driven by the
advances in deep learning. The state-of-the-art approaches
in deep learning, however, predominantly rely on the availability of a large set of carefully annotated training examples.
The need for such large-scale datasets poses a significant
bottleneck against building comprehensive recognition models of the visual world, especially due to the long-tailed
distribution of object categories [1].
Recently, there has been a significant research interest
in overcoming this difficulty. Prominent approaches for

SEEN CLASSES
cow
bird

UNSEEN CLASSES
bat
monkey
CNN

GMN

has-wing
has-teeth
...

has-arm
has-tail
...

Supervised
Training

𝛩All-Classes

Figure 1: Illustration of our approach. We propose the
Gradient Matching Network (GMN) which learns to produce
synthetic examples for a class given it’s semantic embedding.
By using the GMN we generate training samples for zeroshot (unseen) classes, then train a supervised classifier over
the union of this synthetic set and the training set of seen
classes.
this purpose include semi-supervised learning, i.e. improving supervised classification through leveraging unlabeled
data [2, 3], few-shot learning, i.e. learning from few labeled
samples [4, 5] and zero-shot learning (ZSL) for modeling
novel classes without training samples [6, 7, 8]. In our paper, we focus on the ZSL problem, where the goal is to
extrapolate a classification model learned from seen classes,
i.e. those with labeled examples, to unseen classes with
no labeled training samples. In order to relate classes to
each other, they are commonly represented as class embedding vectors constructed from side information. Such class
embedding vectors can be constructed in several different
ways, such as by manually defining attributes that characterize visual and semantic properties of objects [9, 10, 11]
or by adapting vector-space embeddings of class names
[12, 13, 14] or by representing the position of classes in
a relevant taxonomy tree as vectors [15]. Given the class
embeddings, the ZSL problem boils down to modeling relations between a visual feature space, i.e. images or features
extracted from some deep convolutional network, and a class
embedding space [16, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22].
However, ZSL models typically suffer from the domain
shift problem [23] due to distributional differences between
seen and unseen classes. This can significantly limit the
generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) accuracy where test
12168

