Local detection of stereo occlusion boundaries
Jialiang Wang and Todd Zickler
Harvard University
jialiangwang@g.harvard.edu, zickler@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Stereo occlusion boundaries are one-dimensional structures in the visual field that separate foreground regions of a
scene that are visible to both eyes (binocular regions) from
background regions of a scene that are visible to only one
eye (monocular regions). Stereo occlusion boundaries often coincide with object boundaries, and localizing them is
useful for tasks like grasping, manipulation, and navigation. This paper describes the local signatures for stereo
occlusion boundaries that exist in a stereo cost volume, and
it introduces a local detector for them based on a simple
feedforward network with relatively small receptive fields.
The local detector produces better boundaries than many
other stereo methods, even without incorporating explicit
stereo matching, top-down contextual cues, or single-image
boundary cues based on texture and intensity.

1. Introduction
Precisely localizing object boundaries is important for
grasping, navigation, and other visual tasks. In a stereo
image pair, many object boundaries show up as stereo occlusion boundaries, which are 1D curves in the visual field
that separate parts of the scene that are visible to both eyes
(binocular regions) from those that are visible to only one
eye (monocular regions, also called half-occluded regions).
Despite the importance of localizing stereo occlusion
boundaries, the performance of modern stereo algorithms
at these boundaries and their adjacent monocular regions
is relatively poor. Figure 1 shows a breakdown of errors
of the best-performing stereo algorithm on the Middlebury
2014 benchmark [24] for each of the past five years, with errors measured by percentage of “bad pixels” (disparity error
≥ 2) in the benchmark’s “evaluation training dense set” using the provided disparity and occlusion maps. While there
has been almost a three-fold decrease of error in binocular regions (20% to 7%), the error rate in monocular regions
has decreased only slightly (66% to 52%) and remains much
higher than the 10.5% that we conservatively estimate as the

Figure 1. Motivation for improving the localization of stereo occlusion boundaries: Breakdown of errors for the best-performing
algorithms on Middlebury 2014 stereo benchmark [24] during the
past five years. Errors adjacent to stereo occlusion boundaries—in
monocular/half-occluded regions—have not been substantially reduced, and they remain much higher than our estimate (10.5%) of
the achievable error rate in those regions.

achievable error rate in monocular regions1 .
Stereo algorithms typically try to localize stereo occlusion boundaries by relying heavily on their co-occurrence
with texture or intensity boundaries, or by using deep networks with large receptive fields that can incorporate topdown contextual cues by internalizing the non-local disparity patterns that occur in a given dataset. These approaches
quickly break down in situations like Figures 2 and 8, where
texture and intensity boundaries are absent, or where the input is very different from the dataset used for training.
We propose a different, direct approach to localizing
stereo occlusion boundaries. We approach it as a local detection task, where each local 3D region of a stereo cost volume is independently classified as containing a stereo occlusion boundary or not. As we show, this is possible because
there are local signatures near stereo occlusion boundaries
in a stereo cost volume, even in cases like Figure 2 where
texture and intensity boundaries are absent.
1 Using the benchmark’s disparity and occlusion maps, we simulate a
vision system that achieves perfect matching in binocular regions and infers perfect occlusion maps, and then we calculate the disparity error in the
monocular regions that results from naive, constant-disparity extrapolation
from the true disparity of the background binocular region immediately
adjacent to each monocular region.

3818

