Multi-Task Multi-Sensor Fusion for 3D Object Detection
Ming Liang1∗ Bin Yang1,2∗ Yun Chen1† Rui Hu1 Raquel Urtasun1,2
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group 2 University of Toronto
{ming.liang, byang10, yun.chen, rui.hu, urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
In this paper we propose to exploit multiple related tasks
for accurate multi-sensor 3D object detection. Towards this
goal we present an end-to-end learnable architecture that
reasons about 2D and 3D object detection as well as ground
estimation and depth completion. Our experiments show
that all these tasks are complementary and help the network learn better representations by fusing information at
various levels. Importantly, our approach leads the KITTI
benchmark on 2D, 3D and bird’s eye view object detection,
while being real-time.

1. Introduction
Self-driving vehicles have the potential to improve
safety, reduce pollution, and provide mobility solutions for
otherwise underserved sectors of the population. Fundamental to its core is the ability to perceive the scene in
real-time. Most autonomous driving systems rely on 3dimensional perception, as it enables interpretable motion
planning in bird’s eye view.
Over the past few years we have seen a plethora of methods that tackle the problem of 3D object detection from
monocular images [2, 31], stereo cameras [4] or LiDAR
point clouds [36, 34, 16]. However, each sensor has its challenge: cameras have difficulty capturing fine-grained 3D information, while LiDAR provides very sparse observations
at long range. Recently, several attempts [5, 17, 12, 13]
have been developed to fuse information from multiple sensors. Methods like [17, 6] adopt a cascade approach by using cameras in the first stage and reasoning in LiDAR point
clouds only at the second stage. However, such cascade approach suffers from the weakness of each single sensor. As
a result, it is difficult to detect objects that are occluded or
far away. Others [5, 12, 13] have proposed to fuse multisensor features instead. Single-stage detectors [13] fuse
multi-sensor feature maps per LiDAR point, where local
∗ Equal contribution.
† Work done as part of Uber AI Residency program.

Mapping

3D Detection

LiDAR Point Cloud

2D Detection

Depth Completion

RGB Camera Image

Figure 1. Different sensors (bottom) and tasks (top) are complementary to each other. We propose a joint model that reasons on
two sensors and four tasks, and show that the target task - 3D
object detection can benefit from multi-task learning and multisensor fusion.

nearest neighbor interpolation is used to densify the correspondence. However, the fusion is still limited when LiDAR points become extremely sparse at long range. Twostage detectors [5, 12] fuse multi-sensor features per object
region of interest (ROI). However, the fusion process is typically slow (as it involves thousands of ROIs) and imprecise
(either using fix-sized anchors or ignoring object orientation).
In this paper we argue that by solving multiple perception tasks jointly, we can learn better feature representations
which result in better detection performance. Towards this
goal, we develop a multi-sensor detector that reasons about
2D and 3D object detection, ground estimation and depth
completion. Importantly, our model can be learned end-toend and performs all these tasks at once. We refer the reader
to Figure 1 for an illustration of our approach.
We propose a new multi-sensor fusion architecture that
leverages the advantages from both point-wise and ROIwise feature fusion, resulting in fully fused feature representations. Knowledge about the location of the ground can
provide useful cues for 3D object detection in the context
of self-driving vehicles, as the traffic participants of interest are restrained to this plane. Our detector estimates an
accurate voxel-wise ground location online as one of its
auxiliary tasks. This in turn is used by the bird’s eye view

7345

