Unsupervised Face Normalization with Extreme Pose and Expression in the Wild
Yichen Qian12 , Weihong Deng1∗, Jiani Hu1
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
AI Labs, Didi Chuxing, Beijing 100193, China
{mx54039q, whdeng, jnhu}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Face recognition achieves great success thanks to the
emergence of deep learning. However, many contemporary face recognition models still have limited invariance to strong intra-personal variations such as large pose
changes. Face normalization provides an effective and
cheap way to distill face identity and dispell face variances
for recognition. We focus on face generation in the wild with
unpaired data. To this end, we propose a Face Normalization Model (FNM) to generate a frontal, neutral expression,
photorealistic face image for face recognition. FNM is a
well-designed Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) with
three distinct novelties. First, a face expert network is introduced to construct generator and provide the ability of
retaining face identity. Second, with the reconstruction of
normal face, a pixel-wise loss is applied to stabilize optimization process. Third, we present a series of face attention discriminators to refine local textures. FNM could
recover canonical-view, expression-free image and directly
improve the performance of face recognition model. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments on both controlled and in-the-wild databases demonstrate the superiority of our face normalization method. Code is available at
https://github.com/mx54039q/fnm

1. Introduction
Unconstrained face recognition [25] is an important but
extremely challenging problem. Large pose, expression[19]
and lighting remain main obstacles for further pushing unconstrained face recognition performance. Some works
[3, 22, 29] address the pose problem by learning poseinvariant features, while some others [6, 20, 31, 16, 33] try
to synthesize an identity-preserved frontal face. Photorealistic frontal view synthesis from a single face image has an
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Face normalization results under the same identity in
unconstrained environment. Face images are under different views
across pose, lighting, expression and background. FNM can keep
a high-level consistency in preserving identity. On the right of the
dashed line is a near-normal face of the same identity.

abundance of applications other than face recognition.
However, face rotation (especially face frontalization) in
unconstrained environment has two major difficulties: complex face variations besides pose, and unpaired data. Compared to controlled environment, there are more complex
face variations, e.g., lighting, head pose, expression, selfocclusion in real-world scenarios. It is difficult to directly
warp input face to a normalized view. While obtaining
strictly normalized face is undoubtedly expensive and timeconsuming, we can not get effective supervision of target
normalized face (i.e., front-facing, neutral expression) corresponding to an input face. Face synthesis lays great stress
on facial texture, which is difficult without supervision of
target normalized face.
We present a method to normalize face into a frontfacing, neutral expression view. We propose a Face Normalization Model (FNM) completely based on neural network
to solve the two problems above simultaneously. Introduced
by Goodfellow et al. [10], the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) maps from a source data distribution to a target
data distribution using a min-max two-player game between
a generator network and a discriminator network. In this

9851

