Light Field Messaging with Deep Photographic Steganography
Eric Wengrowski
Rutgers University

Kristin Dana
Rutgers University

ericwengrowski@gmail.com

kristin.dana@rutgers.edu

Figure 1. Goal of LFM (Light Field Messaging): embed a message within an image or video, display the image/video on-screen, photograph
it with a handheld camera, and recover the hidden message. LFM significantly outperforms other synchronization-free steganography
techniques for camera-display messaging in message bit recovery error (BER). Our code and dataset are available here [1].

Abstract
We develop Light Field Messaging (LFM), a process of
embedding, transmitting, and receiving hidden information
in video that is displayed on a screen and captured by
a handheld camera. The goal of the system is to minimize perceived visual artifacts of the message embedding,
while simultaneously maximizing the accuracy of message
recovery on the camera side. LFM requires photographic
steganography for embedding messages that can be displayed and camera-captured. Unlike digital steganography,
the embedding requirements are significantly more challenging due to the combined effect of the screen’s radiometric emittance function, the camera’s sensitivity function,
and the camera-display relative geometry. We devise and
train a network to jointly learn a deep embedding and recovery algorithm that requires no multi-frame synchronization. A key novel component is the camera display transfer
function (CDTF) to model the camera-display pipeline. To
learn this CDTF we introduce a dataset (Camera-Display
1M) of 1,000,000 camera-captured images collected from
25 camera-display pairs. The result of this work is a highperformance real-time LFM system using consumer-grade
displays and smartphone cameras.

1. Introduction
In Light Field Messaging (LFM), cameras receive hidden messages from electronic displays concealed within ordinary images and videos. There are many applications
for visually concealed information including interactive vi-

sual media, augmented reality, road signage for self-driving
cars, hidden tags for robotics, privacy-preserving communication, and tagged digital artwork. When the hidden message is recovered from on-screen images, the task has significant challenges and is fundamentally different from the
traditional task of steganography. The conversion of a digital image into a light field depends on the characteristics of
the electronic display such as the spectral emittance function and spatial emitter pattern. Similarly, the transformation of light field to image depends on the camera pose, sensitivity curves, spatial sampling, and radiometric response.
Our unique approach is to learn the entire pathway as a single camera-display transfer function (CDTF) modeled by a
supervised deep network. This CDTF component is then
used in a larger network that maximizes the accuracy of the
camera-recovered message, while minimizing the perceived
artifacts in the observed display image.
Steganography in prior years referred almost exclusively
to the digital domain where images are processed and transferred as digital signals [3]. The classic methods for digital
steganography range from simple alteration of least significant intensity bits to more sophisticated fixed-filter transform domain techniques [4]. Recent work has moved the
prior fixed filter approaches to incorporate modern deep
learning [2]; but these methods are designed for digital
steganography and fail completely for the task of light field
messaging as illustrated in Figure 2.
In this paper, we propose a single-shot end-to-end photographic steganography algorithm for light field messaging.
Our method is comprised of: a CDTF network to model
11515

