Domain-Specific Batch Normalization for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Woong-Gi Chang∗ 1,2 Tackgeun You∗ 1,2 Seonguk Seo∗ 1 Suha Kwak2 Bohyung Han1
1
Computer Vision Lab., ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
2
Computer Vision Lab., CSE, POSTECH, Korea

Abstract
We propose a novel unsupervised domain adaptation
framework based on domain-specific batch normalization
in deep neural networks. We aim to adapt to both domains by specializing batch normalization layers in convolutional neural networks while allowing them to share
all other model parameters, which is realized by a twostage algorithm. In the first stage, we estimate pseudolabels for the examples in the target domain using an external unsupervised domain adaptation algorithm—for example, MSTN [27] or CPUA [14]—integrating the proposed domain-specific batch normalization. The second
stage learns the final models using a multi-task classification loss for the source and target domains. Note that the
two domains have separate batch normalization layers in
both stages. Our framework can be easily incorporated into
the domain adaptation techniques based on deep neural networks with batch normalization layers. We also present that
our approach can be extended to the problem with multiple
source domains. The proposed algorithm is evaluated on
multiple benchmark datasets and achieves the state-of-theart accuracy in the standard setting and the multi-source
domain adaption scenario.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation is a learning framework to transfer knowledge learned from source domains
with a large number of annotated training examples to target
domains with unlabeled data only. This task is challenging
due to domain shift problem, which is the phenomenon that
source and target datasets have different characteristics. The
domain shift is common in real-world problems and should
be handled carefully for broad applications of trained models. Unsupervised domain adaptation aims to learn robust
models for handling the issue, and is getting popular these
days since it can be a rescue for visual recognition tasks
relying on the datasets with limited diversity and variety.
∗ indicates equal contribution.

Recent advances in unsupervised domain adaptation owe
to its success of deep neural networks. Traditional domain
adaptation techniques based on shallow learning are reformulated using deep neural networks with proper loss functions. Strong representation power of deep networks rediscovers effectiveness of the previous methods and facilitates
development of brand-new algorithms. There is a large volume of research on unsupervised domain adaptation based
on deep neural networks [3, 4, 10, 14, 23, 27, 30], and in
recent years we have witnessed significant performance improvement.
One of the drawbacks in many existing unsupervised domain adaptation techniques [3, 4, 14, 23, 27] is the fact
that source and target domains share the whole network for
training and prediction. Shared components between both
domains are inevitable because there is something common
in the two domains; we often need to rely on information
in the source domain to learn the networks adapting to unlabeled target domain data. However, we believe that better generalization performance can be achieved by separating domain-specific information from domain-invariant one
since the two domains obviously have different characteristics that are not compatible within a single model.
To separate domain-specific information for unsupervised domain adaptation, we propose a novel building block
for deep neural networks, referred to as Domain-Specific
Batch Normalization (DSBN). A DSBN layer consists of
two branches of Batch Normalization (BN), each of which
is in charge of a single domain exclusively. DSBN captures domain-specific information using BN parameters and
transforms domain-specific data into domain-invariant representations using the parameters. Since this idea is generic,
DSBN is universally applicable to various deep neural networks for unsupervised domain adaptation that have BN
layers. Furthermore, it can be easily extended for multisource domain adaptation scenarios.
Based on the main idea, we introduce a two-stage framework based on DSBN for unsupervised domain adaptation,
where our network first generates pseudo-labels of unlabeled data in the target domain and then learns a fully supervised model using the pseudo-labels. Specifically, the first
17354

