Knowledge Distillation via Instance Relationship Graph
Yufan Liu∗a , Jiajiong Cao* b , Bing Li†a , Chunfeng Yuan†a , Weiming Hua , Yangxi Lic and Yunqiang
Duanc
a

NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
b
Ant Financial
c
National Computer Network Emergency Response Technical Team/Coordination Center of China

Abstract
The key challenge of knowledge distillation is to extract
general, moderate and sufficient knowledge from a teacher
network to guide a student network. In this paper, a novel
Instance Relationship Graph (IRG) is proposed for knowledge distillation. It models three kinds of knowledge, including instance features, instance relationships and feature space transformation, while the latter two kinds of
knowledge are neglected by previous methods. Firstly, the
IRG is constructed to model the distilled knowledge of
one network layer, by considering instance features and
instance relationships as vertexes and edges respectively.
Secondly, an IRG transformation is proposed to models the
feature space transformation across layers. It is more moderate than directly mimicking the features at intermediate
layers. Finally, hint loss functions are designed to force a
student’s IRGs to mimic the structures of a teacher’s IRGs.
The proposed method effectively captures the knowledge
along the whole network via IRGs, and thus shows stable
convergence and strong robustness to different network architectures. In addition, the proposed method shows superior performance over existing methods on datasets of various scales.

1. Introduction
In pursuit of high performance of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), deeper and wider architectures have been
proposed at the expense of larger model size and longer inference time. Examples include from AlexNet [13, 11, 2]
to ResNet [7, 27, 21] and DenseNet [10]. However, in various practical applications, these networks can not satisfy the
requirements of real-time response and low memory cost.
Therefore, more and more efforts have been putting into
* Both authors contributed equally to this research.
† Corresponding authors: Bing Li (bli@nlpr.ia.ac.cn), Chunfeng Yuan

(cfyuan@nlpr.ia.ac.cn)

    



 



 
 







 











 














(a) Conventional method

(b) Our method

Figure 1: Comparison between the conventional and proposed methods. (a) The conventional method uses instance
features to guide the student. Each instance is an independent point in the feature space. (b) The proposed method
defines Instance Relationship Graph (containing instance
features, instance relationships and feature space transformation) as the distilled knowledge to guide the student.
model compression.
Knowledge distillation [9, 26, 16, 25] is one of the
most popular solutions for model compression. It utilizes
a teacher-student framework to distill knowledge, such as
predicted probabilities, from a teacher network to guide a
student network. For example, Hinton et al. [9] leveraged
the final predicted probabilities of the teacher network to
supervise the student network. Zagoruyko et al. [26] transferred attention maps distilled from some mid-level layers
to teach the student. We refer to the softened outputs or
the intermediate-layer features of the network as instance
features, since they are obtained from samples (also called
instances) independently.
Nevertheless, there exist two limitations in conventional
knowledge distillation methods. Firstly, the existing methods independently extract instance features from the teacher
network as the distilled knowledge (as shown in Figure
1(a)). The instance relationships are never considered, but
they help reduce the intra-class variations and enlarge the
inter-class differences in the feature space. Moreover, instance features based methods usually suffer from signifi-

7096

