Structured Knowledge Distillation for Semantic Segmentation
Yifan Liu1∗ Ke Chen2
Chris Liu2 Zengchang Qin3,4 Zhenbo Luo5
Jingdong Wang2†
1
The University of Adelaide 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 Beihang University
4
Keep Labs, Keep Inc. 5 Samsung Research China

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the knowledge distillation
strategy for training small semantic segmentation networks
by making use of large networks. We start from the straightforward scheme, pixel-wise distillation, which applies the
distillation scheme adopted for image classification and
performs knowledge distillation for each pixel separately.
We further propose to distill the structured knowledge from
large networks to small networks, which is motivated by that
semantic segmentation is a structured prediction problem.
We study two structured distillation schemes: (i) pair-wise
distillation that distills the pairwise similarities, and (ii)
holistic distillation that uses GAN to distill holistic knowledge. The effectiveness of our knowledge distillation approaches is demonstrated by extensive experiments on three
scene parsing datasets: Cityscapes, Camvid and ADE20K.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is the problem of predicting the
category label of each pixel in an input image. It is a fundamental task in computer vision and has many real-world
applications, such as autonomous driving, video surveillance, virtual reality, and so on. Deep neural networks
have been the dominant solutions for semantic segmentation since the invention of fully-convolutional neural networks (FCNs) [38]. The subsequent approaches, e.g.,
DeepLab [5, 6, 7, 48], PSPNet [56], OCNet [50], ReﬁneNet [23] and DenseASPP [46] have achieved signiﬁcant
improvement in segmentation accuracy, often with cumbersome models and expensive computation.
Recently, neural networks with small model size, light
computation cost and high segmentation accuracy, have attracted much attention because of the need of applications
on mobile devices. Most current efforts have been devoted
to designing lightweight networks specially for segmentation or borrowing the design from classiﬁcation networks,

e.g., ENet [31], ESPNet [31], ERFNet [34] and ICNet [55].
The interest of this paper lies in compact segmentation networks, with a focus on training compact networks with the
help of cumbersome networks for improving the segmentation accuracy.
We study the knowledge distillation strategy, which has
been veriﬁed valid in classiﬁcation tasks [15, 35], for
training compact semantic segmentation networks. As a
straightforward scheme, we simply view the segmentation
problem as many separate pixel classiﬁcation problems, and
then directly apply the knowledge distillation scheme to
pixel-level. This simple scheme, we call pixel-wise distillation, transfers the class probability of the corresponding
pixel produced from the cumbersome network (teacher) to
the compact network (student).
Considering that semantic segmentation is a structured
prediction problem, we present structured knowledge distillation and transfer the structure information with two
schemes, pair-wise distillation and holistic distillation. The
pair-wise distillation scheme is motivated by the widelystudied pair-wise Markov random ﬁeld framework [22] for
enforcing spatial labeling contiguity, and the goal is to align
the pair-wise similarities among pixels computed from the
compact network and the cumbersome network.
The holistic distillation scheme aims to align higherorder consistencies, which are not characterized in the
pixel-wise and pair-wise distillation, between segmentation
maps produced from the compact segmentation network
and the cumbersome segmentation network. We adopt the
adversarial training scheme, encouraging the holistic embeddings of the segmentation maps produced from the compact segmentation network not to be distinguished from the
output of the cumbersome segmentation network.
To this end, we optimize an objective function that combines a conventional multi-class cross-entropy loss with the
distillation terms. The main contributions of this paper can
be summarized as follows.
• We study the knowledge distillation strategy for training accurate compact semantic segmentation networks.

∗ Part of this work was done when Y. Liu was an intern at Microsoft

Research, Beijing, China.
† Corresponding author.

2604

