Context-aware Spatio-recurrent Curvilinear Structure Segmentation
Feigege Wang1 ,Yue Gu1 ,Wenxi Liu1 ,Yuanlong Yu1 ,Shengfeng He2 ,Jia Pan3
1
College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Fuzhou University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
Abstract
Curvilinear structures are frequently observed in various
images in different forms, such as blood vessels or neuronal
boundaries in biomedical images. In this paper, we propose a novel curvilinear structure segmentation approach
using context-aware spatio-recurrent networks. Instead of
directly segmenting the whole image or densely segmenting
fixed-sized local patches, our method recurrently samples
patches with varied scales from the target image with
learned policy and processes them locally, which is similar
to the behavior of changing retinal fixations in the human
visual system and it is beneficial for capturing the multiscale or hierarchical modality of the complex curvilinear
structures. In specific, the policy of choosing local patches
is attentively learned based on the contextual information
of the image and the historical sampling experience. In
this way, with more patches sampled and refined, the
segmentation of the whole image can be progressively
improved. To validate our approach, comparison experiments on different types of image data are conducted
and the sampling procedures for exemplar images are
illustrated. We demonstrate that our method achieves the
state-of-the-art performance in public datasets.

1. Introduction
Due to the advances of deep learning techniques, image
segmentation has been rapidly developed in recent years,
with its main focus on semantically segmenting everyday
objects from natural images. On the other hand, there
are many other segmentation tasks about extracting objects
with special shapes, which requires prior domain knowledge about the target objects. Some typical examples
include the cell or organ segmentation from biomedical
images [7, 53] and the aerial images semantic segmentation [32, 21, 29]. In the microscopic image data, objects
with curvilinear structures, such as blood vessels, are the
targets for segmentation, which have not attracted enough
attention in previous works.
Prior methods for addressing the task of the curvilinear
structure segmentation usually involved hand-crafted fea-

Image

Manual annotation

Action at #1

Action at #24

Action at #69

Recurrent segmentation of curvilinear structures

Figure 1. Our proposed approach sequentially and adaptively samples
local patches from the input image, e.g. an retinal image as shown, and
then the segmentation in these patches are enhanced. The green boxes
represent the patches sampled at different time-steps (with 1st , 24th , and
69th as examples). The second row shows the zoomed-in results for the
first row’s segmentation results within red regions and compares with a
manual annotation as reference. The golden arrows highlight the major
changes in the zoomed-in region. Whenever the red and green boxes
overlap, the segmentation within red regions will be refined by taking into
account the image contexts. The segmentation of the entire image will be
progressively improved with more patches being sampled and refined.

tures [49], which cannot robustly handle a wide variety
of complex curvilinear structures and could be sensitive to
image noises. The recent success of Deep Convolutional
Neural Networks (DCNN) has greatly improved the performance of image segmentation, and the standard DCNNs
have also been applied to segmentation tasks involving
curvilinear structures, such as blood vessel [24, 31] and
neurons [4, 42, 35, 10].However, the fixed receptive fields
of convolutional layers in DCNN models have difficulty
to identify the curvilinear structures in biomedical images,
because the curvilinear structures are complex, entangled,
and multi-scaled but may take up a small portion in the local
patches of the image. In addition, existing segmentation
methods [39, 7] need to randomly crop small patches
from the image using a fixed window size, in order to
collect adequate amount of training samples. In the testing
phase, these approaches have to sample patches with the
same window size as in training and to produce the final
segmentation result using the overlapped tiling strategy.
Such a random sampling process does not take into account
the context dependency in the image, which is important
for identifying a complex network of multi-scale curvilinear
112648

