Occupancy Networks: Learning 3D Reconstruction in Function Space
Lars Mescheder1 Michael Oechsle1,2 Michael Niemeyer1 Sebastian Nowozin3† Andreas Geiger1
1
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI for Intelligent Systems and University of Tübingen
2
ETAS GmbH, Stuttgart
3
Google AI Berlin
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

nowozin@gmail.com

Abstract
With the advent of deep neural networks, learning-based
approaches for 3D reconstruction have gained popularity.
However, unlike for images, in 3D there is no canonical representation which is both computationally and memory efficient yet allows for representing high-resolution geometry
of arbitrary topology. Many of the state-of-the-art learningbased 3D reconstruction approaches can hence only represent very coarse 3D geometry or are limited to a restricted
domain. In this paper, we propose Occupancy Networks,
a new representation for learning-based 3D reconstruction
methods. Occupancy networks implicitly represent the 3D
surface as the continuous decision boundary of a deep neural network classifier. In contrast to existing approaches,
our representation encodes a description of the 3D output
at infinite resolution without excessive memory footprint.
We validate that our representation can efficiently encode
3D structure and can be inferred from various kinds of input. Our experiments demonstrate competitive results, both
qualitatively and quantitatively, for the challenging tasks of
3D reconstruction from single images, noisy point clouds
and coarse discrete voxel grids. We believe that occupancy
networks will become a useful tool in a wide variety of
learning-based 3D tasks.

1. Introduction
Recently, learning-based approaches for 3D reconstruction have gained popularity [4, 9, 23, 58, 75, 77]. In contrast
to traditional multi-view stereo algorithms, learned models
are able to encode rich prior information about the space of
3D shapes which helps to resolve ambiguities in the input.
While generative models have recently achieved remarkable successes in generating realistic high resolution images [36, 47, 72], this success has not yet been replicated
in the 3D domain. In contrast to the 2D domain, the com† Part of this work was done while at MSR Cambridge.

(a) Voxel

(b) Point

(c) Mesh

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Overview: Existing 3D representations discretize
the output space differently: (a) spatially in voxel representations, (b) in terms of predicted points, and (c) in terms of
vertices for mesh representations. In contrast, (d) we propose to consider the continuous decision boundary of a classifier fθ (e.g., a deep neural network) as a 3D surface which
allows to extract 3D meshes at any resolution.
munity has not yet agreed on a 3D output representation
that is both memory efficient and can be efficiently inferred
from data. Existing representations can be broadly categorized into three categories: voxel-based representations
[4, 19, 43, 58, 64, 69, 75] , point-based representations [1, 17]
and mesh representations [34, 57, 70], see Fig. 1.
Voxel representations are a straightforward generalization of pixels to the 3D case. Unfortunately, however, the
memory footprint of voxel representations grows cubically
with resolution, hence limiting naı̈ve implementations to
323 or 643 voxels. While it is possible to reduce the memory
footprint by using data adaptive representations such as octrees [61, 67], this approach leads to complex implementations and existing data-adaptive algorithms are still limited
to relatively small 2563 voxel grids. Point clouds [1,17] and
meshes [34, 57, 70] have been introduced as alternative representations for deep learning, using appropriate loss functions. However, point clouds lack the connectivity structure
of the underlying mesh and hence require additional postprocessing steps to extract 3D geometry from the model.

4460

