PVNet: Pixel-wise Voting Network for 6DoF Pose Estimation
Sida Peng1∗

Yuan Liu1∗
Qixing Huang2
Xiaowei Zhou1†
Hujun Bao1†
1
2
Zhejiang University
University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of 6DoF pose estimation from a single RGB image under severe occlusion or
truncation. Many recent works have shown that a two-stage
approach, which first detects keypoints and then solves
a Perspective-n-Point (PnP) problem for pose estimation,
achieves remarkable performance. However, most of these
methods only localize a set of sparse keypoints by regressing
their image coordinates or heatmaps, which are sensitive to
occlusion and truncation. Instead, we introduce a Pixelwise Voting Network (PVNet) to regress pixel-wise vectors
pointing to the keypoints and use these vectors to vote for
keypoint locations. This creates a flexible representation for
localizing occluded or truncated keypoints. Another important feature of this representation is that it provides uncertainties of keypoint locations that can be further leveraged
by the PnP solver. Experiments show that the proposed approach outperforms the state of the art on the LINEMOD,
Occlusion LINEMOD and YCB-Video datasets by a large
margin, while being efficient for real-time pose estimation.
We further create a Truncation LINEMOD dataset to validate the robustness of our approach against truncation. The
code is available at https://zju3dv.github.io/pvnet/.

1. Introduction
Object pose estimation aims to detect objects and estimate their orientations and translations relative to a canonical frame [39]. Accurate pose estimation is essential for
a variety of applications such as augmented reality, autonomous driving and robotic manipulation. For instance,
fast and robust pose estimation is crucial in Amazon Picking Challenge [6], where a robot needs to pick objects from
a warehouse shelf. This paper focuses on the specific setting
of recovering the 6DoF pose of an object, i.e., rotation and
translation in 3D, from a single RGB image of that object.
This problem is quite challenging from many perspectives,
∗ The first two authors contributed equally. The authors from Zhejiang
University are affiliated with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG and the ZJUSenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision.
† Corresponding authors: Hujun Bao and Xiaowei Zhou.

(a) Input image

(b) Vectors

(c) Voting

(g) Occlusion

(d) 2D keypoints

(e) 3D keypoints

(f) Aligned model

(h) Truncation

Figure 1. The 6D pose estimation problem is formulated as a
Perspective-n-Point (PnP) problem in this paper, which requires
correspondences between 2D and 3D keypoints, as illustrated in
(d) and (e). We predict vectors pointing to keypoints for each pixel,
as shown in (b), and localize 2D keypoints in a RANSAC-based
voting scheme, as shown in (c). The proposed method is robust to
occlusion (g) and truncation (h), where the green bounding boxes
represent the ground truth poses and the blue bounding boxes represent our predictions.

including object detection under severe occlusions, variations in lighting and appearance, and cluttered background
objects.
Traditional methods [24, 20, 15] have shown that pose
estimation can be achieved by establishing the correspondences between an object image and the object model. They
rely on hand-crafted features, which are not robust to image
variations and background clutters. Deep learning based
methods [33, 17, 40, 4] train end-to-end neural networks
that take an image as input and output its corresponding
pose. However, generalization remains as an issue, as it
is unclear that such end-to-end methods learn sufficient feature representations for pose estimation.
Some recent methods [29, 30, 36] use CNNs to first
regress 2D keypoints and then compute 6D pose parameters using the Perspective-n-Point (PnP) algorithm. In other
words, the detected keypoints serve as an intermediate representation for pose estimation. Such two-stage approaches
achieve state-of-the-art performance, thanks to robust detection of keypoints. However, these methods have difficulty in tackling occluded and truncated objects, since part
of their keypoints are invisible. Although CNNs may predict these unseen keypoints by memorizing similar patterns,
14561

