Audio Visual Scene-Aware Dialog
Huda Alamri1 , Vincent Cartillier1 , Abhishek Das1 , Jue Wang2 , Anoop Cherian2 , Irfan Essa1 ,
Dhruv Batra1 , Tim K. Marks2 , Chiori Hori2 , Peter Anderson1 , Stefan Lee1 , Devi Parikh1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)
1

{halamri, vcartillier3, abhshkdz, irfan, dbatra, peter.anderson, steflee, parikh}@gatech.edu
2

{juewangj, cherian, tmarks, chori}@merl.com

video-dialog.com

Abstract
We introduce the task of scene-aware dialog. Our goal is
to generate a complete and natural response to a question
about a scene, given video and audio of the scene and the
history of previous turns in the dialog. To answer successfully, agents must ground concepts from the question in the
video while leveraging contextual cues from the dialog history. To benchmark this task, we introduce the Audio Visual
Scene-Aware Dialog (AVSD) Dataset. For each of more
than 11,000 videos of human actions from the Charades
dataset, our dataset contains a dialog about the video, plus
a final summary of the video by one of the dialog participants. We train several baseline systems for this task and
evaluate the performance of the trained models using both
qualitative and quantitative metrics. Our results indicate
that models must utilize all the available inputs (video, audio, question, and dialog history) to perform best on this
dataset.

1. Introduction
Developing conversational agents has been a longstanding goal of artificial intelligence (AI). For many humancomputer interactions, natural language presents an ideal interface, as it is fully expressive and requires no user training.
One emerging area is the development of visually aware dialog systems. Das et al. [6] introduced the problem of visual dialog, in which a model is trained to carry out a conversation in natural language, answering questions about an
image. For a given question, the system has to ground its
response in the input image as well as the previous utterances. However, conversing about a static image is inherently limiting. Many potential applications for conversational agents, such as virtual personal assistants and assistive technologies for the visually impaired, would benefit
greatly from understanding the scene in which the agent is
operating. This context often cannot be captured in a sin-

Figure 1: In Audio Visual Scene-Aware Dialog, an agent’s task
is to answer natural language questions about a short video. The
agent grounds its responses on the dynamic scene, the audio, and
the history (previous rounds) of the dialog, dialog history, which
begins with a short script of the scene.

gle image, as there is important information in the temporal
dynamics of the scene as well as in the audio.
Our goal is to move towards conversational agents that are
not only visually intelligent but also aware of temporal dynamics. For example, a security guard (G) might have the
following exchange with an AI agent: “G: Has there been
anyone carrying a red handbag in the last week in Sector 5?
AI: Yes, a woman in a blue suit. G: Do any of the exit cameras show her leaving with it? AI: No. G: Did anyone else
pick it up?”. Answering such questions requires a holistic understanding of the visual and audio information in the
scene, including temporal dynamics. Since human communication is rarely single-shot, an understanding of sequential
dialog (e.g., what her and it refer to) is also required.
We introduce the task of scene-aware dialog, as well as the

7558

