4D Spatio-Temporal ConvNets: Minkowski Convolutional Neural Networks
Christopher Choy

JunYoung Gwak

Silvio Savarese

chrischoy@stanford.edu

jgwak@stanford.edu

ssilvio@stanford.edu

Abstract
In many robotics and VR/AR applications, 3D-videos
are readily-available input sources (a sequence of depth
images, or LIDAR scans). However, in many cases, the
3D-videos are processed frame-by-frame either through 2D
convnets or 3D perception algorithms. In this work, we
propose 4-dimensional convolutional neural networks for
spatio-temporal perception that can directly process such
3D-videos using high-dimensional convolutions. For this, we
adopt sparse tensors [8, 9] and propose generalized sparse
convolutions that encompass all discrete convolutions. To
implement the generalized sparse convolution, we create an
open-source auto-differentiation library for sparse tensors1
that provides extensive functions for high-dimensional convolutional neural networks. We create 4D spatio-temporal
convolutional neural networks using the library and validate them on various 3D semantic segmentation benchmarks
and proposed 4D datasets for 3D-video perception. To overcome challenges in 4D space, we propose the hybrid kernel,
a special case of the generalized sparse convolution, and
trilateral-stationary conditional random fields that enforce
spatio-temporal consistency in the 7D space-time-chroma
space. Experimentally, we show that a convolutional neural
network with only generalized 3D sparse convolutions can
outperform 2D or 2D-3D hybrid methods by a large margin2 .
Also, we show that on 3D-videos, 4D spatio-temporal convolutional neural networks are robust to noise and outperform
the 3D convolutional neural network.

1. Introduction
In this work, we are interested in 3D-video perception.
A 3D-video is a temporal sequence of 3D scans such as a
video from a depth camera, a sequence of LIDAR scans,
or a multiple MRI scans of the same object or a body part
(Fig. 1). As LIDAR scanners and depth cameras become
more affordable and widely used for robotics applications,
3D-vidoes became readily-available sources of input for
1 https://github.com/StanfordVL/MinkowskiEngine
2 At the time of submission, we achieved the best performance on ScanNet [5] with 67.9% mIoU

Figure 1: An example of 3D video: 3D scenes at different
time steps. Best viewed on display.

1D: Line

2D: Square

3D: Cube

4D: Tesseract

Figure 2: 2D projections of hypercubes in various dimensions
robotics systems or AR/VR applications.
However, there are many technical challenges in using 3Dvideos for high-level perception tasks. First, 3D data requires
a heterogeneous representation and processing that either
alienates users or makes it difficult to integrate into larger
systems. Second, the performance of the 3D convolutional
neural networks is worse or on-par with 2D convolutional
neural networks. Third, the limited number of open-source
libraries for fast large-scale 3D data is another factor.
To resolve most, if not all, of the challenges in highdimensional perception, we adopt a sparse tensor [8, 9] for
our problem and propose the generalized sparse convolutions
for sparse tensors and publish an open-source auto-diff library for sparse tensors with comprehensive standard neural
network functions.
We adopt the sparse representation for a few reasons. Currently, there are various concurrent works for 3D perception:
a dense 3D convolution [5], pointnet-variants [23, 24], continuous convolutions [12, 16], surface convolutions [21, 30],
and an octree convolution [25]. Out of these representations,
we chose a sparse tensor due to its expressiveness and generalizability for high-dimensional spaces. Also, it allows
homogeneous data representation within traditional neural
network libraries since most of them support sparse tensors.
Second, the sparse convolution closely resembles the standard convolution (Sec. 3) which is proven to be successful in
13075

