Structure-Preserving Stereoscopic View Synthesis with
Multi-Scale Adversarial Correlation Matching
Yu Zhang1,2 , Dongqing Zou1∗, Jimmy S. Ren1 , Zhe Jiang1 , Xiaohao Chen1
1
SenseTime Research 2 Tsinghua University
{zhangyu1,zoudongqing,rensijie,jiangzhe,chenxiaohao}@sensetime.com

Abstract
This paper addresses stereoscopic view synthesis from a
single image. Various recent works solve this task by reorganizing pixels from the input view to reconstruct the target
one in a stereo setup. However, purely depending on such
photometric-based reconstruction process, the network may
produce structurally inconsistent results.
Regarding this issue, this work proposes Multi-Scale Adversarial Correlation Matching (MS-ACM), a novel learning framework for structure-aware view synthesis. The proposed framework does not assume any costly supervision
signal of scene structures such as depth. Instead, it models structures as self-correlation coefficients extracted from
multi-scale feature maps in transformed spaces. In training, the feature space attempts to push the correlation distances between the synthesized and target images far apart,
thus amplifying inconsistent structures. At the same time,
the view synthesis network minimizes such correlation distances by fixing mistakes it makes. With such adversarial
training, structural errors of different scales and levels are
iteratively discovered and reduced, preserving both global
layouts and fine-grained details. Extensive experiments on
the KITTI benchmark show that MS-ACM improves both
visual quality and the metrics over existing methods when
plugged into recent view synthesis architectures.

1. Introduction
3D display is becoming universal nowadays. Automatic
conversion of the rich 2D images and videos to 3D is now
a demand that can benefit various industrial fields. To fulfill this demand, binocular views are rendered to form the
stereoscopic format for an input scene, while only one of
them is known beforehand. Such single-image based view
synthesis problem, however, is still challenging.
In its early research, view synthesis is often based on
at least two known views (or continuous video sequences),
∗ Correspondence should be addressed to zoudonqging@sensetime.com

;LH HWDO

1LNODXVHWDO

*RGDUGHWDO

06$&0

*URXQG7UXWK

Figure 1. Structure preservation for view synthesis. Photometric losses commonly adopted by existing approaches (e.g., Xie et
al. [39], Niklaus et al. [21] and Godard et al. [9]) often lead to
blurred and distorted structures, which is more severe for thin, unsalient objects. The proposed MS-ACM addresses this limitation
via a novel adversarial training process that accounts for both large
and fine-grained structures. Best viewed in color with zoom.

so that the 3D scene geometry is well-defined [30, 38, 14].
For a single input view, the gap of 3D understanding is
filled very recently by the strong statistical modeling power
of deep learning. Among these methods, 3D view transformations are formulated as 2D warping fields (e.g. pixel
flows [42, 13, 23], spatially-variant kernels [39, 21], or homographies [15]), which guide the target view to “copy”
pixels from the input image. Photometric reconstruction errors across views are usually adopted to supervise this process in training. However, as such loss functions optimize

5860

