Automatic Face Aging in Videos via Deep Reinforcement Learning
Chi Nhan Duong 1 , Khoa Luu 2 , Kha Gia Quach 1 , Nghia Nguyen 2 ,
Eric Patterson 3 , Tien D. Bui 1 , Ngan Le 4
1
Computer Science and Software Engineering, Concordia University, Canada
2
Computer Science and Computer Engineering, University of Arkansas, USA
3
School of Computing, Clemson University, USA
4
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
1

{dcnhan, kquach}@ieee.org, bui@encs.concordia.ca, 2 {khoaluu, nhnguyen}@uark.edu,
3

ekp@clemson.edu, 4 thihoanl@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a novel approach to synthesize automatically age-progressed facial images in video sequences
using Deep Reinforcement Learning. The proposed method
models facial structures and the longitudinal face-aging
process of given subjects coherently across video frames.
The approach is optimized using a long-term reward, Reinforcement Learning function with deep feature extraction
from Deep Convolutional Neural Network. Unlike previous
age-progression methods that are only able to synthesize an
aged likeness of a face from a single input image, the proposed approach is capable of age-progressing facial likenesses in videos with consistently synthesized facial features
across frames. In addition, the deep reinforcement learning
method guarantees preservation of the visual identity of input faces after age-progression. Results on videos of our
new collected aging face AGFW-v2 database demonstrate
the advantages of the proposed solution in terms of both
quality of age-progressed faces, temporal smoothness, and
cross-age face verification.

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Given an input video, while frame-based approaches produce inconsistent aging features, our videobased method ensures consistency among video frames.

Age-related facial technologies generally address the
two areas of age estimation [4, 21, 20, 23, 8, 22] and age
progression [6, 29, 46, 30, 41, 35]. The face age-estimation
problem is defined as building computer software that has
the ability to recognize the ages of individuals in a given
photograph. Comparatively, the face age-progression problem necessitates the more complex capability to predict the
future facial likeness of people appearing in images [19].
Aside from the innate curiosity of individuals, research
of face aging has its origins in cases of missing persons
and wanted fugitives, in either case law enforcement de-

sires plausible age-progressed images to facilitate searches.
Accurate face aging also provides benefits for numerous
practical applications such as age-invariant face recognition [44, 43, 17]. There have been numerous anthropological, forensic, computer-aided, and computer-automated
approaches to facial age-progression. However, the results
from previous methods for synthesizing aged faces that represent accurate physical processes involved in human aging are still far from perfect. This is especially so in ageprogressing videos of faces, due to the usual challenges for
110013

