FSA-Net: Learning Fine-Grained Structure Aggregation for Head Pose
Estimation from a Single Image
Tsun-Yi Yang1,2
Yi-Ting Chen1
1
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
shamangary@citi.sinica.edu.tw

2

Yen-Yu Lin1
Yung-Yu Chuang1,2
National Taiwan University, Taiwan

jamie@media.ee.ntu.edu.tw

yylin@citi.sinica.edu.tw

cyy@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper proposes a method for head pose estimation
from a single image. Previous methods often predict head
poses through landmark or depth estimation and would require more computation than necessary. Our method is
based on regression and feature aggregation. For having
a compact model, we employ the soft stagewise regression
scheme. Existing feature aggregation methods treat inputs
as a bag of features and thus ignore their spatial relationship in a feature map. We propose to learn a fine-grained
structure mapping for spatially grouping features before aggregation. The fine-grained structure provides part-based
information and pooled values. By utilizing learnable and
non-learnable importance over the spatial location, different model variants can be generated and form a complementary ensemble. Experiments show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods including both the
landmark-free ones and the ones based on landmark or
depth estimation. With only a single RGB frame as input, our method even outperforms methods utilizing multimodality information (RGB-D, RGB-Time) on estimating
the yaw angle. Furthermore, the memory overhead of our
model is 100× smaller than those of previous methods.

1. Introduction
Facial modeling and analysis have long been an active
research topic in computer vision [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 21, 22, 24,
25]. Large facial datasets [16, 37, 48] and efficient methods
for different facial analysis problems have been proposed
for years, such as face recognition [4, 6] or identification,
facial age estimation [45], landmark detection [3], and head
pose estimation [35]. This paper addresses the head pose
estimation problem which has many applications such as
driver behavior monitoring and human attention modelling.
It could also be used to improve or provide extra information for other problems such as identity recognition [39],
expression recognition [46], or attention detection [8].

Figure 1. Sample results of pose estimation using the proposed
method. Our method only takes as input a single RGB frame.
Results for two sequences of head motion are shown. The blue
line indicates the direction the subject is facing; the green line for
the downward direction while the red one for the side.

Head pose estimation from a single image is a challenging problem. Head pose is a 3D vector containing the angles
of yaw, pitch and roll. Estimating the head pose from an image essentially requires to learn a mapping between 2D and
3D spaces. Some methods utilize more modalities such as
3D information in depth images [28, 25, 14, 27] or temporal information in video sequences [16]. The depth images provide 3D information that is missing in 2D images.
Videos capture continuous movement of human heads and
provide extra information to help the pose estimation. However, learning the temporal information is usually achieved
by recurrent structures with high computation costs while
capturing depth information often requires special cameras
which are not always available. Most single-frame pose estimation methods utilize facial landmark detection for estimating head poses [20, 3]. However, it would incur more
computation and leads to bigger models. Hence, all these
models are not suitable to be adopted on platforms with limited memory and computation resource.
This paper proposes FSA-Net, a compact model for pose
estimation from a single image using direct regression without landmarks. For having a compact model, the proposed
model is built on the soft stagewise regression scheme [45].
To harvest multi-scale information, like many regression
methods [45, 3], our method combines feature maps from
different layers/stages. For having more accurate predic-

1087

