Co-saliency Detection via Mask-guided Fully Convolutional Networks with
Multi-scale Label Smoothing

1

Kaihua Zhang1 , Tengpeng Li1 , Bo Liu2∗, Qingshan Liu1
B-DAT and CICAEET, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
JD Digits, Mountain View, CA, USA
{zhkhua,kfliubo}@gmail.com

Abstract
In image co-saliency detection problem, one critical issue is how to model the concurrent pattern of the co-salient
parts, which appears both within each image and across all
the relevant images. In this paper, we propose a hierarchical image co-saliency detection framework as a coarse
to fine strategy to capture this pattern. We first propose a
mask-guided fully convolutional network structure to generate the initial co-saliency detection result. The mask is used
for background removal and it is learned from the high-level
feature response maps of the pre-trained VGG-net output.
We next propose a multi-scale label smoothing model to further refine the detection result. The proposed model jointly optimizes the label smoothness of pixels and superpixels. Experiment results on three popular image co-saliency
detection benchmark datasets including iCoseg, MSRC and
Cosal2015 demonstrate remarkable performance compared
with the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Image saliency detection mimics human vision system
when looking at one image, through detecting the region
that attracts human attention most. Given a group of images,
the image co-saliency refers to common salient objects or
regions in a group of relevant images. Discovering image
co-saliency has been widely used as a pre-processing step
in many applications, such as video/image foreground cosegmentaion [17, 16], object localization [42], surveillance
video analysis [37] and image retrieval [38, 47].
One major theme in co-saliency detection research is image pixel or region feature representation. Traditional manually designed cues such as color histograms, Gabor filters,
and SIFT descriptors, have been used in image co-saliency
detection [8, 41, 15]. However, due to the limited feature
∗ Corresponding author.
This work is supported by the NSFC
(61876088, 61825601), the NSF of Jiangsu Province (BK20170040).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Illustration of different maps. (a) Input images; (b)
Ground truth; (c) Single salient results with the proposed FCN
without mask guidance; (d) Masked co-saliency maps; (e) Final
refined results.

discrimination, the performance of those methods are in
general unsatisfactory. More recently, the deep learning
methods have achieved superior accuracy because neural
networks can generate more discriminative feature representations [51, 52]. The second major theme is to discover the repeated saliency across all images through a proper association strategy. The unsupervised learning methods look for the common objects or salient regions across
images, by a series of models such as clustering [53, 48],
multi-instance learning [54, 24] and graphical model [23].
With co-saliency label information, the supervised learning methods are promising to achieve more accurate results. The supervised single image saliency detection methods [22, 56, 55] can be used for co-saliency detection. However, they ignore the pattern concurrency of salient regions
within all images, which is the essential characteristic of the
co-saliency detection problem compared with single image
saliency detection task. Several recent efforts are conducted
to model the between-image pattern concurrency in the form of distance metric learning [20] and collaborative learning [45].
In this paper, the proposed hierarchical method is also
to capture the salient pattern concurrency across images.
Intuitively, image co-saliency can be derived from the single image saliency repeated in all images [8]. This motivates us to design a two-step framework. In the first step,
4321
3095

