End-to-End Learned Random Walker
for Seeded Image Segmentation
Lorenzo Cerrone, Alexander Zeilmann, Fred A. Hamprecht
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
{lorenzo.cerrone, alexander.zeilmann, fred.hamprecht}@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
We present an end-to-end learned algorithm for seeded
segmentation. Our method is based on the Random Walker
algorithm, where we predict the edge weights of the underlying graph using a convolutional neural network. This can
be interpreted as learning context-dependent diffusivities
for a linear diffusion process. Besides calculating the exact
gradient for optimizing these diffusivities, we also propose
simplifications that sparsely sample the gradient and still
yield competitive results. The proposed method achieves
the currently best results on a seeded version of the CREMI
neuron segmentation challenge.

tured learning is more general than the naive approach of
training a CNN to predict good boundary indicators, oblivious to what these will be used for; and to subsequently
and independently optimize the parameters of the inference
step.
For the second, inference, step, we choose a Conditional Gaussian Markov Random Field with only seed fidelity as the unary term – also known as Random Walker
algorithm [13] – and here show how to train that inference
scheme jointly with a deep convolutional neural network
(CNN).
Our choice of a Gaussian Markov Random Field is motivated by the following features:
• Less sensitive to noisy edge weights than the Watershed [11] which is fast and hence popular in seeded
segmentation, but also susceptible to outliers based on
its use of the (max, min)-semiring [4].

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is the task of partitioning an image
into regions that are meaningful for a given task. Seeded
segmentation is a popular semi-supervised variant, where
an oracle annotates one or more pixels per region with an
instance label, such that all seeds in a region share the same
label.
Most seeded segmentation pipelines involve two parts: a
first step that predicts, for each pair of adjacent pixels, if or
not they are likely part of the same region; and a second step
that ingests these predictions as well as the seed locations
and then infers the precise extent of each region. The second
step is often cast as inference in an undirected probabilistic
graphical model, either discrete [6] or continuous [13].
If no prior information on the nature of the images to be
segmented is available, the first step – boundary estimation
– is of necessity generic. It is then possible to use or train
some state of the art edge detection method (e.g. [19]) and
choose the parameters of the second step – inference – by
hand.
But since dense ground truth is required for the training
of a powerful edge detection method in any case, one may
also go further and train the two steps jointly. Such a struc-

• More amenable to differentiation than the purely combinatorial graph cuts problem [6].
• More computationally efficient than more expressive
generalizations involving higher-order potentials [22].
More specifically, we make the following contributions:
1. We demonstrate end-to-end structured learning of a
pipeline consisting of a deep neural network that predicts edge weights, which are subsequently used in a
seeded segmentation by linear diffusion, i.e., with the
Random Walker algorithm.
2. We calculate the exact gradient of our objective function and propose a sparse sampling strategy of the gradient to reduce computation time.
3. We evaluate the algorithm on a seeded version of the
MICCAI Challenge on Circuit Reconstruction from
Electron Microscopy Images (CREMI) [10]. Here, the
proposed method outperforms unstructured training of

12559

