Unsupervised Disentangling of Appearance and Geometry
by Deformable Generator Network
Xianglei Xing1 , Tian Han2 , Ruiqi Gao2 , Song-Chun Zhu2 , Ying Nian Wu2
College of Automation, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China
2
Department of statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095
1

xingxl@hrbeu.edu.cn, {hantian,ruiqigao}@ucla.edu,{sczhu,ywu}@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
We present a deformable generator model to disentangle the appearance and geometric information in purely unsupervised manner. The appearance generator models the
appearance related information, including color, illumination, identity or category, of an image, while the geometric
generator performs geometric related warping, such as rotation and stretching, through generating displacement of
the coordinate of each pixel to obtain the final image. Two
generators act upon independent latent factors to extract disentangled appearance and geometric information from
images. The proposed scheme is general and can be easily
integrated into different generative models. An extensive set
of qualitative and quantitative experiments shows that the
appearance and geometric information can be well disentangled, and the learned geometric generator can be conveniently transferred to other image datasets to facilitate
knowledge transfer tasks.

model that can disentangle the appearance and geometric
information in purely unsupervised manner under a unified
probabilistic framework. Specifically, our model integrates
two generator networks: one appearance generator and one
geometric generator with two sets of independent latent factors. The dense local displacements are generated by the geometric generator, which then act on the image intensities
generated by the appearance generator to obtain the final
image through a differentiable warping function. The model is learned by introducing alternating back-propagation for
two latent factors, and it can also be easily extended to other generative models such as deformable variational autoencoder. The proposed method can learn well-disentangled
representation, which can transfer the appearance and geometric knowledge to other datasets and tasks.
Our contributions are summarized below:
• Propose a deformable generator network to disentangle the appearance and geometric information in purely unsupervised manner.
• The proposed method is general and agnostic. It can
be easily extended to different models, such as deformable variational auto-encoder.

1. Introduction
Learning disentangled structures behind the observations
[2, 26] is a fundamental problem towards understanding and
controlling modern deep models. Such disentangled representations are useful not only in building more transparent
and interpretable deep models, but also in a large variety of
downstream AI tasks such as transfer learning and zero-shot
inference where humans excel but machines struggle [22].
Among others, deep generative models, e.g., generator
model, have shown great promise in learning representation of images in recent years. However, the learned representation is often entangled and not interpretable. Learning
disentangled and interpretable representation for deep generative models is challenging, e.g., from face images where
no facial landmarks are given. However, only limited work
has been done in this direction.
In this paper, we propose to learn deformable generator

• Perform extensive experiments both qualitatively and
quantitatively to show that appearance and geometric
information can be well disentangled, which can be effectively transferred to other datasets and tasks.

2. Related work
Existing work on learning disentangled representation
using deep generative models generally fall into two categories: implicit learning and explicit learning.
The implicit learning methods proceed through latent factors disentanglement and are focused on two categories: the Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [10,
8, 28, 23, 33] and the Variational Auto-encoders (VAEs)
[17, 30, 27, 21]. InfoGAN [5] and β-VAE [13] are representatives for the two families. Though implicit methods
110354

