Style Transfer by Relaxed Optimal Transport and Self-Similarity
Nicholas Kolkin1 Jason Salavon2
1
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

Gregory Shakhnarovich1
2
University of Chicago

nick.kolkin@ttic.edu, salavon@uchicago.edu, greg@ttic.edu

Abstract
The goal of style transfer algorithms is to render the
content of one image using the style of another. We propose Style Transfer by Relaxed Optimal Transport and
Self-Similarity (STROTSS), a new optimization-based style
transfer algorithm. We extend our method to allow userspecified point-to-point or region-to-region control over visual similarity between the style image and the output. Such
guidance can be used to either achieve a particular visual
effect or correct errors made by unconstrained style transfer. In order to quantitatively compare our method to prior
work, we conduct a large-scale user study designed to assess the style-content tradeoff across settings in style transfer algorithms. Our results indicate that for any desired
level of content preservation, our method provides higher
quality stylization than prior work.

1

Introduction

One of the main challenges of style transfer is formalizing ’content’ and ’style’, terms which evoke strong intuitions but are hard to even define semantically. We propose
formulations of each term which are novel in the domain of

style transfer, but have a long history of successful application in computer vision more broadly. We hope that related
efforts to refine definitions of both style and content will
eventually lead to more robust recognition systems, but in
this work we solely focus on their utility for style transfer.
We define style as a distribution over features extracted
by a deep neural network, and measure the distance between these distributions using an efficient approximation
of the Earth Movers Distance initially proposed in the Natural Language Processing community [14]. This definition
of style similarity is not only well motivated statistically,
but also intuitive. The goal of style transfer is to deploy the
visual attributes of the style image onto the content image
with minimum distortion to the content’s underlying layout
and semantics; in essence to ’optimally transport’ these visual attributes.
Our definition of content is inspired by the concept of
self-similarity, and the notion that human perceptual system is robust because it identifies objects based on their appearance relative to their surroundings, rather than absolute
appearance. Defining content similarity in this way disconnects the term somewhat from pixels precise values making
it easier to satisfy than the definitions used in prior work.
This allows the output of our algorithm to maintain the perceived semantics and spatial layout of the content image,

Figure 1: Examples of our output for unconstrained (left) and guided (right) style transfer.Images are arranged in order of
content, output, style. Below the content and style image on the right we visualize the user-defined region-to-region guidance
used to generate the output in the middle.
110051

