Object-aware Aggregation with Bidirectional Temporal Graph
for Video Captioning
Junchao Zhang and Yuxin Peng∗
Institute of Computer Science and Technology,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
pengyuxin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Video captioning aims to automatically generate natural
language descriptions of video content, which has drawn a
lot of attention recent years. Generating accurate and finegrained captions needs to not only understand the global
content of video, but also capture the detailed object information. Meanwhile, video representations have great
impact on the quality of generated captions. Thus, it is
important for video captioning to capture salient objects
with their detailed temporal dynamics, and represent them
using discriminative spatio-temporal representations. In
this paper, we propose a new video captioning approach
based on object-aware aggregation with bidirectional temporal graph (OA-BTG), which captures detailed temporal dynamics for salient objects in video, and learns discriminative spatio-temporal representations by performing
object-aware local feature aggregation on detected object
regions. The main novelties and advantages are: (1) Bidirectional temporal graph: A bidirectional temporal graph
is constructed along and reversely along the temporal order,
which provides complementary ways to capture the temporal trajectories for each salient object. (2) Object-aware
aggregation: Learnable VLAD (Vector of Locally Aggregated Descriptors) models are constructed on object temporal trajectories and global frame sequence, which performs object-aware aggregation to learn discriminative representations. A hierarchical attention mechanism is also
developed to distinguish different contributions of multiple
objects. Experiments on two widely-used datasets demonstrate our OA-BTG achieves state-of-the-art performance in
terms of BLEU@4, METEOR and CIDEr metrics.

1. Introduction
As a task of generating natural language descriptions for
video content automatically, video captioning takes a cru∗ Corresponding author.

$ &KLQHVHPDQVKRRWVDEDVNHWEDOOLQWRWKHEDVNHW

Figure 1. Illustration for the salient objects marked by the colored
rectangle boxes and an example temporal trajectory indicated by
dashed curve, which are important for discriminative video understanding to generate accurate captioning description.

cial step forward to the high-level video understanding and
artificial intelligence. It supports various potential applications, such as human-robot interaction or assisting the
visually-impaired. Recently, it has received increasing attention in both computer vision and artificial intelligence
communities.
Previous works have explored to model the temporal information of video content by temporal attention mechanism [1, 2] or hierarchical encoder-decoder structures [3, 4].
However, they mainly work on the global frame or salient
regions without discrimination on specific object instances,
which cannot well capture the detailed temporal dynamics
of each object. While for obtaining the accurate captioning descriptions for complex video content, it plays a key
but challenging role to capture the salient objects with their
detailed temporal dynamics. As shown in Fig. 1, the reference captioning sentence “A Chinese man shoots a basketball into the basket” involves three salient objects in the
example video, namely the boy, the basketball and the basket, which needs the object-aware video understanding. Besides, the reference sentence also describes the action that
the boy is performing, “shoots a basketball”, which needs to
understand the detailed temporal dynamics of the boy and
the basketball.
In addition, video representations have great impact
on the quality of generated captions. Therefore, how
18327

