ESPNetv2: A Light-weight, Power Efficient, and General Purpose
Convolutional Neural Network
Sachin Mehta♠ , Mohammad Rastegari♥ ♣ , Linda Shapiro♠ , and Hannaneh Hajishirzi♠ ♥
♠

University of Washington ♥ Allen Institute for AI (AI2) ♣ XNOR.AI
{sacmehta, shapiro, hannaneh}@cs.washington.edu mohammadr@allenai.org

Abstract
We introduce a light-weight, power efficient, and general purpose convolutional neural network, ESPNetv2,
for modeling visual and sequential data. Our network uses
group point-wise and depth-wise dilated separable convolutions to learn representations from a large effective receptive field with fewer FLOPs and parameters. The performance of our network is evaluated on four different tasks:
(1) object classification, (2) semantic segmentation, (3) object detection, and (4) language modeling. Experiments
on these tasks, including image classification on the ImageNet and language modeling on the PenTree bank dataset,
demonstrate the superior performance of our method over
the state-of-the-art methods. Our network outperforms ESPNet by 4-5% and has 2 − 4× fewer FLOPs on the PASCAL
VOC and the Cityscapes dataset. Compared to YOLOv2
on the MS-COCO object detection, ESPNetv2 delivers
4.4% higher accuracy with 6× fewer FLOPs. Our experiments show that ESPNetv2 is much more power efficient than existing state-of-the-art efficient methods including ShuffleNets and MobileNets. Our code is open-source
and available at https://github.com/sacmehta/
ESPNetv2.

1. Introduction
The increasing programmability and computational
power of GPUs have accelerated the growth of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for modeling visual data
[16, 22, 34]. CNNs are being used in real-world visual
recognition applications such as visual scene understanding [62] and bio-medical image analysis [42]. Many of
these real-world applications, such as self-driving cars and
robots, run on resource-constrained edge devices and demand online processing of data with low latency.
Existing CNN-based visual recognition systems require

large amounts of computational resources, including memory and power. While they achieve high performance on
high-end GPU-based machines (e.g. with NVIDIA TitanX),
they are often too expensive for resource constrained edge
devices such as cell phones and embedded compute platforms. As an example, ResNet-50 [16], one of the most well
known CNN architecture for image classification, has 25.56
million parameters (98 MB of memory) and performs 2.8
billion high precision operations to classify an image. These
numbers are even higher for deeper CNNs, e.g. ResNet101. These models quickly overtax the limited resources,
including compute capabilities, memory, and battery, available on edge devices. Therefore, CNNs for real-world applications running on edge devices should be light-weight
and efficient while delivering high accuracy.
Recent efforts for building light-weight networks can
be broadly classified as: (1) Network compression-based
methods remove redundancies in a pre-trained model in order to be more efficient. These models are usually implemented by different parameter pruning techniques [24, 55].
(2) Low-bit representation-based methods represent learned
weights using few bits instead of high precision floating
points [20, 39, 47]. These models usually do not change
the structure of the network and the convolutional operations could be implemented using logical gates to enable
fast processing on CPUs. (3) Light-weight CNNs improve
the efficiency of a network by factoring computationally expensive convolution operation [17, 18, 29, 32, 44, 60]. These
models are computationally efficient by their design i.e. the
underlying model structure learns fewer parameters and has
fewer floating point operations (FLOPs).
In this paper, we introduce a light-weight architecture,
ESPNetv2, that can be easily deployed on edge devices.
The main contributions of our paper are: (1) A general purpose architecture for modeling both visual and sequential
data efficiently. We demonstrate the performance of our network across different tasks, ranging from object classifica19190

