Zoom to Learn, Learn to Zoom
Xuaner Zhang
UC Berkeley

Qifeng Chen
HKUST

Ren Ng
UC Berkeley

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Input with distant object

ESRGAN

Ours-syn-raw

Ours

(A) Bicubic and ground truth

(B) 8-bit RGB

(C) Synthetic sensor

(D) Real sensor

Figure 1: Our model (D) trained with real raw sensor data achieves better 4X computational zoom. We compare zoomed
output against (B) ESRGAN [30], representative of state-of-the-art learning-based super-resolution methods, which operate
on processed 8-bit RGB input, and (C) our model trained on synthetic sensor data. In (A), digital zoom via bicubic upsampling
is the naı̈ve baseline and optical zoom serves as the reference ground truth. Our output is artifact-free and preserves detail
even for challenging regions such as the high-frequency grillwork.

Abstract
This paper shows that when applying machine learning
to digital zoom, it is beneficial to operate on real, RAW sensor data. Existing learning-based super-resolution methods do not use real sensor data, instead operating on processed RGB images. We show that these approaches forfeit detail and accuracy that can be gained by operating
on raw data, particularly when zooming in on distant objects. The key barrier to using real sensor data for training
is that ground-truth high-resolution imagery is missing. We
show how to obtain such ground-truth data via optical zoom
and contribute a dataset, SR-RAW, for real-world computational zoom. We use SR-RAW to train a deep network with
a novel contextual bilateral loss that is robust to mild misalignment between input and outputs images. The trained
network achieves state-of-the-art performance in 4X and 8X
computational zoom. We also show that synthesizing sen-

sor data by resampling high-resolution RGB images is an
oversimplified approximation of real sensor data and noise,
resulting in worse image quality.

1. Introduction
Zoom functionality is a necessity for mobile phones and
cameras today. People zoom onto distant subjects such
as wild animals and sports players in their captured images to view the subject in more detail. Smartphones such
as iPhoneX are even equipped with two cameras at different zoom levels, indicating the importance of high-quality
zoom functionality for the consumer camera market.
Optical zoom is an optimal choice for image zoom and
can preserve high image quality, but zoom lenses are usually
expensive and bulky. Alternatively, we can conveniently use
digital zoom with a standard lens. However, digital zoom
13762

