Rethinking the Evaluation of Video Summaries
Mayu Otani
CyberAgent, Inc.

Yuta Nakashima
Osaka University

Abstract
Video summarization is a technique to create a short
skim of the original video while preserving the main stories/content. There exists a substantial interest in automatizing this process due to the rapid growth of the available
material. The recent progress has been facilitated by public
benchmark datasets, which enable easy and fair comparison of methods. Currently the established evaluation protocol is to compare the generated summary with respect to a
set of reference summaries provided by the dataset. In this
paper, we will provide in-depth assessment of this pipeline
using two popular benchmark datasets. Surprisingly, we
observe that randomly generated summaries achieve comparable or better performance to the state-of-the-art. In
some cases, the random summaries outperform even the
human generated summaries in leave-one-out experiments.
Moreover, it turns out that the video segmentation, which is
often considered as a fixed pre-processing method, has the
most significant impact on the performance measure. Based
on our observations, we propose alternative approaches for
assessing the importance scores as well as an intuitive visualization of correlation between the estimated scoring and
human annotations.

1. Introduction
The tremendous growth of the available video material
has escalated the demand for techniques that enable users to
quickly browse and watch videos. One remedy is provided
by the automatic video summarization, where the aim is to
produce a short video skim that preserve the most important content of the original video. For instance, the original
footage from a sport event could be compressed into a few
minute summary illustrating the most important events such
as goals, penalty kicks, etc.
Numerous automatic summarization methods have been
proposed in the literature. The most recent methods follow a
paradigm that consists of a video segmentation, importance
score prediction, and video segment selection as illustrated
in Figure 1. The most challenging part of this pipeline is the
importance score prediction, where the task is to highlight

Esa Rahtu
Tampere University

Janne Heikkilä
University of Oulu

Importance Score Prediction

Randomization Test

Interestingness
Representativeness
etc.

Random Score Generation

Video Segmentation
Random Video Segmentation

Segment Selection

Figure 1. An illustration of the commonly used video summarization pipeline and our randomization test. We utilize random summaries to validate the current evaluation frameworks.

the parts that are most important for the video content. Various factors affect importance of video parts, and different
video summaries are possible for a single video given a different criterion of importance. In fact, previous works have
proposed a variety of importance criteria, such as visual interestingness [2, 3], compactness (i.e., smaller redundancy)
[28], and diversity [25, 29].
Despite the extensive efforts toward automatic video
summarization, the evaluation of the generated summaries
is still an unsolved problem. A straightforward but yet convincing approach would be to utilise a subjective evaluation;
however, collecting human responses is expensive, and reproduction of the result is almost impossible due to the subjectivity. Another approach is to compare generated video
summaries to a set of fixed reference summaries prepared
by human annotators. To this end, the human annotators are
asked to create video summaries, which are then treated as
ground truth. The advantage of this approach is the reusability of the reference summaries, i.e., different video summarization methods can be evaluated without additional anno4321
7596

