Binary Ensemble Neural Network:
More Bits per Network or More Networks per Bit?
Shilin Zhu
UC San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093

Xin Dong
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

Hao Su
UC San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093

shz338@eng.ucsd.edu

xindong@g.harvard.edu

haosu@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Binary neural networks (BNN) have been studied extensively since they run dramatically faster at lower memory
and power consumption than floating-point networks, thanks
to the efficiency of bit operations. However, contemporary
BNNs whose weights and activations are both single bits
suffer from severe accuracy degradation. To understand why,
we investigate the representation ability, speed and bias/variance of BNNs through extensive experiments. We conclude
that the error of BNNs are predominantly caused by the intrinsic instability (training time) and non-robustness (train
& test time). Inspired by this investigation, we propose the
Binary Ensemble Neural Network (BENN) which leverages
ensemble methods to improve the performance of BNNs with
limited efficiency cost. While ensemble techniques have been
broadly believed to be only marginally helpful for strong
classifiers such as deep neural networks, our analysis and
experiments show that they are naturally a perfect fit to boost
BNNs. We find that our BENN, which is faster and more robust than state-of-the-art binary networks, can even surpass
the accuracy of the full-precision floating number network
with the same architecture.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved great impact to broad disciplines in academia and industry [57, 38].
Recently, the deployment of DNNs are transferring from
high-end cloud to low-end devices such as mobile phones
and embedded chips, serving general public with many realtime applications, such as drones, miniature robots, and augmented reality. Unfortunately, these devices typically have
limited computing power and memory space, thus cannot
afford DNNs to achieve important tasks like object recognition involving significant matrix computation and memory
usage.
Binary Neural Network (BNN) is among the most promising techniques to meet the desired computation and memory
requirement. BNNs [31] are deep neural networks whose

Figure 1. Comparison between traditional floating-number DNN,
BNN and our proposed BENN on image recognition task (W:
weights, A: activations). The inference speed of BENN can be
further boosted on FPGAs [63].

weights and activations have only two possible values (e.g.,
-1 and +1) and can be represented by a single bit. Beyond the
obvious advantage of saving storage and memory space, the
binarized architecture admits only bitwise operations, which
can be computed extremely fast using digital logic units [20]
such as arithmetic-logic unit (ALU) with much less power
consumption than floating-point unit (FPU).
Despite the significant gain in speed and storage, however, current BNNs suffer from notable accuracy degradation when applied to challenging tasks such as ImageNet
classification. To mitigate the gap, previous researches in
BNNs have been focusing on designing more effective optimization algorithms to find better local minima of the quantized weights. However, the task is highly non-trivial, since
gradient-based optimization that used to be effective to train
DNNs now becomes tricky to implement.
In this paper, we investigate BNNs systematically in terms
of representation power, speed, bias, variance, stability, and
their robustness. We find that BNNs suffer from severe intrinsic instability and non-robustness regardless of network
parameter values. What implied by this observation is that
the performance degradation of BNNs are not likely to be
resolved by solely improving the optimization techniques; instead, it is mandatory to cure the BNN function, particularly
to reduce the prediction variance and improve its robustness
14923

