Face-Focused Cross-Stream Network for Deception Detection in Videos
Mingyu Ding1,∗ An Zhao1,∗ Zhiwu Lu1,† Tao Xiang2,3 Ji-Rong Wen1
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China
2
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Surrey, UK
3
Samsung AI Centre, Cambridge, UK
zhiwu.lu@gmail.com

Abstract
Automated deception detection (ADD) from real-life
videos is a challenging task. It speciﬁcally needs to address two problems: (1) Both face and body contain useful
cues regarding whether a subject is deceptive. How to effectively fuse the two is thus key to the effectiveness of an
ADD model. (2) Real-life deceptive samples are hard to
collect; learning with limited training data thus challenges
most deep learning based ADD models. In this work, both
problems are addressed. Speciﬁcally, for face-body multimodal learning, a novel face-focused cross-stream network
(FFCSN) is proposed. It differs signiﬁcantly from the popular two-stream networks in that: (a) face detection is added
into the spatial stream to capture the facial expressions explicitly, and (b) correlation learning is performed across the
spatial and temporal streams for joint deep feature learning across both face and body. To address the training data
scarcity problem, our FFCSN model is trained with both
meta learning and adversarial learning. Extensive experiments show that our FFCSN model achieves state-of-the-art
results. Further, the proposed FFCSN model as well as its
robust training strategy are shown to be generally applicable to other human-centric video analysis tasks such as
emotion recognition from user-generated videos.

1. Introduction
With the recent rapid development of human-centric AI,
human-centric video analysis [48, 49, 54, 30, 32, 61, 27]
has also begun to draw much attention from the computer
vision community. Other than the conventional video content analysis that focuses on generic semantic concept analysis of video content, human-centric video analysis aims to
extract, describe, and organize a wealth of information regarding the main objects of interest in most videos: humans.
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

t.xiang@surrey.ac.uk

This topic covers a wide range of research problems such as
deception detection [36, 37], emotion recognition in videos
[54, 18], personality computing [49, 56], and action recognition [6, 26, 28, 35, 40, 47, 59]. For example, it is often
important to recognize the deceptive behaviors [36, 37], emotions [54, 18], or personality traits [49, 56] of the subject
of a video in real-world scenarios.
Deception detection [36, 37] is a late addition to humancentric video analysis and still under-studied. Deception is
deﬁned as an intentional attempt to mislead others [4]. In
our day-to-day life, deceptive behaviors occur in the form of
intended lies, fabrications, omissions, misrepresentations,
among others. Some deceptive behaviors are simply harmless, but others may have major threats to the society, e.g.,
those taking place in a courtroom. Detecting real-world
human deceptive behaviors is a challenging task even for
humans, and often requires well-trained human experts. A
large-scale deployment of deception detection thus depends
upon automated deception detection (ADD) [36, 37]. An
ADD system can ﬁnd applications in many real-world scenarios including airport security screening, court trial, job
interview, and personal credit risk assessment.
The ADD task faces two major challenges. (1) Multimodal fusion: As a subtle human behavioral trait, deception is hard to detect in real-life scenarios. Its reliable detection needs to resort to multiple modalities including the visual, verbal, and acoustic [14, 16, 22, 12, 21]. Among them,
the visual modality is considered to be the most informative
one. Multiple visual cues also exist visually. In particular,
facial expressions [58, 33] and body motions [51, 31] are
typically the focus of visual analysis. An important problem
thus arises: How to effectively fuse these modalities/cues?
Such a fusion is not straightforward because they not only
have different strengths in each individual video sequence,
but also are temporally asynchronized. An example of the
asynchronization between the face and body cues is shown
in Figure 1. (2) Data scarcity: Unlike the conventional
physiological and biological methods [44, 5, 19, 45, 8], an

7802

