Learning From Noisy Labels By
Regularized Estimation Of Annotator Confusion
Ryutaro Tanno1 ∗
Ardavan Saeedi2
Swami Sankaranarayanan2
1
Daniel C. Alexander
Nathan Silberman2
1
2
University College London, UK
Butterfly Network, New York, USA
1

{r.tanno, d.alexander}@ucl.ac.uk

2

{asaeedi,swamiviv,nsilberman}@butterflynetinc.com

Abstract
The predictive performance of supervised learning algorithms depends on the quality of labels. In a typical label
collection process, multiple annotators provide subjective
noisy estimates of the “truth” under the influence of their
varying skill-levels and biases. Blindly treating these noisy
labels as the ground truth limits the accuracy of learning algorithms in the presence of strong disagreement. This problem is critical for applications in domains such as medical
imaging where both the annotation cost and inter-observer
variability are high. In this work, we present a method for
simultaneously learning the individual annotator model and
the underlying true label distribution, using only noisy observations. Each annotator is modeled by a confusion matrix that is jointly estimated along with the classifier predictions. We propose to add a regularization term to the
loss function that encourages convergence to the true annotator confusion matrix. We provide a theoretical argument
as to how the regularization is essential to our approach
both for the case of single annotator and multiple annotators. Despite the simplicity of the idea, experiments on
image classification tasks with both simulated and real labels show that our method either outperforms or performs
on par with the state-of-the-art methods and is capable of
estimating the skills of annotators even with a single label
available per image.

1. Introduction
In many practical applications, supervised learning algorithms are trained on noisy labels obtained from multiple
annotators of varying skill levels and biases. When there is
a substantial amount of disagreement in the labels, conventional training algorithms that treat such labels as the “truth”
lead to models with limited predictive performance. To
mitigate such variation, practitioners typically abide by the
principle of “wisdom of crowds” [1] and aggregate labels by
computing the majority vote. However, this approach has
limited efficacy in applications where the number of anno∗ A part of the work done during internship at Butterfly Network.

tations is modest or the tasks are ambiguous. For example,
vision applications in medical image analysis [2] require annotations from clinical experts, which incur high costs and
often suffer from high inter-reader variability [3, 4, 5, 6].
However, if the exact process by which each annotator
generates the labels was known, we could correct the annotations accordingly and thus train our model on a cleaner
set of data. Furthermore, this additional knowledge of the
annotators’ skills can be utilized to decide on which examples to be labeled by which annotators [7, 8, 9]. Therefore,
methods that can accurately model the label noise of annotators are useful for improving not only the accuracy of the
trained model, but also the quality of labels in the future.
Previous work proposed various methods for jointly estimating the skills of the annotators and the ground truth (GT)
labels. We categorize these methods into two groups: (1)
two-stage approach and (2) simultaneous approach. Methods in the first category perform label aggregation and training of a supervised learning model in two separate steps.
e are first aggregated by building a probThe noisy labels Y
abilistic model of annotators. The observable variables are
e and the latent variables/parameters to be
the noisy labels Y,
estimated are the annotator skills and GT labels Y. Then, a
machine learning model is trained on the pairs of aggregated
labels Y and input examples X (e.g. images) to perform
the task of interest. The initial attempt was made in [10]
in the early 1970s and more recently, numerous lines of research [11, 6, 12, 13, 14] proposed extensions of this work
e.g. by estimating the difficulty of each example. However,
in all these cases, information about the raw inputs X is
completely neglected in the generative model of noisy labels used in the aggregation step, and this highly limits the
quality of estimated true labels in practice.
The simultaneous approaches [15, 16, 17, 18] address
this issue by integrating the prediction of the supervised
learning model (i.e. distribution p(Y|X)) into the probabilistic model of noisy labels, and have been shown to improve the predictive performance. These methods employ
variants of the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm
during training, and require a reasonable number of labels

11244

