Towards Social Artificial Intelligence:
Nonverbal Social Signal Prediction in A Triadic Interaction∗
Hanbyul Joo1† Tomas Simon1‡ Mina Cikara2 Yaser Sheikh1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Harvard University
{hjoo, tsimon, yaser}@fb.com, mcikara@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We present a new research task and a dataset to understand human social interactions via computational methods, to ultimately endow machines with the ability to encode
and decode a broad channel of social signals humans use.
This research direction is essential to make a machine that
genuinely communicates with humans, which we call Social
Artificial Intelligence. We first formulate the “social signal
prediction” problem as a way to model the dynamics of social signals exchanged among interacting individuals in a
data-driven way. We then present a new 3D motion capture
dataset to explore this problem, where the broad spectrum
of social signals (3D body, face, and hand motions) are captured in a triadic social interaction scenario. Baseline approaches to predict speaking status, social formation, and
body gestures of interacting individuals are presented in the
defined social prediction framework.

1. Introduction
Consider how humans communicate—we use language,
voice, facial expressions, and body gestures to convey our
thoughts, emotions, and intentions. Such social signals that
encode the messages of an individual are then sensed, decoded, and finally interpreted by communication partners.
Notably, the use of all these channels is important in social interactions, where subtle meanings are transmitted via
the combination of such signals. Endowing machines with
the similar social interaction ability that encodes and decodes a broad spectrum of these social signals is an essential goal of Artificial Intelligence (AI) to make them
to effectively cooperate with humans. We use the term,
Social Artificial Intelligence (AI), to refer to the machine
with such ability. A way to build the Social AI would be
to encode all the rules that humans observe during social
∗ Website: http://domedb.perception.cs.cmu.edu/ssp
† H. Joo is now at Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
‡ T. Simon is now at Facebook Reality Labs

communication [11]. Unfortunately, nonverbal interaction
is still poorly understood despite its importance in social
communication [45, 44, 6], making it hard to formalize
rules about how to understand and use social signals. Interestingly, we have recently witnessed a great achievement
in Natural Language Processing showing the potential to
make machines “freely” communicate with humans using
language [70]. This success has been led by data-driven
approaches leveraging large-scale language datasets and a
powerful modeling tool, deep neural networks, to automatically learn the patterns of human verbal communication.
Remarkably, these achievements have not made extensive
use of the prior knowledge about grammar and the structure
of languages that linguists have accumulated over centuries.
Motivated by this, we hypothesize that a similar approach
can be applicable in modeling nonverbal communication.
However, there exists a fundamental difficulty in building a data-driven nonverbal communication model: the data
is extremely rare. In the verbal language domain, words
contain the full expressive power to record verbal signals by
the composition of a handful of discrete symbols, and there
already exist millions of articles, dialogues, and speech audio on the Internet which are readily usable for data-driven
methods. However, for non-verbal signals, how to “record”
or collect these signals is uncertain. Imagine a situation
where a group of people are communicating in our daily
life. The positions and orientations of individuals, their
body gestures, gaze, and facial expressions (among others) are the data we are interested in. Notably, these social signals emitted from all people in the group (i.e., the
signals from senders and receivers) need to be collected simultaneously to study their correlation and causality. Although there also exist millions of videos where our daily
activities—including social interactions—are captured on
the Internet, these raw videos cannot be directly used to
understand the rules of non-verbal interactions because we
have to extract all semantic visual cues (relative location,
face, body pose, and so on) from the raw pixels.
In this paper, we introduce a new research domain with
the long-term aim to build machines that can genuinely in110873

