An Alternative Deep Feature Approach to Line Level Keyword Spotting
George Retsinas1,2 , Georgios Louloudis1 , Nikolaos Stamatopoulos1 , Giorgos Sfikas1,3 , Basilis Gatos1
1

2

Institute of Informatics and Telecommunications, NCSR “Demokritos”, Greece
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Greece
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Ioannina, Greece
{georgeretsi,louloud,nstam,sfikas,bgat}@iit.demokritos.gr

Abstract
Keyword spotting (KWS) is defined as the problem of
detecting all instances of a given word, provided by the
user either as a query word image (Query-by-Example,
QbE) or a query word string (Query-by-String, QbS) in a
body of digitized documents. Keyword detection is typically preceded by a preprocessing step where the text is segmented into text lines (line-level KWS). Methods following
this paradigm are monopolized by test-time computationally expensive handwritten text recognition (HTR)-based
approaches; furthermore, they typically cannot handle image queries (QbE). In this work, we propose a time and
storage-efficient, deep feature-based approach that enables
both the image and textual search options. Three distinct
components, all modeled as neural networks, are combined:
normalization, feature extraction and representation of image and textual input into a common space. These components, even if designed on word level image representations, collaborate in order to achieve an efficient line level
keyword spotting system. The experimental results indicate
that the proposed system is on par with state-of-the-art KWS
methods.

1. Introduction and Related work
A significant, as well as ever-increasing amount of digitized handwritten documents exists today all over the world,
creating an urgent need for efficient and automatic document collection indexing. Keyword spotting (KWS) refers
to the task of automatically retrieving instances of a given
keyword query within a document image. KWS has been
proposed as an alternative to full text recognition in cases
where recognition is deemed to be very difficult or expected
to give poor results [5].
Depending on how the query word is specified by the
user, either using an example word image or just a text

string, we can distinguish Query-by-Example (QbE) from
Query-by-String (QbS) keyword spotting methods, respectively. A different taxonomy of KWS systems is related
with the existence of segmentation of the document collection resulting to the distinction into segmentation-based and
segmentation-free systems. Segmentation-free approaches
aim to locate the query instances on the entire document
without the involvement of any segmentation procedure
whereas segmentation-based approaches assume that a segmentation step into either line (line-based) or word (wordbased) level has preceded. The proposed method is considered as segmentation-based (more specifically line-based)
since it is assumed that the segmented lines are provided.
The main innovation introduced is that, for the first time,
both QbE and QbS search options on line level are allowed
under the same KWS system. The proposed system, which
relies on the success of Pyramidal Histogram of Characters (PHOC) embeddings [1], is based on the combination
of three components, namely the Character Width Normalization, the Feature Extraction and the Common Space Encoder. It should be noted that the main component of each
subtask is a neural network. Experiments conducted on the
well-known data set IAM [9] prove the effectiveness of the
proposed system.
Concerning word-based KWS methods, the seminal
work of Almazán et al. [1], which introduced the PHOC
representation, has influenced many recently proposed
methods. In a nutshell, the PHOC representation encodes
whether a specific character appears in a particular spatial
region of a text string. The main idea of this method relies on the ability to embed both word images as well as
text strings into a common vectorial subspace. The use of
a common representation for both word images and text
strings makes feasible a search using either a word image (QbE) or a word string (QbS). The abovementioned
PHOC representation is learned using Support Vector Machines (SVMs) while Kernel Common Subspace Regression (KCSR) is used in order to find projections that max-

12658

