On Stabilizing Generative Adversarial Training with Noise
Simon Jenni
Paolo Favaro
University of Bern
{simon.jenni,paolo.favaro}@inf.unibe.ch

Abstract
We present a novel method and analysis to train generative adversarial networks (GAN) in a stable manner. As
shown in recent analysis, training is often undermined by
the probability distribution of the data being zero on neighborhoods of the data space. We notice that the distributions of real and generated data should match even when
they undergo the same filtering. Therefore, to address the
limited support problem we propose to train GANs by using different filtered versions of the real and generated data
distributions. In this way, filtering does not prevent the exact matching of the data distribution, while helping training
by extending the support of both distributions. As filtering
we consider adding samples from an arbitrary distribution
to the data, which corresponds to a convolution of the data
distribution with the arbitrary one. We also propose to learn
the generation of these samples so as to challenge the discriminator in the adversarial training. We show that our
approach results in a stable and well-behaved training of
even the original minimax GAN formulation. Moreover, our
technique can be incorporated in most modern GAN formulations and leads to a consistent improvement on several
common datasets.

1. Introduction
Since the seminal work of [6], generative adversarial networks (GAN) have been widely used and analyzed due to
the quality of the samples that they produce, in particular
when applied to the space of natural images. Unfortunately,
GANs still prove difficult to train. In fact, a vanilla implementation does not converge to a high-quality sample generator and heuristics used to improve the generator often exhibit an unstable behavior. This has led to a substantial work
to better understand GANs (see, for instance, [23, 19, 1]). In
particular, [1] points out how the unstable training of GANs
is due to the (limited and low-dimensional) support of the
data and model distributions. In the original GAN formulation, the generator is trained against a discriminator in a
minimax optimization problem. The discriminator learns

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) When the probability density functions of the
real pd and generated data pg do not overlap, then the discriminator can easily distinguish samples. The gradient of
the discriminator with respect to its input is zero in these
regions and this prevents any further improvement of the
generator. (b) Adding samples from an arbitrary pǫ to those
of the real and the generated data results in the filtered versions pd ∗ pǫ and pg ∗ pǫ . Because the supports of the filtered distributions overlap, the gradient of the discriminator
is not zero and the generator can improve. However, the
high-frequency content of the original distributions is missing. (c) By varying pǫ , the generator can learn to match the
data distribution accurately thanks to the extended supports.

to distinguish real from fake samples, while the generator
learns to generate fake samples that can fool the discriminator. When the support of the data and model distributions
is disjoint, the generator stops improving as soon as the discriminator achieves perfect classification, because this prevents the propagation of useful information to the generator
through gradient descent (see Fig. 1a).
The recent work by [1] proposes to extend the support
of the distributions by adding noise to both generated and
real images before they are fed as input to the discriminator. This procedure results in a smoothing of both data
112145

