Natural and Realistic Single Image Super-Resolution with Explicit Natural
Manifold Discrimination
Jae Woong Soh
Gu Yong Park
Junho Jo
Nam Ik Cho
Department of ECE, INMC, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{soh90815, benkay, jottue}@ispl.snu.ac.kr, nicho@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, many convolutional neural networks for single
image super-resolution (SISR) have been proposed, which
focus on reconstructing the high-resolution images in terms
of objective distortion measures. However, the networks
trained with objective loss functions generally fail to reconstruct the realistic fine textures and details that are essential
for better perceptual quality. Recovering the realistic details remains a challenging problem, and only a few works
have been proposed which aim at increasing the perceptual quality by generating enhanced textures. However, the
generated fake details often make undesirable artifacts and
the overall image looks somewhat unnatural. Therefore, in
this paper, we present a new approach to reconstructing realistic super-resolved images with high perceptual quality,
while maintaining the naturalness of the result. In particular, we focus on the domain prior properties of SISR problem. Specifically, we define the naturalness prior in the lowlevel domain and constrain the output image in the natural
manifold, which eventually generates more natural and realistic images. Our results show better naturalness compared to the recent super-resolution algorithms including
perception-oriented ones.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) is a classical
image restoration problem which aims to recover a
high-resolution (HR) image from the corresponding lowresolution (LR) image. In SISR problems, the given image is usually assumed to be a low-pass filtered and downsampled version of an HR image. Hence, recovering the
HR is an ill-posed problem since multiple HR images can
correspond to one LR image. That is, the SISR is a challenging one-to-many problem which attracted researchers
to find many interesting solutions and applications, and thus
numerous algorithms have been proposed so far.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have

(a) HR

(b) EnhanceNet [29]

(c) SFT-GAN [37]

(d) Our NatSR

Figure 1: Super-resolved results (×4) of “0823” in DIV2K
validation set [34]. A part of the image is cropped and
zoomed for visualization. Our NatSR result is more natural with less artifacts which is perceptually plausible than
other algorithms’ results.
shown great success in most computer vision areas including the SISR. In typical CNN-based SISR methods, the
distortion-oriented loss functions are considered. Specifically, the CNNs attempt to achieve higher peak-signal-tonoise ratio (PSNR), i.e., low distortion in terms of mean
squared error (MSE). There have been lots of distortionoriented CNNs for SISR [5, 18, 30, 19, 21, 32, 36, 23, 42,
15, 11], and the performance of SISR is ever increasing as
many researchers are still creating innovative architectures
and also as the possible depth and connections of the net-

8122

