Towards Instance-level Image-to-Image Translation
Zhiqiang Shen1,3∗, Mingyang Huang2 , Jianping Shi2 , Xiangyang Xue3 , Thomas Huang1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2 SenseTime Research, 3 Fudan University
zhiqiangshen0214@gmail.com {huangmingyang, shijianping}@sensetime.com
xyxue@fudan.edu.cn t-huang1@illinois.edu

Abstract
Unpaired Image-to-image Translation is a new rising and challenging vision problem that aims to learn a
mapping between unaligned image pairs in diverse domains. Recent advances in this field like MUNIT [11]
and DRIT [17] mainly focus on disentangling content and
style/attribute from a given image first, then directly adopting the global style to guide the model to synthesize new domain images. However, this kind of approaches severely incurs contradiction if the target domain images are contentrich with multiple discrepant objects. In this paper, we
present a simple yet effective instance-aware image-toimage translation approach (INIT), which employs the finegrained local (instance) and global styles to the target image spatially. The proposed INIT exhibits three import
advantages: (1) the instance-level objective loss can help
learn a more accurate reconstruction and incorporate diverse attributes of objects; (2) the styles used for target domain of local/global areas are from corresponding spatial
regions in source domain, which intuitively is a more reasonable mapping; (3) the joint training process can benefit
both fine and coarse granularity and incorporates instance
information to improve the quality of global translation. We
also collect a large-scale benchmark1 for the new instancelevel translation task. We observe that our synthetic images
can even benefit real-world vision tasks like generic object
detection.

1. Introduction
In the recent years, Image-to-Image (I2I) translation has
received significant attention in computer vision community, since many vision and graphics problems can be formulated as an I2I translation problem like super-resolution,
neural style transfer, colorization, etc. This technique has
∗ Work done during internship at SenseTime.
1 contains 155,529 high-resolution natural images across four different
modalities with object bounding box annotations. A summary of the entire
dataset is provided in the following sections.

Content

+

global style
Scene/object image
Generated image
in domain A
in domain B
(1) MUNIT/DRIT
Content

+

Scene + objects

global style
(2) Limitation
Content

+

Generated image
in domain B

+
+

Scene + objects
object style
background style
(3) Ours
Figure 1. Illustration of the motivation of our method. (1) MUNIT [11]/DRIT [17] methods; (2) their limitation; and (3) our solution for instance-level translation. More details can be referred
to the text.

also been adapted to the relevant fields such as medical
image processing [40] to further improve the medical volumes segmentation performance. In general, Pix2pix [13]
is regarded as the first unified framework for I2I translation which adopts conditional generative adversarial networks [26] for image generation, while it requires the paired
examples during training process. A more general and challenging setting is the unpaired I2I translation, where the
paired data is unavailable.
Several recent efforts [42, 21, 11, 17, 1] have been made
on this direction and achieved very promising results. For
instance, CycleGAN [42] proposed the cycle consistency
loss to enforce the learning process that if an image is translated to the target domain by learning a mapping and translated back with an inverse mapping, the output should be
the original image. Furthermore, CycleGAN assumes the
latent spaces are separate of the two mappings. In contrast,
UNIT [21] assumes two domain images can be mapped onto

3683

