A Main/Subsidiary Network Framework for Simplifying Binary Neural Networks
Yinghao Xu1∗

Xin Dong2∗

Yudian Li4

Hao Su3

1

2
Zhejiang University
Harvard University
3
University of California, San Diego
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
1

justimyhxu@zju.edu.cn

2

4

xindong@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
To reduce memory footprint and run-time latency, techniques such as neural network pruning and binarization have
been explored separately. However, it is unclear how to combine the best of the two worlds to get extremely small and
efficient models. In this paper, we, for the first time, define the filter-level pruning problem for binary neural networks, which cannot be solved by simply migrating existing structural pruning methods for full-precision models. A
novel learning-based approach is proposed to prune filters
in our main/subsidiary network framework, where the main
network is responsible for learning representative features
to optimize the prediction performance, and the subsidiary
component works as a filter selector on the main network.
To avoid gradient mismatch when training the subsidiary
component, we propose a layer-wise and bottom-up scheme.
We also provide the theoretical and experimental comparison between our learning-based and greedy rule-based methods. Finally, we empirically demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach applied on several binary models, including binarized NIN, VGG-11, and ResNet-18, on various image classification datasets. For binary ResNet-18 on ImageNet, we use only 78.6% filters, achieving better test error
49.87% (= 50.02% − 0.15%) than the original model.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNN), especially deep convolution neural networks (DCNN), have made remarkable strides
during the last decade. From the first ImageNet Challenge
winner network, AlexNet, to the more recent state-of-theart, ResNet, we observe that DNNs are growing substantially deeper and more complex. These modern deep neural networks have millions of weights, rendering them both
memory-intensive and computationally expensive. To reduce
the computational cost, the research into network acceleration

daniellee2519@gmail.com

3

haosu@eng.ucsd.edu

and compression emerges as an active field.
A family of popular compression methods are the DNN
pruning algorithms, which are not only efficient in both memory and speed, but also enjoy relatively simple procedure and
intuition. This line of research is motivated by the theoretical analysis and empirical discovery that redundancy does
exist in both human brains and several deep models [8, 9].
We can categorize existing researches according to the level
of the object, such as connection (weights)-level pruning,
unit/channel/filter-level pruning, and layer-level pruning [30].
Connection-level pruning is the most widely studied approach, which produces sparse networks whose weights are
stored as sparse tensors. Although both the footprint memory and the I/O consumption are reduced [14], such methods
are often not helpful towards the goal of computation acceleration unless specifically-designed hardware is leveraged.
This is because the dimensions of the weight tensor remain
unchanged, though many entries are zeroed-out. As a wellknown fact, the MAC operations on random structured sparse
matrices are generally not too much faster than the dense
ones of the same dimension. In contrast, structural pruning
techniques [30], such as unit/channel/filter-level pruning, are
more hardware-friendly, since they aim to produce tensors of
reduced dimensions or having specific structures. Using these
techniques, it is possible to achieve both computation acceleration and memory compression on general hardware and is
common for deep learning frameworks.
We consider the structural network pruning problem for a
specific family of neural networks – binary neural networks.
A binary neural network is a compressed network of a general
deep neural network through the quantization strategy. Convolution operations in DCNN1 inherently involve matrix multiplication and accumulation (MAC). MAC operations become much more energy efficient if we use low-precision
(1 bit or more) fixed-point number to approximate weights
and activation functions (i.e., to quantify neurons) [4]. To
1 Fully connected layers can be implemented as convolution. Therefore,
in the rest of the paper, we mainly focus on convolutional layers.

∗ Equal Contribution

7154

