Fast Single Image Reflection Suppression via Convex Optimization
Yang Yang1 , Wenye Ma2 , Yin Zheng3 , Jian-Feng Cai4 , Weiyu Xu1
University of Iowa, 2 Tencent, 3 WeChat Search Application Department, Tencent,
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
yy.hz76@gmail.com, wenyema@tencent.com, yinzheng@tencent.com,
jfcai@ust.hk, weiyu-xu@uiowa.edu
1

Abstract
Removing undesired reflections from images taken
through the glass is of great importance in computer vision.
It serves as a means to enhance the image quality for aesthetic purposes as well as to preprocess images in machine
learning and pattern recognition applications. We propose
a convex model to suppress the reflection from a single input image. Our model implies a partial differential equation with gradient thresholding, which is solved efficiently
using Discrete Cosine Transform. Extensive experiments
on synthetic and real-world images demonstrate that our
approach achieves desirable reflection suppression results
and dramatically reduces the execution time.

1. Introduction
Images taken through glass usually contain unpleasant
reflections. It is highly desirable if such reflections can
be removed. In particular, with the advent of the popularity of portable digital devices such as smartphones and
tablets, a lot of such images are taken in everyday life. A
fast-response and user-friendly image reflection suppression technology is of great practical significance so that
such images can be processed on portable devices in seconds with the best dereflected results produced in real-time
according to a user’s visual perception.
Given an input reflection-contaminated image Y, traditional approaches that attempt to remove the reflection focus on separating the image into the transmission layer T
(the true background) and the reflection layer R [3], i.e.,
the following assumption is made
Y = T + R,

(1)

where T and R are unknowns. This problem is highly illposed since the number of unknowns is twice the number of
conditions. Multiple ways of separation are possible. Different priors and assumptions have been introduced to narThe work of W. Xu was supported in part by Simons Foundation
318608 and in part by NSF DMS-1418737.

(1a) Original Image

(1b) Dereflected Image

Figure 1: (1a): A real-world image taken through the window
on a train. Notice the reflection of the seat and the lights in the
train. (1b): The result after the reflection suppression by our proposed method. Image size: 1080 × 1440. Execution time: 1.15s.
https://github.com/yyhz76/reflectSuppress

row down the range of valid solutions, despite specific limitations therein. Instead of separating the image into two
layers, suppressing the reflection in a single input image,
as proposed in Arvanitopoulos et al. [2], is more practical.
In most cases, people are more interested in the transmission layer of an image. Also, perfect layer separation of
a single image is in general difficult. The separated layers
using existing approaches more or less contain misclassified information, especially when the reflection is sharp and
strong, which might yield dark dereflected outputs. This is
caused by the removal of a large portion of the energy which
concentrates in the reflection layer (See Sec. 3).
Most image reflection removal approaches so far emphasize the performance in the aspects of the quality of the
dereflection. In addition, they can only handle relatively
small-sized images and are often computationally inefficient. With the rapid development of portable device technologies, megapixel smartphone images are very common
nowadays. Therefore, the efficiency of such methods also
needs to be improved to handle large images. We propose
an image reflection suppression approach that is highly efficient, which is able to process large smartphone images
in seconds, yet can achieve competitive dereflection quality
compared to state-of-the-art approaches. Fig. 1 is an example of our approach applying on a smartphone image.
18141

