Generating Classification Weights with GNN Denoising Autoencoders for
Few-Shot Learning
Spyros Gidaris1,2 and Nikos Komodakis1
1

University Paris-Est, LIGM, Ecole des Ponts ParisTech
2
valeo.ai

Abstract
Given an initial recognition model already trained on
a set of base classes, the goal of this work is to develop a
meta-model for few-shot learning. The meta-model, given
as input some novel classes with few training examples per
class, must properly adapt the existing recognition model
into a new model that can correctly classify in a unified way
both the novel and the base classes. To accomplish this goal
it must learn to output the appropriate classification weight
vectors for those two types of classes. To build our metamodel we make use of two main innovations: we propose the
use of a Denoising Autoencoder network (DAE) that (during training) takes as input a set of classification weights
corrupted with Gaussian noise and learns to reconstruct
the target-discriminative classification weights. In this case,
the injected noise on the classification weights serves the
role of regularizing the weight generating meta-model. Furthermore, in order to capture the co-dependencies between
different classes in a given task instance of our meta-model,
we propose to implement the DAE model as a Graph Neural Network (GNN). In order to verify the efficacy of our
approach, we extensively evaluate it on ImageNet based
few-shot benchmarks and we report state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, deep learning has achieved impressive results on various visual understanding tasks, such
as image classification [19, 35, 38, 15], object detection [29],
or semantic segmentation [5]. However, their success heavily relies on the ability to apply gradient based optimization
routines, which are computationally expensive, and having
access to a large dataset of training data, which often is
very difficult to acquire. For example, in the case of image
classification, it is required to have available thousands or

hundreds of training examples per class and the optimization
routines consume hundreds of GPU days. Moreover, the set
of classes that a deep learning based model can recognize
remains fixed after its training. In case new classes need to
be recognized, then it is typically required to collect thousands / hundreds of training examples for each of them, and
re-train or fine-tune the model on those new classes. Even
worse, this latter training stage would lead the model to “forget” the initial classes on which it was trained. In contrast,
humans can rapidly learn a novel visual concept from only
one or a few examples and reliably recognize it later on.
The ability of fast knowledge acquisition is assumed to be
related with a meta-learning process in the human brain that
exploits past experiences about the world when learning a
new visual concept. Even more, humans do not forget past
visual concepts when learning a new one. Mimicking that
behavior with machines is a challenging research problem,
with many practical advantages, and is also the topic of this
work.
Research on this subject is usually termed few-shot object
recognition. More specifically, few-shot object recognition
methods tackle the problem of learning to recognize a set
of classes given access to only a few training examples for
each of them. In order to compensate for the scarcity of
training data they employ meta-learning strategies that learn
how to efficiently recognize a set of classes with few training data by being trained on a distribution of such few-shot
tasks (formed from the dataset available during training)
that are similar (but not the same) to the few-shot tasks
encountered at test time [39]. Few-shot learning is also
related to transfer learning since the learned meta-models
solve a new task by exploiting the knowledge previously
acquired by solving a different set of similar tasks. There
is a broad class of few-shot learning approaches, including,
among many, metric-learning-based approaches that learn a
distance metric between a test example and the training examples [39, 36, 18, 42, 41], methods that learn to map a test
example to a class label by accessing memory modules that
1 21

