WarpGAN: Automatic Caricature Generation
Yichun Shi∗
Debayan Deb∗
Anil K. Jain
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{shiyichu, debdebay}@msu.edu, jain@cse.msu.edu

(b) WarpGAN
(c) WarpGAN
(a) Photo
(d) Artist
(e) Artist
Figure 1: Example photos and caricatures of two subjects in our dataset. Column (a) shows each identity’s real face photo, while two
generated caricatures of the same subjects by WarpGAN are shown in column (b) and (c). Caricatures drawn by artists are shown in the
column (d) and (e).

Abstract
We propose, WarpGAN, a fully automatic network that
can generate caricatures given an input face photo. Besides transferring rich texture styles, WarpGAN learns to
automatically predict a set of control points that can warp
the photo into a caricature, while preserving identity. We
introduce an identity-preserving adversarial loss that aids
the discriminator to distinguish between different subjects.
Moreover, WarpGAN allows customization of the generated caricatures by controlling the exaggeration extent and
the visual styles. Experimental results on a public domain
dataset, WebCaricature, show that WarpGAN is capable of
generating caricatures that not only preserve the identities
but also outputs a diverse set of caricatures for each input photo. Five caricature experts suggest that caricatures
generated by WarpGAN are visually similar to hand-drawn
ones and only prominent facial features are exaggerated.

1. Introduction

acteristics are exaggerated in order to create a comic or
grotesque effect” [1]. Paradoxically, caricatures are images
with facial features that represent the face more than the
face itself. Compared to cartoons, which are 2D visual art
that try to re-render an object or even a scene in a usually
simplified artistic style, caricatures are portraits that have
exaggerated features of a certain persons or things. Some
example caricatures of two individuals are shown in Figure 1. The fascinating quality of caricatures is that even
with large amounts of distortion, the identity of person in
the caricature can still be easily recognized by humans. In
fact, studies have found that we can recognize caricatures
even more accurately than the original face images [2].
Caricature artists capture the most important facial features, including the face and eye shapes, hair styles, etc.
Once an artist sketches a rough draft of the face, they will
start to exaggerate person-specific facial features towards a
larger deviation from an average face. Nowadays, artists
can create realistic caricatures through computer softwares
through: (1) warping the face photo to exaggerate the shape

A caricature is defined as “a picture, description, or imitation of a person or a thing in which certain striking char-

∗ indicates equal contribution

10762

