Robust Histopathology Image Analysis: to Label or to Synthesize?
Le Hou1 , Ayush Agarwal1,2 , Dimitris Samaras1 , Tahsin M. Kurc1 , Rajarsi R. Gupta1 , Joel H. Saltz1
1
Stony Brook University 2 Stanford University, California
{lehhou,samaras}@cs.stonybrook.edu
{tahsin.kurc,joel.saltz}@stonybrook.edu

rajarsi.gupta@stonybrookmedicine.edu

Abstract
Detection, segmentation and classiﬁcation of nuclei are
fundamental analysis operations in digital pathology. Existing state-of-the-art approaches demand extensive amount
of supervised training data from pathologists and may still
perform poorly in images from unseen tissue types. We propose an unsupervised approach for histopathology image
segmentation that synthesizes heterogeneous sets of training
image patches, of every tissue type. Although our synthetic
patches are not always of high quality, we harness the motley crew of generated samples through a generally applicable importance sampling method. This proposed approach,
for the ﬁrst time, re-weighs the training loss over synthetic
data so that the ideal (unbiased) generalization loss over
the true data distribution is minimized. This enables us
to use a random polygon generator to synthesize approximate cellular structures (i.e., nuclear masks) for which no
real examples are given in many tissue types, and hence,
GAN-based methods are not suited. In addition, we propose a hybrid synthesis pipeline that utilizes textures in real
histopathology patches and GAN models, to tackle heterogeneity in tissue textures. Compared with existing state-ofthe-art supervised models, our approach generalizes significantly better on cancer types without training data. Even
in cancer types with training data, our approach achieves
the same performance without supervision cost. We release
code and segmentation results1 on over 5000 Whole Slide
Images (WSI) in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) repository, a dataset that would be orders of magnitude larger
than what is available today.

1. Introduction
Existing state-of-the-art supervised image analysis methods [11, 22, 13, 48, 3, 62, 59, 61, 9, 66, 64, 24, 40] largely
rely on the availability of large annotated training datasets
which requires the involvement of domain experts. This
is a time-consuming and expensive process. Moreover, for
1 www3.cs.stonybrook.edu/

˜cvl/nuclei_seg.html

ayush94582@gmail.com

(a)

Hundreds of hours to
label a few types

(b)

Unlabeled patches sampled from
every whole slide image in TCGA

...
Synthesize both texture and ground truth
structures in an unsupervised manner

Resulting model fails on
some unseen tissue types

...

Model Generalizes well on every tissue type

Figure 1. (a). Standard learning methods learn and perform well
only with tissue types for which ground truth training data exists. (b). We propose to synthesize both image texture and ground
truth structures for training a supervised model, even when no real
ground truth structures are given. As a result, our model generalizes well on unseen tissue types.

methods that generalize on various input types, supervised
data must be collected for every input type. For example,
labeled satellite images from regions such as north Europe
and south Africa are all needed to train a robust satellite
image analysis method [65, 49]. In pathology image analysis, to achieve optimal performance, the data annotation
phase often must be repeated for different tissue types such
as different cancer sites, fat tissue, necrotic regions, blood
vessels, and glands, because of tissue heterogeneity as well
as variations in tissue preparation and image acquisition.
The detection, segmentation, and classiﬁcation of nuclei are
core analysis steps in virtually all pathology imaging studies [11, 22, 13, 48, 3, 62, 59, 61, 9, 66, 64, 40, 23, 2, 29] and
precision medicine [17, 12]. It is the ﬁrst step in extracting
interpretable features that provide valuable diagnostic and
prognostic cancer indicators [14, 15, 1, 43, 20]. Manual
generation of nucleus segmentation ground truth data takes
a long time. In our experience, a training dataset consisting
of 50 image patches (12M pixels) takes 120-230 hours of an
expert pathologist’s time. This training dataset is extremely
small compared with the volume of data in a large study
(e.g. 10k whole slide images, 50T pixels). This is a major
impediment to robust nucleus segmentation.

8533

