Spatiotemporal CNN for Video Object Segmentation
Kai Xu1 , Longyin Wen2 , Guorong Li1,3 ,* Liefeng Bo2 , Qingming Huang1,3,4
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, UCAS, Beijing, China.
2
JD Digits, Mountain View, CA, USA.
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, CAS, Beijing, China.
4
Key Laboratory of Intell. Info. Process. (IIP), Inst. of Computi. Tech., CAS, China.
xukai16@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {longyin.wen,liefeng.bo}@jd.com, {qmhuang,liguorong}@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present a unified, end-to-end trainable
spatiotemporal CNN model for VOS, which consists of two
branches, i.e., the temporal coherence branch and the spatial segmentation branch. Specifically, the temporal coherence branch pretrained in an adversarial fashion from unlabeled video data, is designed to capture the dynamic appearance and motion cues of video sequences to guide object segmentation. The spatial segmentation branch focuses
on segmenting objects accurately based on the learned appearance and motion cues. To obtain accurate segmentation results, we design a coarse-to-fine process to sequentially apply a designed attention module on multi-scale feature maps, and concatenate them to produce the final prediction. In this way, the spatial segmentation branch is enforced to gradually concentrate on object regions. These
two branches are jointly fine-tuned on video segmentation
sequences in an end-to-end manner. Several experiments
are carried out on three challenging datasets (i.e., DAVIS2016, DAVIS-2017 and Youtube-Object) to show that our
method achieves favorable performance against the stateof-the-arts. Code is available at https://github.
com/longyin880815/STCNN .

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) becomes a hot topic in
recent years, which is a crucial step for many video analysis tasks, such as video summarization, video editing, and
scene understanding. It aims to extract foreground objects
from video clips. Existing VOS methods can be divided
into two settings based on the degrees of human involvement, namely, unsupervised and semi-supervised. The unsupervised VOS methods [49, 44, 17, 32, 29] do not require any manual annotation, while the semi-supervised
* Corresponding author.

methods [47, 6, 9, 18] rely on the annotated mask for objects in the first frame. In this paper, we are interested
in the semi-supervised VOS task, which can be treated as
the label propagation problem through the entire video.
To maintain the temporal associations of object segments,
optical flow is usually used in most of previous methods
[48, 46, 5, 23, 44, 2, 15] to model the pixel consistency
across the time for smoothness. However, optical flow annotation requires significant human effort, and estimation
is challenging and often inaccurate, and thus it is not always helpful in video segmentation. To that end, Li et al.
[33] design an end-to-end trained deep recurrent network
to segment and track objects in video simultaneously. Xu
et al. [51] present a sequence-to-sequence network to fully
exploit long-term spatial-temporal information for VOS.
In contrast to the aforementioned methods, we design a
spatiotemporal convolutional neural network (CNN) algorithm (denoted as STCNN, for short) for VOS, which is a
unified, end-to-end trainable CNN. STCNN is formed by
two branches, i.e., the temporal coherence branch and the
spatial segmentation branch. The features in both branches
are able to obtain useful gradient information during backpropagation. Specifically, the temporal coherence branch
focuses on capturing the dynamic appearance and motion
cues to provide the guidance of object segmentation, which
is pre-trained in an adversarial manner from unlabeled
video data following [24]. The spatial segmentation branch
is a fully convolutional network focusing on segmenting
objects based on the learned appearance and motion cues
from the temporal coherence branch. Inspired by [15], we
design a coarse-to-fine process to sequentially apply a designed attention module on multi-scale feature maps, and
concatenate them to produce the final accurate prediction.
In this way, the spatial segmentation branch is enforced to
gradually concentrate on the object regions, which benefits
both training and testing. These two branches are jointly
fine-tuned on the video segmentation sequences (e.g., the
training set in DAVIS-2016 [39]) in an end-to-end man-

1379

