LBS Autoencoder: Self-supervised Fitting of Articulated Meshes to Point Clouds
Chun-Liang Li1 , Tomas Simon2 , Jason Saragih2 , Barnabás Póczos1 , Yaser Sheikh1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University and 2 Facebook Reality Labs
{chunlial, bapoczos}@cs.cmu.edu

{firstname.lastname}@fb.com

Abstract
We present LBS-AE; a self-supervised autoencoding algorithm for fitting articulated mesh models to point clouds.
As input, we take a sequence of point clouds to be registered as well as an artist-rigged mesh, i.e. a template mesh
equipped with a linear-blend skinning (LBS) deformation
space parameterized by a skeleton hierarchy. As output,
we learn an LBS-based autoencoder that produces registered meshes from the input point clouds. To bridge the gap
between the artist-defined geometry and the captured point
clouds, our autoencoder models pose-dependent deviations
from the template geometry. During training, instead of using explicit correspondences, such as key points or pose supervision, our method leverages LBS deformations to bootstrap the learning process. To avoid poor local minima
from erroneous point-to-point correspondences, we utilize a
structured Chamfer distance based on part-segmentations,
which are learned concurrently using self-supervision. We
demonstrate qualitative results on real captured hands, and
report quantitative evaluations on the FAUST benchmark
for body registration. Our method achieves performance
that is superior to other unsupervised approaches and comparable to methods using supervised examples.

1. Introduction
The registration of unstructured point-clouds to a common mesh representation is an important problem in computer vision and has been extensively studied in the past
decades. Works in this area can be coarsely grouped together based on how much prior knowledge and supervision is incorporated into the fitting method. On one end
of the spectrum, there are entirely unsupervised and objectagnostic models, such as FoldingNet [49] or AtlasNet [13].
These methods learn to deform a flat 2D surface to match
the target geometry, while making no assumptions about the
objects being modeled other than that they can be represented as a 2D surface. Adding slightly more prior knowledge, 3D-CODED [12] uses a template mesh (e.g. hand or
body) with a topology better suited to the object of interest.

Input
(a)

Segmentation
(b)

Template
(c)

Deformed Reconstruction
(d)
(e)

Figure 1: Given point clouds sampled from the surface of
an input shape (a), our model infers a coarse segmentation
(b), and learns to deform a given template (c), through a
combination of deformations of the template (d) as well as
pose deformation parameterized by LBS to match the reconstruction (e). We use a structured Chamfer distance that
uses the inferred segmentation of the data (b) as coarse correspondence to measure distance between matching regions
to avoid local optima in the Chamfer distance.
On the other end of the spectrum are highly specialized models for specific objects, such as hands and bodies. Works of this kind include SCAPE [2], Dyna [34],
SMPL [28], and MANO [38]. These models are built using high-resolution 3D scans with correspondence and human curation. They model correctives for different poses
and modalities (e.g. body types) and can be used as highquality generative models of geometry. A number of works
learn to manipulate these models to fit data based on different sources of supervision, such as key points [6, 22, 31, 15]
and/or prior distributions of model parameters [18, 17].
In this paper, we present an unsupervised/self-supervised
algorithm, LBS Autoencoder (LBS-AE), to fit such articulated mesh models to point cloud data. The proposed algorithm is a middle ground of the two ends of spectrum
discussed above in two senses.
First, we assume an articulated template model of the object class is available, but not the statistics of its articulation
in our dataset nor the specific shape of the object instance.
We argue that this prior information is widely available for
many common objects of interest in the form of “rigged”

11967

