Graph Attention Convolution for Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation
Lei Wang1 , Yuchun Huang1∗, Yaolin Hou1 , Shenman Zhang1 , Jie Shan2∗
1
Wuhan University, China 2 Purdue University, USA
{wlei, hycwhu, houyaolin, smzhang}@whu.edu.cn, jshan@purdue.edu

Abstract

table
6

6
2

Standard convolution is inherently limited for semantic
segmentation of point cloud due to its isotropy about features. It neglects the structure of an object, results in poor
object delineation and small spurious regions in the segmentation result. This paper proposes a novel graph attention convolution (GAC), whose kernels can be dynamically carved into specific shapes to adapt to the structure
of an object. Specifically, by assigning proper attentional
weights to different neighboring points, GAC is designed to
selectively focus on the most relevant part of them according to their dynamically learned features. The shape of the
convolution kernel is then determined by the learned distribution of the attentional weights. Though simple, GAC
can capture the structured features of point clouds for finegrained segmentation and avoid feature contamination between objects. Theoretically, we provided a thorough analysis on the expressive capabilities of GAC to show how it
can learn about the features of point clouds. Empirically,
we evaluated the proposed GAC on challenging indoor and
outdoor datasets and achieved the state-of-the-art results in
both scenarios.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation of point clouds aims to assign
a category label to each point, which is an important yet
challenging task for 3D understanding. Recent approaches
have attempted to generalize convolutional neural network
(CNN) from grid domains (i.e., speech signals, images, and
video data) to unorganized point clouds [34, 45, 33, 35, 44,
36, 26, 14]. However, due to the isotropy of their convolution kernels about the neighboring points’ feature attributes,
these works are inherently limited for the semantic point
cloud segmentation. Intuitively, the learned features for the
points at the boundary of two objects (i.e., point 1 in Figure 1) are actually from both objects rather than the object
they truly belong to, which results in ambiguous label as∗ Corresponding author.

2

chair

table
5

5

1
3
4

1
table

3 chair

table 4

Figure 1. Illustration of the standard convolution and GAC on a
subgraph of a point cloud. Left: The weights of standard convolution are determined by the neighbors’ spatial positions, and the
learned feature at point 1 characterizes all of its neighbors indistinguishably. Right: In GAC, the attentional weights on “chair” (the
brown dotted arrows) are masked, so that the convolution kernel
can focus on the “table” points.

signment.
In fact, standard convolution kernels work in a regular
receptive field for feature response, and the convolution
weights are fixed at specific positions within the convolution window. This kind of position-determined weights results in the isotropy of the convolution kernel about the feature attributes of neighboring points. For instance, in Figure 1 the learned feature at point 1 characterizes its neighboring “table” and “chair” indistinguishably. This limitation of the standard convolution neglects the structural connection between points belonging to the same object, and
results in poor object delineation and small spurious regions
in the segmentation result.
To address this problem, the key idea of this work is as
follows. Based on the position-determined weights of the
standard convolution, we learn to mask or weaken part of
the convolution weights according to the neighbors’ feature
attributes, so that the actual receptive field of our convolution kernel for point clouds is no longer a regular 3D box
but has its own shape to dynamically adapt to the structure
of the objects.
In this paper, we implement this idea by proposing a
novel GAC to selectively focus on the most relevant part
of the neighbors in the receptive field. Specifically, inspired
by the idea of attention mechanism [4, 13, 47], GAC is designed to dynamically assign proper attentional weights to
different neighboring points by combining their spatial po-

10296

