Learning to Synthesize Motion Blur
Tim Brooks
Jonathan T. Barron
Google Research

Abstract
We present a technique for synthesizing a motion blurred
image from a pair of unblurred images captured in succession. To build this system we motivate and design a differentiable “line prediction” layer to be used as part of a neural
network architecture, with which we can learn a system to
regress from image pairs to motion blurred images that span
the capture time of the input image pair. Training this model
requires an abundance of data, and so we design and execute a strategy for using frame interpolation techniques to
generate a large-scale synthetic dataset of motion blurred
images and their respective inputs. We additionally capture
a high quality test set of real motion blurred images, synthesized from slow motion videos, with which we evaluate
our model against several baseline techniques that can be
used to synthesize motion blur. Our model produces higher
accuracy output than our baselines, and is several orders of
magnitude faster than baselines with competitive accuracy.

1. Introduction
Though images are often thought of as capturing a single moment in time, all images in fact capture a duration
of time: an image begins when a camera starts collecting
light, and ends when that camera stops collecting light. If
the camera or the scene move while light is being collected,
the resulting image will exhibit motion blur. That blur may
indicate the speed of a subject or may serve to separate a
subject from the background, depending on the relative motion of the camera and the subject (see Figure 1(b)).
Motion blur is a valuable cue for image understanding.
Given a single image containing motion blur, one can estimate the relative direction and magnitude of scene motion that resulted in the observed blur [7, 8]. This motion
estimate may be semantically meaningful [33], or may be
used by a deblurring algorithm to synthesize a sharp image [5, 9, 17, 23]. Recent work has relied on deep learning for removing motion blur and inferring the underlying
motion of the scene [6, 11, 31]. Deep learning techniques

(a) A pair of input images.

(b) Our model’s output.

Figure 1. In (a) we present two images of a subject moving across
the image plane. Our system uses these images to synthesize the
motion blurred image in (b), which conveys a sense of motion and
separates the subject from the background.

16840

