Coloring With Limited Data:
Few-Shot Colorization via Memory Augmented Networks
Seungjoo Yoo1

Hyojin Bahng1

Sunghyo Chung1

seungjooyoo@korea.ac.kr

hjj552@korea.ac.kr

s94021@korea.ac.kr

Junsoo Lee1

Jaehyuk Chang2

Jaegul Choo1

junsulee@korea.ac.kr

jaehyuk.chang@webtoonscorp.com

jchoo@korea.ac.kr

1

Korea University

2

NAVER WEBTOON Corp.

Abstract
Despite recent advancements in deep learning-based automatic colorization, they are still limited when it comes
to few-shot learning. Existing models require a significant
amount of training data. To tackle this issue, we present
a novel memory-augmented colorization model MemoPainter that can produce high-quality colorization with limited data. In particular, our model is able to capture rare
instances and successfully colorize them. We also propose a
novel threshold triplet loss that enables unsupervised training of memory networks without the need of class labels.
Experiments show that our model has superior quality in
both few-shot and one-shot colorization tasks.

1. Introduction
When Dorothy stepped into Land of Oz in the 1939
movie Wizard of Oz, a transition from black and white to vibrant colors makes it one of the most breathtaking moments
in the history of cinema. There is no doubt to colors being
an effective tool of expression, but they usually come at a
cost. Coloring images is one of the most laborious and expensive stages when making modern day animation movies
and comics. Automating the colorization process can help
to reduce both cost and time required in producing comics
or animated movies.
Despite advances in deep learning-based colorization
models [33, 7, 11, 34], they are still limited when it comes
to real-world applications like coloring animations and cartoons. There exist two main problems that make it difficult
to use deep colorization models in real-world settings.
First, data for animations and cartoons are often limited, but training deep learning-based colorization models
requires a large amount of data. Cartoon images are difficult to create because they must be drawn and intricately

Figure 1. Not much data in your hands? Make the most out of your
limited data with our fully-automatic colorization model MemoPainter. (Res-cGAN is MemoPainter without the memory networks.)

colored by hand. In contrast, obtaining real-world images is
easier because they can be taken by a camera and simply
converted to grayscale. This leads to cartoon data not being
as abundant as real-world images. Numerous existing colorization models are trained on real-world images, and their
111283

