Separate to Adapt: Open Set Domain Adaptation via Progressive Separation
Hong Liu1∗ , Zhangjie Cao1∗ , Mingsheng Long1 (B), Jianmin Wang1 , and Qiang Yang2
1
KLiss, MOE; BNRist; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
1
Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, China
1
Beijing Key Laboratory for Industrial Big Data System and Application
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China
h-l17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {mingsheng, jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn, qyang@cse.ust.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent development of deep neural networks has improved the performance of diverse computer vision tasks.
However, the substantial prerequisite of the performance
boost is the access to large amount of annotated training data,
which is often prohibitive in many real applications. When
labeled data is scarce in the domain of interest, a reasonable
alternative is a relevant domain with sufficient supervision.

Source Domain

Eraser

Laptop

Absent

Target Domain

Domain adaptation has become a resounding success in
leveraging labeled data from a source domain to learn an
accurate classifier for an unlabeled target domain. When
deployed in the wild, the target domain usually contains
unknown classes that are not observed in the source domain.
Such setting is termed Open Set Domain Adaptation (OSDA).
While several methods have been proposed to address OSDA,
none of them takes into account the openness of the target
domain, which is measured by the proportion of unknown
classes in all target classes. Openness is a critical point in
open set domain adaptation and exerts a significant impact
on performance. In addition, current work aligns the entire
target domain with the source domain without excluding
unknown samples, which may give rise to negative transfer
due to the mismatch between unknown and known classes.
To this end, this paper presents Separate to Adapt (STA), an
end-to-end approach to open set domain adaptation. The
approach adopts a coarse-to-fine weighting mechanism to
progressively separate the samples of unknown and known
classes, and simultaneously weigh their importance on feature distribution alignment. Our approach allows opennessrobust open set domain adaptation, which can be adaptive to
a variety of openness in the target domain. We evaluate STA
on several benchmark datasets of various openness levels.
Results verify that STA significantly outperforms previous
methods.

Open Set Domain Adaptation
Bed

Known

Unknown

Figure 1. The open set domain adaptation problem, where the target
domain contains “unknown” classes absent in the source domain.

We term the domain of interest as the target domain and the
relevant domain as the source domain. However, data from
different domains are drawn from different distributions. The
domain gap can cause the model to make false predictions
in the target domain and degrade the performance [26, 24].
A convincing solution to diminish the distribution shift
across domains is domain adaptation. Existing domain adaptation methods seek to bridge domain gap by distribution
matching in feature-level [36, 4, 17, 19, 35, 3] or in pixellevel [10, 31, 11, 22, 16]. However, most of previous methods assume that the source and target domains share the same
labels, known as Closed Set Domain Adaptation [25]. This
closed-set setting is still restricted in applications in the wild,
since we cannot decide whether source and target domains
share the same label space if no target annotations are available. A more realistic setting, Open Set Domain Adaptation
(OSDA), is therefore recently studied [25, 30, 21]. In this
paper, we mainly follow the setting proposed by Saito et al.
[30], where the target domain has all classes in the source

2927

