Strike (with) a Pose: Neural Networks Are Easily Fooled
by Strange Poses of Familiar Objects
Michael A. Alcorn

Qi Li

Zhitao Gong

Chengfei Wang

alcorma@auburn.edu

qzl0019@auburn.edu

gong@auburn.edu

czw0078@auburn.edu

Long Mai

Wei-Shinn Ku

Anh Nguyen

malong@adobe.com

weishinn@auburn.edu

anhnguyen@auburn.edu

Auburn University

Adobe Inc.
(a)

Abstract
Despite excellent performance on stationary test sets,
deep neural networks (DNNs) can fail to generalize to
out-of-distribution (OoD) inputs, including natural, nonadversarial ones, which are common in real-world settings.
In this paper, we present a framework for discovering DNN
failures that harnesses 3D renderers and 3D models. That
is, we estimate the parameters of a 3D renderer that cause
a target DNN to misbehave in response to the rendered image. Using our framework and a self-assembled dataset of
3D objects, we investigate the vulnerability of DNNs to OoD
poses of well-known objects in ImageNet. For objects that
are readily recognized by DNNs in their canonical poses,
DNNs incorrectly classify 97% of their pose space. In addition, DNNs are highly sensitive to slight pose perturbations.
Importantly, adversarial poses transfer across models and
datasets. We find that 99.9% and 99.4% of the poses misclassified by Inception-v3 also transfer to the AlexNet and
ResNet-50 image classifiers trained on the same ImageNet
dataset, respectively, and 75.5% transfer to the YOLOv3 object detector trained on MS COCO.

1. Introduction
For real-world technologies, such as self-driving
cars [10], autonomous drones [14], and search-and-rescue
robots [37], the test distribution may be non-stationary, and
new observations will often be out-of-distribution (OoD),
i.e., not from the training distribution [42]. However, machine learning (ML) models frequently assign wrong labels
with high confidence to OoD examples, such as adversarial
examples [46, 29]—inputs specially crafted by an adversary to cause a target model to misbehave. But ML models
are also vulnerable to natural OoD examples [21, 2, 48, 3].
For example, when a Tesla autopilot car failed to recog-

(b)

(c)

school bus 1.0 garbage truck 0.99 punching bag 1.0

(d)

snowplow 0.92

motor scooter 0.99 parachute 1.0

bobsled 1.0

parachute 0.54

school bus 0.98

fireboat 0.98

bobsled 0.79

fire truck 0.99

Figure 1: The Google Inception-v3 classifier [44] correctly
labels the canonical poses of objects (a), but fails to recognize out-of-distribution images of objects in unusual poses
(b–d), including real photographs retrieved from the Internet (d). The left 3 × 3 images (a–c) are found by our framework and rendered via a 3D renderer. Below each image are
its top-1 predicted label and confidence score.

nize a white truck against a bright-lit sky—an unusual view
that might be OoD—it crashed into the truck, killing the
driver [3].
Previous research has successfully used 3D graphics as
a diagnostic tool for computer vision systems [7, 31, 47,
32, 50]. To understand natural Type II classification errors
in DNNs, we searched for misclassified 6D poses (i.e., 3D
translations and 3D rotations) of 3D objects. Our results re-

4845

