Adaptive Weighting Multi-Field-of-View CNN
for Semantic Segmentation in Pathology
Hiroki Tokunaga1 Yuki Teramoto2 Akihiko Yoshizawa2 Ryoma Bise1,3
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan 2 Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan
3
Research Center for Medical Bigdata, National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
1

1. Introduction
Automated digital pathology image analysis is an important task to help pathologists diagnose tumors and cancer subtypes. In particular, many segmentation methods,
such as for segmenting tumor regions, have been proposed.
The state-of-the-art methods accurately distinguish regions
(normal and tumor) in digital pathology images [7][42][43].
Recent progress in medicine has emphasized, the importance of cancer subtype analysis in histology. For example,
Yoshizawa et al. [45] showed that knowledge of lung adenocarcinoma subtypes could be used to predict the prognosis
of a patient who underwent surgical resection statistically.
The development of multiple-subtype segmentation will be
important for pathological image analysis.
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) [28] have been
used for classification and segmentation tasks and they have
been shown to outperform traditional computer vision tech-

Low
Resolution
High

Wide
Field of view

Automated digital histopathology image segmentation
is an important task to help pathologists diagnose tumors
and cancer subtypes. For pathological diagnosis of cancer subtypes, pathologists usually change the magnification of whole-slide images (WSI) viewers. A key assumption is that the importance of the magnifications depends
on the characteristics of the input image, such as cancer
subtypes. In this paper, we propose a novel semantic segmentation method, called Adaptive-Weighting-Multi-Fieldof-View-CNN (AWMF-CNN), that can adaptively use image
features from images with different magnifications to segment multiple cancer subtype regions in the input image.
The proposed method aggregates several expert CNNs for
images of different magnifications by adaptively changing
the weight of each expert depending on the input image. It
leverages information in the images with different magnifications that might be useful for identifying the subtypes.
It outperformed other state-of-the-art methods in experiments.

Normal

Trade-off

Narrow

Abstract

Lepidic

Acinar/
Papillary

Micro
papillary

Solid

5x

10x

20x

20x
10x
5x

Figure 1. Examples of pathology images at difference magnifications; Top: 5x, Middle: 10x, Bottom: 20x. The columns indicate
the subtypes: from left to right, Normal, Lepidic, Acinar/Papillary,
Micropapillary, and Solid.

niques in various applications. Whole-slide images (WSI),
which are often used in digital pathology, cannot be inputted
to a CNN because they are so large (e.g., 100,000 × 50,000
pixels) compared with a natural image (i.e., WSI is over
10000 times the size of a natural image). Therefore, most
methods take a patch-based classification approach that first
segments a large image into small patches and then classifies each patch [40]. However, a small patch image has less
context of a wide range of texture patterns that might be
useful for classification. In order to extend the field of view
under the size limit, the input image is usually downsampled. As a result, the spatial resolution is reduced (Figure 1).
This trade-off between the size of the field of view and the
resolution of the input image makes it difficult to segment
cancer subtypes from an input patch image.
On the other hand, to make pathological diagnoses,
pathologists usually check images by changing their magnification in WSI viewers (i.e., they use several different
scaled images). They can check a wide range of texture pat112597

