Holistic and Comprehensive Annotation of Clinically Significant Findings on
Diverse CT Images: Learning from Radiology Reports and Label Ontology
Ke Yan1 , Yifan Peng2 , Veit Sandfort1 , Mohammadhadi Bagheri1 , Zhiyong Lu2 , Ronald M. Summers1
1
Imaging Biomarkers and Computer-Aided Diagnosis Laboratory, Clinical Center
2
National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine
1,2
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892
{ke.yan, yifan.peng, veit.sandfort, mohammad.bagheri, zhiyong.lu, rms}@nih.gov

Abstract
In radiologists’ routine work, one major task is to read
a medical image, e.g., a CT scan, find significant lesions,
and describe them in the radiology report. In this paper, we
study the lesion description or annotation problem. Given
a lesion image, our aim is to predict a comprehensive set
of relevant labels, such as the lesion’s body part, type, and
attributes, which may assist downstream fine-grained diagnosis. To address this task, we first design a deep learning
module to extract relevant semantic labels from the radiology reports associated with the lesion images. With the
images and text-mined labels, we propose a lesion annotation network (LesaNet) based on a multilabel convolutional
neural network (CNN) to learn all labels holistically. Hierarchical relations and mutually exclusive relations between
the labels are leveraged to improve the label prediction accuracy. The relations are utilized in a label expansion strategy and a relational hard example mining algorithm. We
also attach a simple score propagation layer on LesaNet to
enhance recall and explore implicit relation between labels.
Multilabel metric learning is combined with classification
to enable interpretable prediction. We evaluated LesaNet
on the public DeepLesion dataset, which contains over 32K
diverse lesion images. Experiments show that LesaNet can
precisely annotate the lesions using an ontology of 171 finegrained labels with an average AUC of 0.9344.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been remarkable progress on
computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) based on medical images, especially with the help of deep learning technologies
[23, 36]. Lesion classiﬁcation is one of the most important
topics in CAD. Typical applications include using medical
images to classify the type of liver lesions and lung tissues
[10, 15, 36], to describe the ﬁne-grained attributes of pul-

Training
phase:

Sentence in radiology report

Filtered labels

Large
Nodule
Right mid lung

Textmining
module

Unchanged large nodule bilaterally for
example right lower lobe OTHER_BMK
and right middle lobe BOOKMARK.

Text

Lesion
dataset
Image

Ontology

Semantic labels
¾ Body parts
¾ Types
¾ Attributes

Label relations
9 Hierarchical
9 Exclusive

+

Knowledge

Lesion patch

Lesion
Annotation
Network
(LesaNet)

Inference
phase:

Lesion patch

LesaNet

Predict

Supervision

Nodule:
Right mid lung:
Lung mass:
Perihilar:
…

0.93
0.92
0.89
0.64

Figure 1. The overall framework. We propose lesion annotation
network (LesaNet) to predict ﬁne-grained labels to describe diverse lesions on CT images. The training labels are text-mined
from radiology reports. Label relations are utilized in learning.

monary nodules and breast masses [5, 30], and to predict
their malignancy [6, 12]. However, existing studies on this
topic usually focus on certain body parts (lung, breast, liver,
etc.) and attempt to distinguish between a limited set of labels. Hence, many clinically meaningful lesion labels covering different body parts were not explored yet. Besides,
in practice, multiple labels can be assigned per lesion and
are often correlated.
In this paper, we tackle a more general and clinically useful problem to mimic radiologists. When an experienced radiologist reads a medical image such as a computed tomography (CT) scan, he or she can detect all kinds of lesions in
various body parts, identify the lesions’ detailed information including its associated body part, type, and attributes,
and ﬁnally link these labels to the predeﬁned ontology. We
aim to develop a new framework to predict these semantic
18523

