Joint Manifold Diffusion for Combining Predictions on Decoupled Observations
Kwang In Kim
UNIST

Abstract
We present a new predictor combination algorithm that
improves a given task predictor based on potentially relevant
reference predictors. Existing approaches are limited in
that, to discover the underlying task dependence, they either
require known parametric forms of all predictors or access
to a single fixed dataset on which all predictors are jointly
evaluated. To overcome these limitations, we design a new
non-parametric task dependence estimation procedure that
automatically aligns evaluations of heterogeneous predictors
across disjoint feature sets. Our algorithm is instantiated
as a robust manifold diffusion process that jointly refines
the estimated predictor alignments and the corresponding
task dependence. We apply this algorithm to the relative
attributes ranking problem and demonstrate that it not only
broadens the application range of predictor combination
approaches but also outperforms existing methods even when
applied to classical predictor combination settings.

1. Introduction
When the performance of an estimated predictor is not
adequate for the task at hand, e.g. due to limited training
examples, we might benefit from the knowledge gained from
related tasks. Multi-task learning (MTL) [1, 12, 16, 19]
explores this possibility by solving multiple problems
simultaneously, and so capturing and benefiting from the
potential task dependence. The success of MTL in many
visual learning problems has demonstrated such task dependence [1, 12, 23, 19, 10]. In most existing MTL algorithms,
task dependence is modeled through the latent structures on
the parameter spaces of the corresponding task predictors.
For instance, Evgeniou and Pontil’s algorithm [6] penalizes
pair-wise parameter deviations of task predictors. Since
it is unlikely that all tasks exhibit known task dependence
structure, MTL algorithms attempt to automatically discover
the underlying dependence and identify outliers, by e.g.
enforcing sparsity and/or introducing low-rank constraints
on the aggregated task parameter matrices [1, 8] or by
explicitly performing clustering of tasks [25, 18].
A major limitation of these traditional MTL approaches
is that they require all task predictors to share the same
predictive model or even the same parameter space, making

Hyung Jin Chang
University of Birmingham

them difficult to apply to heterogeneous predictors, e.g. combining deep neural networks and support vector machines.
However, the best predictor forms often depend on the individual tasks of interest. Further, existing MTL approaches
are designed to train multiple predictors simultaneously,
and so they cannot be directly applied to train a new task
predictor given previously-trained reference predictors, e.g.
combining pre-trained or pre-compiled predictor libraries
without access to the corresponding task training data.
Recently, Kim et al. [10] proposed a non-parametric predictor combination approach where the predictor evaluations
made at sampled data points are improved by combining
them with reference predictions at test time without
requiring simultaneous training. This enables us to combine
predictors with different or even unknown parametric forms.
However, the application scope of this approach is limited
in its own way, as it requires a large set of data points on
which all predictors are jointly evaluated. In practical
applications, different predictions can be constructed based
on the respective feature representations tailored for specific
tasks of interest, and often these features are available by
themselves as separate databases without having explicit
references to the corresponding source data (e.g. images).
In this paper, we propose a new algorithm to avoid the
limitations of previous predictor combination approaches,
thereby broadening the application spectrum of the nonparametric predictor combination approach [10]. Building
on their test-time combination approach, our algorithm
improves a task predictor based on a set of reference
predictors. However, unlike their approach, we do not
require that all predictors are available for evaluation on
a single fixed set. Our algorithm takes as input decoupled
predictor evaluations and automatically aligns these
predictions to discover the underlying task dependence. As
the initial estimates of the alignments and the corresponding
task dependence might be noisy, we denoise them jointly via
a manifold diffusion process. The new algorithm combines
the benefits of classical parametric MTL approaches and
recent test-time combination algorithms, and facilitates
combination applications where multiple heterogeneous
predictors are constructed from disjoint feature sets. We
apply our algorithm to the relative attributes ranking problem, and extend the application over previous approaches.
Furthermore, evaluated on seven challenging datasets,
our approach demonstrates that even when applied in the
17549

