Knowing When to Stop:
Evaluation and Verification of Conformity to Output-size Specifications
Chenglong Wang♠
University of Washington

Rudy Bunel♠
University of Oxford

Krishnamurthy Dvijotham
DeepMind

clwang@cs.washington.edu

rudy@robots.ox.ac.uk

dvij@google.com

Po-Sen Huang
DeepMind

Edward Grefenstette♣
DeepMind

Pushmeet Kohli
DeepMind

posenhuang@google.com

egrefen@fb.com

pushmeet@google.com

Abstract
Models such as Sequence-to-Sequence and Image-toSequence are widely used in real world applications. While
the ability of these neural architectures to produce variablelength outputs makes them extremely effective for problems
like Machine Translation and Image Captioning, it also
leaves them vulnerable to failures of the form where the
model produces outputs of undesirable length. This behaviour can have severe consequences such as usage of increased computation and induce faults in downstream modules that expect outputs of a certain length. Motivated by
the need to have a better understanding of the failures of
these models, this paper proposes and studies the novel
output-size modulation problem and makes two key technical contributions. First, to evaluate model robustness,
we develop an easy-to-compute differentiable proxy objective that can be used with gradient-based algorithms to find
output-lengthening inputs. Second and more importantly,
we develop a verification approach that can formally verify
whether a network always produces outputs within a certain length. Experimental results on Machine Translation
and Image Captioning show that our output-lengthening
approach can produce outputs that are 50 times longer
than the input, while our verification approach can, given
a model and input domain, prove that the output length is
below a certain size.

1. Introduction
Neural networks with variable output lengths have become ubiquitous in several applications. In particular, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) such as LSTMs [17], used
 work done during an internship at DeepMind
| now at Facebook AI Research

to form “sequence” models [30], have been successfully and
extensively applied in in image captioning [34, 28, 21, 6,
12, 37, 26, 24, 1], video captioning [33, 38, 35, 40, 41], machine translation (MT) [30, 9], summarization [10], and in
other sequence-based transduction tasks.
The ability of these sequence neural models to generate
variable-length outputs is key to their performance on complex prediction tasks. However, this ability also opens a
powerful attack for adversaries that try to force the model
to produce outputs of specific lengths that, for instance, lead
to increased computation or affect the correct operation of
down-stream modules. To address this issue, we introduce
the output-length modulation problem where given a specification of the form that the model should produce outputs with less than a certain maximum length, we want to
find adversarial examples, i.e. search for inputs that lead
the model to produce outputs with a larger length and thus
show that the model under consideration violates the specification. Different from existing work on targeted or untargeted attacks where the goal is to perturb the input such that
the output is another class or sequence in the development
dataset (thus within the dataset distribution), the outputmodulation problem requires solving a more challenging
task of finding inputs such that the output sequences are
outside of the training distribution, which was previously
claimed difficult [5].
The naive approach to the solution of the output-length
modulation problem involves a computationally intractable
search over a large discrete search space. To overcome
this, we develop an easy-to-compute differentiable proxy
objective that can be used with gradient-based algorithms
to find output-lengthening inputs. Experimental results
on Machine Translation show that our adversarial outputlengthening approach can produce outputs that are 50 times
longer than the input. However, when evaluated on the
image-to-text image captioning model, the method is less
4321
12260

