Frame-Consistent Recurrent Video Deraining with Dual-Level Flow
Wenhan Yang1 , Jiaying Liu2∗, Jiashi Feng1
1
Department of ECE, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 119077
2
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, 100871

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of rain removal
from videos by proposing a more comprehensive framework
that considers the additional degradation factors in real
scenes neglected in previous works. The proposed framework is built upon a two-stage recurrent network with duallevel flow regularizations to perform the inverse recovery
process of the rain synthesis model for video deraining. The
rain-free frame is estimated from the single rain frame at the
first stage. It is then taken as guidance along with previously recovered clean frames to help obtain a more accurate
clean frame at the second stage. This two-step architecture
is capable of extracting more reliable motion information
from the initially estimated rain-free frame at the first stage
for better frame alignment and motion modeling at the second stage. Furthermore, to keep the motion consistency between frames that facilitates a frame-consistent deraining
model at the second stage, a dual-level flow based regularization is proposed at both coarse flow and fine pixel levels.
To better train and evaluate the proposed video deraining
network, a novel rain synthesis model is developed to produce more visually authentic paired training and evaluation videos. Extensive experiments on a series of synthetic
and real videos verify not only the superiority of the proposed method over state-of-the-art but also the effectiveness
of network design and its each component.

1. Introduction
Rain, as a most common bad weather condition, will
cause the visibility degradation in captured videos, e.g. content changes and detail loss, which may fail well-built outdoor computer vision systems by default taking clean video
frames as input. For example, rain streaks cause intensity fluctuation of image content, obstruct the background
to some extent, and blur the scene. Rain will also result
∗ Corresponding author. Email: liujiaying@pku.edu.cn. This work was

supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under contract
No. 61772043, Beijing Natural Science Foundation under contract No.
L182002 and No. 4192025, and CCF-DiDi BigData Joint Lab.

(a) Rain Frame

(b) SpacCNN [7]

(c) FastDeRain [24]

(d) Proposed

Figure 1. Visual results of different deraining methods. Compared
with FastDeRain [24] and SpacCNN [7], our method is better at removing rain accumulation and accumulation flow (blue box) with
less detail loss (red box).

in occlusion, with no background signals through the raindrop. Another degradation factor due to rain is accumulation, where distant streaks are overlapped to look like mist or fog, which obscures the background and significantly
reduces the visibility of distant scenes. When the amount
of rainfall changes rapidly in a local area, rain accumulation fluctuates and leads to visual degradation like a layer
of flowing veils covering on the rain-free background as
shown in Fig. 2 (c) and the blue box in Fig. 1, which is
called accumulation flow in this work. Compared to normal
accumulation, the behavior of accumulation flow is more
dynamic. Besides static scene transmission, it is also affected by local rain density and atmospheric flow, which makes
its estimation much challenging. Furthermore, the accumulation flow possesses complex local motion patterns, which
hinders both human perception as well as vision applications, and increases the difficulty to model and handle it.
A lot of research efforts have been dedicated to rain image/video restoration. Some works [25, 21, 42, 36] take
a single rain image as input and separate rain streaks and
11661

