Interpreting CNNs via Decision Trees
Quanshi Zhang† , Yu Yang‡ , Haotian Ma§ , and Ying Nian Wu‡
†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, ‡ University of California, Los Angeles,
§
South China University of Technology
(a) Input

Abstract

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [20, 18, 14] have
achieved superior performance in various tasks. However,
besides the discrimination power, model interpretability is
still a significant challenge for neural networks. Many studies have been proposed to visualize or analyze feature
representations hidden inside a CNN, in order to open the
black box of neural networks.
Motivation & objective: In the scope of network interpretability, state-of-the-art algorithms are still far from the
ultimate goal of explaining why a CNN learns knowledge as
it is. Although some theories, such as the information bottleneck [34], analyzed statistical characteristics of a neural
1 Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author with the John Hopcroft
Center and the MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, at the
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Yu Yang and Ying Nian Wu are
with the University of California, Los Angeles, USA. Haotian Ma is with
the South China University of Technology, China.

(c) Visualization of filters

(d) Our explanations

Conv5-2

Conv3-3

y=0.87
...

Explanatory
tree

Tail

This paper1 aims to quantitatively explain the rationales
of each prediction that is made by a pre-trained convolutional neural network (CNN). We propose to learn a decision tree, which clarifies the specific reason for each prediction made by the CNN at the semantic level. I.e. the decision
tree decomposes feature representations in high conv-layers
of the CNN into elementary concepts of object parts. In this
way, the decision tree tells people which object parts activate which filters for the prediction and how much each
object part contributes to the prediction score. Such semantic and quantitative explanations for CNN predictions have
specific values beyond the traditional pixel-level analysis of
CNNs. More specifically, our method mines all potential decision modes of the CNN, where each mode represents a typical case of how the CNN uses object parts for prediction.
The decision tree organizes all potential decision modes in
a coarse-to-fine manner to explain CNN predictions at different fine-grained levels. Experiments have demonstrated
the effectiveness of the proposed method.

(b) grad-CAM

Distribution of
contributions of
different filters
Feature maps
of a nape filter

Figure 1. Different types of explanations for CNNs. We compare
(d) our task of quantitatively and semantically explaining CNN
predictions with previous studies of interpreting CNNs, such as
(b) the grad-CAM [26] and (c) CNN visualization [23]. Given an
input image (a), we infer a parse tree (green lines) within the decision tree to project neural activations onto clear concepts of object
parts. Our method quantitatively explains which filters/parts (in
the small/big round) are used for the prediction and how much
they contribute to the prediction. We visualize numerical contributions from randomly selected 10% filters for clarity.

network, it is still a challenge to explain why a CNN encodes frontal-leg features, rather than rear-leg features, for
classification during the end-to-end learning process.
Therefore, in this study, we limit our discussion to the
issue of explaining what knowledge a CNN learns. In this
direction, our research focuses on the following two new
perspectives of interpreting CNNs:
• How to explain features of a middle layer in a CNN at the
semantic level. I.e. we aim to transform chaotic features of
filters inside a CNN into semantically meaningful concepts,
such as object parts, so as to help people to understand the
knowledge in the CNN.
• How to quantitatively analyze the rationale of each CNN prediction. We need to figure out which filters/parts
pass their information through the CNN and contribute to
the prediction output. We also report the numerical contribution of each filter (or object part) to the output score.
As shown in Fig. 1, the above two perspectives are crucial in real applications and have essential differences from
traditional pixel-level visualization and diagnosis of CNN
features [37, 23, 10, 24, 22]. Our semantic and quantitative
16261

