Good News, Everyone! Context driven entity-aware captioning for news images

Ali Furkan Biten, Lluis Gomez, Marçal Rusiñol, Dimosthenis Karatzas
Computer Vision Center, UAB, Spain
{abiten, lgomez, marcal, dimos}@cvc.uab.es

Abstract
Current image captioning systems perform at a merely
descriptive level, essentially enumerating the objects in the
scene and their relations. Humans, on the contrary, interpret images by integrating several sources of prior knowledge of the world. In this work, we aim to take a step closer
to producing captions that offer a plausible interpretation of
the scene, by integrating such contextual information into
the captioning pipeline. For this we focus on the captioning of images used to illustrate news articles. We propose a
novel captioning method that is able to leverage contextual
information provided by the text of news articles associated
with an image. Our model is able to selectively draw information from the article guided by visual cues, and to dynamically extend the output dictionary to out-of-vocabulary
named entities that appear in the context source. Furthermore we introduce “GoodNews”, the largest news image
captioning dataset in the literature and demonstrate stateof-the-art results.

1. Introduction
People understand scenes by building causal models and
employing them to compose stories that explain their perceptual observations [19]. This capacity of humans is associated with intelligent behaviour. One of the cognitive tasks
in the Binet-Simon intelligence test [34] is to describe an
image. Three performance levels are defined, going from
enumeration of objects in the scene, to basic description of
contents and finally interpretation, where contextual information is drawn upon to compose an explanation of the depicted events.
Current image captioning systems [37, 2, 16, 31, 23, 11]
can at best perform at the description level, if not restricted
at the enumeration part, while failing to integrate any prior
world knowledge in the produced caption. Prior world
knowledge might come in the form of social, political, geographic or temporal context, behavioural cues, or previ-

Ground Truth: JoAnn Falletta leading a performance of the
Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra at Kleinhans Music Hall.
Show & Tell [37]: A group of people standing around a table.
Ours: JoAnn Falletta performing at the Buffalo Philharmonic
Orchestra.

Figure 1: Standard approaches to image captioning cannot
properly take any contextual information into account. Our
model is capable of producing captions that include out-ofvocabulary named entities by leveraging information from
available context knowledge.
ously built knowledge about entities such as people, places
or landmarks. In this work, we aim to take a step closer
to producing captions that offer a plausible interpretation of
the scene, by integrating such contextual information into
the captioning pipeline.
This introduces numerous new challenges. On one hand,
the context source needs to be encoded and information selectively drawn from it, guided by the visual scene content.
On the other hand, explicit contextual information, typically found in the form of named entities such as proper
names, prices, locations, dates, etc, which are typically outof-dictionary terms or at best underrepresented in the statistics of the dictionary used, need to be properly injected in
the produced natural language output.
Currently available image captioning datasets are not
112466

