NDDR-CNN: Layerwise Feature Fusing in Multi-Task CNNs
by Neural Discriminative Dimensionality Reduction

1

Yuan Gao1∗ Jiayi Ma2
Tencent AI Lab 2 Wuhan University

3

Mingbo Zhao3 Wei Liu1∗ Alan L. Yuille4
City University of Hong Kong 4 Johns Hopkins University

{ethan.y.gao, jyma2010, mbzhao4}@gmail.com, wl2223@columbia.edu, alan.yuille@jhu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) structure for general-purpose multi-task
learning (MTL), which enables automatic feature fusing at
every layer from different tasks. This is in contrast with
the most widely used MTL CNN structures which empirically or heuristically share features on some specific layers (e.g., share all the features except the last convolutional
layer). The proposed layerwise feature fusing scheme is formulated by combining existing CNN components in a novel
way, with clear mathematical interpretability as discriminative dimensionality reduction, which is referred to as Neural
Discriminative Dimensionality Reduction (NDDR). Specifically, we first concatenate features with the same spatial
resolution from different tasks according to their channel
dimension. Then, we show that the discriminative dimensionality reduction can be fulfilled by 1 × 1 Convolution,
Batch Normalization, and Weight Decay in one CNN. The
use of existing CNN components ensures the end-to-end
training and the extensibility of the proposed NDDR layer to
various state-of-the-art CNN architectures in a “plug-andplay” manner. The detailed ablation analysis shows that
the proposed NDDR layer is easy to train and also robust
to different hyperparameters. Experiments on different task
sets with various base network architectures demonstrate
the promising performance and desirable generalizability
of our proposed method. The code of our paper is available
at https://github.com/ethanygao/NDDR-CNN .

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
greatly pushed the previous limits of various computer vision tasks since the seminal work [20] in 2012. CNN
models can naturally integrate hierarchical features and
classifiers, which can be trained in an end-to-end man* indicates corresponding authors.

ner. Benefiting from that, significant improvements have
been witnessed in fundamental computer vision tasks, such
as image classification [14–16, 20, 45], object detection
[8, 9, 13, 25, 35, 36, 42–44, 47, 48, 50], semantic segmentation [1–5, 27, 33, 37, 51], etc.
One of the main factors that can further boost the CNN
performance is multi-task learning (MTL), which is engaged in learning multiple related tasks simultaneously.
This is because related tasks can benefit from each other
by jointly learning certain shared, or more precisely, mutually related representations [13, 19]. The multiple supervision signals originating from different tasks in MTL can
be viewed as implicit data augmentation (on labels) or additional regularization (among different tasks) [39]. This
enables to learn mutually related representations that work
well for multiple tasks, thus avoiding overfitting and leading
to better generalizability.
Most commonly, the CNN structure for MTL is heuristically determined by sharing all convolutional layers, and
splitting at fully-connected layers for task-specific losses.
However, as different layers learn low-, mid-, and high-level
features [57], a natural question arises: Why would we assume that the low- and mid-level features for different tasks
in MTL should be identical, especially when the tasks are
loosely related? If not, is it optimal to share the features
until the last convolutional layer?
The study in Misra et al. [31] reveals that sharing/splitting at different layers gives different performances.
Especially, improper features sharing at some layers may
degrade the performance of some, or even all, tasks. In addition, the deep nature of CNNs makes it infeasible to exhaustively test all the possible structures to find the optimal
sharing/splitting scheme. In order to tackle this issue, Misra
et al. used trainable scalars to weighted-sum the features
from different tasks at multiple CNN levels and achieved
state-of-the-art performance [31].
We consider this problem in another way, i.e., by leveraging all the hierarchical features from different tasks. This
is because that the CNN layers trained by different tasks can
be treated as different feature descriptors, therefore the fea-

3205

