Weakly Supervised Complementary Parts Models for Fine-Grained
Image Classification from the Bottom Up
Weifeng Ge1,2∗
1
Deepwise AI Lab

Xiangru Lin2∗
Yizhou Yu1†
2
The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Given a training dataset composed of images and corresponding category labels, deep convolutional neural networks show a strong ability in mining discriminative parts
for image classification. However, deep convolutional neural networks trained with image level labels only tend to focus on the most discriminative parts while missing other object parts, which could provide complementary information.
In this paper, we approach this problem from a different perspective. We build complementary parts models in a weakly supervised manner to retrieve information suppressed by
dominant object parts detected by convolutional neural networks. Given image level labels only, we first extract rough
object instances by performing weakly supervised object detection and instance segmentation using Mask R-CNN
and CRF-based segmentation. Then we estimate and search
for the best parts model for each object instance under the
principle of preserving as much diversity as possible. In the
last stage, we build a bi-directional long short-term memory
(LSTM) network to fuze and encode the partial information
of these complementary parts into a comprehensive feature
for image classification. Experimental results indicate that
the proposed method not only achieves significant improvement over our baseline models, but also outperforms stateof-the-art algorithms by a large margin (6.7%, 2.8%, 5.2%
respectively) on Stanford Dogs 120, Caltech-UCSD Birds
2011-200 and Caltech 256.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated its ability to
learn representative features for image classification [34,
25, 37, 17]. Given training data, image classification [9, 25]
often builds a feature extractor that accepts an input image
and a subsequent classifier that generates prediction probability for the image. This is a common pipeline in many
high-level vision tasks, such as object detection [14, 16],
∗ These authors have equal contribution.
† Corresponding author is Yizhou Yu.

tracking [42, 33, 38], and scene understanding [8, 31].
Although a model trained with the aforementioned
pipeline can achieve competitive results on many image
classification benchmarks, its performance gain primarily
comes from the model’s capacity to discover the most discriminative parts in the input image. To better understand a
trained deep neural network and obtain insights about this
phenomenon, many techniques [1, 54, 2] have been proposed to visualize the intermediate results of deep networks.
In Fig 1, it can be found that deep convolutional neural networks trained with image labels only tend to focus on the
most discriminative parts while missing other object parts.
However, focusing on the most discriminative parts alone
can have limitations. Some image classification tasks need
to grasp object descriptions that are as complete as possible. A complete object description does not have to come in
one piece, but could be assembled together using multiple
partial descriptions. To remove redundancies, such partial
descriptions should be complementary to each other. Image
classification tasks, that could benefit from such complete
descriptions, include fine-grained classification tasks on Stanford Dogs 120 [21] and CUB 2011-200 [47], where appearances of different object parts collectively contribute to
the final classification performance.
According to the above analysis, we approach image
classification from a different perspective and propose a
new pipeline that aims to mine complementary parts instead
of the aforementioned most discriminative parts, and fuse
the mined complementary parts before making final classification decisions.
Object Detection Phase. Object detection [10, 14, 16] is
able to localize objects by performing a huge number of
classifications at a large number of locations. In Fig 1, the
red bounding boxes are the ground truth, the green ones
are positive object proposals, and the blue ones are negative proposals. The differences between the positive and
negative proposals are whether they contain sufficient information (overlap ratio with the ground truth bounding box)
to describe objects. If we look at the activation map in
Fig 1, it is obvious that the positive bounding boxes spread
much wider than the core regions. As a result, we hypoth13034

