Grounding Human-to-Vehicle Advice for Self-driving Vehicles
Jinkyu Kim1 , Teruhisa Misu2 , Yi-Ting Chen2 , Ashish Tawari2 , and John Canny1
1
EECS, UC Berkeley, 2 Honda Research Institute USA, Inc.
1

{jinkyu.kim, canny}@berkeley.edu, 2 {tmisu,ychen,atawari}@honda-ri.com

Abstract
Recent success suggests that deep neural control networks are likely to be a key component of self-driving vehicles. These networks are trained on large datasets to imitate human actions, but they lack semantic understanding of
image contents. This makes them brittle and potentially unsafe in situations that do not match training data. Here,
we propose to address this issue by augmenting training
data with natural language advice from a human. Advice
includes guidance about what to do and where to attend.
We present a first step toward advice giving, where we train
an end-to-end vehicle controller that accepts advice. The
controller adapts the way it attends to the scene (visual
attention) and the control (steering and speed). Attention
mechanisms tie controller behavior to salient objects in the
advice. We evaluate our model on a novel advisable driving
dataset with manually annotated human-to-vehicle advice
called Honda Research Institute-Advice Dataset (HAD). We
show that taking advice improves the performance of the
end-to-end network, while the network cues on a variety of
visual features that are provided by advice. The dataset is
available at https://usa.honda-ri.com/HAD.

1. Introduction
Dramatic progress in self-driving vehicle control has
been made in the last several years. The recent achievements [3, 27] suggest that deep neural models can be applied to vehicle controls in an end-to-end manner by effectively learning latent representations from data. Explainability of these deep controllers has increasingly
been explored via a visual attention mechanism [8], a
deconvolution-style approach [2], and a natural language
model [9]. Such explainable models will be an important element of human-vehicle interaction because they allow people and vehicles to understand and anticipate each other’s
actions, hence to cooperate effectively.
However, the network’s understanding of a scene is limited by the training data: image areas are only attended to if
they are salient to the (training) driver’s subsequent action.

Visual
encoder
Vehicle
controller
End-user
Input image
Human-to-Vehicle Advice
e.g., “pedestrians are in crosswalk”

Textual
encoder

control
commands

without advice

with advice

Visualizing
model’s attention

Figure 1: Our model takes human-to-vehicle advice as an
input, i.e., “pedestrians are in crosswalk”, and grounds it
into the vehicle controller, which then predicts a sequence
of control commands, i.e., a steering wheel angle and a vehicle’s speed. Our driving model also provides a visual explanation in the form of attention - highlighted regions have
a direct influence on the function being estimated. Visualizing attention maps helps the end-users acknowledge the
acceptance of their advice.
We have found that this leads to semantically-shallow models that under-attend to important cues (like pedestrians)
that do not predict vehicle behavior as well as other cues,
like the presence of a stop light or intersection. We also
believe its important for driving models to be able to adapt
the “style” of the journey to user input (fast, gentle, scenic
route, avoid freeways etc). We use the term “advice” to
cover high-level instructions to the vehicle controller about
how to drive, including what to attend to. We distinguish
advice from explicit commands to the vehicle: which may
be problematic if the passenger is not fully attending to the
vehicle’s environment.
The goal of this work is to augment imitation learning
datasets with long-term advice from humans (e.g., driving
instructors) and in the shorter term, from passengers in the
vehicle. In full generality, advice might take the form of
condition-action rules “if you see a child’s toy on the sidewalk, slow down”. For the present paper, we study the sim-

10591

