Knowledge-Embedded Routing Network for Scene Graph Generation
Tianshui Chen†
Sun Yat-Sen University
DarkMatter AI Research

Weihao Yu†
Sun Yat-Sen University

Riquan Chen
Sun Yat-Sen University

weihaoyu6@gmail.com

sysucrq@gmail.com

tianshuichen@gmail.com

Liang Lin∗
Sun Yat-Sen University
DarkMatter AI Research
linliang@ieee.org

Abstract

1. Introduction
Scene graph [13] is a structured representation of image
content that not only encodes semantic and spatial informa∗ Tianshui Chen and Weihao Yu share first-authorship. Corresponding author is Liang Lin. This work was supported in part by State Key
Development Program under Grant 2016YFB1001004, in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No.
2018YFC0830103, in part by National High Level Talents Special Support
Plan (Ten Thousand Talents Program), and in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant No. 61622214, 61836012,
and 61702565.

50

Ours
SMN

40
30
20
10

R@100 (%)

To understand a scene in depth not only involves locating/recognizing individual objects, but also requires to infer the relationships and interactions among them. However, since the distribution of real-world relationships is seriously unbalanced, existing methods perform quite poorly
for the less frequent relationships. In this work, we find that
the statistical correlations between object pairs and their
relationships can effectively regularize semantic space and
make prediction less ambiguous, and thus well address the
unbalanced distribution issue. To achieve this, we incorporate these statistical correlations into deep neural networks to facilitate scene graph generation by developing a
Knowledge-Embedded Routing Network. More specifically,
we show that the statistical correlations between objects appearing in images and their relationships, can be explicitly
represented by a structured knowledge graph, and a routing
mechanism is learned to propagate messages through the
graph to explore their interactions. Extensive experiments
on the large-scale Visual Genome dataset demonstrate the
superiority of the proposed method over current state-ofthe-art competitors.

R@50 (%)

50

Ours
SMN

40
30
20
10

0

0

top 10

(a)

the rest

top 10

the rest

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Recall@50 and (b) Recall@100 of our proposed
method and the SMN [33] on the scene graph classification task
on the Visual Genome dataset [14]. Both models are trained on
the whole training set and evaluated on the two subsets, respectively. Note that SMN is the previous best-performing method.

tion of individual objects in the scene but also represents
the relationship between each pair of objects. In recent
years, inferring such graph has drawn increasing attention
[30, 6] as it provides a deeper understanding for the image
and thus facilitates various vision tasks ranging from fundamental recognition and detection [20, 8] to high-level tasks
[34, 32].
Existing methods for scene graph generation rely on the
target object regions [19, 6] or further introduce contextual
cues [30, 33] to aid recognition. Generally, these methods
require large amounts of annotated samples for model optimization. However, the distribution of real-world relationships is seriously uneven, leading to relatively poor performance for the relationships with limited training samples.
Take the Visual Genome dataset [14] as an example, we
evaluate the performance on samples of top 10 most frequent relationships (namely “top 10” subset) and that on
samples of the rest less frequent relationships (namely “the
rest” subset), respectively. As shown in Figure 1, current
best-performing method (i.e, SMN [33]) can achieve com16163

