Intention Oriented Image Captions with Guiding Objects
Yue Zheng, Yali Li and Shengjin Wang
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
zhengy17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {liyali13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Although existing image caption models can produce
promising results using recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
it is difficult to guarantee that an object we care about
is contained in generated descriptions, for example in the
case that the object is inconspicuous in the image. Problems become even harder when these objects did not appear in training stage. In this paper, we propose a novel approach for generating image captions with guiding objects
(CGO). The CGO constrains the model to involve a humanconcerned object when the object is in the image. CGO ensures that the object is in the generated description while
maintaining fluency. Instead of generating the sequence
from left to right, we start the description with a selected
object and generate other parts of the sequence based on
this object. To achieve this, we design a novel framework
combining two LSTMs in opposite directions. We demonstrate the characteristics of our method on MSCOCO where
we generate descriptions for each detected object in the images. With CGO, we can extend the ability of description
to the objects being neglected in image caption labels and
provide a set of more comprehensive and diverse descriptions for an image. CGO shows advantages when applied to
the task of describing novel objects. We show experimental
results on both MSCOCO and ImageNet datasets. Evaluations show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art
models in the task with average F1 75.8, leading to better
descriptions in terms of both content accuracy and fluency.

1. Introduction
Generating descriptions for images, namely image captioning, is a challenging task in computer vision. It can be
used in many practical applications, such as robotic scene
understanding and assistant systems for visually impaired
users. In the past few years, deep neural networks are
extensively used in image captioning [25, 12, 40, 17, 3],
achieving fluent and accurate descriptions in commonly

Figure 1. Existing models for image captioning generate the descriptions from left to right. Our CGO approach start generating
with a selected object instead. CGO enables us to incorporate the
selected objects into descriptions precisely, and generate a set of
diverse and comprehensive descriptions for an image.

used datasets, e.g. MSCOCO [21]. However, they are limited in the control of the generation process. For instance,
a picture may contain many objects but a description sentence usually contains only one or a small number of objects, as shown in Fig. 1. Although we can accurately classify or detect objects in the image with existing methods
[13, 36, 32], we cannot force the language model to describe the object we care about. This can be important in
practice because the model may be queried for a specific
object. Including a novel object in the description is even
harder, in the cases where the object has not been seen in the
training data. Several recent works have studied the task of
describing novel objects but it is still an open question. In
this paper, we propose a novel approach that generates image captions with guiding objects (CGO). CGO can ensure
that the user-selected guiding object is contained in a fluent
description. The selected object can be any object detected
from the image, even if it is unseen in the image caption
training data.
The encoder-decoder structure is most widely used in
recent image caption works and recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) are often used as the language model to generate

8395

