Perturbation Analysis of the 8-Point Algorithm: a Case Study for Wide FoV
Cameras
Thiago L. T. da Silveira and Claudio R. Jung
Institute of Informatics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
{tltsilveira,crjung}@inf.ufrgs.br

Abstract
This paper presents a perturbation analysis for the estimate of epipolar matrices using the 8-Point Algorithm (8PA). Our approach explores existing bounds for singular
subspaces and relates them to the 8-PA, without assuming
any kind of error distribution for the matched features. In
particular, if we use unit vectors as homogeneous image coordinates, we show that having a wide spatial distribution
of matched features in both views tends to generate lower
error bounds for the epipolar matrix error. Our experimental validation indicates that the bounds and the effective errors tend to decrease as the camera Field of View (FoV) increases, and that using the 8-PA for spherical images (that
present 360◦×180◦ FoV) leads to accurate essential matrices. As an additional contribution, we present bounds for
the direction of the translation vector extracted from the essential matrix based on singular subspace analysis.

1. Introduction
Obtaining 3D scene structure and camera poses based
on two or more views of the same scene have been widely
studied by the computer vision community, and the epipolar
geometry encoded by either the fundamental or the essential matrix is a keystone in the context of Structure from
Motion [28]. For simplicity, we will use the name epipolar
matrix to denote either one of these two matrices, as in [1].
There are several approaches for estimating epipolar matrices [18, 21, 25], but the 8-Point Algorithm (8-PA) proposed by Longuet-Higgins [20] is still very popular, serving
as an initial estimate or as the basis for further developments
such as feature normalization schemes [15, 24], the imposition of rank constraints [49], the inclusion of additional
matrix factorizations [44], the use of robust loss functions
to better handle outliers [16], or the inclusion of weights and
deep learning strategies for simultaneous keypoint matching
and motion recovery [46]. A class of approaches focuses on
estimating optimal inlier sets [45], which is particularly im-

portant when the number of matched features is scarce and
outliers are present. When using wider Field of View (FoV)
cameras, however, the spatial region captured by both cameras present more overlap on the image domain, typically
leading to more matched features. In particular, spherical
images present full 360◦×180◦ FoV and are becoming increasingly popular in the context of multiview 3D reconstruction and/or pose estimation [12, 29, 30, 31, 32].
As noted in [46], the typical pipeline for estimating
epipolar matrices consists of finding correspondence points
across images, and then applying an outlier removal strategy (e.g. RANSAC [9] or its variants [33]) to retrieve a subset of potential inliers. This pruned set of correspondences
is then fed to the estimation method itself, such as the 8-PA,
and errors in the matching step can degrade the estimated
epipolar matrix. They are caused by noisy feature matching
(features are correctly matched but not at the exact location) or wrong feature matching, and determining the impact of these errors on the estimated matrix is a relevant research topic. Existing error analysis approaches [5, 36, 42]
focus on noisy features, assuming that badly matched features can be effectively removed by the outlier rejection
method. However, outliers are typically detected based on
some kind of distance to the epipolar line (or curve when
using spherical images), such as algebraic or Sampson distances [39]. Hence, wrong matches along (or close to) the
epipolar line/curve might be erroneously considered inliers.
This paper presents a perturbation analysis for the 8-PA
that does not assume any kind of matching error distribution. We represent the matched features in homogeneous
coordinates as 3D unit vectors, which relate to the viewing
directions of the rays that connect the 3D world points and
the camera centers in the calibrated case. This is a particularly natural choice when using spherical cameras [12, 17],
but can also be explored when the pinhole model is assumed. We present error bounds for epipolar matrix estimation as a function of matching errors and shed some light
on the impact of the Field of View (FoV) of the cameras on
error propagation. In particular, we show that the 8-PA potentially provides good estimates for the essential matrix E

11757

