Iterative Alignment Network for Continuous Sign Language Recognition
Junfu Pu
Wengang Zhou
Houqiang Li
CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China
pjh@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhwg@ustc.edu.cn, lihq@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an alignment network with iterative optimization for weakly supervised continuous sign
language recognition. Our framework consists of two modules: a 3D convolutional residual network (3D-ResNet) for
feature learning and an encoder-decoder network with connectionist temporal classification (CTC) for sequence modelling. The above two modules are optimized in an alternate way. In the encoder-decoder sequence learning network, two decoders are included, i.e., LSTM decoder and
CTC decoder. Both decoders are jointly trained by maximum likelihood criterion with a soft Dynamic Time Warping
(soft-DTW) alignment constraint. The warping path, which
indicates the possible alignment between input video clips
and sign words, is used to fine-tune the 3D-ResNet as training labels with classification loss. After fine-tuning, the improved features are extracted for optimization of encoderdecoder sequence learning network in next iteration. The
proposed algorithm is evaluated on two large scale continuous sign language recognition benchmarks, i.e., RWTHPHOENIX-Weather and CSL. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
As one of the most important ways to communicate with
the deaf-mute, sign language (SL) is used by millions of
people with hearing or spoken damage in their daily life.
However, due to the lack of systematic study for sign language, it becomes very difficult for many people to communicate with the deaf-mute. In order to make such communication more convenient, it’s necessary to develop an
effective algorithm for sign language recognition (SLR).
Recently, more and more researchers turn their attention to
sign language recognition, not only for the social impacts,
but also with academic explorations.
Comparing to isolated SLR [16, 22, 42, 43], i.e., recognition of words or gestures [31], which is similar to action
recognition [19, 24], continuous SLR [9, 26, 29] is much
more complicated since there is no rigid annotation of text
word to video clip for a complete sign video. As a kind

of weakly supervised sequence learning task, the key idea
for continuous SLR is to learn the mapping between a sign
video and its corresponding annotation of text sentence.
Continuous SLR task is well defined with a very standard
formulation, since the sign translation result is strictly constrained in grammar.
So far, the existing methods on continuous SLR can be
grouped into two categories based on the involved feature
representation, i.e., hand-crafted feature based and deep
learning based methods. Early works [35] mainly use handcrafted features together with statistical sequence modelling
methods such as Hidden Markov Model (HMM) or Hidden Conditional Random Fields (HCRF). Starner et al. [35]
present two real-time HMM-based systems for recognizing
sentence-level continuous American Sign Language (ASL).
Later on, Wang et al. [40] derive a discriminative sequence
model with Hidden Conditional Random Field (HCRF) for
gesture recognition, in order to solve the issue of long-range
dependencies among observations in HMM.
Recently, benefitting from the development of deep
learning, in sign language recognition, there have witnessed
some breakthroughs. With the appearance of large scale
continuous sign language datasets [9, 23, 25], deep learning based continuous SLR methods gradually become the
mainstream. With the powerful video representations by
residual network (ResNet) [18] and 3D convolutional neural network (3D-CNN) [33, 37], deep learning methods for
continuous SLR achieve state-of-the-art performance. Cui
et al. [10] propose to use recurrent convolutional neural
networks with staged optimization to recognize continuous
sign language. Another work [23] with hierarchical attention in latent space also shows the superiority of deep learning to hand-crafted feature based methods.
In this paper, we propose a new deep learning architecture for continuous SLR. Our framework includes a 3D
residual network (3D-ResNet) for feature extraction and an
encoder-decoder network for sequence modelling. Considering the particularity of continuous SLR crossing computer vision and natural language processing, we explore
the technics in video representation and understanding, as
well as the sequence modelling with grammar. We unify
the visual representation learning and sequence modeling in

4165

