Learning monocular depth estimation infusing traditional stereo knowledge
Fabio Tosi, Filippo Aleotti, Matteo Poggi, Stefano Mattoccia
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy
{fabio.tosi5, filippo.aleotti2, m.poggi, stefano.mattoccia }@unibo.it

Abstract
Depth estimation from a single image represents a fascinating, yet challenging problem with countless applications. Recent works proved that this task could be learned
without direct supervision from ground truth labels leveraging image synthesis on sequences or stereo pairs. Focusing on this second case, in this paper we leverage stereo
matching in order to improve monocular depth estimation.
To this aim we propose monoResMatch, a novel deep architecture designed to infer depth from a single input image
by synthesizing features from a different point of view, horizontally aligned with the input image, performing stereo
matching between the two cues. In contrast to previous
works sharing this rationale, our network is the first trained
end-to-end from scratch. Moreover, we show how obtaining
proxy ground truth annotation through traditional stereo
algorithms, such as Semi-Global Matching, enables more
accurate monocular depth estimation still countering the
need for expensive depth labels by keeping a self-supervised
approach. Exhaustive experimental results prove how
the synergy between i) the proposed monoResMatch architecture and ii) proxy-supervision attains state-of-theart for self-supervised monocular depth estimation. The
code is publicly available at https://github.com/
fabiotosi92/monoResMatch-Tensorflow.

1. Introduction
Inferring accurate depth information of a sensed scene
is paramount for several applications such as autonomous
driving, augmented reality and robotics. Although technologies such as LiDAR and time-of-flight are quite popular, obtaining depth from images is often the preferred
choice. Compared to other sensors, those based on standard
cameras potentially have several advantages: they are inexpensive, have a higher resolution and are suited for almost
any environment. In this field, stereo is the preferred choice
to infer disparity (i.e., the inverse of depth) from two or
more images sensing the same area from different points of

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed depth-from-mono solution.
Input image from KITTI dataset (top). Estimated depth map by
our monoResMatch (bottom).

view and Semi-Global Matching (SGM) [15] is a popular,
yet effective algorithm to accomplish this task. However,
inferring depth from a single image is particularly attractive
because it does not require a stereo rig and overcomes some
intrinsic limitations of a binocular setup (e.g., occlusions).
On the other hand, it is an extremely challenging task due
to the ill-posed nature of the problem. Nonetheless, deep
learning enabled to achieve outstanding results for this task
[7], although the gap with state-of-the-art stereo solutions
is still huge [3, 24]. Self-supervised learning paradigms for
monocular depth estimation [11, 63, 32, 44, 40, 58] became
very popular to overcome the need for costly ground truth
annotations, usually obtained employing expensive active
sensors and human post-processing [10, 35, 52]. Following
this strategy, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) can
be trained to tackle depth estimation as an image synthesis task from stereo pairs or monocular sequences [11, 63].
For this purpose, using stereo pairs rather than monocular
sequences as supervision turned out to be more effective
according to the literature. Although the former strategy is
more constrained since a stereo setup is necessary for training, it does neither require to infer relative pose between
adjacent frames in a sequence nor to segment moving objects in the scene. Moreover, a stereo setup does not require
19799

