Deep Virtual Networks for Memory Efficient Inference of Multiple Tasks
Eunwoo Kim1
Chanho Ahn2
1
University of Oxford

Philip H.S. Torr1
Songhwai Oh2
2
Seoul National University

{eunwoo.kim, philip.torr}@eng.ox.ac.uk

{mychahn, songhwai}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep networks consume a large amount of memory by
their nature. A natural question arises can we reduce that
memory requirement whilst maintaining performance. In
particular, in this work we address the problem of memory
efficient learning for multiple tasks. To this end, we propose
a novel network architecture producing multiple networks
of different configurations, termed deep virtual networks
(DVNs), for different tasks. Each DVN is specialized for a
single task and structured hierarchically. The hierarchical
structure, which contains multiple levels of hierarchy corresponding to different numbers of parameters, enables multiple inference for different memory budgets. The building
block of a deep virtual network is based on a disjoint collection of parameters of a network, which we call a unit. The
lowest level of hierarchy in a deep virtual network is a unit,
and higher levels of hierarchy contain lower levels’ units
and other additional units. Given a budget on the number
of parameters, a different level of a deep virtual network can
be chosen to perform the task. A unit can be shared by different DVNs, allowing multiple DVNs in a single network.
In addition, shared units provide assistance to the target
task with additional knowledge learned from another tasks.
This cooperative configuration of DVNs makes it possible
to handle different tasks in a memory-aware manner. Our
experiments show that the proposed method outperforms existing approaches for multiple tasks. Notably, ours is more
efficient than others as it allows memory-aware inference
for all tasks.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep learning methods have made remarkable progress in computer vision and machine learning
[13, 21, 30]. Although successful in many applications, it
is well-known that many deep neural networks have a high
memory footprint [10, 17]. This limits their practical applications, such as mobile phones, robots, and autonomous
vehicles of low capacity. The issue has been addressed by
research aimed at reducing the number of parameters of a

Figure 1. (Top left) Multi-task learning [2] for k tasks and (top
right) memory efficient learning [19] for a single task with nh different memory budgets, realized in a single network, respectively.
(Bottom) An overview of the proposed approach. The proposed architecture contains multiple deep networks (deep virtual networks)
of different configurations for different tasks. Each deep virtual
network is specialized for a single task and allows multiple inference for different memory budgets. Our approach incorporates
both multi-task and memory efficient learning methods in a single
architecture, producing k × nh inference outputs, which significantly reduces the training efforts and network storage.

deep network to create a lightweight network [12, 14].
Unfortunately, developing such a compact network is accompanied by a tradeoff between accuracy and the number of parameters (referred as the memory1 ) at test time
[11, 16]. This requires efforts to find a proper network that
gives competitive performance under a given memory budget [9]. Besides, when a network model with a different
memory budget is required, we define and train a new network, which incurs additional training cost.
Recently, several studies have been conducted on multiple inference under different memory budgets in a single
1 We call the number of parameters as memory throughout the paper.

2710

