Spatially Variant Linear Representation Models for Joint Filtering
Jinshan Pan1 Jiangxin Dong2 Jimmy Ren3 Liang Lin4 Jinhui Tang1 Ming-Hsuan Yang5,6
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 Dalian University of Technology
3
SenseTime Research 4 Sun Yat-Sen University 5 UC Merced 6 Google Cloud

(a) Input & guidance

(b) Pan et al. [37]

(c) He et al. [18]

(d) Ours

(e) Estimated coefficients

Figure 1. One application of the proposed joint filtering on image deblurring. Our algorithm is based on a spatially variant linear representation model (SVLRM), where the target image (i.e., the deblurred image (d)) can be linearly represented by the guidance image (i.e.,
the short exposure image in (a)). We develop an efficient algorithm to estimate the linear representation coefficients (i.e., (e)) by a deep
convolutional neural network which is constrained by the SVLRM. Our analysis shows that the SVLRM is able to capture the structural
details of the input and guidance image well (see (e)). Thus, our method generates better results than those based on the locally linear
representation model (e.g., [18]) and favorable results against the state-of-the-art methods on each task (e.g., image deblurring [37]).

Abstract
Joint filtering mainly uses an additional guidance image
as a prior and transfers its structures to the target image
in the filtering process. Different from existing algorithms that rely on locally linear models or hand-designed objective functions to extract the structural information from
the guidance image, we propose a new joint filter based
on a spatially variant linear representation model (SVLRM), where the target image is linearly represented by the
guidance image. However, the SVLRM leads to a highly illposed problem. To estimate the linear representation coefficients, we develop an effective algorithm based on a deep
convolutional neural network (CNN). The proposed deep CNN (constrained by the SVLRM) is able to estimate the spatially variant linear representation coefficients which are
able to model the structural information of both the guidance and input images. We show that the proposed algorithm can be effectively applied to a variety of applications, including depth/RGB image upsampling and restoration,
flash/no-flash image deblurring, natural image denoising,
scale-aware filtering, etc. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods that have been specially designed for each task.

1. Introduction
Image filters, as fundamental tools in many vision and
graphics problems, are mainly used to suppress fine-scale
details while preserving primary structures. The linear
translation-invariant (LTI) filters usually use spatially in-

variant kernels such as mean, Gaussian, and Laplacian kernels. As the spatially invariant kernels are independent of
image content, these LTI filters usually smooth image structures, details, and noise evenly without discrimination and
thus are less effective for preserving main structures [53].
To overcome this problem, joint filtering using additional guidance images has been proposed. Joint filtering aims
to transfer the important structural details of the guidance
image to the output image so that the important structures
of the output image can be preserved in the filtering process. As the guidance image can be the input image itself
or the image from different domains [18, 25, 47], joint filtering has been widely used in image editing [27], optical
flow [49, 40, 45], stereo matching [40, 43, 31]. Although
achieving impressive performance, the joint filtering usually introduces erroneous or extraneous artifacts in the target
image when the guidance image and input image are from
different domains, such as RGB/depth [56, 39, 12, 25], optical flow/RGB [49, 40, 45], flash/no-flash [54, 18]. Thus,
it is of great interest to explore the proprieties of guidance
image and input image so that the correct structural information can be transferred in the filtering process.
To explore common structures between the input and
guidance images, existing joint filtering methods [43, 17,
16, 22] usually develop kinds of hand-crafted priors to model the structural co-occurrence property. However, using
hand-crafted priors usually leads to complex objective functions, which are difficult to solve.
Motivated by the success of deep learning, the joint filter11702

