Learning Words by Drawing Images
Dı́dac Surı́s ∗

Adrià Recasens∗
David Bau David Harwath
James Glass
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Antonio Torralba

{didac,recasens,davidbau,dharwath,glass,torralba}@csail.mit.edu
∗ indicates equal contribution

a)

Abstract
We propose a framework for learning through drawing. Our goal is to learn the correspondence between spoken words and abstract visual attributes, from a dataset of
spoken descriptions of images. Building upon recent findings that GAN representations can be manipulated to edit
semantic concepts in the generated output, we propose a
new method to use such GAN-generated images to train a
model using a triplet loss. To apply the method, we develop
Audio CLEVRGAN, a new dataset of audio descriptions of
GAN-generated CLEVR images, and we describe a training procedure that creates a curriculum of GAN-generated
images that focuses training on image pairs that differ in
a specific, informative way. Training is done without additional supervision beyond the spoken captions and the
GAN. We find that training that takes advantage of GANgenerated edited examples results in improvements in the
model’s ability to learn attributes compared to previous
results. Our proposed learning framework also results in
models that can associate spoken words with some abstract
visual concepts such as color and size.

1. Introduction
Creation is an essential human learning process: simply drawing an object requires learning how to compose its
parts, attributes, and relationships. Drawing helps children
learn about details that would not otherwise be noticed [12].
In contrast, machine learning systems have not yet demonstrated an ability to learn through drawing. While Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have demonstrated
dramatic success in learning to synthesize realistic images
[32, 43], methods have not been developed for extracting
other types of knowledge from a GAN.
In this work, our goal is to discover the correspondence
between visual attributes and audio words from descriptions
of images. Because we work with unannotated raw audio
speech instead of text captions, our model must learn not
only what a word means, but what a word is — our setting

b)

Original example

Edited examples

Learned concepts

Cube

Purple

Figure 1: In this paper we propose a framework for learning
through generated images. In a) two edited examples are
compared to an original generated image at the left. In b)
we show the concepts learned by our system when trained
with edited examples.

omits the structured supervision that would be provided by
transcribed text. Previous work on this problem [24] has
shown that a triplet loss can be used to learn a visuallygrounded model of speech that can attend to relevant visual objects, but learning words for abstract visual attributes
such as colors and shapes has been out of reach. In contrast,
recent results suggest that GANs learn compositional visual
concepts by learning to draw [9]. Yet a connection between
language and the knowledge learned by GANs is missing.
We propose a training method that uses the knowledge
learned by a GAN to generate a curriculum for training a
visually-grounded model of spoken language [24]. Starting
from a set of images with audio descriptions, we teach the
model to learn about attributes by using the GAN to synthesize many realistic but meaningfully distinct training images (Figure 1a). The generation is done without any supervision beyond the original audio captions. These generated
examples help the model focus on specific abstract visual
attributes that correspond to audio words (Figure 1b).

2029

