GANFIT: Generative Adversarial Network Fitting
for High Fidelity 3D Face Reconstruction
Baris Gecer1,2 , Stylianos Ploumpis1,2 , Irene Kotsia3 , and Stefanos Zafeiriou1,2
1
Imperial College London
2
FaceSoft.io
3
University of Middlesex
{b.gecer, s.ploumpis, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk , drkotsia@gmail.com

Figure 1: The proposed deep fitting approach can reconstruct high quality texture and geometry from a single image with
precise identity recovery. The reconstructions in the figure and the rest of the paper are represented by a vector of size 700
floating points and rendered without any special effects. We would like to highlight that the depicted texture is reconstructed
by our model and none of the features taken directly from the image.

Abstract
In the past few years, a lot of work has been done towards reconstructing the 3D facial structure from single
images by capitalizing on the power of Deep Convolutional
Neural Networks (DCNNs). In the most recent works, differentiable renderers were employed in order to learn the relationship between the facial identity features and the parameters of a 3D morphable model for shape and texture. The
texture features either correspond to components of a linear texture space or are learned by auto-encoders directly
from in-the-wild images. In all cases, the quality of the facial texture reconstruction of the state-of-the-art methods is
still not capable of modeling textures in high fidelity. In this
paper, we take a radically different approach and harness
the power of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and
DCNNs in order to reconstruct the facial texture and shape
from single images. That is, we utilize GANs to train a very
powerful generator of facial texture in UV space. Then, we
revisit the original 3D Morphable Models (3DMMs) fitting
approaches making use of non-linear optimization to find

the optimal latent parameters that best reconstruct the test
image but under a new perspective. We optimize the parameters with the supervision of pretrained deep identity features through our end-to-end differentiable framework. We
demonstrate excellent results in photorealistic and identity
preserving 3D face reconstructions and achieve for the first
time, to the best of our knowledge, facial texture reconstruction with high-frequency details.1

1. Introduction
Estimation of the 3D facial surface and other intrinsic
components of the face from single images (e.g., albedo,
etc.) is a very important problem at the intersection of
computer vision and machine learning with countless applications (e.g., face recognition, face editing, virtual reality). It is now twenty years from the seminal work of Blanz
and Vetter [4] which showed that it is possible to reconstruct shape and albedo by solving a non-linear optimiza1 Project page: https://github.com/barisgecer/ganfit

11155

