ArcFace: Additive Angular Margin Loss for Deep Face Recognition
Jiankang Deng * 1,2,3
Jia Guo * 2
1
Imperial College London

Niannan Xue1
2
InsightFace

Stefanos Zafeiriou1,3
3
FaceSoft

{j.deng16, n.xue15, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk , guojia@gmail.com

Abstract
One of the main challenges in feature learning using
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) for largescale face recognition is the design of appropriate loss
functions that can enhance the discriminative power. Centre loss penalises the distance between deep features and
their corresponding class centres in the Euclidean space
to achieve intra-class compactness. SphereFace assumes
that the linear transformation matrix in the last fully connected layer can be used as a representation of the class
centres in the angular space and therefore penalises the angles between deep features and their corresponding weights
in a multiplicative way. Recently, a popular line of research
is to incorporate margins in well-established loss functions
in order to maximise face class separability. In this paper,
we propose an Additive Angular Margin Loss (ArcFace) to
obtain highly discriminative features for face recognition.
The proposed ArcFace has a clear geometric interpretation due to its exact correspondence to geodesic distance
on a hypersphere. We present arguably the most extensive
experimental evaluation against all recent state-of-the-art
face recognition methods on ten face recognition benchmarks which includes a new large-scale image database
with trillions of pairs and a large-scale video dataset. We
show that ArcFace consistently outperforms the state of the
art and can be easily implemented with negligible computational overhead. To facilitate future research, code
has been made available at: https://github.com/
deepinsight/insightface

1. Introduction
Face representation using Deep Convolutional Neural
Network (DCNN) embedding is the method of choice for
face recognition [30, 31, 27, 22]. DCNNs map the face image, typically after a pose normalisation step [42], into a
* Equal contributions.
InsightFace is a nonprofit Github project for 2D and 3D face analysis.

Figure 1. Based on the centre [15] and feature [35] normalisation,
all identities are distributed on a hypersphere. To enhance intraclass compactness and inter-class discrepancy, we consider four
kinds of Geodesic Distance (GDis) constraint. (A) Margin-Loss:
insert a geodesic distance margin between the sample and centres. (B) Intra-Loss: decrease the geodesic distance between the
sample and the corresponding centre. (C) Inter-Loss: increase the
geodesic distance between different centres. (D) Triplet-Loss: insert a geodesic distance margin between triplet samples. In this
paper, we propose an Additive Angular Margin Loss (ArcFace),
which is exactly corresponded to the geodesic distance (Arc) margin penalty in (A), to enhance the discriminative power of face
recognition model. Extensive experimental results show that the
strategy of (A) is most effective.

feature that should have small intra-class and large interclass distance.
There are two main lines of research to train DCNNs for
face recognition. Some train a multi-class classifier which
can separate different identities in the training set, such by
using a softmax classifier [31, 22, 3], and the others learn
directly an embedding, such as the triplet loss [27]. Based
on the large-scale training data and the elaborate DCNN architectures, both the softmax-loss-based methods [3] and
the triplet-loss-based methods [27] can obtain excellent performance on face recognition. However, both the softmax
loss and the triplet loss have some drawbacks. For the softmax loss: (1) the size of the linear transformation matrix
W ∈ Rd×n increases linearly with the identities number
n; (2) the learned features are separable for the closed-set
classification problem but not discriminative enough for the
open-set face recognition problem. For the triplet loss: (1)
14690

