Fully Automatic Video Colorization with Self-Regularization and Diversity
Chenyang Lei
HKUST

Abstract
We present a fully automatic approach to video colorization with self-regularization and diversity. Our model contains a colorization network for video frame colorization
and a refinement network for spatiotemporal color refinement. Without any labeled data, both networks can be
trained with self-regularized losses defined in bilateral and
temporal space. The bilateral loss enforces color consistency between neighboring pixels in a bilateral space and
the temporal loss imposes constraints between corresponding pixels in two nearby frames. While video colorization
is a multi-modal problem, our method uses a perceptual
loss with diversity to differentiate various modes in the solution space. Perceptual experiments demonstrate that our
approach outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on fully
automatic video colorization.

1. Introduction
There exist numerous classic films and videos in blackand-white. It is desirable for people to watch a colorful
movie rather than a grayscale one. Gone with the Wind in
1939 is one of the first colorized films and is also the alltime highest-grossing film adjusted for inflation [1]. Image
and video colorization can also assist other computer vision
applications such as visual understanding [17] and object
tracking [29].
Video colorization is highly challenging due to its multimodality in the solution space and the requirement of global
spatiotemporal consistency. First, it is not reasonable to recover the ground-truth color in various cases. For example,
given a grayscale image of a balloon, we can not predict the
correct color of the balloon because it may be yellow, blue,
and so on. Instead of recovering the underlying color, we
aim to generate a set of colorized results that look natural.
Second, it often does not matter what color we assign to a
region (i.e. a balloon), but the whole region should be spatially consistent. Third, video colorization is also inherently
more challenging than single image colorization since temporal coherence should be also enforced. Image colorization methods usually do not generalize to video coloriza-

Qifeng Chen
HKUST

tion. In Figure 1, we show some results of our approach and
two state-of-the-art image colorization methods on classic
film colorization.
Colorization of black-and-white images has been well
studied in the literature [18, 6, 32, 16]. Colorization methods in the early days are mostly user-guided approaches that
solve an objective function to propagate user input color
scribbles to other regions [18, 25]. These approaches require users to provide sufficient scribbles on the grayscale
image. On the other hand, researchers explore automatic
image colorization with deep learning models. Some deep
learning based approach for image colorization defines a
classification based loss function with hundreds of discrete
sampled points in chrominance space [32, 16]. However,
the colorized image often exhibits evident discretization artifacts. To tackle this challenge, we suggest using a perceptual loss function combined with diversity. Our approach
does not rely on sampling a discrete set of color in chrominance space and thus avoids discretization artifacts in the
colorized video.
We may apply image colorization methods to colorize
video frames independently, but the overall colorized video
tends to be temporally inconsistent. Recently, Lai et al. [15]
proposed a framework to enhance temporal coherence of a
synthesized video where each frame is processed independently by an image processing algorithm such as colorization. However, this is a post-processing step and its performance is dependant on an image colorization approach that
does not utilize multiple-frame information. Propagationbased video colorization methods require some colorized
frames as reference to propagate the color of the given reference frames to the whole video [23, 29], but colorizing
some frames also requires non-trivial human effort. Also,
the quality of the colorized video frames decays quickly
when the future frames are different from the reference
frames. In this paper, we study the problem of automatic
video colorization without both labeled data and user guidance.
We propose a self-regularized approach to automatic
video colorization with diversity. We regularize our model
with nearest neighbors in both bilateral and temporal
spaces, and train the model with a diversity loss to dif13753

