Led3D: A Lightweight and Efficient Deep Approach to Recognizing Low-quality
3D Faces

1

Guodong Mu1 , Di Huang1∗ , Guosheng Hu2 , Jia Sun1 , and Yunhong Wang1
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, China
2
Anyvision, Queens Road, Belfast, UK
{muyouhang,dhuang,sunjia,yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn,huguosheng100@gmail.com

Abstract
Due to the intrinsic invariance to pose and illumination
changes, 3D Face Recognition (FR) has a promising potential in the real world. 3D FR using high-quality faces,
which are of high resolutions and with smooth surfaces,
have been widely studied. However, research on that with
low-quality input is limited, although it involves more applications. In this paper, we focus on 3D FR using lowquality data, targeting an efficient and accurate deep learning solution. To achieve this, we work on two aspects: (1)
designing a lightweight yet powerful CNN; (2) generating
finer and bigger training data. For (1), we propose a MultiScale Feature Fusion (MSFF) module and a Spatial Attention Vectorization (SAV) module to build a compact and discriminative CNN. For (2), we propose a data processing
system including point-cloud recovery, surface refinement,
and data augmentation (with newly proposed shape jittering and shape scaling). We conduct extensive experiments
on Lock3DFace and achieve state-of-the-art results, outperforming many heavy CNNs such as VGG-16 and ResNet34. In addition, our model can operate at a very high speed
(136 fps) on Jetson TX2, and the promising accuracy and efficiency reached show its great applicability on edge/mobile
devices.

1. Introduction
Face recognition (FR) is a very hot topic in the computer
vision community. Recently, 2D FR has achieved great success with the development of deep learning techniques and
the availability of big visual data. For example, the well
known FaceNet [30], which is built based on the Inception
architecture and the triplet loss, makes use of 200M faces
of 8M identities for training and reports a 99.63% accuracy
on the LFW [14] benchmark, surpassing human-level performance. Despite 2D FR has been widely applied to many
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Visualization of 3D faces. The FRGC v2 (first row) and
Bosphorus (second row) databases provide high-quality data while
the Lock3DFace (last row) dataset offers low-quality ones, with
averagely 53K, 27K and 9K points in each model respectively.

specific situations in the real world, its robustness to more
challenging cases, e.g. large head poses and extreme lighting conditions, remains problematic.
Unlike 2D face images, 3D face models deliver shape
information, which is intrinsically invariant to pose and illumination1 changes. During the last two decades, a large
number of 3D solutions have been proposed, and the accuracies on public benchmarks, e.g. FRGC v2 [26], Bosphorus [29], and BU-3DFE [36] have been consistently promoted. More importantly, they have demonstrated the potential to handle the issues unsolved in the 2D domain. For
instance, high scores are reached on the samples with serious data missing due to self-occlusions incurred by large
poses (i.e. ≥ 45◦ ) [22, 6, 11], and a more recent work [40]
presents a deep model based approach, which boosts the
state of the art precisions on many major databases close to
full marks. However, the overwhelming majority of current
1 Some 3D imaging devices partially depend on RGB cameras and the
data are not really invariant to illumination changes.

5773

