Deep Robust Subjective Visual Property Prediction in Crowdsourcing
Qianqian Xu1
Xiaochun Cao2,3

Zhiyong Yang2,3
Yangbangyan Jiang2,3
Qingming Huang1,4,5
Yuan Yao6

1

Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
State Key Laboratory of Info. Security (SKLOIS), Inst. of Info. Engin., CAS, Beijing, 100093, China
3
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,100049, China
4
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 101408, China
5
BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
6
Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
2

xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn

{yangzhiyong,jiangyangbangyan,caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn

qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
The problem of estimating subjective visual properties
(SVP) of images (e.g., Shoes A is more comfortable than
B) is gaining rising attention. Due to its highly subjective
nature, different annotators often exhibit different interpretations of scales when adopting absolute value tests. Therefore, recent investigations turn to collect pairwise comparisons via crowdsourcing platforms. However, crowdsourcing data usually contains outliers. For this purpose, it is
desired to develop a robust model for learning SVP from
crowdsourced noisy annotations. In this paper, we construct a deep SVP prediction model which not only leads
to better detection of annotation outliers but also enables
learning with extremely sparse annotations. Specifically,
we construct a comparison multi-graph based on the collected annotations, where different labeling results correspond to edges with different directions between two vertexes. Then, we propose a generalized deep probabilistic framework which consists of an SVP prediction module
and an outlier modeling module that work collaboratively
and are optimized jointly. Extensive experiments on various benchmark datasets demonstrate that our new approach
guarantees promising results.

1. Introduction
In recent years, estimating subjective visual properties
(SVP) of images [9, 19, 24] is gaining rising attention in
computer vision community. SVP measures a user’s subjective perception and feeling, with respect to a certain property in images/videos. For example, estimating properties
of consumer goods such as shininess of shoes [9] improves
customer experiences on online shopping websites; and es-

yuany@ust.hk

timating interestingness [8] from images/videos would be
helpful for media-sharing websites (e.g., Youtube). Measuring and ensuring good estimation of SVP is thus highly
subjective in nature. Traditional methods usually adopt absolute value to specify a rating from 1 to 5 (or, 1 to 10)
to grade the property of a stimulus. For example, in image/video interestingness prediction, 5 being the most interesting, 1 being the least interesting. However, since by
definition these properties are subjective, different raters often exhibit different interpretations of the scales and as a result the annotations of different people on the same sample
can vary hugely. Moreover, it is unable to concretely define
the concept of scale (for example, what a scale 3 means for
an image), especially without any common reference point.
Therefore, recent investigations turn to an alternative approach with pairwise comparison. In a pairwise comparison test, an individual is simply asked to compare two stimuli simultaneously, and votes which one has the stronger
property based on his/her perception. Therefore individual
decision process in pairwise comparison is simpler than in
the typical absolute value tests, as the multiple-scale rating
is reduced to a dichotomous choice. It not only promises
assessments that are easier and faster to obtain with less demanding task for raters, but also yields more reliable feedback with less personal scale bias in practice. However, a
shortcoming of pairwise comparison is that it has more expensive sampling complexity than the absolute value tests,
since the number of pairs grows quadratically with the number of items to be ranked.
With the growth of crowdsourcing [2] platforms such as
MTurk, InnoCentive, CrowdFlower, CrowdRank, and AllOurIdeas, recent studies thus resort to using crowdsourcing
tools to tackle the cost problem. However, since the participants in the crowdsourcing experiments often work in the
18993

