Large-Scale Few-Shot Learning: Knowledge Transfer With Class Hierarchy
Aoxue Li1∗ Tiange Luo1∗ Zhiwu Lu2 Tao Xiang3 Liwei Wang1
1
School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
2
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China
3
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Surrey, UK
{lax,luotg,wanglw}@pku.edu.cn, luzhiwu@ruc.edu.cn, t.xiang@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract

1. Introduction
In the past five years, the object recognition research has
focused on large-scale recognition problems such as the ImageNet ILSVRC challenges [22]. Deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) based models [24, 8] have achieved
super-human performance on the ILSVRC 1K recognition
task. However, most existing object recognition models,
particularly those DCNN based ones, require hundreds of
image samples to be collected for each object class; many of
the object classes are rare and it is very hard to collect sufficient training samples, even with social media. Therefore, it
is highly desirable to develop object recognition models that
require only few training samples/shots per object class.
To overcome this challenge, meta-learning based fewshot learning (FSL) [28, 21, 7, 20, 19] has become topical.
∗ Equal contribution.

SGM

PPA

LSD

Ours

65

Top-5 Accuracy (%)

Recently, large-scale few-shot learning (FSL) becomes
topical. It is discovered that, for a large-scale FSL problem with 1,000 classes in the source domain, a strong baseline emerges, that is, simply training a deep feature embedding model using the aggregated source classes and performing nearest neighbor (NN) search using the learned
features on the target classes. The state-of-the-art largescale FSL methods struggle to beat this baseline, indicating intrinsic limitations on scalability. To overcome the
challenge, we propose a novel large-scale FSL model by
learning transferable visual features with the class hierarchy which encodes the semantic relations between source
and target classes. Extensive experiments show that the
proposed model significantly outperforms not only the NN
baseline but also the state-of-the-art alternatives. Furthermore, we show that the proposed model can be easily extended to the large-scale zero-shot learning (ZSL) problem
and also achieves the state-of-the-art results.

NN

60
55
50
45
40
35
30
1

2

3

4

5

K-shot

Figure 1. Comparative results for large-scale FSL on the ImNet
dataset [11]. The top-5 accuracy over target class samples is used
as the evaluation metric. It can be observed that the state-of-the-art
large-scale FSL methods struggle to beat the simple NN baseline,
suggesting intrinsic limitations on scalability. Notations: NN –
nearest neighbor (NN) search performed in a learned feature space
using K samples per target class as the references; SGM – FSL
with the squared gradient magnitude (SGM) loss [7]; PPA – parameter prediction from activations (PPA) [20]; LSD – large-scale
diffusion (LSD) [2]; Ours – the proposed model.

FSL is inspired by the fact that human can easily recognize novel objects with a few samples thanks to the ability
to knowledge transfer. Similarly, in the FSL problem, we
are provided with a set of source classes and a set of target
classes under the setting that: (1) The target classes have no
overlap with the source classes in the label space; (2) Each
source class has sufficient labeled samples, whereas each
target class has only a few labeled samples. FSL thus aims
to transfer knowledge from the source to target classes.
The focus of this work is on the large-scale FSL setting with a large number of source classes provided. This
is very different from the most widely used meta-learning
benchmarks such as mini-ImageNet [29] which contains 64
source classes with 600 samples in each class. Yet it is more
realistic – after all, we have 1,000s of classes in ImageNet

7212

