Taking A Closer Look at Domain Shift:
Category-level Adversaries for Semantics Consistent Domain Adaptation
Yawei Luo1,2 , Liang Zheng5 , Tao Guan1,6 , Junqing Yu1,4 ∗, Yi Yang2,3
1

School of Computer Science & Technology, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
2
CAI, University of Technology Sydney 3 Baidu Research
4
Center of Network and Computation, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
5
Research School of Computer Science, Australian National University 6 Farsee2 Tech. Co.

Abstract
We consider the problem of unsupervised domain adaptation in semantic segmentation. A key in this campaign
consists in reducing the domain shift, i.e., enforcing the
data distributions of the two domains to be similar. One of
the common strategies is to align the marginal distribution
in the feature space through adversarial learning. However, this global alignment strategy does not consider the
category-level joint distribution. A possible consequence
of such global movement is that some categories which are
originally well aligned between the source and target may be
incorrectly mapped, thus leading to worse segmentation results in target domain. To address this problem, we introduce
a category-level adversarial network, aiming to enforce local
semantic consistency during the trend of global alignment.
Our idea is to take a close look at the category-level joint
distribution and align each class with an adaptive adversarial loss. Specifically, we reduce the weight of the adversarial
loss for category-level aligned features while increasing the
adversarial force for those poorly aligned. In this process,
we decide how well a feature is category-level aligned between source and target by a co-training approach. In two
domain adaptation tasks, i.e., GTA5 → Cityscapes and SYNTHIA → Cityscapes, we validate that the proposed method
matches the state of the art in segmentation accuracy.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to assign each pixel of a
photograph to a semantic class label. Currently, the achievement is at the price of large amount of dense pixel-level
∗ Corresponding author (yjqing@hust.edu.cn).

This work was done when Yawei Luo (royalvane@hust.edu.cn) was a
visiting student at University of Technology Sydney. Part of this work was
done when Yi Yang (yee.i.yang@gmail.com) was visiting Baidu Research
during his Professional Experience Program. The code is publicly available
at https://github.com/RoyalVane/CLAN.

Source sample, class A

Source sample, class B

Classifier boundary

Target sample, class A
C

Target sample, class B

Adversarial loss
C

Source

Source

Target

C1
C2

Target
(a) Classical adversarial loss
C1

C2

Source

Source

Target
Target
(b) Self-adaptive adversarial loss

Figure 1. (Best viewed in color.) Illustration of traditional and the
proposed adversarial learning. The size of the solid gray arrow
represents the weight of the adversarial loss. (a) Traditional adversarial learning ignores the semantic consistency when pursuing the
marginal distribution alignment. As a result, the global movement
might cause the well-aligned features (class A) to be mapped onto
different joint distributions (negative transfer). (b) The proposed
self-adaptive adversarial learning reweights the adversarial loss for
each feature by a local alignment score. Our method reduces the
influence of the adversaries when discovers a high semantic alignment score on a feature, and vice versa. As is shown, the proposed
strategy encourages a category-level joint distribution alignment
for both class A and class B.

annotations obtained by expensive human labor [4, 23, 27].
An alternative would be resorting to simulated data, such
as computer generated scenes [31, 32], so that unlimited
amount of labels are made available. However, models
trained with the simulated images do not generalize well
to realistic domains. The reason lies in the different data
distributions of the two domains, typically known as do-

2507

