Practical Coding Function Design for Time-of-Flight Imaging
Felipe Gutierrez-Barragan, Syed Azer Reza, Andreas Velten, Mohit Gupta
University of Wisconsin-Madison
{fgutierrez3, sreza2, velten}@wisc.edu, mohitg@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
The depth resolution of a continuous-wave time-of-flight
(CW-ToF) imaging system is determined by its coding functions. Recently, there has been growing interest in the design of new high-performance CW-ToF coding functions.
However, these functions are typically designed in a hardware agnostic manner, i.e., without considering the practical device limitations, such as bandwidth, source power,
digital (binary) function generation. Therefore, despite theoretical improvements, practical implementation of these
functions remains a challenge. We present a constrained
optimization approach for designing practical coding functions that adhere to hardware constraints. The optimization problem is non-convex with a large search space and
no known globally optimal solutions. To make the problem
tractable, we design an iterative, alternating least-squares
algorithm, along with convex relaxation of the constraints.
Using this approach, we design high-performance coding
functions that can be implemented on existing hardware
with minimal modifications. We demonstrate the performance benefits of the resulting functions via extensive simulations and a hardware prototype.

1. Introduction
Time-of-Flight (ToF) cameras are fast becoming the preferred depth sensing technology in several applications, including autonomous navigation, augmented reality and user
interfaces. Broadly, ToF cameras can be categorized in
two ways: Impulse ToF (I-ToF), and continuous-wave ToF
(CW-ToF). I-ToF systems estimate depths by emitting a
high-powered laser pulse and measuring its time-of-flight
using a high-speed detector. Typical I-ToF systems (e.g. LiDAR) need high-cost components such as high-speed lasers
and sensors. In contrast, CW-ToF cameras are low-power
and low-cost (e.g. Kinect), and estimate depths by modulating the light intensity and decoding the reflected signal.
Current CW-ToF cameras have limited depth resolution,
especially in low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) scenarios.
While the resolution can be increased using high-powered
light sources and longer exposure times, this is not always
possible. Given a fixed energy and exposure time budget,
the depth resolution of a CW-ToF system depends on the
coding functions (i.e. light modulation and sensor demodu-

lation functions). Most existing CW-ToF systems use sinusoid [22] or square [12, 24] functions, which, although easy
to implement, have low depth resolution.
Recently, there has been growing interest in designing
high-performance CW-ToF codes [1, 15, 27], albeit in a
hardware agnostic setting. These works propose novel coding functions, which, although theoretically interesting, do
not adhere to practical constraints imposed by current devices. For example, these coding functions [15, 1] require
impulse modulation with infinite peak power and bandwidth, and continuous, analog demodulation functions. In
practice, the space of physically realizable coding functions is highly constrained. Specifically, although high-cost
lasers can emit ultra-short pulses with large peak power,
most light sources employed in CW-ToF cameras (e.g., laser
diodes, LEDs) have finite peak power. Furthermore, most
components of the system have a limited bandwidth. Additionally, most CW-ToF systems use digital square/binary
functions for light modulation and sensor demodulation,
and may need considerable hardware modifications to support arbitrary continuous functions. Finally, binary functions are also preferred because of their applicability to 2bucket sensors used in commercial CW-ToF cameras [29].
This leads to a trade-off in CW-ToF code design: Conventional coding schemes, such as sinusoid and square, adhere to practical constraints, but have low performance.
On the other hand, recent schemes promise higher performance, but, may not be physically realizable on current
hardware. In this paper, we consider the following question: Can we design CW-ToF coding functions that adhere
to hardware constraints, and yet, achieve high performance
in a broad range of imaging scenarios? We consider three
important constraints: Limited peak source power, limited
bandwidth, and binary coding functions. 1
To address this question, we pose the practical CW-ToF
code design as a constrained optimization problem. This
is challenging due to the large space of coding functions
and the non-convex constraints. In order to keep the problem tractable, we consider pre-designed correlation functions, which are factorized into physically realizable modulation and demodulation functions. While this reduces the
1 Binary functions, theoretically, have infinite bandwidth. We consider
both binary and bandwidth constraints simultaneously by assuming that the
bandwidth constraints are applied while being passed through the imaging
system, after the binary coding functions are generated.

1566

