Robust Video Stabilization by Optimization in CNN Weight Space
Jiyang Yu
University of California, San Diego

Ravi Ramamoorthi
University of California, San Diego

jiy173@eng.ucsd.edu

ravir@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract

the physics and directly optimize the appearance change of the
frames in the results so that the video is stabilized. To model
the appearance change, dense optical flow fields between consecutive frames are needed. We seek to apply pixel-wise offsets to these optical flow fields, and smooth the motion of
each pixel. However, modeling the frames with optical flow
brings three major challenges. First, modern videos are usually high-definition. This means that the number of pixels in
each frame is large. As the length of video grows, optimization quickly becomes intractable since too many pixel motions
need to be solved. (For example, for a 100-frame standard 480P
video(854×480), the number of motion vectors to be solved is
854 ∗ 480 ∗ 100 = 4.1 × 107 ). Second, as the problem size
becomes large, the energy landscape of the non-convex optimization becomes complex. General gradient-based optimization algorithms may easily get stuck in local minima and yield
unsatisfactory results. Third, the performance of the video stabilization is affected by the quality of optical flow. Local errors
in the optical flow map will also be blindly treated as actual
pixel motions, causing artifacts in the final results. Therefore,
the regularization needs to be carefully designed to enforce spatial consistency and maintain robustness to the errors in the optical flow field.

We propose a novel robust video stabilization method. Unlike traditional video stabilization techniques that involve complex motion models, we directly model the appearance change
of the frames as the dense optical flow field of consecutive
frames. We introduce a new formulation of the video stabilization task based on first principles, which leads to a large scale
non-convex problem. This problem is hard to solve, so previous
optical flow based approaches have resorted to heuristics. In
this paper, we propose a novel optimization routine that transfers this problem into the convolutional neural network parameter domain. While we exploit the general benefits of CNNs,
including standard gradient-based optimization techniques, our
method is a new approach to using CNNs purely as an optimizer
rather than learning from data. Our method trains the CNN
from scratch on each specific input example, and intentionally
overfits the CNN parameters to produce the best result on the
input example. By solving the problem in the CNN weight space
rather than directly for image pixels, we make it a viable formulation for video stabilization. Our method produces both visually and quantitatively better results than previous work, and
is robust in situations acknowledged as limitations in current
state-of-the-art methods.

Instead of trying to directly solve for the pixel-wise warp
field, we propose a novel method that optimizes in the space
of neural network parameters. Note that unlike standard CNN
approaches, we don’t use large datasets or learning of parameters a-priori. We train the CNN from scratch on a single input
video. In fact, there is no traditional training in our method; the
CNN is simply used as a robust way to do global optimization
with a physically-based objective function. The other important difference from traditional CNN training is that we seek to
overfit the data as much as possible since our sole goal is to
produce the best results for the single input video. By optimizing the parameters of the CNN rather than directly for pixels in
a single test video, we make the dense warp field optimization
tractable. A similar idea has been employed in image generation and restoration by Ulyanov et al.[27], but is applied by us
for the first time in video stabilization. This idea may be applicable in many other image and video processing applications
where the physically-based problem is intractable for traditional
optimization algorithms.

1. Introduction
Video stabilization has been an important part of both professional and amateur video processing tools like Adobe Premiere,
After Effects and Deshaker. There are also numerous researches
on video stabilization. These works are typically summarized
into two categories according to the dimensionality of the model
used to interpret the frame motion. The 2D methods analyze the
video frame motion by tracking features in 2D image space. The
frame motion is modeled as a full-frame 2D image transformation like Matsushita et al.[22] or a grid of local homographies
like Liu et al.[21]. 3D methods seek to explore the 3D location of feature points in the scene while calculating the camera
pose in 3D space. Works following this direction include Liu
et al.[18], Bhat et al.[1] and Sun[25]. However, all previous
methods involve various heuristics. In real scenarios, complex
effects (e.g. motion blur, occlusion, parallax) may unexpectedly
break the assumptions in these methods and therefore produce
artifacts in the results.
It would be ideal if we could make no assumptions about

The pipeline of our method is shown in Fig. 1. We first
pre-stabilize the video to reduce the frame motion (Appendix
A). We use optical flow between consecutive frames to generate

3800

