Why ReLU networks yield high-confidence predictions far away from
the training data and how to mitigate the problem
Matthias Hein
University of Tübingen

Maksym Andriushchenko
Saarland University

Abstract
Classifiers used in the wild, in particular for safetycritical systems, should not only have good generalization properties but also should know when they don’t
know, in particular make low confidence predictions far
away from the training data. We show that ReLU type
neural networks which yield a piecewise linear classifier function fail in this regard as they produce almost
always high confidence predictions far away from the
training data. For bounded domains like images we
propose a new robust optimization technique similar
to adversarial training which enforces low confidence
predictions far away from the training data. We show
that this technique is surprisingly effective in reducing
the confidence of predictions far away from the training
data while maintaining high confidence predictions and
test error on the original classification task compared
to standard training.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have recently obtained state-of-theart performance in several application domains like object recognition and speech recognition. They have become the de facto standard for many learning tasks.
Despite this great success story and very good prediction performance there are also aspects of neural networks which are undesirable. One property which is
naturally expected from any classifier is that it should
know when it does not know or said more directly:
far away from the training data a classifier should not
make high confidence predictions. This is particularly important in safety-critical applications like autonomous driving or medical diagnosis systems where
such an input should either lead to the fact that other
redundant sensors are used or that a human doctor is
asked to check the diagnosis. It is thus an important
property of a classifier which however has not received
much attention despite the fact that it seems to be a
minimal requirement for any classifier.

Julian Bitterwolf
University of Tübingen

There have been many cases reported where high
confidence predictions are made far away from the
training data by neural networks, e.g. fooling images
[30], for out-of-distribution images [15] or in a medical
diagnosis task [23]. Moreover, it has been observed
that, even on the original task, neural networks often produce overconfident predictions [12]. A related
but different problem are adversarial samples where
very small modifications of the input can change the
classifier decision [34, 11, 32]. Apart from methods
which provide robustness guarantees for neural networks [14, 37, 31, 26] which give still only reasonable
guarantees for small networks, up to our knowledge the
only approach which has not been broken again [6, 5, 2]
is adversarial training [25] using robust optimization
techniques.
While several methods have been proposed to adjust
overconfident predictions on the true input distribution
using softmax calibration [12], ensemble techniques [20]
or uncertainty estimation using dropout [10], only recently the detection of out-of-distribution inputs [15]
has been tackled. The existing approaches basically either use adjustment techniques of the softmax outputs
[9, 24] by temperature rescaling [12] or they use a generative model like a VAE or GAN to model boundary inputs of the true distribution [22, 36] in order to discriminate in-distribution from out-of-distribution inputs directly in the training process. While all these approaches are significant steps towards obtaining more
reliable classifiers, the approaches using a generative
model have been recently challenged by [28, 16] which
report that generative approaches can produce highly
confident density estimates for inputs outside of the
class they are supposed to model. Moreover, note that
the quite useful models for confidence calibration on
the input distribution like [10, 12, 20] cannot be used
for out-of-distribution detection as it has been observed
in [23]. Another approach is the introduction of a rejection option into the classifier [35, 4], in order to avoid
decisions the classifier is not certain about.
In this paper we will show that for the class of ReLU

41

