On Finding Gray Pixels
Yanlin Qian1,3 , Joni-Kristian Kämäräinen1 , Jarno Nikkanen2 , Jiri Matas1,3
1
Computing Sciences, Tampere University 2 Intel Finland
3
Center for Machine Perception, Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract
We propose a novel grayness index for finding gray pixels and demonstrate its effectiveness and efficiency in illumination estimation. The grayness index, GI in short,
is derived using the Dichromatic Reflection Model and is
learning-free. GI allows to estimate one or multiple illumination sources in color-biased images. On standard singleillumination and multiple-illumination estimation benchmarks, GI outperforms state-of-the-art statistical methods
and many recent deep methods. GI is simple and fast, written in a few dozen lines of code, processing a 1080p image
in ∼ 0.4 seconds with a non-optimized Matlab code.

1. Introduction
The human eye has the ability to adapt to changes in
imaging conditions and illumination of scenes. The wellestablished computer vision problem of color constancy,
CC in short, is trying to endow consumer digital cameras
with the same ability. With “perfect” color constancy, finding a gray pixel is not a problem at all – just checking
whether the RGB values are equal. However, given a colorbiased image, detecting gray pixels, i.e. pixels observing
an achromatic surface, is a hard and ill-posed problem –
imagine a white piece of paper illuminated with a cyan light
source; or is it a cyan paper under white light? On the
other hand, “perfect” gray pixels in an image indicate that
color constancy is satisfied. Thus, from this point onward,
we treat finding gray pixels and color constancy as equivalent problems (see also Fig. 1). Color constancy problem
arises in many computer vision and image processing applications, such as computational photography, intrinsic image decomposition, semantic segmentation, scene rendering, object tracking, etc. [18].
For decades, learning-free methods, the classical approach to color constancy, have relied on the assumption that the illumination color is constant over the whole
scene and can therefore be estimated by global processing [6, 2, 38, 17, 19, 41, 12]. This approach has the advantage of being independent to the acquisition device, since

Figure 1: Gray and non-gray image pixels (left). The Grayness Index (GI) map (middle, blue denotes high grayness
value). The global (top right) and spatially-variant illumination color (right) estimated from the GI map.
the illumination properties are estimated on a per-image basis. Recently, state-of-the-art learning-based methods, including convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have consistently outperformed statistical methods when validated
on specific datasets [9, 25, 22, 24, 29]. We argue that
learning-based methods depend on the assumption that the
statistical distribution of the illumination and/or scene content is similar in training and test images. In other words,
learning-based methods assume that imaging and illumination conditions of a given image can be inferred from previous training examples, thus becoming heavily dependent
on the training data [21].
In this paper, we focus on the learning-free approach.
For a practical example, consider the case when a user retrieves a linear-RGB (gamma corrected) image from the
web and wants to correct its colors. In this scenario, in
which the used CC method has never seen images from that
camera, illumination estimation and color correction must
be performed without strong assumptions on the imaging
device or the captured scene. We experimentally show that
in this setting, learning-free methods show more promising and robust results as compared to learning-based methods. As a result, there is a great need for learning-free approaches that are insensitive to parameters such as the camera and imaging process of captured images.
In most camera sensors, gray pixels are rendered gray
in linear-RGB image under standard neutral illumination,
making grayness a potential measure to estimate the color

8062

