Learning Structure-And-Motion-Aware Rolling Shutter Correction
Bingbing Zhuang1 Quoc-Huy Tran2 Pan Ji2 Loong-Fah Cheong1 Manmohan Chandraker2,3
1

National University of Singapore

2

3

NEC Labs America

University of California, San Diego

Abstract
An exact method of correcting the rolling shutter (RS)
effect requires recovering the underlying geometry, i.e. the
scene structures and the camera motions between scanlines
or between views. However, the multiple-view geometry
for RS cameras is much more complicated than its global
shutter (GS) counterpart, with various degeneracies. In this
paper, we first make a theoretical contribution by showing
that RS two-view geometry is degenerate in the case of pure
translational camera motion. In view of the complex RS
geometry, we then propose a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN)-based method which learns the underlying geometry (camera motion and scene structure) from just a single
RS image and perform RS image correction. We call our
method structure-and-motion-aware RS correction because
it reasons about the concealed motions between the scanlines as well as the scene structure. Our method learns from
a large-scale dataset synthesized in a geometrically meaningful way where the RS effect is generated in a manner
consistent with the camera motion and scene structure. In
extensive experiments, our method achieves superior performance compared to other state-of-the-art methods for single
image RS correction and subsequent Structure from Motion
(SfM) applications.

1. Introduction
Many consumer cameras such as webcams or mobile
phones employ CMOS sensors due to their cost advantage.
However, they come with the limitation of operating on a
rolling shutter (RS) mechanism. In contrast to global shutter
(GS), which exposes all rows of the sensor array at the same
time, RS exposes them on a row-by-row basis from top to
bottom with a constant time delay between consecutive rows.
In the presence of camera motion during image capture, the
delay between the exposure of the first row and last row can
cause significant distortions in the captured image, resulting
in deviation from the pinhole camera model [16].
Being a pure geometric distortion, the RS effect can be
corrected rigorously by recovering the underlying geometry

Structure-And-Motion-Aware
RS Correction Network
Synthesized RS
Camera Motions

RS Camera Motion

Synthesized RS
Depth Maps

RS Depth Map

Structure-And-Motion-Aware
RS Distortion Rendering

GS Images

Rectification

GS Depth
Maps
Synthesized RS Images

Training

Real RS Image

Rectified Image

Testing

Figure 1. Overview of our approach. From a set of GS images and
corresponding GS depth maps, we generate synthetic RS images
with corresponding RS camera motions and RS depth maps for
training our network. At testing, given a single real RS image, our
network predicts an accurate RS camera motion and RS depth map,
which are used for correcting RS effects in the input image.

(i.e. camera motion and 3D structure). However, due to the
extra unknown parameters arising from the changes in the
per-scanline camera poses during the exposure period, the geometric problem for RS cameras is often more complicated
than its GS counterpart [3, 8, 18]. In particular, two-view geometry of RS cameras requires 44 2D point correspondences
to get a linear solution [8], making it generally intractable
in practice. Thus, method that uses two-view geometry to
remove the RS effect has to impose special constraints, e.g.
assuming differential camera motions and require non-trivial
readout calibration [43].
Our first contribution in this work is a geometric degeneracy analysis in RS cameras. Note that despite the widespread
deployment of RS cameras in many real-world applications,
analyses on potential degeneracies have only emerged recently [4, 21]. In this paper, we show that RS two-view
geometry is degenerate in cases of pure translational camera
motion. In particular, there are infinitely many combinations
of per-scanline camera poses and scene structures that can
explain the 2D points in both views exactly in terms of reprojection errors. Such degeneracy poses additional challenges
in applying two-view RS geometry for rectification, due to
the prevalence of pure translation in practical applications,
e.g., driving scenarios [13, 10].
Given such challenges using pure geometric method and

4551

