SSN: Learning Sparse Switchable Normalization via SparsestMax
Wenqi Shao1∗, Tianjian Meng2,3∗ , Jingyu Li2 , Ruimao Zhang1 , Yudian Li2 , Xiaogang Wang1 , Ping Luo1
1
CHUK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Research 3 University of Pittsburgh
{weqish@link., ruimao.zhang@, xgwang@ee.}cuhk.edu.hk, tianjian.meng@pitt.edu
{lijingyu, liyudian}@sensetime.com, pluo.lhi@gmail.com

Abstract
Normalization methods improve both optimization and
generalization of ConvNets. To further boost performance,
the recently-proposed switchable normalization (SN) provides a new perspective for deep learning: it learns to select different normalizers for different convolution layers of
a ConvNet. However, SN uses softmax function to learn importance ratios to combine normalizers, leading to redundant computations compared to a single normalizer.
This work addresses this issue by presenting Sparse
Switchable Normalization (SSN) where the importance ratios are constrained to be sparse. Unlike ℓ1 and ℓ0 constraints that impose difficulties in optimization, we turn this
constrained optimization problem into feed-forward computation by proposing SparsestMax, which is a sparse version of softmax. SSN has several appealing properties.
(1) It inherits all benefits from SN such as applicability
in various tasks and robustness to a wide range of batch
sizes. (2) It is guaranteed to select only one normalizer
for each normalization layer, avoiding redundant computations. (3) SSN can be transferred to various tasks in
an end-to-end manner. Extensive experiments show that
SSN outperforms its counterparts on various challenging
benchmarks such as ImageNet, Cityscapes, ADE20K, and
Kinetics. Code is available at https://github.com/
switchablenorms/Sparse_SwitchNorm.

1. Introduction
Normalization techniques [1,9,25,28] such as batch normalization (BN) [9] are indispensable components in deep
neural networks (DNNs) [6,8]. They improve both learning
and generalization capacity of DNNs. Different normalizers have different properties. For example, BN [9] acts as a
regularizer and improves generalization of a deep network
[15]. Layer normalization (LN) [1] accelerates the train∗ Equal contribution.

ing of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) by stabilizing the
hidden states in them. Instance normalization (IN) [25] is
able to filter out complex appearance variances [19]. Group
normalization (GN) [28] achieves stable accuracy in a wide
range of batch sizes.
To further boost performance of DNNs, the recentlyproposed Switchable Normalization (SN) [14] offers a new
viewpoint in deep learning: it learns importance ratios to
compute the weighted average statistics of IN, BN and LN,
so as to learn different combined normalizers for different
convolution layers of a DNN. SN is applicable in various
computer vision problems and robust to a wide range of
batch sizes. Although SN has great successes, it suffers
from slowing the testing speed because each normalization
layer is a combination of multiple normalizers.
To address the above issue, this work proposes Sparse
Switchable Normalization (SSN) that learns to select a single normalizer from a set of normalization methods for each
convolution layer. Instead of using ℓ1 and ℓ0 regularization
to learn such sparse selection, which increases the difficulty
of training deep networks, SSN turns this constrained optimization problem into feed-forward computations, making
auto-differentiation applicable in most popular deep learning frameworks to train deep models with sparse constraints
in an end-to-end manner.
In general, this work has three main contributions.
(1) We present Sparse Switchable Normalization (SSN)
that learns to select a single normalizer for each normalization layer of a deep network to improve generalization ability and speed up inference compared to SN. SSN inherits all
advantages from SN, for example, it is applicable to many
different tasks and robust to various batch sizes without any
sensitive hyper-parameter.
(2) SSN is trained using a novel SparsestMax function
that turns the sparse optimization problem into a simple forward propagation of a deep network. SparsestMax is an extension of softmax with sparsity guarantee and is designed
to be a general technique to learn one-hot distribution. We
provide its geometry interpretations compared to its coun-

443

