Learning Semantic Segmentation from Synthetic Data:
A Geometrically Guided Input-Output Adaptation Approach
Yuhua Chen1
1

Wen Li1∗

Xiaoran Chen1
2

Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich

Luc Van Gool1,2

VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven

{yuhua.chen,liwen,chenx,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
As an alternative to manual pixel-wise annotation, synthetic data has been increasingly used for training semantic
segmentation models. Such synthetic images and semantic labels can be easily generated from virtual 3D environments. In this work, we propose an approach to crossdomain semantic segmentation with the auxiliary geometric
information, which can also be easily obtained from virtual environments. The geometric information is utilized on
two levels for reducing domain shift: on the input level, we
augment the standard image translation network with the
geometric information to translate synthetic images into realistic style; on the output level, we build a task network
which simultaneously performs semantic segmentation and
depth estimation. Meanwhile, adversarial training is applied on the joint output space to preserve the correlation
between semantics and depth. The proposed approach is
validated on two pairs of synthetic to real dataset: Virtual KITTI→KITTI, and SYNTHIA→Cityscapes, where we
achieve a clear performance gain compared to the baselines
and various competing methods, demonstrating the effectiveness of the geometric information for cross-domain semantic segmentation. Our implementation is available at
http://github.com/yuhuayc/gio-ada.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation refers to the task of classifying
each pixel in a given image to its semantic category, e.g.
sky, road, car. The task provides pixel-wise semantic understanding of scenes, and leads to many attractive applications such as robotics, autonomous driving etc. Like many
other visual perception tasks, deep neural networks [28] excel at semantic segmentation when trained on large-scale
labeled datasets. However, building such labeled datasets
for semantic segmentation is not an easy task, in terms of
both collecting and annotating: it is non-trivial to collect
∗ corresponding author.

Source domain

Target domain

Synthetic Image

Real Image
Semantic Label

Depth Map
Semantic Segmentation Model

Figure 1. We aim to adapt a semantic segmentation model learned
from synthetic data to real data. The semantic label is only available in the source domain(synthetic data). Only unlabeled images
are given in the target domain(real data). The domain adaptation
process is strengthened by auxiliary geometric information in synthetic data, which can be obtained easily from virtual environment.

images with large diversity of scenes and conditions; annotating them can be even more costly due to the process of
acquiring pixel-wise labels.
To address these bottlenecks, synthetic data becomes a
charming alternative to supervise semantic segmentation
models. Recent advances in computer graphics make it
possible to automatically generate synthetic images, with
the corresponding per-pixel labels from virtual 3D environments [46, 45]. Training on synthetic data seems to
be a tempting way to reduce annotation cost, however, the
mismatch in appearance often leads to a significant performance drop when the learned models are applied to real
data.
Many works have been proposed to tackle this issue from
the domain distribution shift perspective using various domain adaptation techniques [21, 57, 5]. On the other hand,
image translation techniques [60] have also been widely
used to transform synthetic images into realistic style. This
can be seen as aligning the domain distribution at pixel
level [20]. Nevertheless, these works typically utilize only
synthetic images and the corresponding semantic labels.
However, a significant advantage of synthetic data has been
11841

