Transferable AutoML by Model Sharing over Grouped Datasets
Chao Xue1 , Junchi Yan2 , Rong Yan1 , Stephen M. Chu1 , Yonggang Hu3 , Yonghua Lin1
1
2

IBM Research – China, 3 IBM Systems

Department of CSE and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{xuechao,yanrong,schu,linyh}@cn.ibm.com, yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn, yhu@ca.ibm.com

Abstract
Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) is an active
area on the design of deep neural networks for specific tasks
and datasets. Given the complexity of discovering new network designs, methods for speeding up the search procedure are becoming important. This paper presents a socalled transferable AutoML approach that leverages previously trained models to speed up the search process for new
tasks and datasets. Our approach involves a novel metafeature extraction technique based on the performance of
benchmark models, and a dynamic dataset clustering algorithm based on Markov process and statistical hypothesis
test. As such multiple models can share a common structure while with different learned parameters. The transferable AutoML can either be applied to search from scratch,
search from predefined models, or transfer from basic cells
according to the difficulties of the given datasets. The
experimental results on image classification show notable
speedup in overall search time for multiple datasets with
negligible loss in accuracy.

1. Introduction and Related Work
With the wide adoption of deep networks, identifying
proper network architectures tailored to specific task and
dataset is attractive while it still mainly relies on human
expertise. This has motivated rapidly growing research on
automatically discovering the tailored network models1 for
training in a fully automatic fashion without human intervention, which is referred to as AutoML.
There has been considerable literature on AutoML using methods based on genetic algorithms, random search,
Bayesian optimization, reinforcement learning and continuous differentiable methods. Genetic algorithm based
method [33] is introduced in the last century to find both
architectures and weights. However, they fail to match
1 For deep learning, the meaning of ‘model’ in this paper includes both
the network architecture and learning related hyper-parameters.

the performance of handcrafted networks. [32] proposes
an evolutionary searching methods for generating architectures. The accuracy approaches those of handcrafted models in some cases [14, 41, 15]. Similarly, random search
has been explored to choose hyper-parameters. [6] shows
empirically and theoretically that random search is more efficient than grid search for hyper-parameter optimization.
In particular, the method Hyperband [22] speeds up random
search using an early-stopping strategy to allocate resources
adaptively. Bayesian optimization [5, 34, 16, 12, 7] also
provides a sound foundation for AutoML. One choice for
Bayesian optimization is to model the generalization performance as a sample from a Gaussian process (GP) [34],
which can reach expert-level optimization performance for
many machine learning algorithms. The work in [3] develops a Q-learning agent to pick the modules of the layers in
a neural network architecture. A Neural architecture search
(NAS) method proposed by [42] employs a policy gradient
method to learn networks from a recurrent network and has
achieved good results in tasks in both vision and language.
Recently, the continuous domain differentiable method has
gained interests for AutoML. Unlike evolution or reinforcement learning that is over a discrete search space, DARTS
[25] uses a continuous relaxation of the architecture representation and search the architecture by gradient descent.
However, most existing AutoML approaches require
considerable overhead for model searching. To improve
efficiency, one idea is to share information across different trials. Multi-task Bayesian optimization and Gaussian
processes (GP) are proposed in [35, 8, 4]. In these methods, different datasets are regarded as different tasks, and
the covariances between hyper-parameter and task pairs are
defined. The multi-task Bayesian optimization and Gaussian process show some success with established theoretical
foundation. Meanwhile warm-starting of sequential modelbased algorithm configuration is introduced by [24, 26, 30].
In [24], it exploits one trial’s performance to warm-start its
model configuration on the new job type. The work [26]
uses meta-learning for initializing the Bayesian optimizer
and automated ensemble construction from configurations

9002

