Contrastive Adaptation Network for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Guoliang Kang1 , Lu Jiang2 , Yi Yang1,3∗, Alexander G. Hauptmann4
1
CAI, University of Technology Sydney, 2 Google AI, 3 Baidu Research, 4 Carnegie Mellon University
kgl.prml@gmail.com, lujiang@google.com, Yi.Yang@uts.edu.au, alex@cs.cmu.edu

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) makes predictions for the target domain data while manual annotations
are only available in the source domain. Previous methods
minimize the domain discrepancy neglecting the class information, which may lead to misalignment and poor generalization performance. To address this issue, this paper proposes Contrastive Adaptation Network (CAN) optimizing a
new metric which explicitly models the intra-class domain
discrepancy and the inter-class domain discrepancy. We design an alternating update strategy for training CAN in an
end-to-end manner. Experiments on two real-world benchmarks Office-31 and VisDA-2017 demonstrate that CAN
performs favorably against the state-of-the-art methods and
produces more discriminative features.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in deep neural networks have successfully improved a variety of learning problems [40, 8,
26, 19, 20]. For supervised learning, however, massive labeled training data is still the key to learning an accurate
deep model. Although abundant labels may be available for
a few pre-specified domains, such as ImageNet [7], manual
labels often turn out to be difficult or expensive to obtain
for every ad-hoc target domain or task. The absence of indomain labeled data hinders the application of data-fitting
models in many real-world problems.
In the absence of labeled data from the target domain,
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) methods have
emerged to mitigate the domain shift in data distributions
[2, 1, 5, 37, 30, 18, 3, 17]. It relates to unsupervised learning as it requires manual labels only from the source domain
and zero labels from the target domain. Among the recent
work on UDA, a seminal line of work proposed by Long
et al. [22, 25] aims at minimizing the discrepancy between
the source and target domain in the deep neural network,
where the domain discrepancy is measured by Maximum
∗ Corresponding author. Part of this work was done when Yi Yang was
visiting Baidu Research during his Professional Experience Program.

Previous Methods

Before Adaptation

Abstract

Source:

Target:

Approaching:

Proposed Method

Splitting:

Figure 1. Comparison between previous domain-discrepancy
minimization methods and ours. Left: The domain shift exists between the source and target data before adaptation. Middle: Classagnostic adaptation aligns source and target data at the domainlevel, neglecting the class label of the sample, and hence may lead
to sub-optimal solutions. Consequently, the target samples of one
label may be misaligned with source samples of a different label. Right: Our method performs class-aware alignment across
domains. To avoid the misalignment, only the intra-class domain
discrepancy is minimized. The inter-class domain discrepancy is
maximized to enhance the model’s generalization ability.

Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [22] and Joint MMD (JMMD)
[25]. MMD and JMMD have proven effective in many computer vision problems and demonstrated the state-of-the-art
results on several UDA benchmarks [22, 25].
Despite the success of previous methods based on MMD
and JMMD, most of them measure the domain discrepancy at the domain level, neglecting the class from which
the samples are drawn. These class-agnostic approaches,
hence, do not discriminate whether samples from two domains should be aligned according to their class labels
(Fig. 1). This can impair the adaptation performance due
to the following reasons. First, samples of different classes
may be aligned incorrectly, e.g. both MMD and JMMD
can be minimized even when the target-domain samples are
misaligned with the source-domain samples of a different
class. Second, the learned decision boundary may generalize poorly for the target domain. There exist many suboptimal solutions near the decision boundary. These solutions may overfit the source data well but are less discriminative for the target.
14893

