Adversarial Defense by Stratified Convolutional Sparse Coding
Bo Sun
Peking University

Nian-hsuan Tsai
National Tsinghua University

bosun@pku.edu.cn

nianhsuan@gmail.com

Fangchen Liu Ronald Yu
UC San Diego

Hao Su

{fliu,ronaldyu,haosu}@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
We propose an adversarial defense method that achieves
state-of-the-art performance among attack-agnostic adversarial defense methods while also maintaining robustness
to input resolution, scale of adversarial perturbation, and
scale of dataset size. Based on convolutional sparse coding, we construct a stratified low-dimensional quasi-natural
image space that faithfully approximates the natural image space while also removing adversarial perturbations.
We introduce a novel Sparse Transformation Layer (STL)
between the input image and the first layer of the neural
network to efficiently project images into our quasi-natural
image space. Our experiments show state-of-the-art performance of our method compared to other attack-agnostic adversarial defense methods in various adversarial settings.

1. Introduction
Existing defense mechanisms against adversarial attacks,
although able to achieve robustness in certain adversarial
settings, are still unable to achieve true robustness to all adversarial inputs. The most effective existing defense methods modify the network training process to improve robustness against adversarial examples [18, 24, 51, 34]. However, they are trained to defend a specified attack for a specified model, limiting their real-world applications and claims
of robustness to all adversarial inputs. Ideally, our defense
mechanism should be attack agnostic and model agnostic.
Instead of modifying the network and training process,
another line of existing methods achieve the desired property of being attack-agnostic and model-agnostic by modifying adversarial inputs to resemble clean inputs [12, 16,
36, 54, 40, 46, 32, 43]. However, these methods show weaknesses in other adversarial settings such as being unable to
handle larger perturbations, unable to simultaneously handle many different resolutions, and not scalable to large
datasets.
In this paper, we present an input-transformation based
defense method that achieves state-of-the-art performance
when compared to previous attack-agnostic and modelagnostic defense methods. Moreover, our method is also

!"

!#$%
(off manifold)
!#$%
!"
(on manifold)

Natural Image Space

Neural Network

far
Feature Space

T(!")

T(!#$%)

T(!" )

T(!#$% )

Quasi-natural Image Space

Neural Network

Feature Space

e
clos

Figure 1: Comparison of feature extraction between natural
image space and our learned quasi-natural image space. In
the natural image space, a neural network trained from natural images may assign different labels to the adversarial example and the clean image, since they can be far from each
other in the feature space. After projection to the quasinatural image space, they tend to lie closely together in the
feature space.
far more simultaneously robust to scale of attack perturbation, a variety of different input resolutions, and dataset
scale. We achieve our high level of robustness by projecting both clean and adversarially attacked input images into
a low-dimensional quasi-natural image space that faithfully
approximates the natural image space while also removing
adversarial perturbations so that adversarial examples will
be close to their original inputs in feature space.
We construct the quasi-natural image space in an unsupervised manner using a convolutional dictionary learningbased [4, 22, 8, 53] method, and we project the input images into our quasi-natural image space by introducing a
novel Sparse Transformation Layer (STL) between the input and first layer of the network. We can further enhance
the robustness of our pipeline by retraining a classifier on
the quasi-natural images.
Experimentally, we demonstrate that our method

11447

