Neural RGB→D Sensing: Depth and Uncertainty from a Video Camera
Chao Liu1,2∗

Jinwei Gu1,3∗
1
NVIDIA

Kihwan Kim1
Srinivasa G. Narasimhan2
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
SenseTime

Jan Kautz1

Abstract
Depth sensing is crucial for 3D reconstruction and scene
understanding. Active depth sensors provide dense metric
measurements, but often suffer from limitations such as restricted operating ranges, low spatial resolution, sensor interference, and high power consumption. In this paper, we
propose a deep learning (DL) method to estimate per-pixel
depth and its uncertainty continuously from a monocular
video stream, with the goal of effectively turning an RGB
camera into an RGB-D camera. Unlike prior DL-based
methods, we estimate a depth probability distribution for
each pixel rather than a single depth value, leading to an
estimate of a 3D depth probability volume for each input
frame. These depth probability volumes are accumulated
over time under a Bayesian filtering framework as more incoming frames are processed sequentially, which effectively
reduces depth uncertainty and improves accuracy, robustness, and temporal stability. Compared to prior work, the
proposed approach achieves more accurate and stable results, and generalizes better to new datasets. Experimental
results also show the output of our approach can be directly
fed into classical RGB-D based 3D scanning methods for
3D scene reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Depth sensing is crucial for 3D reconstruction [31, 32,
52] and scene understanding [43, 18, 34]. Active depth
sensors (e.g., time of flight cameras [19, 35], LiDAR [7])
measure dense metric depth, but often have limited operating range (e.g., indoor) and spatial resolution [5], consume
more power, and suffer from multi-path reflection and interference between sensors [29]. In contrast, estimating depth
directly from image(s) solves these issues, but faces other
long-standing challenges such as scale ambiguity and drift
for monocular methods [37], as well as the correspondence
problem and high computational cost for stereo [47] and
multi-view methods [41].
Inspired by recent success of deep learning in 3D vision [13, 56, 50, 17, 20, 51, 53, 6, 55, 4, 46], in this paper,
we propose a DL-based method to estimate depth and its
∗ The authors contributed on this work when they were at NVIDIA.

Input frame

Estimated depth
1

0

3D Recon. using 30 views
Conﬁdence
Figure 1. We proposed a DL-based method to estimate depth and
its uncertainty (or, confidence) continuously for a monocular video
stream, with the goal of turning an RGB camera into an RGB-D
camera. Its output can be directly fed into classical RGB-D based
3D scanning methods [31, 32] for 3D reconstruction.

uncertainty continuously from a monocular video stream,
with the goal of effectively turning an RGB camera into an
RGB-D camera. We have two key ideas:
1. Unlike prior work, for each pixel, we estimate a
depth probability distribution rather than a single
depth value, leading to an estimate of a Depth Probability Volume (DPV) for each input frame. As
shown in Fig. 1, the DPV provides both a MaximumLikelihood-Estimate (MLE) of the depth map, as well
as the corresponding per-pixel uncertainty measure.
2. These DPVs across different frames are accumulated
over time, as more incoming frames are processed sequentially. The accumulation step, originated from the
Bayesian filtering theory and implemented as a learnable deep network, effectively reduces depth uncertainty and improves accuracy, robustness, and temporal stability over time, as shown later in Sec. 4.
We argue that all DL-based depth estimation methods
should predict not depth values but depth distributions,
and should integrate such statistical distributions over time
(e.g., via Bayesian filtering). This is because dense depth
estimation from image(s) – especially for single-view methods – inherently has a lot of uncertainty, due to factors such

10986

