Analysis of Feature Visibility in Non-Line-of-Sight Measurements
Xiaochun Liu

Sebastian Bauer

Andreas Velten*

xliu669@wisc.edu

sbauer8@wisc.edu

velten@gmail.com

University of Wisconsin – Madison

Abstract
We formulate an equation describing a general Nonline-of-sight (NLOS) imaging measurement and analyze the
properties of the measurement in the Fourier domain regarding the spatial frequencies of the scene it encodes. We
conclude that for a relay wall with finite size, certain scene
configurations and features are not detectable in an NLOS
measurement. We then provide experimental examples of
invisible scene features and their reconstructions, as well
as a set of example scenes that lead to an ill-posed NLOS
imaging problem.

a

b c

a

c

b

c

b

a

1. Introduction
Time of flight non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging uses
fast illumination sources and detectors to probe multibounce light transport of scenes not directly visible to the
observer (Figure 2). An illumination source illuminates
points pi on a relay surface with short pulses and captures
light returning from the scene to points pd on the relay
wall. By solving the inverse light transport problem from
those NLOS measurements, the invisible 3D space can be
reconstructed. We refer to this type of time of flight (timeresolved) NLOS measurement simply as NLOS measurement.
Different inverse methods have been developed to reconstruct hidden scenes from the time of flight data such as filtered backprojection [18, 7, 3, 10], similar to backprojection
methods used in computed tomography problems. Other
methods formulate the light transport in the hidden scene
as a linear matrix operator and solve a matrix inverse problem to reconstruct the scene through an optimization framework [9]. More recently, O’Toole et al. showed that for confocal datasets (see Fig. 2 a; on the other hand, b shows the
non-confocal NLOS measurement) the forward integral can
be simplified to a convolution operator. Thus the inverse
process can be expressed as a deconvolution problem and
solved efficiently [13]. Other methods perform the reconstruction using subsets of the measurement data such as the

Figure 1. Three patches rotation example. Experimental reconstruction of a scene containing three patches denoted by a, b, c.
Patches a and c are parallel but the latter one’s surface normal
vector does not point towards the NLOS relay wall and the patch
does not appear in the reconstruction shown on the right. The first
row stands for the top view and the second row for the front view.
The explanation for this astonishing effect will be developed in the
main text, see Sec. 6.2, and also Fig. 8 for a graphical explanation.

first returned photon [16], or parameterizing the reconstruction as a set of planes [14]. Other reconstruction techniques
are described in [19, 17]. Some existing approaches even
model partial occlusions within the hidden scene, e.g., [8].
The findings about reconstruction techniques developed for
NLOS imaging have also been transferred to acoustic imaging around corners [11].
In this work, we aim to provide a generic description
for direct bounce (3rd bounce) NLOS measurements and
show how much information they encode and how this affects practical NLOS imaging problems.
Consider the NLOS reconstruction shown in Figure 1. It
contains three very similar patches that only vary slightly
in orientation and have different positions in the reconstruction space. Yet while two of the patches are reconstructed
110140

