Hyperspectral Image Super-Resolution with Optimized RGB Guidance
Ying Fu1 Tao Zhang1 Yinqiang Zheng2 Debing Zhang3 Hua Huang1
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 National Institute of Informatics 3 DeepGlint
{fuying,tzhang,huahuang}@bit.edu.cn

yqzheng@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
To overcome the limitations of existing hyperspectral
cameras on spatial/temporal resolution, fusing a low resolution hyperspectral image (HSI) with a high resolution
RGB (or multispectral) image into a high resolution HSI
has been prevalent. Previous methods for this fusion task
usually employ hand-crafted priors to model the underlying
structure of the latent high resolution HSI, and the effect of
the camera spectral response (CSR) of the RGB camera on
super-resolution accuracy has rarely been investigated. In
this paper, we first present a simple and efficient convolutional neural network (CNN) based method for HSI superresolution in an unsupervised way, without any prior training. Later, we append a CSR optimization layer onto the
HSI super-resolution network, either to automatically select
the best CSR in a given CSR dataset, or to design the optimal CSR under some physical restrictions. Experimental
results show our method outperforms the state-of-the-arts,
and the CSR optimization can further boost the accuracy of
HSI super-resolution.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging systems capture detailed spectral
distribution of a scene, and have found numerous applications in remote sensing [7, 34], object classiﬁcation [8],
anomaly detection [41], ﬂuorescent analysis [15, 16], and
so on.
For these applications, images with sufﬁcient spectral
and spatial resolution are usually desired [20, 37]. However, to achieve high spectral resolution, traditional hyperspectral imaging systems [6, 18, 36] often sacriﬁce the temporal and spatial resolution. In contrast, conventional RGB
(or multispectral) cameras integrate the radiance across a
wide wavelength range, and can easily capture high spatial
resolution images in real time. Therefore, a natural way to
obtain high resolution HSI is to fuse the low resolution HSI
with its corresponding high resolution RGB image, which
acts as spatial guidance.
Most existing approaches for HSI super-resolution of a

debingzhang@deepglint.com

hybrid camera system [1, 2, 3, 12, 14, 24, 28, 30, 31, 45]
employ various hand-crafted priors to model the underlying
structure of the latent high resolution HSI. Nevertheless, to
hammer out proper priors for a speciﬁc scene remains to be
an art.
Recent alternative approaches [13, 35] leverage on deep
learning to alleviate the dependence on hand-crafted priors,
and show that the CNN scheme can effectively exploit the
intrinsic characteristics of HSIs. Nevertheless, these methods either use the CNN scheme to reﬁne the initialized results in a supervised way [13], or resort to step-by-step alternating optimization [35]. In this work, we present a simple
and efﬁcient CNN-based end-to-end method for HSI superresolution with RGB guidance, which can effectively approximate the spectral nonlinear mapping between the RGB
and the spectral space, and utilize the spatial consistency.
Neither delicate hand-crafted priors nor training data are
needed in our method. This allows our method to handle
various scenes more easily.
In addition, all these methods mainly focus on RGBguided HSI super-resolution under a given CSR function
of the RGB camera. Recent researches on HSI superresolution from a single RGB image [5, 17, 33] have shown
that the CSR is critical in improving super-resolution accuracy. This motivates to explore the effect of CSR in our hybrid super-resolution task. Through experiments, we have
found that the performance of HSI super-resolution methods for the hybrid camera system is obviously dependent
on the CSR. To optimize the RGB guidance, in this paper,
we present a CSR optimization layer to automatically determine the best CSR in a given CSR dataset, or even to
design an unprecedented CSR function that is optimal for
the task of RGB-guided HSI super-resolution. To the best
of our knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst to evaluate the effect
of CSR in a hybrid hyperspectral imaging system, and optimize the RGB guidance for hybrid HSI super-resolution. In
summary, our main contributions are that
1. we present an unsupervised CNN-based method for
HSI super-resolution, which can effectively exploit the
underlying characteristics of the HSI and adapt itself
to variant scenes more easily;

11661

