Action4D: Online Action Recognition in the Crowd and Clutter
Quanzeng You
Hao Jiang
Microsoft Cloud & AI
One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052
{quyou, jiang.hao}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recognizing every person’s action in a crowded and cluttered environment is a challenging task in computer vision.
We propose to tackle this challenging problem using a holistic 4D “scan” of a cluttered scene to include every detail
about the people and environment. This leads to a new
problem, i.e., recognizing multiple people’s actions in the
cluttered 4D representation. At the ﬁrst step, we propose a
new method to track people in 4D, which can reliably detect
and follow each person in real time. Then, we build a new
deep neural network, the Action4DNet, to recognize the action of each tracked person. Such a model gives reliable and
accurate results in the real-world settings. We also design
an adaptive 3D convolution layer and a novel discriminative temporal feature learning objective to further improve
the performance of our model. Our method is invariant to
camera view angles, resistant to clutter and able to handle crowd. The experimental results show that the proposed
method is fast, reliable and accurate. Our method paves
the way to action recognition in the real-world applications
and is ready to be deployed to enable smart homes, smart
factories and smart stores.

1. Introduction
Action recognition is a key task in computer vision.
Even though human vision is good at recognizing subtle
actions, computer vision algorithm still cannot achieve the
same robustness and accuracy. The difﬁculty is largely
caused by the variations of the visual inputs. The input
video may be crowded and cluttered. People may have different clothing, different body shapes and are highly articulated. They may perform the same action in slightly different ways. The camera viewing angles can be drastically
different so that the same action in the training videos may
look quite different from those in the testing videos.
To tackle the above challenges, in this paper, we propose
a novel 4D method for robust action recognition. The input
of our method is a 4D volume of the dynamic environment

5HDGLQJ
6LWWLQJ
3OD\LQJZLWKSKRQH

5HDGLQJ
6LWWLQJ
3OD\LQJZLWKSKRQH

5HDGLQJ
6LWWLQJ
3OD\LQJZLWKSKRQH

5HDGLQJ
6LWWLQJ
3OD\LQJZLWKSKRQH

D 5HDGLQJ

E 6LWWLQJ

F 3OD\LQJZLWKSKRQH

Figure 1. Examples of the inference results of our action recognition system on a crowded and cluttered environment with four
Kinect V2 cameras. The top two rows show the projected 3D
bounding boxes on each camera view given by our multiple-people
tracker. The last row shows the volumes generated from the four
calibrated depth cameras for each subject with different actions.

constructed from multiple calibrated RGBD cameras. Figure 1 illustrates our scheme. The proposed method tracks
each individual person using the 4D representation and recognizes their actions. It is view invariant, able to handle
crowd and clutter, and scalable to applications in a huge
space with hundreds of cameras.
Recognizing multiple people’s actions in cluttered 4D
volume is a new and challenging problem. To the best of
our knowledge, our method gives the ﬁrst solution to this
problem. In particular, we propose a novel Action4DNet to
recognize the action of each subject in a cluttered environment using online 4D modeling. Our work has the following contributions:

11857

