Neural Scene Decomposition for Multi-Person Motion Capture
Helge Rhodin

Victor Constantin Isinsu Katircioglu Mathieu Salzmann
CVLab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
helge.rhodin@epfl.ch

Neural Scene Decomposition (NSD)

Abstract
Learning general image representations has proven key
to the success of many computer vision tasks. For example,
many approaches to image understanding problems rely
on deep networks that were initially trained on ImageNet,
mostly because the learned features are a valuable starting
point to learn from limited labeled data. However, when it
comes to 3D motion capture of multiple people, these features are only of limited use.
In this paper, we therefore propose an approach to learning features that are useful for this purpose. To this end, we
introduce a self-supervised approach to learning what we
call a neural scene decomposition (NSD) that can be exploited for 3D pose estimation. NSD comprises three layers
of abstraction to represent human subjects: spatial layout
in terms of bounding-boxes and relative depth; a 2D shape
representation in terms of an instance segmentation mask;
and subject-specific appearance and 3D pose information.
By exploiting self-supervision coming from multiview data,
our NSD model can be trained end-to-end without any 2D
or 3D supervision. In contrast to previous approaches,
it works for multiple persons and full-frame images. Because it encodes 3D geometry, NSD can then be effectively
leveraged to train a 3D pose estimation network from small
amounts of annotated data. Our code and newly introduced
boxing dataset is available at github.com and cvlab.epfl.ch.

1. Introduction
Most state-of-the-art approaches to 3D pose estimation
use a deep network to regress from the image either directly
to 3D joint locations or to 2D ones, which are then lifted to
3D using another deep network. In either case, this requires
large amounts of training data that may be hard to obtain,
especially when attempting to model non-standard motions.
In other areas of computer vision, such as image classification and object detection, this has been handled by using a
large, generic, annotated database to train networks to produce features that generalize well to new tasks. These features can then be fed to other, task-specific deep nets, which

Pascal Fua

Input

Abstraction I

Self-supervision

Image
(source view)

Spatial layout (bounding boxes & depth)

Image
(target view)

Abstraction II

Instance segmentation and depth maps

Abstraction III

Rotation
(source to
target view)

Encoding and novel view decoding

Figure 1. Neural Scene Decomposition disentangles an image into foreground and background, subject bounding boxes,
depth, instance segmentation, and latent encodings in a fully selfsupervised manner using a second view and its relative view transformation for training.

can be trained using far less labeled data. AlexNet [27] and
VGG [57] have proved to be remarkably successful at this,
resulting in many striking advances.
Our goal is to enable a similar gain for 3D human pose
estimation. A major challenge is that there is no large,
generic, annotated database equivalent to those used to train
AlexNet and VGG that can be used to learn our new representation. For example, Human 3.6M [20] only features
a limited range of motions and appearances, even though
it is one of the largest publicly available human motion
databases. Thus, only limited supervision has to suffice.
As a step towards our ultimate goal, we therefore introduce a new scene and body representation that facilitates the
training of 3D pose estimators, even when only little annotated data is available. To this end, we train a neural network that infers a compositional scene representation that
comprises three levels of abstraction. We will refer to it as
Neural Scene Decomposition (NSD). As shown in Fig. 1,
the first one captures the spatial layout in terms of bounding boxes and relative depth; the second is a pixel-wise instance segmentation of the body; the third is a geometryaware hidden space that encodes the 3D pose, shape and
17703

