Arbitrary Shape Scene Text Detection with Adaptive Text Region Representation
Xiaobing Wang1 , Yingying Jiang1 , Zhenbo Luo1 , Cheng-Lin Liu2, 3 , Hyunsoo Choi4 , Sungjin Kim4
1
Samsung Research China - Beijing, Beijing 100028, China
2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
4
Samsung Research, Seoul 06765, Korea
{x0106.wang, yy.jiang, zb.luo, hsu.choi, sj9373.kim}@samsung.com, liucl@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Scene text detection attracts much attention in computer vision, because it can be widely used in many applications such as real-time text translation, automatic information entry, blind person assistance, robot sensing and so on.
Though many methods have been proposed for horizontal
and oriented texts, detecting irregular shape texts such as
curved texts is still a challenging problem. To solve the
problem, we propose a robust scene text detection method
with adaptive text region representation. Given an input image, a text region proposal network is first used for extracting text proposals. Then, these proposals are verified and
refined with a refinement network. Here, recurrent neural
network based adaptive text region representation is proposed for text region refinement, where a pair of boundary points are predicted each time step until no new points
are found. In this way, text regions of arbitrary shapes are
detected and represented with adaptive number of boundary points. This gives more accurate description of text
regions. Experimental results on five benchmarks, namely,
CTW1500, TotalText, ICDAR2013, ICDAR2015 and MSRATD500, show that the proposed method achieves state-ofthe-art in scene text detection.

1. Introduction
Text is the most fundamental medium for communicating semantic information. It appears everywhere in daily
life: on street nameplates, store signs, product packages,
restaurant menus and so on. Such texts in natural environment are known as scene texts. Automatically detecting
and recognizing scene texts can be very rewarding with numerous applications, such as real-time text translation, blind
person assistance, shopping, robots, smart cars and education. An end-to-end text recognition system usually consist-

s of two steps: text detection and text recognition. In text
detection, text regions are detected and labeled with their
bounding boxes. And in text recognition, text information
is retrieved from the detected text regions. Text detection
is an important step for end-to-end text recognition, without which texts can not be recognized from scene images.
Therefore, scene text detection attracts much attention these
years.
While traditional optical character reader (OCR) techniques can only deal with texts on printed documents or
business cards, scene text detection tries to detect various
texts in complex scenes. Due to complex backgrounds and
variations of font, size, color, language, illumination condition and orientation, scene text detection becomes a very
challenging task. And its performance was poor when hand
designed features and traditional classifiers were used before deep learning methods become popular. However, the
performance has been much improved in recent years, significantly benefitted from the development of deep learning.
Meanwhile, the research focus of text detection has shifted from horizontal scene texts [10] to multi-oriented scene
texts [9] and more challenging curved or arbitrary shape
scene texts [19]. Therefore, arbitrary shape scene text detection is focused on in this paper.
In this paper, we propose an arbitrary shape scene text
detection method using adaptive text region representation,
as shown in Figure 1. Given an input image, a text region
proposal network (Text-RPN) is first used for obtaining text
proposals. The Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) feature maps of the input image are also obtained in this step.
Then, text proposals are verified and refined with a refinement network, whose input are the text proposal features
obtained by using region of interest (ROI) pooling to the CNN feature maps. Here, three branches including text/nontext classification, bounding box refinement and recurrent
neural network (RNN) based adaptive text region representation exist in the refinement network. In the RNN, a pair

6449

