Information Maximizing Visual Question Generation
Ranjay Krishna, Michael Bernstein, Li Fei-Fei
Stanford University
{ranjaykrishna, msb, feifeili}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Though image-to-sequence generation models have become overwhelmingly popular in human-computer communications, they suffer from strongly favoring safe generic
questions (“What is in this picture?”). Generating uninformative but relevant questions is not sufficient or useful. We
argue that a good question is one that has a tightly focused
purpose — one that is aimed at expecting a specific type of
response. We build a model that maximizes mutual information between the image, the expected answer and the generated question. To overcome the non-differentiability of discrete natural language tokens, we introduce a variational
continuous latent space onto which the expected answers
project. We regularize this latent space with a second latent
space that ensures clustering of similar answers. Even when
we don’t know the expected answer, this second latent space
can generate goal-driven questions specifically aimed at extracting objects (“what is the person throwing”), attributes,
(“What kind of shirt is the person wearing?”), color (“what
color is the frisbee?”), material (“What material is the frisbee?”), etc. We quantitatively show that our model is able
to retain information about an expected answer category,
resulting in more diverse, goal-driven questions. We launch
our model on a set of real world images and extract previously unseen visual concepts.

1. Introduction
The task of transforming visual scenes to language, questions [47, 44], answers [64, 2] or captions [56, 30], has
widely adopted an image-to-sequence architecture that encodes the image through a convolutional neural network
(CNN) [33] and then decodes the language with a recurrent neural network [42]. The whole framework can be efficiently trained by maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
and has demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in various tasks [60, 8, 10, 11, 38]. However, this training procedure is not suitable for generating questions or enabling
discovery of new concepts. In fact, most MLE-based training schemes have shown to produce generic questions that

INPUT
Image

OUTPUT

Expected answer category
object
attribute
relationship

Generated questions
What is the person throwing?
What is on top of the person’s head?
What material are those white pants made out of?
What color is the frisbee?
What is the person on the right doing with the frisbee?
Did the person on the left throw or catch the frisbee?

Figure 1. Our new architecture generates goal-driven visual questions that maximize the likelihood of receiving an expected answer. When attempting to learn about objects or their attributes, it
can generate questions aimed at attaining such answer categories.

result in uninformative answers (e.g. “yes”) [22], questions
(e.g. “What is the person doing?”) [23], captions (e.g. “A
clear day with a blue sky” [60]) or dialogue (e.g. “I don’t
know”) [35, 51]. Simply generating a generic question is
not sufficient or useful for discovering new concepts.
Instead of generating generic questions, question generation models should be goal-driven — we show how they
can be trained to ask questions aimed at extracting specific
answer categories. Visual question generation is not a bijection, i.e. multiple correct questions can be generated from
the same image. Previous research moved away from a supervised approach to question generation to a variational
approach that can generate multiple questions by sampling
a latent space [23] (see Figure 2). However, previous approaches are not goal-driven — they do not guarantee that
the question will result in a specific type of answer. To remedy their problem, we could encode the answer along with
the image before generating the question. While such an approach allows the model to condition its question on the answer, it is neither technically feasible nor practical. Technical infeasibility arises because variational models often lead
to the posterior collapsing problem [4], where the model can
learn to ignore the answer when generating questions. Impracticality arises because the main purpose of asking questions is to attain an answer, implying that knowing the answer defeats the purpose of generating the question.
To tackle the first challenge, we design a visual question
generation architecture that maximizes the mutual information between the generated question with the image as well
as with the expected answer (see Figure 2). We call our
12008

