HAQ: Hardware-Aware Automated Quantization with Mixed Precision
Kuan Wang∗ , Zhijian Liu∗ , Yujun Lin∗ , Ji Lin, and Song Han
{kuanwang, zhijian, yujunlin, jilin, songhan}@mit.edu

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract

73
MobileNets (fixed 8-bit quantization)
MobileNets (our flexible-bit quantization)

∗ indicates equal contributions.

Top-1 Accuracy (%)

72

Model quantization is a widely used technique to compress and accelerate deep neural network (DNN) inference.
Emergent DNN hardware accelerators begin to support
mixed precision (1-8 bits) to further improve the computation efficiency, which raises a great challenge to find the
optimal bitwidth for each layer: it requires domain experts
to explore the vast design space trading off among accuracy, latency, energy, and model size, which is both timeconsuming and sub-optimal. There are plenty of specialized
hardware for neural networks, but little research has been
done for specialized neural network optimization for a particular hardware architecture. Conventional quantization
algorithm ignores the different hardware architectures and
quantizes all the layers in a uniform way. In this paper,
we introduce the Hardware-Aware Automated Quantization
(HAQ) framework which leverages the reinforcement learning to automatically determine the quantization policy, and
we take the hardware accelerator’s feedback in the design
loop. Rather than relying on proxy signals such as FLOPs
and model size, we employ a hardware simulator to generate direct feedback signals (latency and energy) to the RL
agent. Compared with conventional methods, our framework
is fully automated and can specialize the quantization policy
for different neural network architectures and hardware architectures. Our framework effectively reduced the latency
by 1.4-1.95× and the energy consumption by 1.9× with negligible loss of accuracy compared with the fixed bitwidth (8
bits) quantization. Our framework reveals that the optimal
policies on different hardware architectures (i.e., edge and
cloud architectures) under different resource constraints (i.e.,
latency, energy and model size) are drastically different. We
interpreted the implication of different quantization policies,
which offer insights for both neural network architecture
design and hardware architecture design.

71
70
69
68

Model Size:
1MB 2MB 3MB
25

44

63

82

101

120

Latency (ms)

Figure 1: We need mixed precision for different layers. We
quantize MobileNets [13] to different number of bits (both
weights and activations), and it lies on a better pareto curve
(yellow) than fixed bit quantization (blue). The reason is that
different layers have different redundancy and have different arithmetic intensity (OPs/byte) on the hardware, which
advocates for using mixed precision for different layers.

1. Introduction
In many real-time machine learning applications (such
as robotics, autonomous driving, and mobile VR/AR), deep
neural networks is strictly constrained by the latency, energy,
and model size. In order to improve the hardware efficiency,
many researchers have proposed to directly design efficient
models [25, 13, 2] or to quantize the weights and activations
to low precision [9, 35].
Conventional quantization methods use the same number
of bits for all layers [3, 15], but as different layers have different redundancy and behave differently on the hardware
(computation bounded or memory bounded), it is necessary
to use mixed precision for different layers (as shown in Figure 1). This flexibility was originally not supported by chip
vendors until recently the hardware manufacturers started
to implement this feature: Apple released the A12 Bionic
chip that supports mixed precision for the neural network
inference [7]; NVIDIA recently introduced the Turing GPU
architecture that supports 1-bit, 4-bit, 8-bit and 16-bit arithmetic operations [22]; Imagination launched a flexible neural
network IP that supports per-layer bitwidth adjustment for
18612

