Single Image Deraining: A Comprehensive Benchmark Analysis
Siyuan Li1∗, Iago Breno Araujo2∗ , Wenqi Ren3† , Zhangyang Wang4†, Eric K. Tokuda2 ,
Roberto Hirata Junior2 , Roberto Cesar-Junior2 , Jiawan Zhang1 , Xiaojie Guo1 , Xiaochun Cao3
1
Tianjin University 2 University of Sao Paulo 3 SKLOIS, IIE, CAS 4 Texas A&M University
https://github.com/lsy17096535/Single-Image-Deraining

Abstract
Numerous single image deraining algorithms have been
recently proposed. However, these algorithms are mainly
evaluated using certain type of synthetic images, assuming
a specific rain model, plus a few real images. It is thus
unclear how these algorithms would perform on rainy images acquired “in the wild” and how we could gauge the
progress in the field. This paper aims to bridge this gap.
We present a comprehensive study and evaluation of existing single image deraining algorithms, using a new largescale benchmark consisting of both synthetic and realworld rainy images of various rain types. This dataset highlights diverse rain models (rain streak, rain drop, rain and
mist), as well as a rich variety of evaluation criteria (fulland no-reference objective, subjective, and task-specific)
Our evaluation and analysis indicate the performance gap
between synthetic rainy images and real-world images and
allow us to better identify the strengths and limitations of
each method as well as future research directions.

1. Introduction
Images captured in rainy days suffer from noticeable
degradation of scene visibility. The goal of single image deraining algorithms is to generate sharp images from a rainy
image input. Image deraining can potentially benefit both
the human visual perception quality of images, and many
computer vision applications, such as outdoor surveillance
systems and intelligent vehicles.
The recent years have witnessed significant progress in
single image deraining. The progress in this field can be
attributed to various natural image priors [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] and
deep convolutional neural network (CNN)-based models [6,
7, 8]. However, a fair comprehensive study of the problem,
the existing algorithms, and the performance metrics have
been absent so far, which is the goal of this paper.
∗ The first two authors contributed equally.
† indicates corresponding author.

1.1. Rainy Image Formulation Models
As a complicated atmospheric process, rain could cause
several different types of visibility degradations, due to a
magnitude of environmental factors including raindrop size,
rain density, and wind velocity [9]. When a rainy image is
taken, the visual effects of rain on that digital image further
hinges on many camera parameters, such as exposure time,
depth of field, and resolution [10]. Most existing deraining
works assume one rain model (usually rain streak), which
might have oversimplified the problem. We group existing
rain models in literature into three major categories: rain
streak, raindrop, as well as rain and mist.
A rain streak image Rs can be modeled as a linear superimposition of the clean background scene B and the sparse,
line-shape rain streak component S:
Rs = B + S.

(1)

Rain streaks S accumulated throughout the scene reduce the
visibility of the background B. This is the most common
model assumed by the majority of deraining algorithms.
Adherent raindrops [11] that fall and flow on camera
lenses or a window glasses can obstruct and/or blur the
background scenes. The raindrop degraded image Rd can
be modeled as the combination of the clean background B,
and the blurry or obstruction effect of the raindrops D in
scattered, small-sized local coherent regions:
Rd = (1 − M) ⊙ B + D.

(2)

M is a binary mask and ⊙ means element-wise multiplication. In the mask, a pixel x is part of a raindrop region if
M(x) = 1, and otherwise belongs to the background.
Further, rainy images often contain both rain and mist
in real cases [12]. In addition, distant rain streaks accumulated throughout the scene reduce the visibility in a manner
more similarly to fog, creating a mist-like phenomenon in
the image background. Concerning this, we can define the
rain and mist model for the captured image Rm , based on

3838

