Bounding Box Regression with Uncertainty for Accurate Object Detection
Yihui He1

Chenchen Zhu1
Jianren Wang1
1
Carnegie Mellon University

Marios Savvides1
Xiangyu Zhang2
2
Megvii Inc. (Face++)

{he2,chenchez,jianrenw,marioss}@andrew.cmu.edu

(b)

(a)

zhangxiangyu@megvii.com

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: In object detection datasets, the ground-truth bounding boxes have inherent ambiguities in some cases. The
bounding box regressor is expected to get smaller loss from ambiguous bounding boxes with our KL Loss. (a)(c) The
ambiguities introduced by inaccurate labeling. (b) The ambiguities introduced by occlusion. (d) The object boundary itself is
ambiguous. It is unclear where the left boundary of the train is because the tree partially occludes it. (better viewed in color)

Abstract
Large-scale object detection datasets (e.g., MS-COCO)
try to define the ground truth bounding boxes as clear as
possible. However, we observe that ambiguities are still introduced when labeling the bounding boxes. In this paper,
we propose a novel bounding box regression loss for learning bounding box transformation and localization variance
together. Our loss greatly improves the localization accuracies of various architectures with nearly no additional computation. The learned localization variance allows us to
merge neighboring bounding boxes during non-maximum
suppression (NMS), which further improves the localization
performance. On MS-COCO, we boost the Average Precision (AP) of VGG-16 Faster R-CNN from 23.6% to 29.1%.
More importantly, for ResNet-50-FPN Mask R-CNN, our
method improves the AP and AP90 by 1.8% and 6.2% respectively, which significantly outperforms previous stateof-the-art bounding box refinement methods. Our code and
models are available at github.com/yihui-he/KL-Loss

1. Introduction
Large scale object detection datasets like ImageNet [6],
MS-COCO [35] and CrowdHuman [47] try to define the

ground truth bounding boxes as clear as possible.
However, we observe that the ground-truth bounding
boxes are inherently ambiguous in some cases. The ambiguities makes it hard to label and hard to learn the bounding
box regression function. Some inaccurately labeled bounding boxes from MS-COCO are shown in Figure 1 (a)(c).
When the object is partially occluded, the bounding box
boundaries are even more unclear, shown in Figure 1 (d)
from YouTube-BoundingBoxes [40].
Object detection is a multi-task learning problem consisting of object localization and object classification.
Current state-of-the-art object detectors (e.g., Faster RCNN [42], Cascade R-CNN [2] and Mask R-CNN [17]) rely
on bounding box regression to localize objects.
However, the traditional bounding box regression loss
(i.e., the smooth L1 loss [13]) does not take such the ambiguities of the ground truth bounding boxes into account.
Besides, bounding box regression is assumed to be accurate
when the classification score is high, which is not always
the case, illustrated in Figure 2.
To address these problems, we propose a novel bounding
box regression loss, namely KL Loss, for learning bounding box regression and localization uncertainty at the same
time. Specifically, to capture the uncertainties of bounding box prediction, we first model the bounding box pre-

2888

