Density Map Regression Guided Detection Network for RGB-D
Crowd Counting and Localization
Dongze Lian1∗, Jing Li1∗, Jia Zheng1 , Weixin Luo1,2 , Shenghua Gao1†
1
2
ShanghaiTech University
Yoke Intelligence
{liandz, lijing1, zhengjia, luowx, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
To simultaneously estimate head counts and localize
heads with bounding boxes, a regression guided detection
network (RDNet) is proposed for RGB-D crowd counting.
Specifically, to improve the robustness of detection-based
approaches for small/tiny heads, we leverage density map to
improve the head/non-head classification in detection network where density map serves as the probability of a pixel
being a head. A depth-adaptive kernel that considers the
variances in head sizes is also introduced to generate highfidelity density map for more robust density map regression.
Further, a depth-aware anchor is designed for better initialization of anchor sizes in detection framework. Then we use
the bounding boxes whose sizes are estimated with depth
to train our RDNet. The existing RGB-D datasets are too
small and not suitable for performance evaluation on datadriven based approaches, we collect a large-scale RGB-D
crowd counting dataset. Experiments on both our RGBD dataset and the MICC RGB-D counting dataset show
that our method achieves the best performance for RGBD crowd counting and localization. Further, our method
can be readily extended to RGB image based crowd counting and achieves comparable performance on the ShanghaiTech Part B dataset for both counting and localization.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting is a task of estimating the number of
persons in images or surveillance videos, and it has drawn
a lot of attention in computer vision community due to its
potential applications in security-related scenarios. Almost
all previous works target at RGB image based crowd counting [37, 21, 25, 17] and achieve satisfactory performance
on this task. With the popularity of depth sensor, people
also propose to study RGB-D crowd counting [36, 1, 4] in
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

surveillance scenarios. Compared with RGB image, depth
map provides additional information about the localization
of heads [5, 33]. In this paper, we propose to simultaneously
count and localize heads with RGB-D data.
Crowd counting methods can be roughly categorized
into regression-based approaches and detection-based approaches. Recent works have shown the success of
regression-based approaches [37, 18, 21, 25, 17] for density map estimation in crowd counting. However, a crucial
issue in these regression-based approaches is that the position of each head is not explicitly given, which restricts the
application of regression-based approaches in some related
video surveillance tasks, including pedestrian detection
[22], anomaly detection [16] and person re-identification
[23], etc.. In contrast, detection-based crowd counting approaches [29, 30, 31] can provide such head localization
information. However, detection-based approaches usually
encounter underestimation issues because of the low recall rate for small/tiny heads. Motivated by the success of
regression-based approaches as well as advantages of RGBD data for object detection [5, 33], we propose to leverage
density map for more robust detection-based crowd counting with RGB-D data. Next we will analyze the challenges
in detection-based approaches, and give our solutions by
leveraging RGB-D data.
Challenge 1: Underestimation. Underestimation,
which means the number of detected heads is much smaller
than the total number of heads (i.e. low recall), is a common problem in detection-based approaches. Especially
when the heads are small/tiny or occluded, detection-based
approaches usually fail to detect them [15]. However,
small/tiny heads are very common in real scenarios. For
example, about 23% of heads are smaller than 8×8 pixels
in ShanghaiTech Part B as shown in Figure 1 (a).
Our solution. We alleviate this underestimation problem from the following aspects: i) a density map provides
a prior about the probability of a pixel being a head. Existing work [37, 12] has shown that the effectiveness of density
map estimation for those small/tiny even occluded heads (as
shown in Figure 1 (c)), which motivates us to leverage den-

1821

