Learning Independent Object Motion from Unlabelled Stereoscopic Videos
Zhe Cao
UC Berkeley

Abhishek Kar
Fyusion Inc.

Christian Häne
Google

Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley

zhecao@berkeley.edu

akar@fyusion.com

chaene@google.com

malik@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present a system for learning motion maps of independently moving objects from stereo videos. The only annotations used in our system are 2D object bounding boxes
which introduce the notion of objects in our system. Unlike prior learning based approaches which have focused
on predicting dense optical flow fields and/or depth maps
for images, we propose to predict instance specific 3D scene
flow maps and instance masks from which we derive a factored 3D motion map for each object instance. Our network
takes the 3D geometry of the problem into account which allows it to correlate the input images and distinguish moving
objects from static ones. We present experiments evaluating
the accuracy of our 3D flow vectors, as well as depth maps
and projected 2D optical flow where our jointly learned system outperforms earlier approaches trained for each task
independently.

1. Introduction
Consider the crowded road scene in Figure 1, what information do we as humans use to navigate effectively in
this environment? We need to have an understanding of the
structure of the environment, i.e. how far other elements
in the scene (cars, bikes, people, trees) are from us. Moreover, we also require knowledge of the speed and direction
in which other agents in the environment are moving relative to us. Such a representation, in conjunction with our
ego-motion, enables us to produce a hypothesis of the environment state in the near future and ultimately allows us to
plan our next actions.
In order to gather this information, humans use stereomotion, i.e. a stream of images captured with our two eyes
as we move through the environment. In this work, we develop a computational system that aims to produce such a
factored scene representation of 3D structure and motion
from a binocular video stream. Specifically, we propose to
predict the 3D object motion of each moving object (represented by 3D scene flow) in addition to a detailed depth map
of the scene from a stereo image sequence. This task and

Figure 1. Object motion predicted by our system. Trained with raw
stereo motion sequences in a self-supervised manner, our model
learns to predict object motion together with the scene depth using sequence of stereo images and object proposals as input. The
speed and moving direction of each moving object is derived from
our scene flow prediction.

its variants have been tackled in supervised settings which
require labels such as dense depth maps and motion annotations that are prohibitively expensive to collect or alternatively obtained from synthetic datasets [4, 5, 17, 21, 27].
We present a system that learns to predict these quantities
using only unlabelled stereo videos, thus making it applicable at scale. In addition to producing pixel-wise depth and
scene flow maps, our network is aware of the notion of independent objects. This allows us to produce a rich factored
3D representation of the environment where we can measure velocities of independent objects in addition to their
3D positions and extents in the scene. The only labels used
by our system are those introduced by off-the-shelf object
detectors which are very cheap to acquire at scale.
Prior work in this domain has focused on certain subproblems such as learning depth or optical flow prediction
without explicit labels [49, 12, 8]. In Section 5, we demonstrate that by jointly learning the full problem of depth and
scene flow prediction, we outperform these methods for
each of these sub-problems as well. The key contributions
of our work are as follows: (1) formulating a learning objective which works with the limited amount of supervision that can be gathered in a real world scenario (object
bounding box annotations), (2) factoring the scene repre15594

