Zoom-In-to-Check: Boosting Video Interpolation via
Instance-level Discrimination
Liangzhe Yuan1∗ Yibo Chen1∗ Hantian Liu1 Tao Kong1,2 Jianbo Shi1
1
2
University of Pennsylvania
Tsinghua University
{lzyuan,yibochen,lhantian,jshi}@seas.upenn.edu, taokongcn@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a light-weight video frame interpolation algorithm. Our key innovation is an instance-level supervision that allows information to be learned from the highresolution version of similar objects. Our experiment shows
that the proposed method can generate state-of-the-art results across different datasets, with fractional computation
resources (time and memory) of competing methods.
Given two image frames, a cascade network creates
an intermediate frame with 1) a flow-warping module that
computes coarse bi-directional optical flow and creates an
interpolated image via flow-based warping, followed by 2)
an image synthesis module to make fine-scale corrections.
In the learning stage, object detection proposals are generated on the interpolated image. Lower resolution objects
are zoomed into, and the learning algorithms using an adversarial loss trained on high-resolution objects to guide
the system towards the instance-level refinement corrects
details of object shape and boundaries.

1. Introduction
High fidelity video frame interpolation has usages in
novel-view rendering, video compression, and frame rate
conversion. Existing methods focus on achieving overall
high-quality interpolation averaged over all regions of images. The lack of explicitly object instances modeling became the bottleneck for algorithm’s improvement.
Flow-based image synthesis algorithms [1, 10, 19, 22]
generate realistic colors and patterns by explicitly copying
pixels from given frames. For challenging scenes with occlusion, complex deformation or fast motion, flow-based
interpolation suffers due to inaccuracy in optical flow estimation algorithms. To compensate for optical flow error,
[19, 22] added an additional network to refine the interpolation results, at a cost of much higher computational cost.
∗ indicates equal contribution

Supplementary video: https://youtu.be/q-_wIRq26DY.

Figure 1: Object detection proposals allow region-ofinterest (RoI) Zoom-In-to-Check. An adversarial discriminator is trained using high-resolution objects across the
entire video against the current interpolated image region.
From top to bottom: synthesized image by image synthesis loss only; by whole image adversarial discriminator; by
proposed instance-level discriminator; and the ground truth.
A kernel-based interpolation approach achieves the same
per-pixel mapping goal without requiring a precise per-pixel
flow estimation. The size of blending kernels in a such
112183

