Overcoming Limitations of Mixture Density Networks:
A Sampling and Fitting Framework for Multimodal Future Prediction
Osama Makansi, Eddy Ilg, Özgün Çiçek and Thomas Brox
University of Freiburg
makansio,ilge,cicek,brox@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Future prediction is a fundamental principle of intelligence that helps plan actions and avoid possible dangers.
As the future is uncertain to a large extent, modeling the
uncertainty and multimodality of the future states is of great
relevance. Existing approaches are rather limited in this regard and mostly yield a single hypothesis of the future or,
at the best, strongly constrained mixture components that
suffer from instabilities in training and mode collapse. In
this work, we present an approach that involves the prediction of several samples of the future with a winner-takes-all
loss and iterative grouping of samples to multiple modes.
Moreover, we discuss how to evaluate predicted multimodal
distributions, including the common real scenario, where
only a single sample from the ground-truth distribution is
available for evaluation. We show on synthetic and real
data that the proposed approach triggers good estimates of
multimodal distributions and avoids mode collapse.

1. Introduction
Future prediction at its core is to estimate future states
of the environment, given its past states. The more complex
the dynamical system of the environment, the more complex the prediction of its future. The future trajectory of a
ball in free fall is almost entirely described by deterministic
physical laws and can be predicted by a physical formula. If
the ball hits a wall, an additional dependency is introduced,
which conditions the ball’s trajectory on the environment,
but it would still be deterministic.
Outside such restricted physical experiments, future
states are typically non-deterministic. Regard the bicycle
traffic scenario in Figure 1. Each bicyclist has a goal where
to go, but it is not observable from the outside, thus, making the system non-deterministic. On the other hand, the
environment restricts the bicyclists to stay on the lanes and
adhere (mostly) to certain traffic rules. Also statistical information on how bicyclists moved in the past in this round-

Figure 1: Given the past images, the past positions of an object (red boxes), and the experience from the training data,
the approach predicts a multimodal distribution over future
states of that object (visualized by the overlaid heatmap).
The bicyclist is most likely to move straight (1), but could
also continue on the roundabout (2) or turn right (3).

about and potentially subtle cues like the orientation of the
bicycle and its speed can indicate where a bicyclist is more
likely to go. A good future prediction must be able to model
the multimodality and uncertainty of a non-deterministic
system and, at the same time, take all the available conditional information into account to shape the predicted distribution away from a non-informative uniform distribution.
Existing work on future prediction is mostly restricted to
predict a single future state, which often corresponds to the
mean of all possible outcomes [42, 57, 39, 12, 10]. In the
best case, such system predicts the most likely of all possible future states, ignoring the other possibilities. As long
as the environment stays approximately deterministic, the
latter is a viable solution. However, it fails to model other
possibilities in a non-deterministic environment, preventing
the actor to consider a plan B.
Rupprecht et al. [44] addressed multimodality by predicting diverse hypotheses with the Winner-Takes-All
(WTA) loss [16], but no distribution and no uncertainty.
Conditional Variational Autoencoders (cVAE) provide a

7144

