Neural Rerendering in the Wild
Moustafa Meshry∗1 , Dan B Goldman2 , Sameh Khamis2 , Hugues Hoppe2 , Rohit Pandey2 ,
Noah Snavely2 , Ricardo Martin-Brualla2
1

University of Maryland, 2 Google Inc.

Abstract
We explore total scene capture — recording, modeling,
and rerendering a scene under varying appearance such
as season and time of day. Starting from internet photos
of a tourist landmark, we apply traditional 3D reconstruction to register the photos and approximate the scene as a
point cloud. For each photo, we render the scene points
into a deep framebuffer, and train a neural network to learn
the mapping of these initial renderings to the actual photos. This rerendering network also takes as input a latent
appearance vector and a semantic mask indicating the location of transient objects like pedestrians. The model is
evaluated on several datasets of publicly available images
spanning a broad range of illumination conditions. We create short videos demonstrating realistic manipulation of the
image viewpoint, appearance, and semantic labeling. We
also compare results with prior work on scene reconstruction from internet photos.

1. Introduction
Imagine spending a day sightseeing in Rome in a fully
realistic interactive experience without ever stepping on a
plane. One could visit the Pantheon in the morning, enjoy
the sunset overlooking the Colosseum, and fight through the
crowds to admire the Trevi Fountain at night time. Realizing this goal involves capturing the complete appearance
space of a scene, i.e., recording a scene under all possible
lighting conditions and transient states in which the scene
might be observed—be it crowded, rainy, snowy, sunrise,
spotlit, etc.—and then being able to summon up any viewpoint of the scene under any such condition. We call this
ambitious vision total scene capture. It is extremely challenging due to the sheer diversity of appearance—scenes
can look dramatically different under night illumination,
during special events, or in extreme weather.
∗ Work performed during an internship at Google.

(a) Input deep buffer

(b) Output renderings

Figure 1: Our neural rerendering technique uses a large-scale internet photo collection to reconstruct a proxy 3D model and trains
a neural rerendering network that takes as input a deferred-shading
deep buffer (consisting of depth, color and semantic labeling) generated from the proxy 3D model (left), and outputs realistic renderings of the scene under multiple appearances (right).

In this paper, we focus on capturing tourist landmarks
around the world using publicly available community photos as the sole input, i.e., photos in the wild. Recent advances in 3D reconstruction can generate impressive 3D
models from such photo collections [1, 39, 41], but the renderings produced from the resulting point clouds or meshes
lack the realism and diversity of real-world images. Alternatively, one could use webcam footage to record a scene
at regular intervals but without viewpoint diversity, or use
specialized acquisition (e.g., Google Street View, aerial, or
satellite images) to snapshot the environment over a short
time window but without appearance diversity. In contrast,
community photos offer an abundant (but challenging) sampling of appearances of a scene over many years.
Our approach to total scene capture has two main components: (1) creating a factored representation of the input
images, which separates viewpoint, appearance conditions,
and transient objects such as pedestrians, and (2) rendering
realistic images from this factored representation. Unlike
recent approaches that extract implicit disentangled representations of viewpoint and content [31, 34, 43], we employ
state-of-the-art reconstruction methods to create an explicit
intermediate 3D representation, in the form of a dense but
noisy point cloud, and use this 3D representation as a “scaffolding” to predict images.
16878

