Relational Knowledge Distillation
Wonpyo Park*
POSTECH, Kakao Corp.

Dongju Kim
POSTECH

Yan Lu
Microsoft Research

Minsu Cho
POSTECH

http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/RKD/

Abstract
Input

Knowledge distillation aims at transferring knowledge
acquired in one model (a teacher) to another model (a student) that is typically smaller. Previous approaches can be
expressed as a form of training the student to mimic output
activations of individual data examples represented by the
teacher. We introduce a novel approach, dubbed relational
knowledge distillation (RKD), that transfers mutual relations of data examples instead. For concrete realizations
of RKD, we propose distance-wise and angle-wise distillation losses that penalize structural differences in relations.
Experiments conducted on different tasks show that the proposed method improves educated student models with a significant margin. In particular for metric learning, it allows
students to outperform their teachers’ performance, achieving the state of the arts on standard benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in computer vision and artificial intelligence have largely been driven by deep neural networks
with many layers, and thus current state-of-the-art models
typically require a high cost of computation and memory
in inference. One promising direction for mitigating this
computational burden is to transfer knowledge in the cumbersome model (a teacher) into a small model (a student).
To this end, there exist two main questions: (1) ‘what constitutes the knowledge in a learned model?’ and (2) ‘how
to transfer the knowledge into another model?’. Knowledge
distillation (or transfer) (KD) methods [3, 4, 11] assume the
knowledge as a learned mapping from inputs to outputs, and
transfer the knowledge by training the student model with
the teacher’s outputs (of the last or a hidden layer) as targets.
Recently, KD has turned out to be very effective not only in
training a student model [1, 11, 12, 27, 47] but also in improving a teacher model itself by self-distillation [2, 9, 45].
In this work, we revisit KD from a perspective of the lin* The work was done when Wonpyo Park was an intern at MSR.

DNN
Output

𝑓𝑇

𝑡1

𝑓𝑆

𝑠1

𝑓𝑇

𝑡2

𝑓𝑆

𝑠2

𝑓𝑇

𝑡3

𝑓𝑆

𝑠3

Figure 1: Relational Knowledge Distillation. While conventional KD transfers individual outputs from a teacher
model (fT ) to a student model (fS ) point-wise, our approach transfers relations of the outputs structure-wise. It
can be viewed as a generalization of conventional KD.
guistic structuralism [19], which focuses on structural relations in a semiological system. Saussure’s concept of the
relational identity of signs is at the heart of structuralist theory; “In a language, as in every other semiological system,
what distinguishes a sign is what constitutes it” [30]. In this
perspective, the meaning of a sign depends on its relations
with other signs within the system; a sign has no absolute
meaning independent of the context.
The central tenet of our work is that what constitutes the
knowledge is better presented by relations of the learned
representations than individuals of those; an individual data
example, e.g., an image, obtains a meaning in relation to
or in contrast with other data examples in a system of representation, and thus primary information lies in the structure in the data embedding space. On this basis, we introduce a novel approach to KD, dubbed Relational Knowledge Distillation (RKD), that transfers structural relations
of outputs rather than individual outputs themselves (Figure 1). For its concrete realizations, we propose two RKD
losses: distance-wise (second-order) and angle-wise (third13967

