CAM-Convs: Camera-Aware Multi-Scale Convolutions for Single-View Depth
Jose M. Facil1
jmfacil@unizar.es

Benjamin Ummenhofer2,3

benjamin.ummenhofer@intel.com

Luis Montesano1,4
1

Huizhong Zhou2

Thomas Brox*,2

zhouh@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Javier Civera*,1

montesano@unizar.es

brox@cs.uni-freiburg.de

University of Zaragoza

2

University of Freiburg

jcivera@unizar.es
3

Intel Labs

Abstract
Single-view depth estimation suffers from the problem
that a network trained on images from one camera does not
generalize to images taken with a different camera model.
Thus, changing the camera model requires collecting an
entirely new training dataset. In this work, we propose a
new type of convolution that can take the camera parameters into account, thus allowing neural networks to learn
calibration-aware patterns. Experiments confirm that this
improves the generalization capabilities of depth prediction
networks considerably, and clearly outperforms the state of
the art when the train and test images are acquired with
different cameras.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D information from 2D images is one of
the fundamental problems in computer vision that, due to
recent advances and applications, is receiving nowadays a
renewed attention. Among others, there has been recent relevant results on problems such as 6D object pose detection
[17, 30, 32], 3D model reconstruction [9, 34], depth estimation from single [21, 10, 22] and multiple views [38, 16],
6D camera pose recovery [19, 18] or camera tracking and
mapping [46, 2, 33, 35]. While traditional multi-view methods (e.g., [29]) are mostly based on geometry and optimization and, thus, are largely independent of the data, these recent deep learning approaches depend on training data that
demonstrates the mapping from images to depth.
The common strategy to collect such data is by using
an RGBD sensor, like the Kinect camera, which conveniently provides both the RGB image and what can be considered ground truth depth. It is implicitly assumed that
training on this type of data will generalize to other RGB
sensors that do not provide depth. However, the evaluation of recent learning-based methods relies largely on pub* Equal contribution

Find our code in webdiis.unizar.es/~jmfacil/camconvs

4

Bitbrain

Camera Model

Encoder

*

Decoder

CAM-Conv

Figure 1. CAM-Convs allows efficient specialization of a camerageneric network for various camera models by feeding cameraspecific parameters into the network.

lic benchmarks where images have been recorded with the
same RGBD camera as the training data. Thus, evaluation
on these benchmarks does not reveal whether a depth estimation method generalizes to RGB images from another
camera.
Overfitting to a benchmark is a common problem in
computer vision research. Other works [36] have shown
that datasets may have strong biases that make researchers
over-confident regarding the performance of their method.
In particular, train-test divisions of the same kind of data
are not enough to prove generalization. In this work we
show that, indeed, state-of-the-art single-view depth prediction networks do not generalize when the camera parameters of the test images are different from the training ones.
Moreover, we show that for single-view depth prediction
the problem of missing generalization to images from different cameras is even more severe: it cannot be solved by
training on images from a diverse set of cameras with different parameters. For present methods to adapt to a different
camera model, they require changes in the architecture.
We present a deep neural network for single-view depth
prediction that, for the first time, addresses the variability on the camera’s internal parameters. We show that
this allows to use images from different cameras at train
and test time without a performance degradation. This is
of particular interest, as it enables the exploitation of images from any camera for training the data-hungry deep
111826

