Social Relation Recognition from Videos via Multi-scale
Spatial-Temporal Reasoning
Xinchen Liu† , Wu Liu† , Meng Zhang† , Jingwen Chen§ , Lianli Gao¶ , Chenggang Yan§ , and Tao Mei†
†
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
§
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
¶
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
{liuxinchen1, zhangmeng1208}@jd.com, liuwu@live.cn
{jingwenchen, cgyan}@hdu.edu.cn, lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn, tmei@live.com

Abstract
Discovering social relations, e.g., kinship, friendship,
etc., from visual contents can make machines better interpret the behaviors and emotions of human beings. Existing
studies mainly focus on recognizing social relations from
still images while neglecting another important media—
video. On the one hand, the actions and storylines in videos
provide more important cues for social relation recognition. On the other hand, the key persons may appear at
arbitrary spatial-temporal locations, even not in one same
image from beginning to the end. To overcome these challenges, we propose a Multi-scale Spatial-Temporal Reasoning (MSTR) framework to recognize social relations from
videos. For the spatial representation, we not only adopt a
temporal segment network to learn global action and scene
information, but also design a Triple Graphs model to capture visual relations between persons and objects. For the
temporal domain, we propose a Pyramid Graph Convolutional Network to perform temporal reasoning with multiscale receptive fields, which can obtain both long-term and
short-term storylines in videos. By this means, MSTR can
comprehensively explore the multi-scale actions and storylines in spatial-temporal dimensions for social relation reasoning in videos. Extensive experiments on a new largescale Video Social Relation dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework. Our dataset is available on https://lxc86739795.github.io.

1. Introduction
Social relation is the close association between multiple
individual persons and forms the basic structure of our society. Recognizing social relations from images or videos can
empower machines to better understand the behaviors or emotions of human beings. However, compared to image-

Colleague

Man A
Woman A Woman B

Man A
Man A

Woman B

Woman A

Woman B

Chair

Cup
Desk
Door
Document

Door

Door

Document
Document

Standing

Talking
Writing
Meeting
Room

Couple

Woman A

Man A

Man A

Bag

Hat

Hat
Grass

Woman A

Mower

Tree

Standing

Woman A Man A

Smiling
Hugging

Hat
Grass

Outdoors

Figure 1. How do we recognize colleagues or couples from a
video? The appearance of persons, interactions between persons, and the scenes with contextual objects are key cues for social
relation recognition.

based social relation recognition [32], the video-based scenario is an important but frontier topic which is often neglected by the community. It has many potential applications such as family video search on mobile phones [27]
and product recommendation to groups of customers in stores [21].
Sociological analytics from visual content has been a
popular area during the last decade [27, 31]. Existing social
recognition studies mainly focus on image-based condition,
in which algorithms recognize social relations between persons in a single image. Appearance and face attributes of
persons and contextual objects are explored to distinguish
different social relations [26, 30, 33]. Although discovering
social networks [5], communities [6], roles [23, 24], and
13566

