PoseFix: Model-agnostic General Human Pose Refinement Network
Gyeongsik Moon
Department of ECE, ASRI
Seoul National University

Ju Yong Chang
Department of EI
Kwangwoon University

Kyoung Mu Lee
Department of ECE, ASRI
Seoul National University

mks0601@snu.ac.kr

juyong.chang@gmail.com

kyoungmu@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Multi-person pose estimation from a 2D image is an essential technique for human behavior understanding. In
this paper, we propose a human pose refinement network
that estimates a refined pose from a tuple of an input image
and input pose. The pose refinement was performed mainly
through an end-to-end trainable multi-stage architecture in
previous methods. However, they are highly dependent on
pose estimation models and require careful model design.
By contrast, we propose a model-agnostic pose refinement
method. According to a recent study, state-of-the-art 2D
human pose estimation methods have similar error distributions. We use this error statistics as prior information
to generate synthetic poses and use the synthesized poses
to train our model. In the testing stage, pose estimation
results of any other methods can be input to the proposed
method. Moreover, the proposed model does not require
code or knowledge about other methods, which allows it to
be easily used in the post-processing step. We show that
the proposed approach achieves better performance than
the conventional multi-stage refinement models and consistently improves the performance of various state-of-the-art
pose estimation methods on the commonly used benchmark.
The code is available in 1 .

1. Introduction
The goal of human pose estimation is to localize semantic keypoints of a human body. It is an essential technique
for human behavior understanding and human-computer
interaction. Recently, many methods [4, 6, 9, 12, 13, 16,
18, 20, 21, 24, 28] utilize deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and achieved noticeable performance improvement. They are also updating performance limits in
annual competitions for 2D human keypoint detection such
as MS COCO keypoint detection challenge [17].
In this paper, we propose a human pose refinement net1 https://github.com/mks0601/PoseFix_RELEASE

keypoints:
(x1, y1),
(x2, y2),
(x3, y3), ..
(xN, yN)

Pose result file of
method A

keypoints:
(x1, y1),
(x2, y2),
(x3, y3), ..
(xN, yN)

Pose result file of
method B

keypoints:
(x1, y1),
(x2, y2),
(x3, y3), ..
(xN, yN)

Pose result file of
method C

(a) Pose estimation results of any methods

Input pose

Input image

PoseFix

Refined pose

(b) Pose error fix procedure of the PoseFix

Figure 1: Testing pipeline of the PoseFix. It takes pose
estimation results of any other method with an input image
and outputs a refined pose. Note that the PoseFix does not
require any code or knowledge about other methods.
work that estimates a refined pose from a tuple of an input image and a pose. Conventionally, the pose refinement has been mainly performed by multi-stage architectures [3,6,19,27]. In other words, the initial pose and image
features generated in the first stage go through subsequent
stages, and each stage outputs a refined pose. These multistage architectures are usually trained in an end-to-end manner. However, the conventional multi-stage architecturebased refinement approach is highly dependent on the pose
estimation model and requires careful design for successful
refinement. By contrast, in this work, we propose a modelagnostic pose refinement method that does not depend on
the pose estimation model.
Recent research by Ronchi et al. [22] gave us a clue on
how to design a general model-agnostic pose refiner. They
analyzed the results of the MS COCO 2016 keypoint detection challenge winners [4,20] by using new pose estimation
evaluation metrics, i.e., keypoint similarity (KS) and object
keypoint similarity (OKS). They taxonomized pose estimation errors into several types such as jitter, inversion, swap,

7773

