High-Quality Face Capture Using Anatomical Muscles
Michael Bao1,2
1

Matthew Cong2,†
1
Stanford University

Stéphane Grabli2,†
Ronald Fedkiw1,2
2
Industrial Light & Magic
†

{mikebao,rfedkiw}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Muscle-based systems have the potential to provide both
anatomical accuracy and semantic interpretability as compared to blendshape models; however, a lack of expressivity and differentiability has limited their impact. Thus, we
propose modifying a recently developed rather expressive
muscle-based system in order to make it fully-differentiable;
in fact, our proposed modifications allow this physically
robust and anatomically accurate muscle model to conveniently be driven by an underlying blendshape basis. Our
formulation is intuitive, natural, as well as monolithically
and fully coupled such that one can differentiate the model
from end to end, which makes it viable for both optimization and learning-based approaches for a variety of applications. We illustrate this with a number of examples including both shape matching of three-dimensional geometry as as well as the automatic determination of a threedimensional facial pose from a single two-dimensional RGB
image without using markers or depth information.

1. Introduction
Muscle simulation-based animation systems are attractive due to their ability to preserve important physical properties such as volume conservation as well as their ability to handle contact and collision. Moreover, utilizing an
anatomically motivated set of controls provides a straightforward way of extracting out semantic meaning from the
control values. Unfortunately, even though [42] was able
to automatically compute muscle activation values given
sparse motion capture data, muscle-based animation models
have proven to be significantly less expressive and harder to
control than their blendshape-based counterparts [30].
Recently, [14] introduced a novel method that significantly improved upon the expressiveness of muscle-based
animation systems. They introduced the concept of “muscle tracks” to control the deformation of the underlying
musculature. This concept gives the muscle simulation
enough expressiveness to target arbitrary shapes, which allowed it be used in high-quality movie productions such

{mcong,sgrabli}@ilm.com

as Kong: Skull Island where it was used both to aid in
the creation of blendshapes and to offer physically-based
corrections to artist-created animation sequences [15, 29].
While [14] alleviates the problems of muscle-based simulation in regards to expressiveness and control, the method
is geared towards generative computer graphics problems,
and is thus not amenable for estimating a facial pose from
a two-dimensional image as is common for markerless performance capture. One could iterate between solving for
a performance using blendshapes and then using a musclebased solution to correct the blendshapes; however, this iterative method is lossy as the muscle simulation does not
have access to the raw data and may thus hallucinate details
or erase details of the performance.
In this paper, we extend [14] by combining the ease of
use and differentiability of traditional blendshape models
with expressive, physically-plausible muscle track simulations in order to create a differentiable simulation framework that can be used interchangeably with traditional
blendshape models for facial performance capture and animation. Instead of relying on a non-differentiable perframe volumetric morph to drive the muscle track deformation as in [14], we instead create a state-of-the-art blendshape model for each muscle, which is then used to drive
its volumetric deformation. Our model maintains the expressiveness of [14] while preserving crucial physical properties. Furthermore, our new formulation is differentiable
from end to end, which allows it to be used to target
three-dimensional facial poses as well as two-dimensional
RGB images. We demonstrate that our blendshape muscle
tracks method shows significant improvements in anatomical plausibility and semantic interpretability when compared to state-of-the-art blendshape-based methods for targeting three-dimensional geometry and two-dimensional
RGB images.

2. Related Work
Face Models: Although our work does not directly address the modeling part of the pipeline, it relies on having
a pre-existing model of the face. For building a realistic
digital double of an actor, multi-view stereo techniques can

10802

