Distant Supervised Centroid Shift: A Simple and Efficient
Approach to Visual Domain Adaptation ∗

♮

Jian Liang, Ran He, Zhenan Sun and Tieniu Tan
CRIPAC & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), ♯ University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, ♭ CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
liangjian92@gmail.com, {jian.liang,rhe,znsun,tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Conventional domain adaptation methods usually resort
to deep neural networks or subspace learning to find invariant representations across domains. However, most deep
learning methods highly rely on large-size source domains
and are computationally expensive to train, while subspace
learning methods always have a quadratic time complexity
that suffers from the large domain size. This paper provides
a simple and efficient solution, which could be regarded as
a well-performing baseline for domain adaptation tasks.
Our method is built upon the nearest centroid classifier,
seeking a subspace where the centroids in the target domain are moderately shifted from those in the source domain. Specifically, we design a unified objective without
accessing the source domain data and adopt an alternating minimization scheme to iteratively discover the pseudo
target labels, invariant subspace, and target centroids. Besides its privacy-preserving property (distant supervision),
the algorithm is provably convergent and has a promising
linear time complexity. In addition, the proposed method
can be readily extended to multi-source setting and domain
generalization, and it remarkably enhances popular deep
adaptation methods by borrowing the learned transferable
features. Extensive experiments on several benchmarks including object, digit, and face recognition datasets validate
that our methods yield state-of-the-art results in various domain adaptation tasks.

1. Introduction
Traditional machine learning paradigms always assume
that the training data and the testing data come from the
same distribution, however, this assumption does not always
hold in real-world applications [52, 66]. To avoid the expensive and time-consuming data labeling step, massive efforts
∗ This work is funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (Grants No. 61622310, 61721004), and Beijing Natural Science
Foundation (Grants No. JQ18017).

Figure 1. Illustrative example of centroid shift (arrows) in our approach. Larger markers indicate the source and target centroids.

over the last decade have been devoted to transfer learning [64, 8, 34, 36] and multi-task learning [14, 30, 63, 70]
that leverage the latent relationship with previous datasets
to learn a new model for an emerging dataset.
Taking a night object image recognition problem for example, it is not desirable to neither train a model on existing
day-time object images to recognize these night object images nor acquire massive labeled object images at night to
re-train a model on them from scratch. By contrast, we expect to transfer the knowledge from existing day-time object
images to recognizing these unlabeled night object images,
which is also known as domain adaptation, and such daytime and night images are termed as source and target domains, respectively. Based on the availability of partial labeled target data, domain adaptation can be roughly divided
into two categories, unsupervised and semi-supervised domain adaptation. In this paper, we mainly focus on the challenging unsupervised domain adaptation problem where the
labels of target data are totally unknown.
Since the degradation in performance mainly arises from
the covariate shift (i.e., the change in the data distribution of
the source and target domains), early approaches [72, 58]
favor an intuitive strategy named instance re-weighting,
which tries to align two different domains via estimating
naturally the ratio between the likelihoods of being a source
or target example. Later studies [42, 7] exploit one favorite distribution measure named Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [24] to weigh data instances. However,

2975

