RENAS: Reinforced Evolutionary Neural Architecture Search

Yukang Chen1,2 Gaofeng Meng1,2 Qian Zhang3 Shiming Xiang1,2
Chang Huang3 Lisen Mu3 Xinggang Wang4
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Horizon Robotics 4 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{yukang.chen,gfmeng,smxiang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{qian01.zhang,chang.huang,lisen.mu}@horizon.ai, {xgwang}@hust.edu.cn
Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is an important yet
challenging task in network design due to its high computational consumption. To address this issue, we propose the
Reinforced Evolutionary Neural Architecture Search (RENAS), which is an evolutionary method with reinforced mutation for NAS. Our method integrates reinforced mutation
into an evolution algorithm for neural architecture exploration, in which a mutation controller is introduced to learn
the effects of slight modifications and make mutation actions. The reinforced mutation controller guides the model
population to evolve efficiently. Furthermore, as child models can inherit parameters from their parents during evolution, our method requires very limited computational resources. In experiments, we conduct the proposed search
method on CIFAR-10 and obtain a powerful network architecture, RENASNet. This architecture achieves a competitive result on CIFAR-10. The explored network architecture
is transferable to ImageNet and achieves a new state-of-theart accuracy, i.e., 75.7% top-1 accuracy with 5.36M parameters on mobile ImageNet. We further test its performance
on semantic segmentation with DeepLabv3 on the PASCAL
VOC. RENASNet outperforms MobileNet-v1, MobileNet-v2
and NASNet. It achieves 75.83% mIOU without being pretrained on COCO.

1. Introduction
Recent several years have witnessed the great success
of neural networks [34, 14, 35, 33, 17] in tackling various
challenging tasks, e.g., image classification, object detection and semantic segmentation. However, designing handcrafted neural networks is still a laborious task due to the
heavy reliance on expert experience and large amount of

trials. For example, hundreds of experts in academia and
industry have made great efforts to optimize the architectures of neural networks that increase the top-5 accuracy
to 96.43% on the ImageNet challenge from AlexNet [20],
VGG [31], Inception [34] to ResNet [14].
Techniques in automated network architecture design
have attracted increasing research interests. Many neural
architecture search methods have been proposed and proven
to be capable of yielding high-performance models. A
large portion of these methods are based on Reinforcement
Learning (RL) [41, 3, 40]. Typical RL-based NAS methods
construct networks sequentially, e.g., by using a RNN controller [41, 27, 40] to determine a sequence of operator and
connection tokens. In addition to RL, Evolution Algorithm
(EA) is also employed in many works [28, 32, 29, 25, 36].
In EA-based NAS methods, a population of architectures
are initialized first and then evolved with their validation
accuracies as fitnesses.
EA and RL have achieved the state-of-the-art performance in the task of NAS. However, both of them have
limitations respectively: 1) For EA-based NAS, it tends
to evolve a population of architectures that guarantees the
diversity of potential results. However, as the evolution
progress relies heavily on random uncontrollable mutation,
the efficiency of EA has no guarantee. For instance, AmoebaNet [28] is searched by an EA-based method and has better final results than its RL counterpart, NASNet [41]. But
in the same search space, AmoebaNet [28] uses more computational resources than NASNet [41] (3150 GPU days vs
2000 GPU days). 2) For RL-based NAS, it relies on hyperparameters to guarantee stability. But when determining an
architecture layer by layer, RL controller needs to try tens
of actions to get a positive reward as a supervisory signal.
This makes the training process inefficient.
In this paper, we propose the Reinforced Evolutionary

4787

