Regularizing Activation Distribution for Training Binarized Deep Networks
Ruizhou Ding, Ting-Wu Chin, Zeye Liu, Diana Marculescu
Carnegie Mellon University
{rding, tingwuc, zeyel, dianam}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Binarized Neural Networks (BNNs) can significantly
reduce the inference latency and energy consumption in
resource-constrained devices due to their pure-logical computation and fewer memory accesses. However, training
BNNs is difficult since the activation flow encounters degeneration, saturation, and gradient mismatch problems.
Prior work alleviates these issues by increasing activation
bits and adding floating-point scaling factors, thereby sacrificing BNN’s energy efficiency. In this paper, we propose
to use distribution loss to explicitly regularize the activation
flow, and develop a framework to systematically formulate
the loss. Our experiments show that the distribution loss
can consistently improve the accuracy of BNNs without losing their energy benefits. Moreover, equipped with the proposed regularization, BNN training is shown to be robust to
the selection of hyper-parameters including optimizer and
learning rate.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed tremendous success of
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) in various applications of
image, video, speech, natural language, etc [16, 31]. However, the increased computation workload and memory access count required by DNNs pose a burden on latencysensitive applications and energy-limited devices. Since latency and energy consumption are highly related to computation cost and memory access count, there has been
a lot of research on reducing these two important design metrics [11, 41, 18, 6]. Binarized Neural Networks
(BNNs) [22] that constrain the network weights and activations to be ±1 have been proven highly efficient on custom hardware [51]. We also show later in Sec. 3.1 that a
typical block of a BNN can be implemented in hardware
with merely a few logical operators including XNOR gates,
counters and comparators, and therefore greatly reduce the
energy consumption and circuit area, as shown in Table 1.
In addition to the computational benefit brought by making the whole network binarized, another benefit of BNNs

BinConv

BN

Activation
Forward: 𝐒𝐢𝐠𝐧 𝒙
Backward: 𝐇𝐚𝐫𝐝𝐓𝐚𝐧𝐡 𝒙 = 𝐦𝐢𝐧(𝐦𝐚𝐱 𝒙, −𝟏 , 𝟏)

Pre-activation distribution

Degeneration

Saturation

Gradient mismatch

Causes difficulty in training

Figure 1: The basic Conv-BN-Act structure for BNN (BinConv: binary convolution; BN: batch normalization). The
pre-activation distribution may exhibit from degeneration,
saturation or gradient mismatch problem that causes difficulty in training.

is the huge reduction of memory footprint due to their 1bit weights and activations. Prior work on extremely lowbit DNNs [9, 12, 28, 4, 46, 10] mainly focuses on fewbit weights and uses more bits for activations, while only
a few [22, 29] target 1-bit weights and activations. However, reading and writing intermediate results (activations)
generate a larger memory footprint than the weights [35].
For example, in the inference phase of a full-precision (32bit) AlexNet with batch size 32, 92.7% of the memory footprint is caused by activations, while only 7.3% is caused by
weights [35]. Therefore, the memory footprint of BNNs is
significantly reduced due to their binary activations.
However, training accurate BNNs requires careful hyperparameter selection [1], which makes the process more difficult than for their full-precision counterparts. Prior work
has shown that this difficulty arises from the bounded activation function and the gradient approximation of the
non-differentiable quantization function [4]. Even for fullprecision DNNs, bounded activation functions (e.g., Sigmoid or Tanh) usually lead to lower accuracy compared to
the unbounded ones (e.g., ReLU, leaky ReLU, or SELU)
111408

