Ray-Space Projection Model for Light Field Camera∗
Qi Zhang1 , Jinbo Ling1 , Qing Wang1 , and Jingyi Yu2
1

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, P.R. China,
qwang@nwpu.edu.cn
2

ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 200031, P.R. China

Abstract
Light field essentially represents the collection of rays in
space. The rays captured by multiple light field cameras
form subsets of full rays in 3D space and can be transformed to each other. However, most previous approaches model the projection from an arbitrary point in 3D space to corresponding pixel on the sensor. There are few
models on describing the ray sampling and transformation
among multiple light field cameras. In the paper, we propose a novel ray-space projection model to transform sets of
rays captured by multiple light field cameras in term of the
Plücker coordinates. We first derive a 6×6 ray-space intrinsic matrix based on multi-projection-center (MPC) model.
A homogeneous ray-space projection matrix and a fundamental matrix are then proposed to establish ray-ray correspondences among multiple light fields. Finally, based on
the ray-space projection matrix, a novel camera calibration
method is proposed to verify the proposed model. A linear
constraint and a ray-ray cost function are established for
linear initial solution and non-linear optimization respectively. Experimental results on both synthetic and real light
field data have verified the effectiveness and robustness of
the proposed model.

1. Introduction
Light field cameras [18, 23] can record spatial and angular information of light rays in 3D space. Based on angular sampling of light rays, sophisticated post-processing
techniques [20, 27, 13, 26, 34, 35, 33] ranging from digital refocusing to depth estimation have been introduced in
decades. However, the major disadvantages of such handheld systems are the spatio-angular trade-off and narrow
baseline. Applications of registration [15, 31, 32] and light
field stitching [1, 8, 24, 7] are proposed to overcome these
∗ The work was supported by NSFC under Grant 61531014.

limitations. In general, the performance of these applications can be enhanced by accurate geometric information
of multiple light field cameras. But, there are fewer works on establishing a generalized model for defining the ray
sampling and transformation among multiple light fields.
Existing light field camera models [3, 30] mostly define
the projection from an arbitrary point in 3D space (passing
through micro-lens) to corresponding pixel on the sensor.
Nevertheless, light field essentially represents the collection
of rays in space. The Plücker line coordinates explicitly provide a homogeneous parameterization for rays to effectively
formulate ray-ray correspondence, which has already verified in generalized epipolar geometry [22]. Dansereau et
al. [4] describe pixel-ray correspondences in 3D space and
present a 4D intrinsic matrix. However, they only focus on
the transformation of rays in monocular light field camera.
Meanwhile, their model has redundancy and dependency,
which results in irregular ray sampling and makes parameterization impossible in term of the Plücker line coordinates. In order to explore the ray sampling and transformation among multiple light field cameras, multi-projectioncenter model (MPC) [30] which provides independent and
effective intrinsic parameters for the Plücker representation
is used.
In the paper, we exploit the transformation of light fields captured by multiple cameras and propose a novel rayspace projection model in term of the Plücker coordinates.
We first propose a so-called ray-space intrinsic matrix (RSIM) to relate the recorded indices to corresponding physical ray. We show that the RSIM is a 6 × 6 matrix consisted
of 6-parameter intrinsics, which is analogous to traditional camera matrix. Furthermore, we derive a homogeneous
ray-space projection matrix and a fundamental matrix using
the RSIM and ray-space extrinsic matrix to describe ray-ray
correspondences. Secondly, we propose a novel light field
camera calibration method to certify the proposed model.
According to the ray-sapce projection matrix, a linear constraint between 3D point and the rays captured by light field

10121

