Temporal Transformer Networks:
Joint Learning of Invariant and Discriminative Time Warping
Suhas Lohit
Qiao Wang
Pavan Turaga
Geometric Media Lab, Arizona State University
{slohit, qiao.wang, pturaga}@asu.edu

Abstract
Many time-series classification problems involve developing metrics that are invariant to temporal misalignment.
In human activity analysis, temporal misalignment arises
due to various reasons including differing initial phase, sensor sampling rates, and elastic time-warps due to subjectspecific biomechanics. Past work in this area has only
looked at reducing intra-class variability by elastic temporal alignment. In this paper, we propose a hybrid modelbased and data-driven approach to learn warping functions
that not just reduce intra-class variability, but also increase
inter-class separation. We call this a temporal transformer
network (TTN). TTN is an interpretable differentiable module, which can be easily integrated at the front end of a
classification network. The module is capable of reducing
intra-class variance by generating input-dependent warping functions which lead to rate-robust representations. At
the same time, it increases inter-class variance by learning
warping functions that are more discriminative. We show
improvements over strong baselines in 3D action recognition on challenging datasets using the proposed framework.
The improvements are especially pronounced when training
sets are smaller.

1. Introduction
Guaranteed invariances of machine learning algorithms
to nuisance parameters is an important design consideration
in critical applications. Classically, invariances can only be
guaranteed under a model-based approach. Learned representations however have not been able to guarantee invariances, except by empirical tests [8]. Learning invariant representations that build on analytical models of phenomena
may hold the cue to bridge this gap, and can also help lend
explainability to the model.
However, deep learning presents a challenge for learning explainable invariants, primarily due to incompatibility
* Qiao Wang is now at SRI International.

between the mathematical approaches that underly invariant design, and the architectures prevalent in deep learning. There have been recent attempts at leveraging modelbased and data-driven approaches to learn invariant representations across spatial transforms [16, 14, 38], illumination [33, 21], and viewpoints [20]. On the other hand,
learning invariant/robust representations to temporal ratevariations has received significantly less attention. If tackled well, many applications of human activity modeling will
benefit, including more robust recognition algorithms for
human-robot interaction, richer synthesis of human motion
for computer-generated imagery, and health applications.
Hybrid model- and data-based approach: In this paper, our chosen application is activity classification from
RGBD devices, where skeleton data are available. Activities such as walking can be performed at different rates by
different subjects owing to physiological and biomechanical factors. We would like to design representations that
provide robust classification against such nuisance factors.
To do this, we adopt a model-based approach, and constrain
certain layers in deep network using the model. The model
for temporal variability is adopted from past work in elastic temporal alignment which considers temporal variability
as a result of a temporal diffeomorphism acting on a given
time-series [31]. The space of such diffeomorphisms has a
group structure, and can be converted to simpler geometric
constraints by exploiting contemporary square-root forms
to represent the diffeomorphic maps [29].
Compatibility with deep architectures: We design a
novel module, which we refer to as a Temporal Transformer
Network (TTN). The hallmark of this module is that it can
be easily integrated into existing time-series classifiers such
as Temporal Convolution Networks (TCNs) [17] and Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks [9]. TTN is explainable in the sense that it is designed so as to interact
with the classification network in a predefined, predictable
and visualizable manner. TTN is a trainable network added
at the beginning of the classifier and operates on the input
sequence by performing selective temporal warping of the
input sequences. As such, it has the ability to factor out

12426

