Convolutional Neural Networks Can Be Deceived by Visual Illusions
A. Gomez-Villa∗, A. Martı́n∗, J. Vazquez-Corral†, M. Bertalmı́o∗
{alexander.gomez, adrian.martin, marcelo.bertalmio}@upf.edu, j.vazquez@uea.ac.uk

Abstract
Visual illusions teach us that what we see is not always
what is represented in the physical world. Their special nature make them a fascinating tool to test and validate any
new vision model proposed. In general, current vision models are based on the concatenation of linear and non-linear
operations. The similarity of this structure with the operations present in Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
has motivated us to study if CNNs trained for low-level visual tasks are deceived by visual illusions. In particular, we
show that CNNs trained for image denoising, image deblurring, and computational color constancy are able to replicate the human response to visual illusions, and that the
extent of this replication varies with respect to variation in
architecture and spatial pattern size. These results suggest
that in order to obtain CNNs that better replicate human
behaviour, we may need to start aiming for them to better
replicate visual illusions.

1. Introduction
Visual illusions are fascinating examples of the complexity of the human visual system, and of the intrinsic difference between perception and reality: while we constantly
assume that what we see is a faithful representation of the
world around us, visual illusions make clear that what we
see is just an internal construct of eyes and brain, because
our internal representation and the world itself often do not
match.
For instance, Fig. 1 shows a simple color illusion, where
three identical cats are seen as having quite different colors
depending on their surround. Visual illusions are so striking
because, even after we go and check that the three cats have
indeed the same triplet RGB value and therefore send the
same light to us, we still see them as having different colors.
There are many types of illusions apart from color-based,
involving other percepts such as brightness, motion, geom∗ Department of Information and Communication Technologies
(DTIC), Universitat Pompeu Fabra. C. Roc Boronat 138, 08018,
Barcelona, Spain
† CMP, University of East Anglia,NR4 7TJ, Norwich, UK

Visual illusion

Target

Inducer

Figure 1. Anatomy of a simple color visual illusion. While the
target (cat) is always the same, with the same RGB triplet in the
three cases, we perceive it as “pink” when it is isolated, but magenta with one inducing surround and orange with the other.

etry or grouping, to name a few [1]. For the visual science
community the study of visual illusions is key [2, 3], as the
mismatches between reality and perception provide insights
that can be very useful to develop new vision models of perception or of neural activity [4], and also to validate existing
ones. This remains a very challenging open problem, as attested by the variety of vision science models (e.g. perceptual models based on edge-integration, Gestalt-anchoring,
spatial-filtering, intrinsic images or purely empirical ones)
and the fact that none of them can replicate a wide range of
visual illusions; even models that can successfully predict
an illusion may fail when a slight modification (like adding
noise) is introduced [5].
A very popular approach in vision science is to model
neural activity and also perception as a cascade of modules,
each consisting of a linear convolution operation followed
by a nonlinearity, see [6] and references therein1 . These are
of course the building blocks of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), but while the filters in visual models are designed so that the model best replicates neural or perceptual
data, filters in CNNs are learned in a supervised manner in
order to perform a specific imaging task, such as classification, recognition or denoising, to name just a few.
The authors find rather stunning that, given the importance of visual illusions for the vision science community,
the neural inspiration of CNNs, and that so often the aim
of CNNs is replicating human behaviour, there is virtually
no work done on linking visual illusions and CNNs. To the
1 We want to stress that linear+nonlinear cascades are very common but
definitely not the only approach to modeling in vision science, given their
well-known limitations [7].

12309

