A Simple Baseline for Audio-Visual Scene-Aware Dialog
Idan Schwartz1 , Alexander Schwing2 , Tamir Hazan1
1
2
Technion
UIUC
idanschwartz@gmail.com, aschwing@illinois.edu, tamir.hazan@technion.ac.il

Abstract
The recently proposed audio-visual scene-aware dialog
task paves the way to a more data-driven way of learning
virtual assistants, smart speakers and car navigation systems. However, very little is known to date about how to
effectively extract meaningful information from a plethora of
sensors that pound the computational engine of those devices.
Therefore, in this paper, we provide and carefully analyze a
simple baseline for audio-visual scene-aware dialog which
is trained end-to-end. Our method differentiates in a datadriven manner useful signals from distracting ones using an
attention mechanism. We evaluate the proposed approach on
the recently introduced and challenging audio-visual sceneaware dataset, and demonstrate the key features that permit
to outperform the current state-of-the-art by more than 20%
on CIDEr.

1. Introduction
We are interacting with a dynamic environment which
constantly stimulates our brain via visual and auditory signals. Despite the huge amount of different information that
is permanently occupying our nervous system, we are often
easily able to quickly discern important cues from data that
is irrelevant. Telling apart useful information from distracting aspects is also an important ability for virtual assistants,
car navigation systems, or smart speakers. However present
day technology uses a chain of components from speech
recognition and dialog management to sentence generation
and speech synthesis, making it hard to design a holistic and
entirely data-driven approach.
For instance, in computer vision, a tremendous amount of
recent work has focused on image captioning [68, 30, 11, 16,
75, 45, 77, 31, 69, 4, 15, 10], visual question generation [36,
48, 47, 28], visual question answering [5, 19, 59, 54, 44, 73,
74, 76, 57, 58, 49, 50], and very recently visual dialog [13,
14, 27, 46]. While those meticulously engineered algorithms
have shown promising results in their specific domain, little
is known about the end-to-end performance of an entire
system. This is partly due to the fact that little data is publicly
available to design such an end-to-end algorithm.
Recent work on audio-visual scene aware dialog [2, 25]
partly addresses this shortcoming and proposes a novel

Question: what color is the rag ?

Question: where is the video taking place ?

MultiModal-Attention:

MultiModal-Attention:

Answer: it appears to be white .
Question:does he speak at all ?

Answer: the video starts with a man
in the kitchen .
Question: do they get up from the chair?

MultiModal-Attention:

MultiModal-Attention:

Answer: no he does not speak .

Answer: no , they stay sitting in the chair .

Figure 1: We present 4 different questions and the generated answer. Our attention unit is illustrated as well. Our model samples 4
frames, and attends to each frame separately, along with the question and the audio. We observe attention for each frame to differ,
where first and fourth frames are widespread, while the second
and third are more specific. Also, the question attention attends to
relevant words. We also include the audio modality as input to the
attention computation.

dataset. Different from classical datasets like MSCOCO [39],
VQA [5] or Visual Dialog [13], this new dataset contains
short video clips, the corresponding audio stream and a sequence of question-answer pairs. While development of an
end-to-end data driven system isn’t feasible just yet due to
the missing speech signal, the new audio-visual scene aware
dialog dataset at least permits to develop a holistic dialog
management and sentence generation approach taking audio
and video signals into account.
In recent work [2, 25], a baseline for a system based on
audio, video and language data was proposed. Compelling
results were achieved, demonstrating accurate question answering. The authors demonstrate that multimodal features
based on I3D-Kinetics (RGB+Flow) [9] refined via a carefully designed attention-based mechanism improve the quality of the generated dialog.
However, since much effort was dedicated to collecting
the dataset, little analysis of such a holistic system was provided. Moreover, due to tremendous amounts of available
data (certainly a ten-fold increase compared to classical vi112548

