Inserting Videos into Videos
Donghoon Lee1,2
Tomas Pfister2
Ming-Hsuan Yang2,3
1
Electrical and Computer Engineering and ASRI, Seoul National University
2
Google Cloud AI
3
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California at Merced

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a new problem of manipulating a given video by inserting other videos into it. Our
main task is, given an object video and a scene video, to insert the object video at a user-specified location in the scene
video so that the resulting video looks realistic. We aim to
handle different object motions and complex backgrounds
without expensive segmentation annotations. As it is difficult to collect training pairs for this problem, we synthesize fake training pairs that can provide helpful supervisory
signals when training a neural network with unpaired real
data. The proposed network architecture can take both real
and fake pairs as input and perform both supervised and unsupervised training in an adversarial learning scheme. To
synthesize a realistic video, the network renders each frame
based on the current input and previous frames. Within this
framework, we observe that injecting noise into previous
frames while generating the current frame stabilizes training. We conduct experiments on real-world videos in object
tracking and person re-identification benchmark datasets.
Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm is able to synthesize long sequences of realistic videos
with a given object video inserted.

1. Introduction
Object insertion in images aims to insert a new object
into a given scene such that the manipulated scene looks
realistic. In recent years, there has been increasing interest in this problem as it can be applied to numerous vision
tasks, including but not limited to training data augmentation for object detection [19], interactive image editing [10],
and manipulating semantic layouts [14]. However, there remains a significant gap between its potential and real-world
applications since existing methods focus on modifying a
single image while either requiring carefully pre-processed
inputs, e.g. segmented objects without backgrounds [16],
or generating objects from a random vector which makes
it difficult to control the resulting appearance of the object

directly [10, 14, 19].
In this paper, we introduce a new problem of inserting existing videos into other videos. More specifically,
as shown in Figure 1, a user can select a video of an object of interest, e.g. a walking pedestrian, and put it at a
desired location in other videos, e.g. surveillance scenes.
Then, an algorithm composes the object seamlessly while
it moves in the scene video. Note that unlike previous
approaches [10, 14, 19], we do not assume that the input
videos have expensive segmentation annotations. This not
only allows users to edit videos more directly and intuitively, but also opens the door to numerous applications
from training data augmentation for object tracking, video
person re-identification, and video object segmentation, to
video content generation for virtual reality or movies.
We pose the problem as a video-to-video synthesis task
where the synthesized video containing an object of interest should follow the distribution of existing objects in
the scene video. This falls into an unsupervised videoto-video translation problem since we do not have paired
data in general, i.e. we do not observe exactly the same
motion of the same object at the location we want to insert in different videos. Nevertheless, without any supervision, we face challenging issues such as handling different backgrounds, occlusions, lighting conditions and object
sizes. Existing methods are limited to addressing such issues when there exists a number of moving objects and
complex backgrounds. For example, the performance of
an algorithm that relies on object segmentation methods,
which often fails to crop foreground objects accurately in
a complex scene, will be bounded by the accuracy of the
segmentation algorithm.
To address the problem, we first address the related problems in the image domain, i.e. we study how to insert a
given object image into other frames from different videos.
To alleviate the issue of unpaired data, we propose a simple
yet effective way to synthesize fake data that can provide supervisory signals for object insertion. The key idea of this
supervision approach using the fake data is, when training a
network, the fake data is carefully rendered to closely match
110061

