Defending against adversarial attacks by randomized diversification
Olga Taran, Shideh Rezaeifar, Taras Holotyak, Slava Voloshynovskiy∗
Department of Computer Science, University of Geneva
7, route de Drize, 1227 Carouge, Switzerland
{olga.taran, shideh.rezaeifar, taras.holotyak, svolos}@unige.ch

Shared secret key k

Abstract

Soft-max
1
1

X

n

x1

xN

Known
training
data

···
M

y1

φθ
M

x′

yN

1

Testing

ĉ

···

φθ

n

x

Training

···

∗ S. Voloshynovskiy is a corresponding author. The research was supported by the SNF project No. 200021 182063.

1

···

Besides remarkable and impressive achievements, many
machine learning systems are vulnerable to adversarial attacks [6]. The adversarial attacks attempt at tricking a decision of a classifier by introducing bounded and invisible
perturbations to a chosen target image. This weakness seriously questions the usage of the machine learning in many
security- and trust-sensitive domains.
Many researchers have proposed various defense strategies and countermeasures to defeat adversarial attacks.
However, the growing number of defenses naturally stimulates the invention of new and even more universal attacks.

···

···

1. Introduction

1

···

The vulnerability of machine learning systems to adversarial attacks questions their usage in many applications.
In this paper, we propose a randomized diversification as a
defense strategy. We introduce a multi-channel architecture
in a gray-box scenario, which assumes that the architecture
of the classifier and the training data set are known to the
attacker. The attacker does not only have access to a secret key and to the internal states of the system at the test
time. The defender processes an input in multiple channels. Each channel introduces its own randomization in
a special transform domain based on a secret key shared
between the training and testing stages. Such a transform
based randomization with a shared key preserves the gradients in key-defined sub-spaces for the defender but it prevents gradient back propagation and the creation of various bypass systems for the attacker. An additional benefit of
multi-channel randomization is the aggregation that fuses
soft-outputs from all channels, thus increasing the reliability of the final score. The sharing of a secret key creates an
information advantage to the defender. Experimental evaluation demonstrates an increased robustness of the proposed
method to a number of known state-of-the-art attacks.

y

M

Known
architecture
Adversarial
examples
modulator

x′ = x + wc

′

Target host (x)
Target class (c′ )

Figure 1: Setup under investigation: the attacker knows the
labeled training data set X and the system architecture but
he does not have access to secret key k of the defender
shared between the training and testing.

An overview and classification of the most efficient attacks
and defenses are given in [15, 10].
In this paper, we consider a ”game” between the defender and the attacker according to the diagram presented
in Figure 1.
The defender has access to the classifier φθ and the training data set X. The defender shares a secret key k between
training and testing. The classifier outputs a soft-max vector
y of length M , where M corresponds to the total number
of classes, and each yc , 1 ≤ c ≤ M is treated as a probability that a given input x belongs to a class c. The trained
classifier φθ is used during testing.
The attacker in the white-box scenario has full knowledge about the classifier architecture, defense mechanisms,
training data and, quite often, can access the trained parameters of the classifier. In the gray-box scenario, considered
in this paper, the attacker knows the architecture of the classifier, the general defense mechanism and has access to the
same training data X [3, 15]. Using the above available
knowledge, the attacker can generate a non-targeted or targeted, with respect to a specified class c′ , adversarial perturbation wc′ . The attacker produces an adversarial example
by adding this perturbation to the target host sample x as

11226

