Homomorphic Latent Space Interpolation for Unpaired Image-to-image
Translation
Ying-Cong Chen1 Xiaogang Xu1 Zhuotao Tian1 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent Youtu Lab

Generative adversarial networks have achieved great
success in unpaired image-to-image translation. Cycle consistency allows modeling the relationship between two distinct domains without paired data. In this paper, we propose
an alternative framework, as an extension of latent space
interpolation, to consider the intermediate region between
two domains during translation. It is based on the fact that
in a flat and smooth latent space, there exist many paths
that connect two sample points. Properly selecting paths
makes it possible to change only certain image attributes,
which is useful for generating intermediate images between
the two domains. We also show that this framework can be
applied to multi-domain and multi-modal translation. Extensive experiments manifest its generality and applicability
to various tasks.

1. Introduction
Unpaired image-to-image translation and latent space interpolation were developed separately and serve different
applications. Unpaired image-to-image translation [28, 9,
14, 4] aims to map images from one domain to another,
e.g, translating a collection of neutral faces to smiling ones.
Since no pair information is available, the connection of different domains is usually built upon the cycle-consistency
constraint [28], which largely promotes the capacity of generative models and leads to many impressive results.
When the purpose is to generate a sequence of images
between the input two domains, intermediate states should
be considered, which is however beyond the capability of
the cycle-consistency constraint. We show an example in
Fig. 1 – directly using StarGAN [4] does not generate a natural sequence (or expression flow) to gradually close mouth.
There exists a quick change between (c) and (d).
On the other hand, to generate smooth flow, latent
space interpolation [11, 21, 22] focuses on intermediate
states based on an assumption that deep neural networks

Ours

Abstract

StarGAN

{ycchen,xgxu,zttian,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Rendering intermediate states between (a) “open-mouth”
domain and (e) “close-mouth” domain. The first-row results
are generated by StarGAN [4]. Rendering intermediate states is
achieved by altering the input domain label continuously. (c) and
(d) show that abrupt change of expression exists. Our results in the
second row model intermediate regions and show smooth translation effect.

can model natural images as flat and smooth distributions.
Specifically, if x and y are sampled from two respective domains X and Y, moving from x toward y in the latent space
continuously produces realistic images from domain X to
Y. Albeit this nice property, this method cannot directly
serve image-to-image translation because it does not distinguish among different attribute factors, and thus makes
complicated expression transition tangled with identity or
background changes. Also, the interpolation path ends at y
instead of a translated version of x.
In this paper, we address latent space interpolation in unpaired image-to-image translation. This solution inherently
allows modeling intermediate regions between different domains, with additional important and appealing capacity of
multi-domain and multi-modal translation. Since in a flat
and smooth latent space, many paths exist to connect two
samples, interpolating along different paths leads to diverse
intermediate results [24]. Our idea is to choose the path
that only corresponds to a certain attribute component to
make transition natural to human perception. Here the term
attribute defines image domains. For example, smiling attribute divides facial images to smiling and non-smiling domains. Fig. 2 provides an example where translating be-

2408

