Attention-guided Unified Network for Panoptic Segmentation
Yanwei Li1,2 , Xinze Chen3 , Zheng Zhu1,2 , Lingxi Xie4,5 , Guan Huang3 ,
Dalong Du3 , Xingang Wang1
1
Institute of Automation, CAS 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Horizon Robotics, Inc. 4 Johns Hopkins University 5 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Inc.
{liyanwei2017,zhuzheng2014,xingang.wang}@ia.ac.cn
{xinze.chen,guan.huang,dalong.du}@horizon.ai

198808xc@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper studies panoptic segmentation, a recently
proposed task which segments foreground (FG) objects at
the instance level as well as background (BG) contents at
the semantic level. Existing methods mostly dealt with these
two problems separately, but in this paper, we reveal the underlying relationship between them, in particular, FG objects provide complementary cues to assist BG understanding. Our approach, named the Attention-guided Unified
Network (AUNet), is a unified framework with two branches
for FG and BG segmentation simultaneously. Two sources
of attentions are added to the BG branch, namely, RPN and
FG segmentation mask to provide object-level and pixellevel attentions, respectively. Our approach is generalized
to different backbones with consistent accuracy gain in both
FG and BG segmentation, and also sets new state-of-thearts both in the MS-COCO (46.5% PQ) and Cityscapes
(59.0% PQ) benchmarks.1

(a) Input Image

(b) Panoptic Segmentation

(c) Foreground: things

(d) Background: stuff

Figure 1. Given an image 1(a), the goal of panoptic segmentation 1(b) is to find FG things at the instance level 1(c) and BG
stuff at the semantic level 1(d). The things of the same class share
the same color family but appear in different intensities. All these
results are produced by the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding is a fundamental yet challenging
task in computer vision, which has a great impact on
other applications such as autonomous driving and robotics.
Classic tasks for scene understanding mainly include object detection, instance segmentation and semantic segmentation. This paper considers a recently proposed task
named panoptic segmentation [23], which aims at finding
all foreground (FG) objects (named things, mainly including countable targets such as people, animals, tools, etc.) at
the instance level, meanwhile parsing the background (BG)
contents (named stuff, mainly including amorphous regions
of similar texture and/or material such as grass, sky, road,
etc.) at the semantic level. The benchmark algorithm [23]
and MS-COCO panoptic challenge winners [1] dealt with
1 This work was done in Horizon Robotics.

this task by directly combining FG instance segmentation
models [15] and BG scene parsing [45] algorithms, which
ignores the underlying relationship and fails to borrow rich
contextual cues between things and stuff.
In this paper, we present a conceptually simple and unified framework for panoptic segmentation. To facilitate information flow between FG things and BG stuff, we combine conventional instance segmentation and semantic segmentation networks, leading to a unified network with two
branches. This strategy brings an immediate improvement
in segmentation accuracy as well as higher efficiency in
computation (because the network backbone can be shared).
This implies that panoptic segmentation benefits from complementary information provided by FG objects and BG
contents, which lays the foundation of our approach.

7026

