The Domain Transform Solver
Akash Bapat and Jan-Michael Frahm
Department of Computer Science, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{akash,jmf}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
We present a novel framework for edge-aware optimization that is an order of magnitude faster than the state of
the art while maintaining comparable results. Our key insight is that the optimization can be formulated by leveraging properties of the domain transform [17], a method
for edge-aware filtering that defines a distance-preserving
1D mapping of the input space. This enables our method
to improve performance for a wide variety of problems including stereo, depth super-resolution, render from defocus,
colorization, and especially high-resolution depth filtering,
while keeping the computational complexity linear in the
number of pixels. Our method is highly parallelizable and
adaptable, and it has demonstrable linear scalability with
respect to image resolutions. We provide a comprehensive
evaluation of our method w.r.t speed and accuracy for a variety of tasks.

1. Introduction
Edge-aware optimization is a widely utilized tool in
computer vision. It has been applied to a large variety of
tasks, including semantic segmentation [21], stereo [5], colorization [22], and optical flow [32]. Edge-awareness is
motivated by the intuition that similar-looking pixels often have similar properties. For this reason, a wide variety of edge-aware filtering algorithms have been developed, including the bilateral filter [37], anisotropic diffusion [29], and edge-avoiding wavelets [14], all of which
identify similar-looking pixels. However, using such filters
in optimization frameworks typically leads to computationally expensive algorithms. While high-level groupings like
super-pixels can be used to compensate for this sluggishness [25], the color-space clusterings of such approaches
are not guaranteed to respect the semantics of the underlying domain, often leading to artifacts.
We propose a general optimization framework that directly operates in the pixel space while maintaining distances in the combined color and pixel space with an edgeaware regularizer. The framework can be applied for a va-

(a) Colorization result

(c) Color image

(b) Noisy depthmap vs. our 16x
upsampled smooth result

(d) Target image

(e) Our result

Figure 1: Our domain transform solver can tackle a variety of problems, including (a) colorization, (b) depth superresolution using the color image as reference, and (c-e)
depth map refinement. The second row shows a color image from the Middlebury dataset [33] with an initialization
(target) obtained from MC-CNN [44], which is then refined
in an edge-aware sense to obtain our result (e).

riety of optimization problems, as we demonstrate in Fig. 1
and Sec. 3. Our method achieves competitive accuracy in
applications like stereo optimization (Sec. 4.1), rendering
from defocus (Sec. 4.2), depth super-resolution (Sec. 4.3),
and high resolution depth filtering for multi-view stereo
(Sec. 5). While being extremely fast, our framework excels in two aspects that are not jointly achieved by any
prior edge-aware optimization algorithms: 1) With increasing image resolution, as well as a growing number of image dimensions/channels, our method scales linearly and is
more than twice as fast as existing parallel methods. 2) Our
approach is independent of blur kernel sizes. Considering
the increasingly high resolutions of cameras in consumer
devices such as smartphones, and the desire for on-device
computing for tasks like automatic photo enhancement, our
contributions are poised to enable crucial advances for up16014

