Image Deformation Meta-Networks for One-Shot Learning
Zitian Chen1
Yanwei Fu1 *
Yu-Xiong Wang2
Lin Ma3
Wei Liu3
Martial Hebert2
1
Schools of Computer Science, and Data Science, Fudan University; Jilian Technology Group (Video++)
2
3
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Tencent AI Lab
{chenzt15,yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn

yuxiongw@cs.cmu.edu

wl2223@columbia.edu

(a)

(b)

forest.linma@gmail.com

hebert@cs.cmu.edu

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Illustration of a variety of image deformations: ghosted (a, b), stitched (c), montaged (d), and partially occluded (e) images.

Abstract
Humans can robustly learn novel visual concepts even
when images undergo various deformations and loose certain information. Mimicking the same behavior and synthesizing deformed instances of new concepts may help visual recognition systems perform better one-shot learning,
i.e., learning concepts from one or few examples. Our key
insight is that, while the deformed images may not be visually realistic, they still maintain critical semantic information and contribute significantly to formulating classifier decision boundaries. Inspired by the recent progress of
meta-learning, we combine a meta-learner with an image
deformation sub-network that produces additional training
examples, and optimize both models in an end-to-end manner. The deformation sub-network learns to deform images
by fusing a pair of images — a probe image that keeps the
visual content and a gallery image that diversifies the deformations. We demonstrate results on the widely used oneshot learning benchmarks (miniImageNet and ImageNet 1K
Challenge datasets), which significantly outperform stateof-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Deep architectures have made significant progress in various visual recognition tasks, such as image classification
and object detection. This success typically relies on super* Yanwei Fu is the corresponding author

vised learning from large amounts of labeled examples. In
real-world scenarios, however, one may not have enough resources to collect large training sets or need to deal with rare
visual concepts. It is also unlike the human visual system,
which can learn a novel concept with very little supervision.
One-shot or low/few-shot learning [4], which aims to build
a classifier for a new concept from one or very few labeled
examples, has thus attracted more and more attention.
Recent efforts to address this problem have leveraged a
learning-to-learn or meta-learning paradigm [25, 20, 28,
32, 31, 22, 33, 17, 5, 13]. Meta-learning algorithms train a
learner, which is a parameterized function that maps labeled
training sets to classifiers. Meta-learners are trained by sampling a collection of one-shot learning tasks and the corresponding datasets from a large universe of labeled examples
of known (base) categories, feeding the sampled small training set to the learner to obtain a classifier, and then computing the loss of the classifier on the sampled test set. The
goal is that the learner is able to tackle the recognition of
unseen (novel) categories from few training examples.
Despite their noticeable performance improvements,
these generic meta-learning algorithms typically treat images as black boxes and ignore the structure of the visual
world. By contrast, our biological vision system is very robust and trustable in understanding images that undergo various deformations [27, 1]. For instance, we can easily recognize the objects in Figure 1, despite ghosting (Figure 1(a,
b)), stitching (Figure 1(c)), montaging (Figure 1(d)), and
partially occluding (Figure 1(e)) the images. While these

8680

