Describing like Humans: on Diversity in Image Captioning
Qingzhong Wang and Antoni B. Chan
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
qingzwang2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recently, the state-of-the-art models for image captioning have overtaken human performance based on the most
popular metrics, such as BLEU, METEOR, ROUGE and
CIDEr. Does this mean we have solved the task of image
captioning? The above metrics only measure the similarity
of the generated caption to the human annotations, which
reflects its accuracy. However, an image contains many
concepts and multiple levels of detail, and thus there is a
variety of captions that express different concepts and details that might be interesting for different humans. Therefore only evaluating accuracy is not sufficient for measuring
the performance of captioning models – the diversity of the
generated captions should also be considered. In this paper,
we proposed a new metric for measuring diversity of image
captions, which is derived from latent semantic analysis and
kernelized to use CIDEr similarity. We conduct extensive
experiments to re-evaluate recent captioning models in the
context of both diversity and accuracy. We find that there is
still a large gap between the model and human performance
in terms of both accuracy and diversity, and the models that
have optimized accuracy (CIDEr) have low diversity. We
also show that balancing the cross-entropy loss and CIDEr
reward in reinforcement learning during training can effectively control the tradeoff between diversity and accuracy of
the generated captions.

1. Introduction
The task of image captioning is challenging and draws
much attention from researchers in the fields of both computer vision and natural language processing. A large variety of models have been proposed to automatically generate
image captions, and most of the models are engaged in improving the accuracy of the generated captions as measured
by the current metrics, such as BLEU 1-4 [22], METEOR
[7], ROUGE [16], CIDEr [28] and SPICE [1]. However,
another important property, the diversity of captions generated for a given image, receives less attention. Generally, diversity refers to the differences among a set of cap-

Model 1

Human

Model 2

1.a zebra standing alone 1.a zebra standing in
in a field next to trees the middle of a field

4.a zebra standing in 4.a zebra standing in
tall dry grass in trees the middle of a field

1.a zebra is standing in the
forest
2.a zebra standing near a
tree in a field
3.a zebra standing on a lush
dry grass field
4.a zebra standing on all four
legs near trees and bushes
with hills in the far distance

5.a zebra walking in
5.a zebra standing in
a dry terrain field and the grass of a field

5.a zebra is standing in the
grass near a tree

2.a zebra is walking
through the wild dry

2.a zebra standing in
a field of grass

3.a zebra stands in a
field in tall grass

3.a zebra standing in
a field of grass

Similarity Matrix

Decomposition

SVD

SVD

SVD

Diversity Scores

0.859

0.423

0.835

Accuracy Scores

1.225

2.141

1.443

Figure 1: An overview of our diversity metric. Given a set of captions from a method, we first construct the self-similarity matrix
K, consisting of CIDEr [28] scores between all pairs of captions.
The diversity score is computed from the singular values of K. A
higher diversity score indicates more variety in the set of generated captions, such as changes in the level of descriptive detail and
inclusion of removal of objects. The accuracy (average CIDEr) of
the captions with respect to the human ground-truth is on the bottom. For human annotations, this is the leave-one-out accuracy.

tions generated by a method for a single image, and can
be categorized into three levels: (1) word diversity refers
to only changes of single words that do not change the
caption’s semantics, e.g., using synonyms in different captions; (2) syntactic diversity refers to only differences in
the word order, phrases, and sentence structures, such as
pre-modification, post-modification, redundant and concise
descriptions, which do not change the caption’s concept.
(3) semantic diversity refers to the differences of expressed
concepts, including level of descriptive detail, changing of
the sentence’s subject, and addition/removal of sentence objects. For example, in Figure 1, the human captions 2 and
5 have syntactic diversity, as they both express the same
concept of a zebra near a tree in a grass field using different word orderings. In contrast, captions 2 and 3 exhibit
semantic diversity, as caption 3 describes the type of grass
field (“lush dry”) and omits “near a tree” as unimportant.
Ideally, a caption system should be able to generate captions expressing different concepts in the image, and hence
in this paper we focus on measuring semantic diversity.
The motivations for considering diversity of image cap-

4195

