Divide and Conquer the Embedding Space for Metric Learning
Artsiom Sanakoyeu∗
Vadim Tschernezki∗
Uta Büchler
Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing, IWR, Heidelberg University

Abstract
Learning the embedding space, where semantically similar objects are located close together and dissimilar objects far apart, is a cornerstone of many computer vision
applications. Existing approaches usually learn a single
metric in the embedding space for all available data points,
which may have a very complex non-uniform distribution
with different notions of similarity between objects, e.g. appearance, shape, color or semantic meaning. Approaches
for learning a single distance metric often struggle to encode all different types of relationships and do not generalize
well. In this work, we propose a novel easy-to-implement divide and conquer approach for deep metric learning, which
significantly improves the state-of-the-art performance of
metric learning. Our approach utilizes the embedding space
more efficiently by jointly splitting the embedding space and
data into K smaller sub-problems. It divides both, the data
and the embedding space into K subsets and learns K separate distance metrics in the non-overlapping subspaces
of the embedding space, defined by groups of neurons in
the embedding layer of the neural network. The proposed
approach increases the convergence speed and improves
generalization since the complexity of each sub-problem
is reduced compared to the original one. We show that
our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art by a large
margin in retrieval, clustering and re-identification tasks
on CUB200-2011, CARS196, Stanford Online Products, Inshop Clothes and PKU VehicleID datasets. Source code:
https://bit.ly/dcesml.

1. Introduction
Deep metric learning methods learn to measure similarities or distances between arbitrary groups of data points,
which is a task of paramount importance for a number of
computer vision applications. Deep metric learning has
been successfully applied to image search [3, 19, 32, 45],
person/vehicle re-identification [5, 29, 51], fine-grained retrieval [30], near duplicate detection [54], clustering [16]
and zero-shot learning [32, 43, 2, 37, 4].
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1: Evaluation of different numbers of learners.
We train our model with K = 1, 2, 3, 4, 8 and 16 learners
on the Stanford Online Products dataset [31] and report the
change of the Recall@1 score during training. An increase
in the number of learners leads to higher Recall@1. The best
performance is achieved with K = 8.

The core idea of deep metric learning is to pull together
samples with the same class label and to push apart samples
coming from different classes in the learned embedding
space. An embedding space with the desired properties
is learned by optimizing loss functions based on pairs of
images from the same or different class [13, 3], triplets of
images [38, 45, 17] or tuples of larger number of images [20,
43, 41, 1], which express positive or negative relationships
in the dataset.
Existing deep metric learning approaches usually learn
a single distance metric for all samples from the given data
distribution. The ultimate goal for the learned metric is to
resolve all conflicting relationships and pull similar images
closer while pushing dissimilar images further away. However, visual data is, commonly, not uniformly distributed,
but has a complex structure, where different regions of the
data distribution have different densities [20]. Data points in
different regions of the distribution are often related based
on different types of similarity such as shape, color, identity
or semantic meaning. While, theoretically, a deep neural

471

