Striking the Right Balance with Uncertainty
Salman Khan∗

Munawar Hayat∗ Syed Waqas Zamir Jianbing Shen†
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

Ling Shao

firstname.lastname@inceptioniai.org

Class C

Class B

Class
uncertainty

Class A

Boundaries learned
using soft-max loss

Boundaries learned
with our cost function

Sample
distribution

Class density
distribution

Abstract
Learning unbiased models on imbalanced datasets is a
significant challenge. Rare classes tend to get a concentrated representation in the classification space which hampers the generalization of learned boundaries to new test
examples. In this paper, we demonstrate that the Bayesian
uncertainty estimates directly correlate with the rarity of
classes and the difficulty level of individual samples. Subsequently, we present a novel framework for uncertainty
based class imbalance learning that follows two key insights: First, classification boundaries should be extended
further away from a more uncertain (rare) class to avoid
over-fitting and enhance its generalization. Second, each
sample should be modeled as a multi-variate Gaussian distribution with a mean vector and a covariance matrix defined by the sample’s uncertainty. The learned boundaries
should respect not only the individual samples but also their
distribution in the feature space. Our proposed approach
efficiently utilizes sample and class uncertainty information to learn robust features and more generalizable classifiers. We systematically study the class imbalance problem
and derive a novel loss formulation for max-margin learning based on Bayesian uncertainty measure. The proposed
method shows significant performance improvements on six
benchmark datasets for face verification, attribute prediction, digit/object classification and skin lesion detection.
∗ Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

Class A Sample
Class B Sample

Figure 1: Imbalance learning with Bayesian
uncertainty estimates. (a) We enforce classlevel margin penalty based on class uncertainty. This pushes boundaries further away
from rare classes B and C. (b) We also consider sample-level uncertainty that is modeled as a Gaussian distribution. The learned
margins consider the confidence level of
classifier to re-adjust boundaries (i.e., provide more room to uncertain samples). This
improves the generalization ability of the
proposed model for imbalanced classes.

1. Introduction
Objects, events, actions and visual concepts appear with
varying frequencies in real world imagery [38]. This often leads to highly skewed datasets where a few abundant
classes outnumber several rare classes in a typical longtail data distribution. The low amount of training data for
infrequent classes makes it challenging to learn optimal
classification boundaries in the feature space. Existing approaches to tackle class imbalance either modify data distribution [42, 7, 22] or introduce appropriate costs to re-weight
class errors [25, 1, 40]. The popular data-level approaches
are prone to over-fitting while the cost-sensitive learning
requires careful choice of weights for successful training.
Despite an overwhelming success of deep neural networks
on computer vision problems, learning from highly imbalanced sets is still an open problem for deep learning [24].
This paper proposes a new direction towards learning balanced representations using deep neural networks
(Fig. 1). We use a principled approach to integrate Bayesian
uncertainty estimates for class imbalance learning at two
distinct levels, i.e., category-level and individual samplelevel. Our approach is based on the observation that rare
classes have higher uncertainty in the prediction space and
the associated classifier confidence levels are low. Therefore, the uncertainty estimates can be used to expand decision regions for less frequent classes so that classifier’s generalization to new test examples is improved. This concept
is illustrated in Fig. 1. Since all samples within a class do
1103

