Circulant Binary Convolutional Networks: Enhancing the Performance of 1-bit
DCNNs with Circulant Back Propagation
jironronggChunlei Liu,1 Wenrui Ding,2 Xin Xia,1 Baochang Zhang,4∗j Jiaxin Gu,4 jiergrong
Jianzhuang Liu,3 Rongrong Ji,5,6 David Doermann7
1

2

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University,
Unmanned System Research Institute, Beihang University, 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab,
4
School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University,
5
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University,
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory, 7 University at Buffalo
{liuchunlei, ding, xiaxin, bczhang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
The rapidly decreasing computation and memory cost
has recently driven the success of many applications in the
field of deep learning. Practical applications of deep learning in resource-limited hardware, such as embedded devices and smart phones, however, remain challenging. For
binary convolutional networks, the reason lies in the degraded representation caused by binarizing full-precision
filters. To address this problem, we propose new circulant
filters (CiFs) and a circulant binary convolution (CBConv) to enhance the capacity of binarized convolutional features via our circulant back propagation (CBP). The CiFs
can be easily incorporated into existing deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs), which leads to new Circulant
Binary Convolutional Networks (CBCNs). Extensive experiments confirm that the performance gap between the 1-bit
and full-precision DCNNs is minimized by increasing the
filter diversity, which further increases the representational
ability in our networks. Our experiments on ImageNet show
that CBCNs achieve 61.4% top-1 accuracy with ResNet18.
Compared to the state-of-the-art such as XNOR, CBCNs
can achieve up to 10% higher top-1 accuracy with more
powerful representational ability.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) have been
successfully demonstrated on many computer vision tasks
such as object detection and image classification. DC∗ Baochang Zhang is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Circulant back propagation (CBP). We manipulate the
learned convolution filters using the circulant transfer matrix,
which is employed to build our CBP. By doing so, the capacity
of the binarized convolutional features are significantly enhanced,
e.g., robustness to the orientation variations in objects, and the performance gap between the 1-bit and full-precision DCNNs is minimized. In the example, 4 CiFs are produced based on the learned
filter and the circular matrix.

NNs deployed in practical environments, however, still face
many challenges. It is particularly true when the portability
and real time performance are required. This is critical because models of vision applications can require very large
memory, making them impractical for most embedded platforms. Besides, floating-point inputs and network weights
along with forward or backward data flow can result in a
significant computational burden.

2691

