Privacy Preserving Image-Based Localization
Pablo Speciale1,2 Johannes L. Schönberger2 Sing Bing Kang2 Sudipta N. Sinha2 Marc Pollefeys1,2
1

Projected 3D Points

(a) 3D Point Cloud

2

ETH Zürich

Reconstructed Image

Microsoft

Original Image

(b) Inversion Attack on SIFT of 3D Point Cloud

(c) 3D Line Cloud

Figure 1: (a) Traditional image-based localization using 3D point cloud, which reveals potentially confidential information in the scene.
(b) Reconstructed image using projected sparse 3D points and their SIFT features [50]. (c) Our proposed 3D line cloud protects user
privacy by concealing the scene geometry and preventing inversion attacks, while still enabling accurate and efficient localization.

Abstract
Image-based localization is a core component of many
augmented/mixed reality (AR/MR) and autonomous robotic
systems. Current localization systems rely on the persistent storage of 3D point clouds of the scene to enable camera pose estimation, but such data reveals potentially sensitive scene information. This gives rise to significant privacy risks, especially as for many applications 3D mapping is a background process that the user might not be
fully aware of. We pose the following question: How can
we avoid disclosing confidential information about the captured 3D scene, and yet allow reliable camera pose estimation? This paper proposes the first solution to what we call
privacy preserving image-based localization. The key idea
of our approach is to lift the map representation from a 3D
point cloud to a 3D line cloud. This novel representation
obfuscates the underlying scene geometry while providing
sufficient geometric constraints to enable robust and accurate 6-DOF camera pose estimation. Extensive experiments
on several datasets and localization scenarios underline the
high practical relevance of our proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Localizing a device within a scene by computing the
camera pose from an image is a fundamental problem in
computer vision, with high relevance in applications such
as robotics [16, 19, 65], augmented/mixed reality (AR/MR)
[36, 46], and structure from motion (SfM) [25, 61, 63]. Arguably, the most common approach to image-based localization is structure-based [19, 33, 46, 59] and tackles the
problem by first matching the local 2D features of an image to the 3D point cloud model of the scene. Geometric

constraints derived from the matched 2D–3D point correspondences are then used to estimate the camera pose. Inherently, the traditional approach to image-based localization thus requires the persistent storage of 3D point clouds.
The popularity of AR platforms such as ARCore [5]
and ARKit [7], wearable AR devices such as Microsoft
HoloLens [31], and announcements of Microsoft’s Azure
Spatial Anchors (ASA) [11], Google’s Visual Positioning
System (VPS) [80] as well as 6D.AI’s mapping platform [1]
indicate rising demand for image-based localization services that enable spatial persistence in AR/MR and robotics.
Even today, devices like HoloLens, MagicLeap1, or iRobot
Roomba continuously map their 3D environment to operate. This is a background process that users often are not
consciously aware of. As robotics and AR/MR become increasingly relevant in consumer and enterprise applications,
more and more 3D maps of our environment will be stored
on device or in the cloud and then shared with other clients.
Even though the source images are typically discarded after mapping, a person can easily infer the scene layout and
presence of potentially confidential objects based on a casual visual inspection of the 3D point cloud (see Fig. 1-(a)).
Furthermore, methods that reconstruct images from local
features (such as [18, 50]) make it possible to recover remarkably accurate images of the scene from point clouds
(see Fig. 1-(b)). From a technical standpoint, these privacy risks have been widely ignored so far. However, these
will become increasingly relevant as localization services
are adopted by more users as well as when mapping and
localization capabilities will be more and more integrated
with the cloud. As a consequence, there has recently been
a lot of discussion in the AR/MR community around the
privacy implications of this development [48, 54, 79].

5493

