Video Generation from Single Semantic Label Map
Junting Pan1,4 , Chengyu Wang1 , Xu Jia2 , Jing Shao1 , Lu Sheng3,4∗, Junjie Yan1 , and Xiaogang Wang1,4
Sensetime Research1 , Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab2 , College of Software, Beihang University3 ,
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong4

Abstract
This paper proposes the novel task of video generation
conditioned on a SINGLE semantic label map, which provides a good balance between flexibility and quality in the
generation process. Different from typical end-to-end approaches, which model both scene content and dynamics in
a single step, we propose to decompose this difficult task into
two sub-problems. As current image generation methods do
better than video generation in terms of detail, we synthesize high quality content by only generating the first frame.
Then we animate the scene based on its semantic meaning to
obtain temporally coherent video, giving us excellent results
overall. We employ a cVAE for predicting optical flow as
a beneficial intermediate step to generate a video sequence
conditioned on the initial single frame. A semantic label map
is integrated into the flow prediction module to achieve major improvements in the image-to-video generation process.
Extensive experiments on the Cityscapes dataset show that
our method outperforms all competing methods. The source
code will be released on https://github.com/junting/seg2vid.

1. Introduction
A typical visual scene is composed of foreground objects
and the background. In a dynamic scene, motion of the
background is determined by camera movement which is
independent of the motion of foreground objects. Scene
understanding, which include both understanding how foreground objects and background look and how they change, is
essential to advancing the development of computer vision.
Scene understanding, besides using recognition models, can
be accomplished by generative methods[34]. In this work we
focus on using generative models to understand our visual
world.
There has been much progress in image generation to
address static scene modeling. Researchers have proposed
methods to generate images from only noise [10] or from pre∗ Lu Sheng is the corresponding author.

pix2pix

vid2vid

seg2vid

Figure 1: Comparison with existing generation tasks. From
top: Image-to-image translation, video-to-video, and our
image-to-video synthesis. Our method only takes one semantic label map as input and synthesizes a sequence of
photo-realistic video frames.
defined conditions such as attribute, text and pose [41, 20]. In
recent works, people also pay attention to image generation
conditioned on semantic information with either paired [12]
or unpaired data [42]. The conditional image generation
methods provide a way to manipulate existing images and
have potential value as a data augmentation strategy to assist
other computer vision tasks. While image generation tasks
only model static scenes, for video prediction, it is essential
to also investigate the temporal dynamics. Models are trained
to predict raw pixels of the future frame by learning from
historical motion patterns. There is another line of work on
video synthesis without any history frames.
Similar to research on image generation, some work investigated unconditional video generation. That is, directly
generating video clips from noise by using generative adversarial networks to learn a mapping between spatial-temporal
latent space and video clips [31, 25]. Another group of researchers worked on video-to-video translation [37], where
a sequence of frames are generated according to a sequence
of aligned semantic representations.
13733

