Blending-target Domain Adaptation by Adversarial Meta-Adaptation Networks
Ziliang Chen1 , Jingyu Zhuang1 , Xiaodan Liang1,2 , Liang Lin1,2∗
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 DarkMatter AI Research
c.ziliang@yahoo.com, zhuangjy6@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xdliang328@gmail.com, linliang@ieee.org

Figure 1. The comparison of MTDA and BTDA (color orange and blue denote source and target) setups. In MTDA (a), target domains are
explicitly separated and we are informed by which target an unlabeled sample originates from. In BTDA (b), sub-target IDs are encrypted.
If we treat them as a combined single target, transfer learning will lead to the adaptation on a multi-target mixture instead of each hidden
target (gray distribution curves in (a), (b)). It implies category-shifted adaptation and negative transfer in practice. Best viewed in color.

Abstract
(Unsupervised) Domain Adaptation (DA) seeks for classifying target instances when solely provided with source
labeled and target unlabeled examples for training. Learning domain-invariant features helps to achieve this goal,
whereas it underpins unlabeled samples drawn from a single or multiple explicit target domains (Multi-target DA). In
this paper, we consider a more realistic transfer scenario:
our target domain is comprised of multiple sub-targets implicitly blended with each other, so that learners could not
identify which sub-target each unlabeled sample belongs to.
This Blending-target Domain Adaptation (BTDA) scenario
commonly appears in practice and threatens the validities
of most existing DA algorithms, due to the presence of domain gaps and categorical misalignments among these hidden sub-targets.
To reap the transfer performance gains in this new scenario, we propose Adversarial Meta-Adaptation Network
(AMEAN). AMEAN entails two adversarial transfer learning processes. The first is a conventional adversarial transfer to bridge our source and mixed target domains. To circumvent the intra-target category misalignment, the second
process presents as “learning to adapt”: It deploys an unsupervised meta-learner receiving target data and their ongoing feature-learning feedbacks, to discover target clus-

ters as our “meta-sub-target” domains. These meta-subtargets auto-design our meta-sub-target DA loss, which empirically eliminates the implicit category mismatching in
our mixed target. We evaluate AMEAN and a variety of DA
algorithms in three benchmarks under the BTDA setup. Empirical results show that BTDA is a quite challenging transfer setup for most existing DA algorithms, yet AMEAN significantly outperforms these state-of-the-art baselines and
effectively restrains the negative transfer effects in BTDA.

1. Introduction
1

Despite achieving a growing number of successes, deep
supervised learning algorithms remain restrictive in a variety of new application scenarios due to their vulnerabilities towards domain shifts [15]: when evaluated on newlyemerged unlabeled target examples drawn from a distribution non-identical with the training source density, supervised learners inevitably perform inferior. In terms of visual data, this issue stems from diverse domain-specific appearance variabilities, e.g. differences in background and
1 * Liang Lin is the corresponding author. This work was supported
in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China
under Grant No. 2018YFC0830103 and Grant No.2016YFB1001004, in
part by National High Level Talents Special Support Plan (Ten Thousand
Talents Program), and in part by National Natural Science Foundation of
China (NSFC) under Grant No. 61622214, 61836012, and 61876224.

12248

