DeepMapping: Unsupervised Map Estimation From Multiple Point Clouds

†

University of Rochester

‡

Li Ding∗ †

Chen Feng∗ ‡ §

l.ding@rochester.edu

cfeng@nyu.edu

NYU Tandon School of Engineering

Abstract
We propose DeepMapping, a novel registration framework using deep neural networks (DNNs) as auxiliary functions to align multiple point clouds from scratch to a globally consistent frame. We use DNNs to model the highly
non-convex mapping process that traditionally involves
hand-crafted data association, sensor pose initialization,
and global refinement. Our key novelty is that “training”
these DNNs with properly defined unsupervised losses is
equivalent to solving the underlying registration problem,
but less sensitive to good initialization than ICP. Our framework contains two DNNs: a localization network that estimates the poses for input point clouds, and a map network that models the scene structure by estimating the occupancy status of global coordinates. This allows us to convert the registration problem to a binary occupancy classification, which can be solved efficiently using gradientbased optimization. We further show that DeepMapping
can be readily extended to address the problem of Lidar
SLAM by imposing geometric constraints between consecutive point clouds. Experiments are conducted on both
simulated and real datasets. Qualitative and quantitative
comparisons demonstrate that DeepMapping often enables
more robust and accurate global registration of multiple
point clouds than existing techniques. Our code is available
at https://ai4ce.github.io/DeepMapping/.

1. Introduction
Advances in deep learning have led to many state-of-theart methods for semantic computer vision tasks. Despite
those successes, their compelling improvements on the geometric aspects of computer vision are yet to be fully demonstrated (especially for registration and mapping). This is
perhaps because powerful deep semantic representations
have limitations in accurately estimating and modeling of
geometric attributes of the environment. This includes, but
is not limited to, estimating camera motions from a sequence of images, or registering multiple point clouds into
a complete model. As opposed to semantic attributes of
∗ This work was partially done while the authors were with MERL. And
Chen Feng is the corresponding author.

§

Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)

Ours

GoICP [46]

ICP Plane [10]

Ours (Warm Start)

Figure 1. DeepMapping achieves better registration quality than
other baselines on an example dataset. Best viewed in color.

objects/scenes that are often categorical and thus easily described by human language, those geometric attributes are
more often continuous and can be better described numerically, such as poses and shapes. These spatial properties
and relations between objects play as vital roles as semantic ones in robotics, augmented reality, medical, and other
engineering applications.
Several works attempt to integrate deep learning methods into geometric vision problems [45, 52, 49, 20, 19, 29,
18]. Methods in [26, 9, 20] try to regress camera poses by
training a DNN, inside which a map of the environment is
implicitly represented. Methods in [45, 52] propose unsupervised approaches that exploit inherent relationships between depth and motion. Despite different tasks, most approaches follow the same train-and-test pipeline that neural
networks are first learned from a set of training data (either
supervised or unsupervised), and then evaluated on a testing
set, expecting those DNNs to be able to generalize as much
as possible to untrained situations.
The essence of our discussion is an open question: Will
DNNs generalize well for geometric problems especially
for registration and mapping? Semantic tasks can benefit
from DNNs because those related problems are defined em-

8650

