Divergence Triangle for Joint Training of Generator Model, Energy-based
Model, and Inferential Model
Tian Han1∗, Erik Nijkamp1∗, Xiaolin Fang2 , Mitch Hill1 , Song-Chun Zhu1 , Ying Nian Wu1
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 Zhejiang University
{hantian, enijkamp, mkhil}@ucla.edu, xiaolinfang@zju.edu.cn, {sczhu,ywu}@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes the divergence triangle as a framework for joint training of a generator model, energy-based
model and inference model. The divergence triangle is
a compact and symmetric (anti-symmetric) objective function that seamlessly integrates variational learning, adversarial learning, wake-sleep algorithm, and contrastive divergence in a unified probabilistic formulation. This unification makes the processes of sampling, inference, and
energy evaluation readily available without the need for
costly Markov chain Monte Carlo methods. Our experiments demonstrate that the divergence triangle is capable
of learning (1) an energy-based model with well-formed energy landscape, (2) direct sampling in the form of a generator network, and (3) feed-forward inference that faithfully
reconstructs observed as well as synthesized data.

1. Introduction
1.1. Integrating Three Models
Deep probabilistic generative models are a powerful
framework for representing complex data distributions.
They have been widely used in unsupervised learning problems to learn from unlabeled data. The goal of generative
learning is to build rich and flexible models to fit complex, multi-modal data distributions as well as to be able
to generate samples with high realism. The family of generative models may be roughly divided into two classes:
The first class is the energy-based model (a.k.a undirected
graphical model) and the second class is the latent variable model (a.k.a directed graphical model) which usually
includes generator model for the generation and inference
model for inference or reconstruction.
These models have their advantages and limitations. An
energy-based model defines an explicit likelihood of the observed data up to a normalizing constant. However, sam∗ Equal contributions.

pling from such a model usually requires expensive Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). A generator model defines direct sampling of the data. However, it does not have an explicit likelihood. The inference of the latent variables also
requires MCMC sampling from the posterior distribution.
The inference model defines an explicit approximation to
the posterior distribution of the latent variables.
Combining the energy-based model, the generator
model, and the inference model to get the best of each
model is an attractive goal. On the other hand, challenges
may accumulate when the models are trained together since
different models need to effectively compete or cooperate
together to achieve their highest performances. In this work,
we propose the divergence triangle for joint training of
energy-based model, generator model and inference model.
The learning of three models can then be seamlessly integrated in a principled probabilistic framework. The energybased model is learned based on the samples supplied by the
generator model. With the help of the inference model, the
generator model is trained by both the observed data and the
energy-based model. The inference model is learned from
both the real data fitted by the generator model as well as
the synthesized data generated by the generator model.
Our experiments demonstrate that the divergence triangle is capable of learning an energy-based model with a
well-behaved energy landscape, a generator model with
highly realistic samples, and an inference model with faithful reconstruction ability.

1.2. Prior Art
The maximum likelihood learning of the energy-based
model requires expectation with respect to the current
model, while the maximum likelihood learning of the generator model requires expectation with respect to the posterior distribution of the latent variables. Both expectations can be approximated by MCMC, such as Gibbs
sampling [11], Langevin dynamics, or Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo (HMC) [34]. [31, 48] used Langevin dynamics for
learning the energy-based models, and [13] used Langevin
dynamics for learning the generator model. In both cases,
18670

