A General and Adaptive Robust Loss Function
Jonathan T. Barron
Google Research

Abstract
We present a generalization of the Cauchy/Lorentzian,
Geman-McClure, Welsch/Leclerc, generalized Charbonnier, Charbonnier/pseudo-Huber/L1-L2, and L2 loss functions. By introducing robustness as a continuous parameter, our loss function allows algorithms built around robust loss minimization to be generalized, which improves
performance on basic vision tasks such as registration and
clustering. Interpreting our loss as the negative log of a
univariate density yields a general probability distribution
that includes normal and Cauchy distributions as special
cases. This probabilistic interpretation enables the training
of neural networks in which the robustness of the loss automatically adapts itself during training, which improves performance on learning-based tasks such as generative image synthesis and unsupervised monocular depth estimation, without requiring any manual parameter tuning.
Many problems in statistics and optimization require robustness — that a model be less influenced by outliers than
by inliers [17, 19]. This idea is common in parameter estimation and learning tasks, where a robust loss (say, absolute error) may be preferred over a non-robust loss (say,
squared error) due to its reduced sensitivity to large errors.
Researchers have developed various robust penalties with
particular properties, many of which are summarized well
in [3, 39]. In gradient descent or M-estimation [16] these
losses are often interchangeable, so researchers may experiment with different losses when designing a system. This
flexibility in shaping a loss function may be useful because
of non-Gaussian noise, or simply because the loss that is
minimized during learning or parameter estimation is different from how the resulting learned model or estimated
parameters will be evaluated. For example, one might train
a neural network by minimizing the difference between the
network’s output and a set of images, but evaluate that network in terms of how well it hallucinates random images.
In this paper we present a single loss function that is a
superset of many common robust loss functions. A single
continuous-valued parameter in our general loss function
can be set such that it is equal to several traditional losses,

and can be adjusted to model a wider family of functions.
This allows us to generalize algorithms built around a fixed
robust loss with a new “robustness” hyperparameter that can
be tuned or annealed to improve performance.
Though new hyperparameters may be valuable to a practitioner, they complicate experimentation by requiring manual tuning or time-consuming cross-validation. However,
by viewing our general loss function as the negative loglikelihood of a probability distribution, and by treating the
robustness of that distribution as a latent variable, we show
that maximizing the likelihood of that distribution allows
gradient-based optimization frameworks to automatically
determine how robust the loss should be without any manual
parameter tuning. This “adaptive” form of our loss is particularly effective in models with multivariate output spaces
(say, image generation or depth estimation) as we can introduce independent robustness variables for each dimension
in the output and thereby allow the model to independently
adapt the robustness of its loss in each dimension.
The rest of the paper is as follows: In Section 1 we define our general loss function, relate it to existing losses,
and enumerate some of its useful properties. In Section 2 we use our loss to construct a probability distribution, which requires deriving a partition function and a
sampling procedure. Section 3 discusses four representative experiments: In Sections 3.1 and 3.2 we take two

Figure 1. Our general loss function (left) and its gradient (right)
for different values of its shape parameter α. Several values of α
reproduce existing loss functions: L2 loss (α = 2), Charbonnier
loss (α = 1), Cauchy loss (α = 0), Geman-McClure loss (α =
−2), and Welsch loss (α = −∞).

14331

