Adversarial Semantic Alignment for Improved Image Captions
Pierre Dognin∗ , Igor Melnyk∗ , Youssef Mroueh∗ , Jerret Ross∗ & Tom Sercu∗
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY
{pdognin,mroueh,rossja}@us.ibm.com, {igor.melnyk,tom.sercu1}@ibm.com

Abstract
In this paper we study image captioning as a conditional
GAN training, proposing both a context-aware LSTM captioner and co-attentive discriminator, which enforces semantic alignment between images and captions. We empirically
focus on the viability of two training methods: Self-critical
Sequence Training (SCST) and Gumbel Straight-Through
(ST) and demonstrate that SCST shows more stable gradient
behavior and improved results over Gumbel ST, even without
accessing discriminator gradients directly. We also address
the problem of automatic evaluation for captioning models
and introduce a new semantic score, and show its correlation
to human judgement. As an evaluation paradigm, we argue
that an important criterion for a captioner is the ability to
generalize to compositions of objects that do not usually cooccur together. To this end, we introduce a small captioned
Out of Context (OOC) test set. The OOC set, combined with
our semantic score, are the proposed new diagnosis tools
for the captioning community. When evaluated on OOC and
MS-COCO benchmarks, we show that SCST-based training
has a strong performance in both semantic score and human
evaluation, promising to be a valuable new approach for
efficient discrete GAN training.

1. Introduction
Significant progress has been made on the task of generating image descriptions using neural image captioning. Early
systems were traditionally trained using cross-entropy (CE)
loss minimization [27, 11, 28]. Later, reinforcement learning
techniques [22, 23, 14] based on policy gradient methods,
e.g., REINFORCE, were introduced to directly optimize
the n-gram matching metrics such as CIDEr [26], BLEU4
[20] or SPICE [1]. Along a similar idea, [23] introduced
Self-critical Sequence Training (SCST), a light-weight variant of REINFORCE, which produced state of the art image
captioning results using CIDEr as an optimization metric.
Although optimizing the above automatic metrics might be a

promising direction to take, these metrics unfortunately miss
an essential part of the semantic alignment between image
and caption. They do not provide a way to promote naturalness of the language, e.g., as measured by a Turing test, so
that the machine-generated text becomes indistinguishable
from the text created by humans.
To address the problem of diversity and naturalness, image captioning has recently been explored in the framework
of GANs [6]. The main idea is to train a discriminator to
detect a signal on the misalignment between an image and a
generated sentence, while the generator (captioner) can use
this signal to improve its text generation mechanism to better
align the caption with a given image. Due to the discrete
nature of text generation, GAN training remains challenging
and has been generally tackled with either reinforcement
learning techniques [29, 3, 8, 21, 4] or by using the Gumbel
softmax relaxation [9], for example, as in [25, 12].
Despite these impressive advances, image captioning is
far from being a solved task. It still is a challenge to satisfactory bridge a semantic gap between image and caption,
and to produce diverse, creative and human-like captions.
The current captioning systems also suffer from a dataset
bias: the models overfit to common objects co-occurring in
common context, and they struggle to generalize to scenes
where the same objects appear in unseen contexts. Although
the recent advances of applying GANs for image captioning
to promote human-like captions is a very promising direction, the discrete nature of the text generation process makes
it challenging to train such systems. The results in [4, 25]
are encouraging but the proposed solutions are still complex
and computationally expensive. Moreover, the recent work
of [2] showed that the task of text generation for the current discrete GAN models is still challenging, many times
producing unsatisfactory results, and therefore requires new
approaches and methods. Finally, evaluation of image captioning using automated metrics such as CIDEr, BLEU4,
etc. is still unsatisfactory since simple n-gram matching,
that does not reference the image, remains inadequate and
sometimes misleading for scoring diverse and descriptive
captions.
In this paper, we propose to address the above issues by

∗ Equal Contributions. Authors in alphabetical order.

110463

