Sphere Generative Adversarial Network Based on Geometric Moment Matching
Sung Woo Park and Junseok Kwon
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea
pswkiki@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose sphere generative adversarial network
(GAN), a novel integral probability metric (IPM)-based
GAN. Sphere GAN uses the hypersphere to bound IPMs
in the objective function. Thus, it can be trained stably. On the hypersphere, sphere GAN exploits the information of higher-order statistics of data using geometric moment matching, thereby providing more accurate results. In the paper, we mathematically prove the good
properties of sphere GAN. In experiments, sphere GAN
quantitatively and qualitatively surpasses recent state-ofthe-art GANs for unsupervised image generation problems
with the CIFAR-10, STL-10, and LSUN bedroom datasets.
Source code is available at https://github.com/
pswkiki/SphereGAN .

1. Introduction
Since the seminal work by Goodfellow et al. [8], generative adversarial networks (GANs) have attracted much research interest, and they have been used to achieve outstanding performance in a wide range of computer vision applications including in image generation [17, 26], super resolution [14], video prediction [19], style transfer [5, 12, 34],
image inpainting [39], image editing [14], visual tracking [28], 3D reconstruction [1], segmentation [7], object
detection [35], reinforcement learning [10], and medical
imaging [40].
Conventional GANs try to minimize the distribution divergence between fake and real data [8]. For this purpose,
the generator tries to produce desired samples that look like
real data, and the discriminator tries to differentiate them
from real data. Although GANs have been successfully applied to various tasks, it is very difficult to train them, in
turn making it difficult to use them to solve more complex
problems. For example, training dynamics frequently become unstable, and the generated samples easily collapse to
a few modes.
While a lot of GANs and their applications have been
proposed recently, in this paper, we focus on GANs based

jskwon@cau.ac.kr

on integral probability metrics (IPMs) [2, 9, 24, 37] for
overcoming the aforementioned problems. IPM-based
GANs insert a gradient penalty term or soft consistent term
into objective functions for achieving stable learning, resulting in a remarkable improvement in performance. However, these additional terms inevitably introduce additional
hyper-parameters that need to be tuned, thereby incurring
higher computation cost. In addition, many IPM-based
GANs suffer from the unstable behavior of the samplebased constrain strategy, and WGAN uses only first-order
statistics with a dual form of the 1-Wesserstein distance.
In this paper, we develop sphere GAN, a novel IPMbased GAN. Sphere GAN uses geometric moment matching and exploits the information of higher-order statistics
of data, thus obtaining accurate results. Because moment
matching is performed on the hypersphere, IPMs of sphere
GAN can be bounded. We show that the geometric constraint induced by the hypersphere makes GAN training
more stable. Sphere GAN affords these advantages without
relying on the heuristics of conventional IPM-based GAN,
namely, virtual sampling techniques and additional gradient
penalty terms. Instead, sphere GAN utilizes Riemannian
manifolds (i.e., hypersphere) supported by the mathematical theory.
This paper makes three main contributions:
• We propose sphere GAN, a novel concept that afford
several advantages over IPM-based GANs. To the best
of our knowledge, our proposed sphere GAN is the
first attempt to use Riemannian manifolds to define
IPMs in GAN objective functions. In addition, it is
the first IPM-based GAN that does not use the gradient penalty or virtual data sampling techniques.
• The good properties of sphere GAN are mathematically proven. In Section 4, we show that sphere GAN
is closely related to IPMs and that minimizing the proposed distance amounts to minimizing the multiple
Wesserstein distances of probability measures on the
n-dimensional hypersphere Sn .
• Sphere GAN outperforms recent state-of-the-art methods including IPM-based GAN variants for unsu-

4292

