Towards Visual Feature Translation
Jie Hu1 , Rongrong Ji12∗, Hong Liu1 , Shengchuan Zhang1 , Cheng Deng3 , and Qi Tian4
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Department of Cognitive Science,
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. 3 Xidian University. 4 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei.
{hujie.cpp,lynnliu.xmu,chdeng.xd}@gmail.com, {rrji,zsc 2016}@xmu.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract

Translator

•••

Inverted Index
Feature A

Feature B

•••

Most existing visual search systems are deployed based
upon fixed kinds of visual features, which prohibits the feature reusing across different systems or when upgrading
systems with a new type of feature. Such a setting is obviously inflexible and time/memory consuming, which is indeed mendable if visual features can be “translated” across
systems. In this paper, we make the first attempt towards visual feature translation to break through the barrier of using features across different visual search systems. To this
end, we propose a Hybrid Auto-Encoder (HAE) to translate
visual features, which learns a mapping by minimizing the
translation and reconstruction errors. Based upon HAE, an
Undirected Affinity Measurement (UAM) is further designed
to quantify the affinity among different types of visual features. Extensive experiments have been conducted on several public datasets with sixteen different types of widelyused features in visual search systems. Quantitative results
show the encouraging possibilities of feature translation.
For the first time, the affinity among widely-used features
like SIFT and DELF is reported.

Cross-feature Retrieval

Feature AB

Extractor
Expensive
Efficient
Translator
Merger of Retrieval Systems

Figure 1. Two potential applications of visual feature translation.
Top: In cross-feature retrieval, Feature A is translated to Feature
AB, which can be used to search images that are represented and
indexed by Feature B. Bottom: In the merger of retrieval systems,
Feature A used in System A is efficiently translated to Feature AB,
instead of the expensive process of re-extracting entire dataset in
System A with Feature B.

1. Introduction
Visual features serve as the basis for most existing visual search systems. In a typical setting, a visual search
system can only handle pre-defined features extracted from
the image set offline. Such a setting prohibits the reusing
of a certain kind of visual feature across different systems.
Moreover, when upgrading a visual search system, a timeconsuming step is needed to extract new features and to
build the corresponding indexing, while the previous features and indexing are simply discarded. Breaking through
such a setting, if possible, is by any means very beneficial.
For instance, the existing features and indexing can be efficiently reused when updating old features with new ones,
∗ Corresponding author.

which can significantly save the time and memory cost. For
another instance, images can be efficiently archived with
only respective features for cross-system retrieval. These
examples are detailedly depicted in Fig. 1.
However, feature reusing is not an easy task. Various dimensions and diverse distributions of different types of features prohibit reusing features directly. Therefore, a feature
“translator” is needed to transform across different types of
features, which, to our best knowledge, remains untouched
in the literature. Intuitively, given a set of images extracted
with different types of features, one can leverage the feature
pairs to learn the corresponding feature translator.
In this paper, we make the first attempt to investigate vi-

3004

