On zero-shot recognition of generic objects
Tristan Hascoet

Yasuo Ariki

Tetsuya Takiguchi

tristan.hascoet@gmail.com

ariki@kobe-u.ac.jp

takigu@kobe-u.ac.jp

Graduate School of System Informatics, Kobe University, Japan

Abstract
Many recent advances in computer vision are the result
of a healthy competition among researchers on high quality, task-specific, benchmarks. After a decade of active research, zero-shot learning (ZSL) models accuracy on the
Imagenet benchmark remains far too low to be considered
for practical object recognition applications. In this paper, we argue that the main reason behind this apparent
lack of progress is the poor quality of this benchmark. We
highlight major structural flaws of the current benchmark
and analyze different factors impacting the accuracy of ZSL
models. We show that the actual classification accuracy of
existing ZSL models is significantly higher than was previously thought as we account for these flaws. We then introduce the notion of structural bias specific to ZSL datasets.
We discuss how the presence of this new form of bias allows for a trivial solution to the standard benchmark and
conclude on the need for a new benchmark. We then detail the semi-automated construction of a new benchmark
to address these flaws.

1. Introduction
Datasets play a leading role in computer vision research.
Perhaps the most striking example of the impact a dataset
can have on research has been the introduction of Imagenet
[2]. The new scale and granularity of Imagenet’s coverage
of the visual world has paved the way for the success and
wide spread adoption of CNN [8, 11] that have revolutionized generic object recognition.
The current best-practice for the development of a practical object recognition solution consists in collecting and
annotating application-specific training data to fine-tune a
large Imagenet-pretrained CNN on. This data annotation
process can be prohibitively expensive for many applications which hinders the wide-spread usage of these technologies. ZSL models generalize the recognition ability of
traditional image classifiers to unknown classes, for which
no image sample is available for training. The promise of

ZSL for generic object recognition is huge: to scale up the
recognition capacity of image classifiers beyond the set of
annotated training classes. Hence ZSL has the potential to
be of great practical impact as they would considerably ease
the deployment of object recognition technologies by eliminating the need for expensive task-specific data collection
and fine-tuning processes.
Despite its great promise, and after a decade of active
research [10], the accuracy of ZSL models on the standard
Imagenet benchmark [3] remain far too low for practical
applications. To better understand this lack of progress, we
analyzed the errors of several ZSL baselines. Our analysis
leads us to identify two main factors impacting the accuracy
of ZSL models: structural flaws in the standard evaluation
protocol and poor quality of both semantic and visual samples. On the bright side of things, we show that once these
flaws are taken into account, the actual accuracy of existing
ZSL models is much higher than was previously thought.
On the other hand, we show that a trivial solution outperforms most existing ZSL models by a large margin, which
is upsetting. To explain this phenomenon, we introduce the
notion of structural bias in ZSL datasets. We argue that
ZSL models should aim to develop compositional reasoning abilities, but the presence of structural bias in the Imagenet benchmark favors solutions based on a trivial one to
one mapping between training and test classes. We come to
the conclusion that a new benchmark is needed to address
the different problems identified by our analysis and, in the
last section of this paper, we detail the semi-automated construction of a new benchmark we propose.
To structure our discussion, we first briefly review preliminaries on ZSL in Section 3. Section 4 details our analysis of the different factors impacting the accuracy of ZSL
models on the standard benchmark. Section 5 introduces
the notions of structural bias, and propose a way to measure
and minimize its impact in the construction of a new benchmark. Finally, Section 6 summarizes the construction of our
proposed benchmark. For space constraint, we only include
the main results of our analysis in the body of this paper.
We refer interested readers to the supplementary material
for additional results and details of our analysis.
4321
9553

