LaserNet: An Efficient Probabilistic 3D Object Detector for Autonomous Driving
Gregory P. Meyer*, Ankit Laddha*, Eric Kee, Carlos Vallespi-Gonzalez, Carl K. Wellington
Uber Advanced Technologies Group
{gmeyer,aladdha,ekee,cvallespi,cwellington}@uber.com
Abstract
In this paper, we present LaserNet, a computationally
efficient method for 3D object detection from LiDAR data
for autonomous driving. The efficiency results from processing LiDAR data in the native range view of the sensor,
where the input data is naturally compact. Operating in
the range view involves well known challenges for learning, including occlusion and scale variation, but it also provides contextual information based on how the sensor data
was captured. Our approach uses a fully convolutional network to predict a multimodal distribution over 3D boxes for
each point and then it efficiently fuses these distributions to
generate a prediction for each object. Experiments show
that modeling each detection as a distribution rather than
a single deterministic box leads to better overall detection
performance. Benchmark results show that this approach
has significantly lower runtime than other recent detectors
and that it achieves state-of-the-art performance when compared on a large dataset that has enough data to overcome
the challenges of training on the range view.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is a key capability for autonomous
driving. LiDAR range sensors are commonly used for this
task because they generate accurate range measurements of
the objects of interest independent of lighting conditions.
To be used in a real-time autonomous system, it is important that these approaches run efficiently in addition to having high accuracy. Also, within the context of a full selfdriving system, it is beneficial to have an understanding of
the detector’s uncertainty.
LiDAR range sensors used on autonomous vehicles employ a variety of physical approaches to point one or more
range-measuring lasers in different directions (physically
spinning, raster scanning, MEMS mirrors, etc), but the data
from these sensors are all similar in that they contain range
measurements from a single location spanning some verti*Equal Contribution

Figure 1: Example detection results from our approach
(bottom) generated from the input range image (middle).
The camera image (top) is provided for reference. Notice
the data is dense in the range image but becomes sparse
when projected into 3D space.

cal and horizontal angular field of view. Note that this data
is quite different from full 3D point cloud data collected by
scanning an object on a turntable or through other means
to generate a consistent dense point cloud of all sides of
the object. As shown in Figure 1, the LiDAR data is inherently dense from the sensor’s point of view but sparse when
the range measurements are projected into 3D space. The
density of measurements is constant in angle, so nearby objects have significantly more measurements than far away
objects. Also, only the sides of objects facing the sensor
receive measurements.
When performing 2D detection in camera images, efficient and high-performing results have been achieved using
dense convolutional approaches [19, 24]. Although the sen-

12677

