Group-wise Correlation Stereo Network
Xiaoyang Guo1
Kai Yang2
Wukui Yang2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{xyguo, xgwang, hsli}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Stereo matching estimates the disparity between a rectified image pair, which is of great importance to depth sensing, autonomous driving, and other related tasks. Previous works built cost volumes with cross-correlation or concatenation of left and right features across all disparity levels, and then a 2D or 3D convolutional neural network is
utilized to regress the disparity maps. In this paper, we
propose to construct the cost volume by group-wise correlation. The left features and the right features are divided into groups along the channel dimension, and correlation maps are computed among each group to obtain
multiple matching cost proposals, which are then packed
into a cost volume. Group-wise correlation provides efficient representations for measuring feature similarities and
will not lose too much information like full correlation. It
also preserves better performance when reducing parameters compared with previous methods. The 3D stacked
hourglass network proposed in previous works is improved
to boost the performance and decrease the inference computational cost. Experiment results show that our method
outperforms previous methods on Scene Flow, KITTI 2012,
and KITTI 2015 datasets. The code is available at https:
//github.com/xy-guo/GwcNet

1. Introduction
Accurate depth sensing plays an important role in many
computer vision applications like odometry, robot navigation, pose estimation, and object detection [10, 28, 6, 16].
Unlike monocular depth estimation [3, 5] or active depth
sensing [24], stereo matching estimates depth by matching
pixels from rectified image pairs captured by two cameras.
Traditional stereo pipelines usually consist of all or portion of the following four steps, matching cost computation, cost aggregation, disparity optimization, and postprocessing [23]. Matching cost computation provides initial similarity measures for left image patches and possible corresponding right patches, which is a crucial step of
stereo matching. Common matching costs include absolute

Xiaogang Wang1
Hongsheng Li1
2
SenseTime Research
{yangkai, yangwukui}@sensetime.com

difference (SAD), sum of squared difference (SSD), and
normalized cross-correlation (NCC). The cost aggregation
and the optimization steps incorporate contextual matching
costs and priors to obtain more robust disparity predictions.
Learning-based methods explore different feature representations and aggregation algorithms for matching costs.
DispNetC [19] computes a correlation volume from the left
and right image features and utilizes a CNN to directly
regress disparity maps. GC-Net [9] and PSMNet [2] construct concatenation-based feature volume and incorporate
a 3D CNN to aggregate contextual features. There are also
works [1, 25] trying to aggregate evidence from multiple
hand-crafted matching cost proposals. However, the above
methods have several drawbacks. The full correlation [19]
provides an efficient way for measuring feature similarities,
but it loses much information because it produces only a
single-channel correlation map for each disparity level. The
concatenation volume [9, 2] requires more parameters in the
following aggregation network to learn the similarity measurement function from scratch. [1, 25] stills utilizes traditional matching costs and cannot be optimized end-to-end.
In this paper, we propose a simple yet efficient operation called group-wise correlation to tackle the above drawbacks. Multi-level unary features are extracted to form
high-dimensional feature representations fl , fr for a leftright image pair. Then, the features are split into multiple
groups along the channel dimension, and the ith left feature
group is correlated with the corresponding ith right feature
group over all disparity levels to obtain group-wise correlation maps. At last, all the correlation maps are packed to
form a 4D cost volume. The unary features can be treated
as groups of structured vectors [32], so the correlation maps
for a certain group can be seen as a matching cost proposal.
In this way, we can leverage the power of traditional correlation matching cost and provide better similarity measures
for the following 3D aggregation network compared with
[9, 2]. The multiple matching cost proposals also avoid the
information loss like full correlation [19].
The 3D stacked hourglass aggregation network proposed
in PSMNet [2] is modified to further improve the performance and decrease the inference computational cost.

3273

