Learning to Extract Flawless Slow Motion from Blurry Videos
Meiguang Jin
AutoNavi

Zhe Hu
Hikvision Research

Paolo Favaro
University of Bern

meiguang.jmg@autonavi.com

zhe.hu@hikvision.com

paolo.favaro@inf.unibe.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the task of generating a sharp
slow-motion video given a low frame rate blurry video. We
propose a data-driven approach, where the training data
is captured with a high frame rate camera and blurry images are simulated through an averaging process. While it
is possible to train a neural network to recover the sharp
frames from their average, there is no guarantee of the temporal smoothness for the formed video, as the frames are
estimated independently. To address the temporal smoothness requirement we propose a system with two networks:
One, DeblurNet, to predict sharp keyframes and the second, InterpNet, to predict intermediate frames between the
generated keyframes. A smooth transition is ensured by interpolating between consecutive keyframes using InterpNet.
Moreover, the proposed scheme enables further increase in
frame rate without retraining the network, by applying InterpNet recursively between pairs of sharp frames. We evaluate the proposed method on several datasets, including a
novel dataset captured with a Sony RX V camera. We also
demonstrate its performance of increasing the frame rate up
to 20 times on real blurry videos.

enormous transfer bandwidth and storage space. Moreover,
with an increasing frame rate, frames share a lot of content,
which makes the whole capture process resource-wasteful.

1. Introduction

A cheaper and more resource-efficient alternative to the
high frame rate and high noise-sensitivity hardware solution is to use low frame rate cameras with long exposures
and increase their frame rate computationally. This has
been addressed by developing algorithms to interpolate subsequent frames so that objects in the scene move naturally [17]. However, using long exposures to image moving objects may result in motion blur. Thus, simply interpolating frames of a low frame rate camera may result in
unrealistic high frame rate blurry videos. To synthesize the
frames captured with a high frame rate camera and its small
exposure time, it is also necessary to perform motion deblurring. A direct solution is to combine the existing state of
the art methods for video deblurring (e.g., [24]), which yield
sharp frames corresponding to each input blurry frame, and
those for video interpolation (e.g., [6]), which generate intermediate frames between the deblurred frames, sequentially. However, a naı̈ve combination of these methods is
suboptimal, because the deblurring process eliminates useful temporal information. In fact, blurry frames contain information about the intermediate sharp frames (as their average), and once deblurred, the recovered frame will contain
information only about one of the intermediate frames.

The understanding of fast moving objects is a challenging task that the average human eye can tackle only through
the aid of specialized hardware. Fortunately, commercial
cameras that can capture events in extreme slow-motion
have been made available by recent advances in the technology. At one end of the camera spectrum are very expensive
and high-quality devices, used mostly by movie makers. At
the other end of the spectrum are cheaper commercial products that currently offer up to 240 frames per second (FPS).
The latter cameras tend to suffer from low signal-to-noise
ratio. This problem, however, is a general challenge, since
an increase of the frame rate causes a reduction of the exposure and, consequently, of the amount of light impinging on the sensor, which leads to poor signal to noise ratio. Another challenge of these cameras is that they require

To address these issues, we propose the system illustrated in Fig. 1. The method is built as a combination of
deblurring and interpolation, by introducing two neural networks: DeblurNet and InterpNet. The first network takes as
input four blurry frames and outputs five sharp keyframes,
which lie between the two middle input frames (highlighted
in blue in Fig. 1(a)). The second network takes as input
two subsequent keyframes and two blurry inputs, and generates a sharp frame between the two keyframes. InterpNet brings three benefits: 1) it generates realistic intermediate frames by exploiting the motion information stored
in the input blurry frames; 2) it ensures a smooth temporal
transition between output frames (see “frame across inputs”
in Fig. 1(b)) by using keyframes from subsequent blurry
frames quadruplets; 3) it allows to interpolate an arbitrary
18112

