What and How Well You Performed? A Multitask Learning Approach to
Action Quality Assessment
Paritosh Parmar
Brendan Tran Morris
University of Nevada, Las Vegas
parmap1@unlv.nevada.edu, brendan.morris@unlv.edu

Abstract
Can performance on the task of action quality assessment (AQA) be improved by exploiting a description of the
action and its quality? Current AQA and skills assessment
approaches propose to learn features that serve only one
task - estimating the final score. In this paper, we propose to learn spatio-temporal features that explain three
related tasks - fine-grained action recognition, commentary generation, and estimating the AQA score. A new
multitask-AQA dataset, the largest to date, comprising of
1412 diving samples was collected to evaluate our approach (http://rtis.oit.unlv.edu/datasets.
html). We show that our MTL approach outperforms
STL approach using two different kinds of architectures:
C3D-AVG and MSCADC. The C3D-AVG-MTL approach
achieves the new state-of-the-art performance with a rank
correlation of 90.44%. Detailed experiments were performed to show that MTL offers better generalization than
STL, and representations from action recognition models
are not sufficient for the AQA task and instead should be
learned.

1. Introduction
What score should an athlete receive on her
dive/gymvault/skating/etc?
Which med student has
the highest surgical skill level? How well can he paint or
draw? How is a patient progressing in their physical rehabilitation program? Answering these questions involves the
quantification of the quality of the action – determining how
well the action was carried out, also known as action quality
assessment (AQA). Existing AQA [18, 16, 26, 13, 25] and
skills assessment [4, 10, 31, 32, 33] approaches use a
single label, known as a final score or skill-level, to train
the system using some kind of regression or ranking loss
function. However, the performance of these systems is
limited and it seems that a single score is not sufficient
to characterize a complicated action. In AQA, the final

Multitask
AQA

Action Quality Score:

83.25/100

Factorized Action
Recognition:

Position: Tuck
Armstand?: No
Rotation type: Forward
No. of somersaults: 4.5
No. of twists: 0

AQA-oriented Caption
Generation:

let's go and go he does
forward four-and-a-half
somersault three point
seven big opening dive
from even Garcia just a
really difficult dive to
control the splash a
little more than he
might have liked nice
tight tuck position spots
the water the feet
coming over just a little

Figure 1: Multitask AQA concept. Recognizing an action
instance in detail and verbally describing its good and bad
points can be helpful in the process of quantifying the quality of that action instance. We propose to learn a model that
delineates an action besides measuring its quality. To see
the videos play, please download the manuscript and view
in an Adobe Reader.

score is dependent on what was done (this determines the
difficulty level) and how was that done (this determines
the quality of execution). We pose the following question:
can learning to describe and commentate on the action
instances help improve the performance on the AQA task?
We hypothesize that by forcing the network to learn to
do so will help better characterize the action, and hence aid
1304

