Not All Frames Are Equal: Weakly-Supervised Video Grounding
with Contextual Similarity and Visual Clustering Losses
Jing Shi†
Jia Xu‡
Boqing Gong‡
Chenliang Xu†
†
‡
University of Rochester
Tencent AI Lab
†

{j.shi,chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu ‡ xujianjucs@gmail.com ‡ boqinggo@outlook.com

Abstract
We investigate the problem of weakly-supervised video
grounding, where only video-level sentences are provided.
This is a challenging task, and previous Multi-Instance
Learning (MIL) based image grounding methods turn to
fail in the video domain. Recent work attempts to decompose the video-level MIL into frame-level MIL by applying weighted sentence-frame ranking loss over frames,
but it is not robust and does not exploit the rich temporal information in videos. In this work, we address these
issues by extending frame-level MIL with a false positive
frame-bag constraint and modeling the visual feature consistency in the video. In specific, we design a contextual
similarity between semantic and visual features to deal with
sparse objects association across frames. Furthermore, we
leverage temporal coherence by strengthening the clustering effect of similar features in the visual space. We conduct an extensive evaluation on YouCookII and RoboWatch
datasets, and demonstrate our method significantly outperforms prior state-of-the-art methods.

Description: add the potatoes to the pot. Query: potato
Video
segment

V2

V1

Label

potato

V4

V3

potato

potato

potato

potato

Bag

(a) Video-level MIL

(b) Frame-level MIL

Figure 1. The illustration of (a) video-level MIL and (b) framelevel MIL. V1 to V4 are uniformly sampled from a video segment. Region proposals in different frames are distinguished by
color. Video-level MIL puts region proposals from all frames into
one bag while frame-level MIL constructs a bag for each frame.
The positive instances are denoted with black shadow. Here is the
dilemma: video-level MIL suffers from monotonically increased
bag size w.r.t. the number of frames, while frame-level MIL may
contain false positive bags such as bags for V3 , and V4 .

1. Introduction
Grounding textual signals to visual-spatial regions have
various applications, e.g., robotics [3, 2], human-computer
interaction [27] and image retrieval [11]. While visual grounding in static images has witnessed great
progress [11, 24, 4, 34, 35], visual grounding in videos
is still challenging—first, a video contains many frames,
which induces the temporal visual-language alignment
problem that is unique to video grounding; second, despite rich source of online videos, constructing a largescale video dataset with grounding annotation is expensive
and time-consuming. Therefore, in this paper, we aim to
do weakly-supervised video grounding: localize language
queries in video frames without object location annotation.
Kapathy and Fei-Fei [11] introduce a Multiple Instance
Learning (MIL) based grounding method that only requires

the alignment of images and sentences. It reasonably assumes that each image contains at least one region corresponding to the sentence query. If we define an image as the
“bag,” regions as instances in the bag and language query as
the label of the bag, then the image satisfies the definition
of the positive bag in MIL: a bag is positive if at least one of
its instances is positive. However, directly extending MIL
based grounding method from image to video easily falls
into a dilemma as shown in Fig. 1. The first way is to
regard each video as a bag, which contains all region proposals across frames as the instances. However, the bag size
will drastically increase as video becomes longer. We call
this brute-force video-level MIL. Another option is to construct a bag for every frame, and assign the same video label
to all frame bags, but it is easy to trigger false-positive bags.
This option is named as frame-level MIL. Zhou et al. [40]
4321
10444

