AET vs. AED: Unsupervised Representation Learning by Auto-Encoding
Transformations rather than Data
Liheng Zhang 1,∗, Guo-Jun Qi 1,2,†, Liqiang Wang3 , Jiebo Luo4
1

2

Laboratory for MAchine Perception and LEarning (MAPLE)
http://maple-lab.net/

Huawei Cloud, 3 University of Central Florida, 4 University of Rochester
guojun.qi@huawei.com
http://maple-lab.net/projects/AET.htm

Abstract
The success of deep neural networks often relies on a
large amount of labeled examples, which can be difficult to
obtain in many real scenarios. To address this challenge,
unsupervised methods are strongly preferred for training
neural networks without using any labeled data. In this
paper, we present a novel paradigm of unsupervised representation learning by Auto-Encoding Transformation (AET)
in contrast to the conventional Auto-Encoding Data (AED)
approach. Given a randomly sampled transformation, AET
seeks to predict it merely from the encoded features as accurately as possible at the output end. The idea is the following: as long as the unsupervised features successfully encode the essential information about the visual structures of original and transformed images, the transformation can be well predicted. We will show that this AET
paradigm allows us to instantiate a large variety of transformations, from parameterized, to non-parameterized and
GAN-induced ones. Our experiments show that AET greatly improves over existing unsupervised approaches, setting new state-of-the-art performances being greatly closer to the upper bounds by their fully supervised counterparts on CIFAR-10, ImageNet and Places datasets. Our
source codes are available at https://github.com/
maple-research-lab/AET.

1. Introduction
The great success in applying deep neural networks to
image classification, object detection and semantic segmentation has inspired us to explore their full ability in a wide
variety of computer vision tasks. Unfortunately, training
∗ The work was done while L. Zhang was interning at Huawei Cloud.
† Corresponding author: G.-J. Qi. Email: guojunq@gmail.com

(a) Auto-Encoding Data (AED)

(b) Auto-Encoding Transformation (AET)

Figure 1: An illustrative comparison between AED and
AET, where AET attempts to estimate the input transformation rather than the data at the output end. This forces
the encoder network E to extract the features that contain
the sufficient information about visual structures to decode
the input transformation.
deep neural networks often requires a large amount of labeled data to learn adequate feature representations for visual understanding tasks. This greatly limits the applicability
of deep neural networks when only a limited amount of labeled data is available for training the networks. Therefore,
there has been an increasing interest in literature to learn
deep feature representations in an unsupervised fashion to
solve emerging visual understanding tasks with insufficient
labeled data.
Among the efforts on unsupervised learning methods,
the most representative ones are Auto-Encoders and Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) [11]. The former trains an
encoder network to output feature representations with suf12547

