FilterReg: Robust and Efficient Probabilistic Point-Set Registration
using Gaussian Filter and Twist Parameterization
Wei Gao
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Russ Tedrake
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

weigao@mit.edu

russt@mit.edu

Abstract
Probabilistic point-set registration methods have been
gaining more attention for their robustness to noise, outliers and occlusions. However, these methods tend to be
much slower than the popular iterative closest point (ICP)
algorithms, which severely limits their usability. In this paper, we contribute a novel probabilistic registration method
that achieves state-of-the-art robustness as well as substantially faster computational performance than modern ICP
implementations. This is achieved using a rigorous yet
computationally-efficient probabilistic formulation. Pointset registration is cast as a maximum likelihood estimation
and solved using the EM algorithm. We show that with a
simple augmentation, the E step can be formulated as a filtering problem, allowing us to leverage advances in efficient
Gaussian filtering methods. We also propose a customized
permutohedral filter [1] for improved efficiency while retaining sufficient accuracy for our task. Additionally, we
present a simple and efficient twist parameterization that
generalizes our method to the registration of articulated and
deformable objects. For articulated objects, the complexity
of our method is almost independent of the Degrees Of Freedom (DOFs). The results demonstrate the proposed method
consistently outperforms many competitive baselines on a
variety of registration tasks. The video demo and source
code are available on our project page.

1. Introduction
Point-set registration is the task of aligning two point
clouds by estimating their relative transformation. This
problem is an essential component for many practical vision
systems, such as SLAM [27], object pose estimation [20],
dense 3d reconstruction [40], and interactive tracking of articulated [24] and deformable [12] objects.
The ICP [3] algorithm is the most widely used method
for this task. ICP alternatively establishes nearest-neighbor
correspondences and minimizes the point-pair distances.

With spatial indices such as the KD-tree, ICP provides relatively fast performance. The literature contains many variants of the ICP algorithm; [28] and [29] provide a thorough
review and comparison.
Despite its popularity, the ICP algorithm is susceptible to noise, outliers and occlusions. These limitations
have been widely documented in the literature [9, 25, 15].
Thus, a great deal of research has been done on the use of
probabilistic models for point-set registration [25, 14, 13],
which can in principle provide better outlier-rejection. Additionally, if each point is given a Gaussian variance,
the point cloud can be interpreted as a Gaussian Mixture
Model (GMM). Most statistical registration methods are
built on the GMM and empirically provide improved robustness [25, 15, 10]. However, these methods tend to be
much slower than the ICP and can hardly scale to large point
clouds, which severely limits their practical usability.
In this paper, we present a novel probabilistic registration algorithm that achieves state-of-the-art robustness as
well as substantially faster computational performance than
modern ICP implementations. To achieve it, we propose
a computationally-efficient probabilistic model and cast the
registration as a maximum likelihood estimation, which can
be solved using the EM algorithm. With a simple augmentation, we formulate the E step as a filtering problem and
solve it using advances in efficient Gaussian filters [1, 5, 2].
We also present a customized permutohedral filter [1] with
improved efficiency while retaining sufficient accuracy for
our task. Empirically our method is as robust as state-ofthe-art GMM-based methods, such as [25]. In terms of the
speed, our method with CPU is 3-7 times faster than modern
ICP implementations and orders of magnitude faster than
typical robust GMM-based methods. Furthermore, the proposed method can be GPU-parallelized and is 7 times faster
than the CPU implementation.
Additionally, we propose a simple and efficient twist parameterization that extends our method to articulated and
node-graph [17] deformable objects. Our method is easy
to implement and achieves substantial speedup over direct
parameterization. For articulated objects, the complexity
111095

