APDrawingGAN: Generating Artistic Portrait Drawings
from Face Photos with Hierarchical GANs
Ran Yi, Yong-Jin Liu∗
CS Dept, BNRist
Tsinghua University, China

Yu-Kun Lai, Paul L. Rosin
School of Computer Science and Informatics
Cardiff University, UK

{yr16,liuyongjin}@tsinghua.edu.cn

{LaiY4,RosinPL}@cardiff.ac.uk

Face photo

A test photo

APDrawingGAN

Drawing by an artist

Output

(a) An image pair
in the training set

(b) Our method

Deep Image Analogy

CNNMRF

Gatys

The results of using the same input test photo of Barack Obama

Headshot Portrait

CycleGAN

Pix2Pix

(c) Existing methods

Figure 1: (a) An artist draws a portrait drawing using a sparse set of lines and very few shaded regions to capture the
distinctive appearance of a given face photo. (b) Our APDrawingGAN learns this artistic drawing style and automatically
transforms a face photo into a high-quality artistic portrait drawing. (c) Using the same input face photo, six state-of-the-art
style transfer methods cannot generate desired artistic drawings: Deep Image Analogy [20], CNNMRF [18], Gatys [11] and
Headshot Portrait [32] change facial features or fail to capture style, CycleGAN [40] and Pix2Pix [15] produce false details
around hair, eyes or corners of the mouth.

Abstract
Significant progress has been made with image stylization using deep learning, especially with generative adversarial networks (GANs). However, existing methods fail to
produce high quality artistic portrait drawings. Such drawings have a highly abstract style, containing a sparse set of
continuous graphical elements such as lines, and so small
artifacts are more exposed than for painting styles. Moreover, artists tend to use different strategies to draw different
facial features and the lines drawn are only loosely related
to obvious image features. To address these challenges,
we propose APDrawingGAN, a novel GAN based architecture that builds upon hierarchical generators and discriminators combining both a global network (for images as a
*Corresponding author

whole) and local networks (for individual facial regions).
This allows dedicated drawing strategies to be learned for
different facial features. Since artists’ drawings may not
have lines perfectly aligned with image features, we develop
a novel loss to measure similarity between generated and
artists’ drawings based on distance transforms, leading to
improved strokes in portrait drawing. To train APDrawingGAN, we construct an artistic drawing dataset containing
high-resolution portrait photos and corresponding professional artistic drawings. Extensive experiments, and a user
study, show that APDrawingGAN produces significantly
better artistic drawings than state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Portrait drawings are a longstanding and distinct art
form, which typically use a sparse set of continuous graph-

10743

