Did it change?
Learning to Detect Point-of-Interest Changes for Proactive Map Updates
Jérôme Revaud†

Minhyeok Heo§
†

Rafael S. Rezende†

Chanmi You§
§

NAVER LABS Europe

Seong-Gyun Jeong§

NAVER LABS

Abstract
Maps are an increasingly important tool in our daily
lives, yet their rich semantic content still largely depends
on manual input. Motivated by the broad availability of
geo-tagged street-view images, we propose a new task aiming to make the map update process more proactive. We
focus on automatically detecting changes of Points of Interest (POIs), specifically stores or shops of any kind, based on
visual input. Faced with the lack of an appropriate benchmark, we build and release a large dataset, captured in two
large shopping centers, that comprises 33K geo-localized
images and 578 POIs. We then design a generic approach
that compares two image sets captured in the same venue
at different times and outputs POI changes as a ranked list
of map locations. In contrast to logo or franchise recognition approaches, our system does not depend on an external
franchise database. It is instead inspired by recent deep
metric learning approaches that learn a similarity function
fit to the task at hand. We compare various loss functions to
learn a metric aligned with the POI change detection goal,
and report promising results.

1. Introduction
Maps have become a useful companion in our daily lives,
as they provide a convenient and searchable representation
of our physical world. To achieve map usability, raw geographical data is manually enriched with associated semantic information [18, 38]. This way, maps can be queried and
explored in an effective and user-friendly manner.
Points of interest (POIs), i.e. well-localized landmarks
that one may find useful or interesting, typically constitute
an important part of this semantic content. POIs can be
shops or stores of all kinds, including restaurants, cafés,
banks, and so forth. Currently, most of this content is
gathered and entered mostly by hand in the map database
[18, 27, 41], but this process is tedious and expensive. This
is problematic as map semantic content is alive by definition
and, thus, subject to frequent changes. In addition, out-of-

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed system. We detect changes
of Points-of-Interest (POIs) as a first step towards the long-term
goal of fully-automated map updates. To that purpose, we compare
two sets of images captured at different moments. Image pairs
corresponding to the same physical location are first formed and
then compared using specially trained embeddings extracted by a
deep network. The comparison is simply carried out as an innerproduct between the two ℓ2 -normalized embeddings.

date POI information can be a source of accidents and user
frustration [8, 37].
In this paper, we ask the following question: Could the
map maintenance burden be alleviated by leveraging recent
advances in computer vision? We notice that, much like humans, who unconsciously build a mental map of their surrounding relying heavily on their ocular sense, machines
should also be able to perform semantic mapping-related

4086

