Toward Convolutional Blind Denoising of Real Photographs
Shi Guo1,3,4 , Zifei Yan( ☞) 1 , Kai Zhang1,3 , Wangmeng Zuo1,2 , Lei Zhang3,4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin; 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen;
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong; 4 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
1

guoshi28@outlook.com, {wmzuo,yanzifei}@hit.edu.cn
cskaizhang@gmail.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
While deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved impressive success in image denoising with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN), their performance remains limited on real-world noisy photographs. The main
reason is that their learned models are easy to overfit on
the simplified AWGN model which deviates severely from
the complicated real-world noise model. In order to improve the generalization ability of deep CNN denoisers, we
suggest training a convolutional blind denoising network
(CBDNet) with more realistic noise model and real-world
noisy-clean image pairs. On the one hand, both signaldependent noise and in-camera signal processing pipeline
is considered to synthesize realistic noisy images. On the
other hand, real-world noisy photographs and their nearly
noise-free counterparts are also included to train our CBDNet. To further provide an interactive strategy to rectify denoising result conveniently, a noise estimation subnetwork
with asymmetric learning to suppress under-estimation of
noise level is embedded into CBDNet. Extensive experimental results on three datasets of real-world noisy photographs clearly demonstrate the superior performance of
CBDNet over state-of-the-arts in terms of quantitative metrics and visual quality. The code has been made available
at https://github.com/GuoShi28/CBDNet.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is an essential and fundamental problem in low-level vision and image processing. With decades
of studies, numerous promising approaches [3, 12, 17,
53, 11, 61] have been developed and near-optimal performance [8, 31, 50] has been achieved for the removal
of additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). However, in
real camera system, image noise comes from multiple
sources (e.g., dark current noise, short noise, and thermal
noise) and is further affected by in-camera processing (ISP)
pipeline (e.g., demosaicing, Gamma correction, and compression). All these make real noise much more different

(b) Noisy

(a) “0002 02” from DND [45]

(d) DnCNN [61]

(e) FFDNet+ [62]

(c) BM3D [12]

(f) CBDNet

Figure 1: Denoising results of different methods on realworld noisy image “0002 02” from DND [45].
from AWGN, and blind denoising of real-world noisy photographs remains a challenging issue.
In the recent past, Gaussian denoising performance has
been significantly advanced by the development of deep
CNNs [61, 38, 62]. However, deep denoisers for blind
AWGN removal degrades dramatically when applied to real
photographs (see Fig. 1(d)). On the other hand, deep denoisers for non-blind AWGN removal would smooth out
the details while removing the noise (see Fig. 1(e)). Such
an phenomenon may be explained from the characteristic of
deep CNNs [39], where their generalization largely depends
on the ability of memorizing large scale training data. In
other words, existing CNN denoisers tend to be over-fitted
to Gaussian noise and generalize poorly to real-world noisy
images with more sophisticated noise.

1712

