A Simple Pooling-Based Design for Real-Time Salient Object Detection
Jiang-Jiang Liu1∗
Qibin Hou1∗
Ming-Ming Cheng1 †
Jiashi Feng2
Jianmin Jiang3
1
2
3
TKLNDST, College of CS, Nankai University
NUS
Shenzhen University
{j04.liu, andrewhoux}@gmail.com

Abstract
We solve the problem of salient object detection by investigating how to expand the role of pooling in convolutional neural networks. Based on the U-shape architecture,
we first build a global guidance module (GGM) upon the
bottom-up pathway, aiming at providing layers at different
feature levels the location information of potential salient
objects. We further design a feature aggregation module
(FAM) to make the coarse-level semantic information well
fused with the fine-level features from the top-down pathway. By adding FAMs after the fusion operations in the topdown pathway, coarse-level features from the GGM can be
seamlessly merged with features at various scales. These
two pooling-based modules allow the high-level semantic
features to be progressively refined, yielding detail enriched
saliency maps. Experiment results show that our proposed
approach can more accurately locate the salient objects
with sharpened details and hence substantially improve
the performance compared to the previous state-of-the-arts.
Our approach is fast as well and can run at a speed of more
than 30 FPS when processing a 300 × 400 image. Code can
be found at http://mmcheng.net/poolnet/.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the capability of detecting the most visually distinctive objects from a given image, salient object detection plays an important role in many computer vision tasks, such as visual tracking [8], content-aware image
editing [4], and robot navigation [5]. Traditional methods
[11, 25, 14, 31, 2, 12, 41, 3] mostly rely on hand-crafted features to capture local details and global context separately
or simultaneously, but the lack of high-level semantic information restricts their ability to detect the integral salient objects in complex scenes. Luckily, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) greatly promote the development of salient
object detection models because of their capability of extracting both high-level semantic information and low-level
∗ Indicates equal contributions.
† M.M. Cheng (cmm@nankai.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

detail features in multiple scale space.
As pointed out in many previous approaches [9, 28, 44],
because of the pyramid-like structural characteristics of
CNNs, shallower stages usually have larger spatial sizes
and keep rich, detailed low-level information while deeper
stages contain more high-level semantic knowledge and are
better at locating the exact places of salient objects. Based
on the aforementioned knowledge, a variety of new architectures [9, 17, 38, 10] for salient object detection have been
designed. Among these approaches, U-shape based structures [32, 22] receive the most attentions due to their ability to construct enriched feature maps by building top-down
pathways upon classification networks.
Despite the good performance achieved by this type of
approaches, there is still a large room for improving it. First,
in the U-shape structure, high-level semantic information
is progressively transmitted to shallower layers, and hence
the location information captured by deeper layers may be
gradually diluted at the same time. Second, as pointed out
in [47], the receptive field size of a CNN is not proportional to its layer depth. Existing methods solve the abovementioned problems by introducing attention mechanisms
[46, 24] into U-shape structures, refining feature maps in
a recurrent way [23, 46, 36], combining multi-scale feature information [9, 28, 44, 10], or add extra constraints to
saliency maps like the boundary loss term in [28].
In this paper, different from the methods mentioned
above, we investigate how to solve these problems by expanding the role of the pooling techniques in U-shape based
architectures. In general, our model consists of two primary modules on the base of the feature pyramid networks
(FPNs) [22]: a global guidance module (GGM) and a feature aggregation module (FAM). As shown in Fig. 1, our
GGM composes of a modified version of pyramid pooling
module (PPM) and a series of global guiding flows (GGFs).
Unlike [37] which directly plugs PPM into the U-shape networks, our GGM is an individual module. More specifically, the PPM is placed on the top of the backbone to capture global guidance information (where the salient objects
are). By introducing GGFs, high-level semantic information collected by PPM can be delivered to feature maps at
13917

