Marginalized Latent Semantic Encoder for Zero-Shot Learning
Zhengming Ding† and Hongfu Liu‡
†
Department of CIT, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, IN, USA
‡
Michtom School of Computer Science, Brandeis University, MA, USA
zd2@iu.edu, hongfuliu@brandeis.edu

Abstract


Zero-shot learning has been well explored to precisely
identify new unobserved classes through a visual-semantic
function obtained from the existing objects. However, there
exist two challenging obstacles: one is that the humanannotated semantics are insufficient to fully describe the visual samples; the other is the domain shift across existing
and new classes. In this paper, we attempt to exploit the
intrinsic relationship in the semantic manifold when given
semantics are not enough to describe the visual objects, and
enhance the generalization ability of the visual-semantic
function with marginalized strategy. Specifically, we design
a Marginalized Latent Semantic Encoder (MLSE), which
is learned on the augmented seen visual features and the
latent semantic representation. Meanwhile, latent semantics are discovered under an adaptive graph reconstruction
scheme based on the provided semantics. Consequently, our
proposed algorithm could enrich visual characteristics from
seen classes, and well generalize to unobserved classes.
Experimental results on zero-shot benchmarks demonstrate
that the proposed model delivers superior performance over
the state-of-the-art zero-shot learning approaches.

1. Introduction
Visual data analytic has achieved tremendous improvements recently, as the rapid explosion of data scales and
continuously-improved learning models. Traditional visual
recognition systems almost pursue the supervised strategies,
that require a great number of well-annotated instances to
seek a high-performance model. Unfortunately, it is expensive and even prohibitive to collect enough training samples
for an effective model, especially when these samples need
fine-grained annotations. Hence, it is appealing and essential to build such recognition systems that can identify novel
categories in the test stage with limited or even no instances
accessible in the training process.
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) has been surging recently,
which catches great attention for its promising performance





  


 





    

 







   



 

 

       

Figure 1. Illustration of our marginalized latent semantic encoder,
in which a semantic encoder is built to bridge visual features in
marginalized corruption E(X̃) and the latent semantics Z with
W E(X̃) ≈ Z. Furthermore, latent semantics are learned over
the given semantics A through an adaptive graph (Z ≈ AS).

in generalizing knowledge from observed objects to unseen objects [22, 8, 33, 11, 6, 17, 14, 31, 3, 26, 7, 28].
In fact, ZSL is motivated by the human cognitive learning
mechanism in identifying unknown classes. ZSL attempts
to discover the intrinsic visual-semantic mapping from observed objects and generalizes it for unobserved categories.
One of the most frequently-adopted approaches is to embed
visual features and their corresponding semantics of seen
classes into the same common space to couple the semantic
gap across two, which expects that the unseen classes with
their semantics and visual samples are also embedded in the
same space. Most existing ZSL models focus on seeking
the visual-semantic function only relying on the provided
visual data and its semantics [4, 22, 12, 13]. The visualsemantic function could simply be a linear mapping [23],
or dual linear mappings [4], or even complex non-linear
functions, including dictionary learning [8], auto-encoder
[12, 17, 3, 34], and generative models [38, 31, 9, 7], where
generative models are usually promising to augment the
space of seen classes and more likely to cover that of unseen classes in the training stage.
Although the existing ZSL methods achieve some
promising results in generalizing the seen knowledge to un-

6191

