Explicit Spatial Encoding for Deep Local Descriptors
Arun Mukundan
Giorgos Tolias
Ondřej Chum
Visual Recognition Group, FEE, CTU in Prague

Abstract
We propose a kernelized deep local-patch descriptor
based on efficient match kernels of neural network activations. Response of each receptive field is encoded together
with its spatial location using explicit feature maps. Two
location parametrizations, Cartesian and polar, are used to
provide robustness to a different types of canonical patch
misalignment. Additionally, we analyze how the conventional architecture, i.e. a fully connected layer attached after the convolutional part, encodes responses in a spatially
variant way. In contrary, explicit spatial encoding is used in
our descriptor, whose potential applications are not limited
to local-patches. We evaluate the descriptor on standard
benchmarks. Both versions, encoding 32 × 32 or 64 × 64
patches, consistently outperform all other methods on all
benchmarks. The number of parameters of the model is independent of the input patch resolution.

1. Introduction
Local feature extraction and representation is still an essential part of a number computer vision applications across
many different problems. A common and well performing
procedure is a sequence of three steps: local feature detection [16, 27, 29, 6, 25], local patch rectification into a
canonical form, and finally a descriptor construction from
the canonical patch [28, 6, 25, 14]. The desired property of
the local patch descriptors is that Euclidean distance or a dot
product between two descriptors indicates whether they are
matching, i.e. the local features are coming approximately
from the same surface of a 3D scene. The descriptor methods have shifted from hand-crafted to currently the most
successful convolutional neural network (CNN) based approaches [58, 46, 5, 30, 49, 33].
Fully convolutional neural networks takes an image or a
patch as input and produces a tensor, where a vector at each
spatial location can be seen as a detector response over its
receptive field. In the case of variable-sized, or non-aligned
input, such as images, the response tensor is transformed
into a descriptor typically by some form of global pooling [40, 19, 39], which discards geometric information. The

global pooling is analogous to bags-of-features [13, 48] or
descriptor aggregation [37, 18]. In the case of aligned input of fixed size, such as rectified image patches, the tensor
is vectorized and further processed. Vectorization has similar interpretation to vectorizing spatial bins in SIFT [25].
Commonly, the vectorized tensor is processed by a single
fully-connected (FC) layer [30, 49], that can be either interpreted as learned affine (linear and bias) transformation of
the space, e.g. whitening and dimensionality reduction, or
as spatially dependent embedding with efficient match kernels (EMK) [9, 11] (see Section 3.2). The key contribution
of this work is a CNN module that explicitly models the
spatial information of a rectified patch. Its applicability is
not limited to local descriptors.
Two rectified patches coming from matching local features are far from being identical in general. The difference has two sources, namely appearance change in imaging process and geometric misalignment. The former comes
from different light conditions, non-planarity of the surface,
imaging artifacts, etc. The latter is caused by the detected
feature covering slightly different area of the 3D surface, or
incorrect rectification of the patch. These are consequences
of either the appearance changes or of insufficient geometric invariance of the detector, i.e. affine invariant detector
acting on projectively transformed surface.
Prior work on hand-crafted feature descriptors has shown
that it is beneficial to explicitly address the geometric misalignment. Some of the approaches handling this are soft
assignment of gradients to bins in SIFT and continuous spatial encoding by kernel methods in different [11] or multiple [32] coordinate systems.
CNNs are powerful in modeling the appearance variance, while weak in modeling the geometric displacement
(at least with a single FC layer). Recent methods propose different ways of incorporating spatial information in
a CNN [34, 24], but their application field is different than
local descriptors. In this work, we propose to model the
geometric misalignment by efficient match kernels that explicitly encode the spatial positions of the responses. To
encode the spatial information, kernel-based explicit feature maps are used in a similar fashion to hand-crafted features [11, 32]. This can be seen as a transition from soft
19394

