VERI-Wild: A Large Dataset and a New Method for
Vehicle Re-Identification in the Wild
Yihang Lou1,4
Yan Bai1,5
Jun Liu2
Shiqi Wang3
Ling-Yu Duan1,4,∗
1
2
Peking University, Beijing, China
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
City University of Hong Kong, Hongkong, China 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
5
Hulu, Beijing, China
{yihanglou, yanbai, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn, jliu029@ntu.edu.sg, shiqwang@cityu.edu.hk

Re-Identify Vehicles In the Wild

Abstract
Vehicle Re-identification (ReID) is of great significance
to the intelligent transportation and public security. However, many challenging issues of Vehicle ReID in real-world
scenarios have not been fully investigated, e.g., the high
viewpoint variations, extreme illumination conditions, complex backgrounds, and different camera sources. To promote the research of vehicle ReID in the wild, we collect
a new dataset called VERI-Wild with the following distinct features: 1) The vehicle images are captured by a
large surveillance system containing 174 cameras covering
a large urban district (more than 200km2 ). 2) The camera
network continuously captures vehicles for 24 hours in each
day and lasts for 1 month. 3) It is the first vehicle ReID
dataset that is collected from unconstrained conditions1 .
VERI-Wild contains more than 400 thousand images of 40
thousand vehicle IDs. In this paper, we also propose a new
method for vehicle ReID, in which, the ReID model is coupled into a Feature Distance Adversarial Network (FDANet), and a novel feature distance adversary scheme is designed to online generate hard negative samples in feature
space to facilitate ReID model training. The comprehensive
results show the effectiveness of our method on the proposed
dataset2 and the other two existing datasets.

1. Introduction
Vehicle Re-Identification (ReID) aims to retrieve images of a query vehicle from a large-scale vehicle database,
which is of great significance to the urban security and
city management [9][31]. The straightforward method is to
identify vehicles by the recognition of license plates [10][4].
∗ Ling-Yu Duan is the corresponding author.
1 The unconstrained condition arises from the data collection in a real
surveillance camera network of a city-scale district, covering huge diversity of viewpoints, resolutions, illuminations, camera sources, weathers,
occlusions, backgrounds, vehicle models in the wild, etc.
2 The dataset is available at https://github.com/PKU-IMRE/
VERI-Wild.

Hard Negative

CNN

Positive

Negative

Hard Negative

Figure 1. Left: Our dataset is collected with a large-scale real
video surveillance system consisting of 174 cameras distributed
in a urban district (>200km2 ). Right: A hard negative generation
method is proposed to boost the vehicle ReID performance.

However, in many circumstances, the license plates cannot
be clearly captured, sometimes even removed, occluded, or
faked. As a result, there is an exponential increase in the
demand for the visual appearance based vehicle ReID techniques. The development of deep learning and existing annotated datasets have greatly facilitated the vehicle ReID research. However, the diversity in terms of viewpoint, background, and illumination variations present great challenges
to the vehicle ReID models in real-world applications.
In vehicle ReID, the dataset is crucial to comprehensively and fairly evaluate the performance of the ReID
methods. However, to the best of our knowledge, all of the
existing vehicle ReID datasets [9][26][10] are captured under constrained conditions, and generally have limitations
in the following aspects: 1) The number of vehicle identities and images are not large enough to the needs of practical application. 2) The limited camera numbers and covering areas do not involve complex and variant backgrounds
in a variety of real-world scenarios. 3) The camera views
are highly restricted. For most vehicle datasets, the samples are collected from checkpoint cameras that only capture the front and rear views, and the severe occlusion is also
13235

