Scan2Mesh: From Unstructured Range Scans to 3D Meshes
Angela Dai
Matthias Nießner
Technical University of Munich

Figure 1: 3D scans of objects suffer from sensor occlusions as well as noisy, oversmoothed reconstruction quality in very
dense, triangle-heavy meshes, due to both sensor noise and resolution as well as reconstruction artifacts. We propose a novel
approach, leveraging graph neural networks, which takes a partial scan of an object and generates a complete, lightweight
3D mesh of the object. Our approach is the first to propose a generative deep-learning based model for directly creating a 3D
mesh as an indexed face set.

Abstract

We introduce Scan2Mesh, a novel data-driven generative
approach which transforms an unstructured and potentially
incomplete range scan into a structured 3D mesh representation. The main contribution of this work is a generative
neural network architecture whose input is a range scan of
a 3D object and whose output is an indexed face set conditioned on the input scan. In order to generate a 3D mesh
as a set of vertices and face indices, the generative model
builds on a series of proxy losses for vertices, edges, and
faces. At each stage, we realize a one-to-one discrete mapping between the predicted and ground truth data points
with a combination of convolutional- and graph neural network architectures. This enables our algorithm to predict
a compact mesh representation similar to those created
through manual artist effort using 3D modeling software.
Our generated mesh results thus produce sharper, cleaner
meshes with a fundamentally different structure from those
generated through implicit functions, a first step in bridging
the gap towards artist-created CAD models.

1. Introduction
3D meshes are one of the most popular representations
used to create and design 3D surfaces, from across content
creation for movies and video games to architectural and
mechanical design modeling. These mesh or CAD models are handcrafted by artists, often inspired by or mimicking real-world objects and scenes through expensive, significantly tedious manual effort. Our aim is to develop a
generative model for such 3D mesh representations; that is,
a mesh model described as an indexed face set: a set of vertices as 3D positions, and a set of faces which index into
the vertices to describe the 3D surface of the model. In this
way, we can begin to learn to generate 3D models similar to
the handcrafted content creation process.
The nature of these 3D meshes, structured but irregular
(e.g., irregular vertex locations, varying face sizes), make
them very difficult to generate. In particular, with the burgeoning direction of generative deep learning approaches
for 3D model creation and completion [5, 10, 30, 6], the
irregularity of mesh structures provides a significant challenge, as these approaches are largely designed for regular
grids. Thus, work in the direction of generating 3D models
predominantly relies on the use of implicit functions stored
15574

