Detect-to-Retrieve: Efficient Regional Aggregation for Image Search
Marvin Teichmann∗
University of Cambridge, UK

André Araujo∗ Menglong Zhu Jack Sim
Google AI, USA

mttt2@eng.cam.ac.uk

{andrearaujo, menglong, jacksim}@google.com

1. Introduction
In this paper, we address the image retrieval problem:
given a query image, a system should efficiently retrieve
similar images from a database. Image retrieval systems are
usually composed of two main stages: (1) filtering, where an
efficient technique ranks database images according to their
similarity with respect to the query; (2) re-ranking, where a
small number of the most similar database images from the
first stage are inspected in more detail and re-ranked.
Traditionally, hand-crafted local features [21, 6] were
coupled to Bag-of-Words-inspired techniques [35, 26, 27,
14, 15, 16, 37] to construct high-dimensional representations
used in the filtering step. Local feature matching and geo∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

R-ASMK

VLAD

R1
Local Feature Extraction
+ Region Detection

Retrieving object instances among cluttered scenes efficiently requires compact yet comprehensive regional image
representations. Intuitively, object semantics can help build
the index that focuses on the most relevant regions. However, due to the lack of bounding-box datasets for objects of
interest among retrieval benchmarks, most recent work on
regional representations has focused on either uniform or
class-agnostic region selection. In this paper, we first fill the
void by providing a new dataset of landmark bounding boxes,
based on the Google Landmarks dataset, that includes 94k
images with manually curated boxes from 15k unique landmarks. Then, we demonstrate how a trained landmark detector, using our new dataset, can be leveraged to index image
regions and improve retrieval accuracy while being much
more efficient than existing regional methods. In addition, we
introduce a novel regional aggregated selective match kernel
(R-ASMK) to effectively combine information from detected
regions into an improved holistic image representation. RASMK boosts image retrieval accuracy substantially with no
dimensionality increase, while even outperforming systems
that index image regions independently. Our complete image
retrieval system improves upon the previous state-of-the-art
by significant margins on the Revisited Oxford and Paris
datasets. Code and data will be released.

Regional Aggregation

Abstract

R3

R2

R1
R3

R2

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed regional aggregation method. Deep
local features (stars) and object regions (boxes) are extracted from an image.
Regional aggregation proceeds in two steps, using a large codebook of
visual words (red and yellow visual words are depicted): first, per-region
VLAD description; second, sum pooling and per-visual word normalization.
Our final regionally aggregated image representation can be combined to
selective match kernels and provide improved image similarity estimation:
we refer to this technique as regional aggregated selective match kernels
(R-ASMK). It leverages detected regions to improve image retrieval at no
dimensionality increase when compared to the original ASMK method [37].

metric verification [26, 27, 3] (commonly using RANSAC
[8]) have been used as effective re-ranking strategies. Recently, several deep learning techniques have been proposed
for these two stages. Global image representations based on
convolutional neural networks (CNN) can produce compact
embeddings to enable fast similarity computation in the filtering step [5, 4, 39, 1, 9, 30]. Local image representations
can also be extracted using CNNs, suitable to re-ranking via
spatial matching and geometric verification [25, 24, 23].
Today’s image retrieval systems tend to fail when relevant
objects do not occupy a large enough fraction of database
15109

