Multi-Target Embodied Question Answering
Licheng Yu1 , Xinlei Chen3 , Georgia Gkioxari3 , Mohit Bansal1 ,
Tamara L. Berg1,3 , Dhruv Batra2,3
1
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 2 Georgia Tech 3 Facebook AI

Abstract

EQA-v1: What color is the car?
bedroom
T-1

Embodied Question Answering (EQA) is a relatively new
task where an agent is asked to answer questions about
its environment from egocentric perception. EQA as introduced in [8] makes the fundamental assumption that every
question, e.g. “what color is the car?”, has exactly one target (“car”) being inquired about. This assumption puts a
direct limitation on the abilities of the agent.
We present a generalization of EQA – Multi-Target EQA
(MT-EQA). Specifically, we study questions that have multiple targets in them, such as “Is the dresser in the bedroom bigger than the oven in the kitchen?”, where the
agent has to navigate to multiple locations (“dresser in bedroom”, “oven in kitchen”) and perform comparative reasoning (“dresser” bigger than “oven”) before it can answer a question. Such questions require the development of
entirely new modules or components in the agent. To address this, we propose a modular architecture composed of
a program generator, a controller, a navigator, and a VQA
module. The program generator converts the given question into sequential executable sub-programs; the navigator guides the agent to multiple locations pertinent to the
navigation-related sub-programs; and the controller learns
to select relevant observations along its path. These observations are then fed to the VQA module to predict the
answer. We perform detailed analysis for each of the model
components and show that our joint model can outperform
previous methods and strong baselines by a significant margin. Project page: https://embodiedqa.org.

1. Introduction
One of the grand challenges of AI is to build intelligent
agents that visually perceive their surroundings, communicate with humans via natural language, and act in their environments to accomplish tasks. In the vision, language, and
AI communities, we are witnessing a shift in focus from
internet vision to embodied AI – with the creation of new
tasks and benchmarks [7, 2, 14, 35], instantiated on new
simulation platforms [21, 28, 32, 33, 20, 6].
The focus of this paper is one such embodied AI task,

bathroom
T-3

garage

Answer: Orange

T-2

T-4

T-1

MT-EQA: Does the dressing table in the bedroom
have same color as the sink in the bathroom?
T-1

dining room

T-2
T-1

living room
T-3

T-4

kitchen

Answer: No

Figure 1: Difference between EQA-v1 and MT-EQA. While EQAv1’s question asks about a single target “car”, MT-EQA’s question
involves multiple targets (e.g., bedroom, dressing table, bathroom,
sink) to be navigated, and attribute comparison between multiple
targets (e.g., dressing table and sink).

Embodied Question Answering (EQA) [8], which tests an
agent’s overall ability to jointly perceive its surrounding,
communicate with humans, and act in a physical environment. Specifically, in EQA, an agent is spawned in a random location within an environment and is asked a question
about something in that environment, for example “What
color is the lamp?”. In order to answer the question correctly, the agent needs to parse and understand the question,
navigate to a good location (looking at the “lamp”) based
on its first-person perception of the environment and predict the right answer (e.g. “blue”).
However, there is still much left to be done in EQA. In
its original version, the EQA-v1 dataset only consists of
single-target question-answer pairs, such as “What color is
the car?”. The agent just needs to find the car then check
its color based on its last observed frames. However, the
single target constraint places a direct limitation on the possible set of tasks that the AI agent can tackle. For example,
consider the question “Is the kitchen larger than the bedroom?” in EQA-v1; the agent would not be able to answer
this question because it involves navigating to multiple targets –“kitchen” and “bedroom” – and the answer requires
comparative reasoning between the two rooms, where all of
these skills are not part of the original EQA task.
In this work, we present a generalization of EQA –
16309

