Spatial Fusion GAN for Image Synthesis
Fangneng Zhan
Nanyang Technological University
50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798

Hongyuan Zhu
Institute for Infocomm, A*STAR, Singapore
1 Fusionopolis Way, Singapore 138632

fnzhan@ntu.edu.sg

zhuh@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Shijian Lu
Nanyang Technological University
50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798
shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent advances in generative adversarial networks
(GANs) have shown great potentials in realistic image synthesis whereas most existing works address synthesis realism in either appearance space or geometry space but few
in both. This paper presents an innovative Spatial Fusion
GAN (SF-GAN) that combines a geometry synthesizer and
an appearance synthesizer to achieve synthesis realism in
both geometry and appearance spaces. The geometry synthesizer learns contextual geometries of background images
and transforms and places foreground objects into the background images unanimously. The appearance synthesizer
adjusts the color, brightness and styles of the foreground
objects and embeds them into background images harmoniously, where a guided filter is introduced for detail preserving. The two synthesizers are inter-connected as mutual references which can be trained end-to-end without supervision. The SF-GAN has been evaluated in two tasks:
(1) realistic scene text image synthesis for training better
recognition models; (2) glass and hat wearing for realistic matching glasses and hats with real portraits. Qualitative and quantitative comparisons with the state-of-the-art
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed SF-GAN.

1. Introduction
With the advances of deep neural networks (DNNs), image synthesis has been attracting increasing attention as
a means of generating novel images and creating annotated images for training DNN models, where the latter has
great potentials to replace the traditional manual annotation which is usually costly, time-consuming and unscalable. The fast development of generative adversarial networks (GANs) [9] in recent years opens a new door of au-

Figure 1. The proposed SF-GAN is capable of synthesizing realistic images concurrently in geometric and appearance spaces. Rows
1 and 2 show a few synthesized scene text images and row 3 shows
a few hat-wearing and glass-wearing images where the foreground
texts, glasses and hats as highlighted by red-color boxes are composed with the background scene and face images harmoniously.

tomated image synthesis as GANs are capable of generating realistic images by concurrently implementing a generator and discriminator. Three typical approaches have been
explored for GAN-based image synthesis, namely, direct
image generation [27, 33, 1], image-to-image translation
[55, 16, 22, 14] and image composition [21, 2].
On the other hand, most existing GANs were designed
to achieve synthesis realism either from geometry space or
appearance space but few in both. Consequentially, most
GAN-synthesized images have little contribution (many
even harmful) when they are used in training deep network
models. In particular, direct image generation still faces
difficulties in generating high-resolution images due to the
limited network capacity. GAN-based image composition
is capable of producing high-resolution images [21, 2] by
placing foreground objects into background images. But
most GAN-based image composition techniques focus on
geometric realism only (e.g. object alignment with con13653

