Global Second-order Pooling Convolutional Networks
Zilin Gao1,2 , Jiangtao Xie1 , Qilong Wang3 , Peihua Li1∗
1
Dalian University of Technology 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 3 Tianjin University
{gzl, jiangtaoxie}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, qlwang@tju.edu.cn, peihuali@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) are fundamental to, besides large-scale visual recognition, a lot of
vision tasks. As the primary goal of the ConvNets is to
characterize complex boundaries of thousands of classes
in a high-dimensional space, it is critical to learn higherorder representations for enhancing non-linear modeling
capability. Recently, Global Second-order Pooling (GSoP),
plugged at the end of networks, has attracted increasing attentions, achieving much better performance than classical,
first-order networks in a variety of vision tasks. However,
how to effectively introduce higher-order representation in
earlier layers for improving non-linear capability of ConvNets is still an open problem. In this paper, we propose a
novel network model introducing GSoP across from lower
to higher layers for exploiting holistic image information
throughout a network. Given an input 3D tensor outputted
by some previous convolutional layer, we perform GSoP to
obtain a covariance matrix which, after nonlinear transformation, is used for tensor scaling along channel dimension.
Similarly, we can perform GSoP along spatial dimension
for tensor scaling as well. In this way, we can make full use
of the second-order statistics of the holistic image throughout a network. The proposed networks are thoroughly evaluated on large-scale ImageNet-1K, and experiments have
shown that they outperform non-trivially the counterparts
while achieving state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) are fundamental to computer vision field, since they are not only
paramount for high accuracy of large-scale object recognition, but also play central roles, through means of pretrained models, in advancing substantially many other computer vision tasks, e.g., object detection [29], semantic segmentation [27] and video classification [35]. Given color
∗ Peihua Li is the corresponding author.

images as inputs, the ConvNets can learn progressively the
low-level, mid-level and high-level features [42], finally
producing global image representations connected to softmax layer for classification. To better characterize complex boundaries of thousands of classes in a very highdimensional space, one possible solution is to learn higherorder representations for enhancing nonlinear modeling capability of ConvNets.
Recently, modeling of higher-order statistics for more
discriminative image representations has attracted great interests in deep ConvNets. The global second-order pooling1
(GSoP), producing covariance matrices as image representations, has achieved state-of-the-art results in a variety of
vision tasks [22, 3, 33, 36] such as object recognition, finegrained visual categorization, object detection and video
classification. The pioneering works, i.e., DeepO2 P [18]
and bilinear CNN (B-CNN) [26], performed global secondorder pooling, rather than the commonly used global average (i.e., first-order) pooling (GAvP) [25], after the last
convolutional layers in an end-to-end manner. However,
most of the variants of GSoP [7, 1] only focused on smallscale scenarios. In large-scale visual recognition, MPNCOV [23, 22] has shown matrix power normalized GSoP
can significantly outperform global average pooling.
Though GSoP plugged at the end of network has proven
successful, how to effectively introduce higher-order representation in earlier layers for improving non-linear capability of ConvNets is still an open problem. Several
works [24, 37, 43] have made attempts to enhance nonlinear modeling capability using quadratic transformation
to model feature interactions, instead of only using linear transformation of convolutions. However, performance
gains of these methods are limited in large-scale visual
recognition. Motivated by Squeeze-and-Excitation (SE)
networks [15], we introduce GSoP across from lower to
higher layers of deep ConvNets, aiming to learn more discriminative representations by exploiting the second-order
statistics of holistic image throughout a deep ConvNet.
At the heart of our global second-order networks is the
GSoP block, which can be conveniently plugged into any

The work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. 61471082 and No. 61806140).

1 To our knowledge the term “second-order pooling” was coined in [2].

3024

