Pyramid Feature Attention Network for Saliency detection
Ting Zhao, Xiangqian Wu
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
17S003073@stu.hit.edu.cn, xqwu@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Saliency detection is one of the basic challenges in computer vision. Recently, CNNs are the most widely used and
powerful techniques for saliency detection, in which feature maps from different layers are always integrated without distinction. However, instinctively, the different feature
maps of CNNs and the different features in the same maps
should play different roles in saliency detection. To address
this problem, a novel CNN named pyramid feature attention
network (PFAN) is proposed to enhance the high-level context features and the low-level spatial structural features.
In the proposed PFAN, a context-aware pyramid feature extraction (CPFE) module is designed for multi-scale highlevel feature maps to capture the rich context features. A
channel-wise attention (CA) model and a spatial attention
(SA) model are respectively applied to the CPFE feature
maps and the low-level feature maps, and then fused to detect salient regions. Finally, an edge preservation loss is
proposed to get the accurate boundaries of salient regions.
The proposed PFAN is extensively evaluated on five benchmark datasets and the experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed network outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches under different evaluation metrics.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection aims to locate the important parts of
natural images which attract our attention. As the preprocessing of computer vision applications, e.g. object
detection[8, 35], visual tracking[1, 14], image retrieval[10,
13] and semantic segmentation[9], saliency detection attracts many researchers. Currently, the most effective
saliency detection methods are based on the fully convolutional network (FCN). FCN stacks multiple convolution and
pooling layers to gradually increase the receptive field and
generate the high-level semantic information, which plays
a crucial role in saliency detection. However, the pooling
layers reduce the size of the feature maps and deteriorate
the boundaries of the salient objects.
To deal with this problem, some works introduce

Figure 1. An example of applying Pyramid Feature Attention network.(a) and (b) represent the input image and corresponding
Ground Truth. (c) and (d) mean low-level features without or with
spacial attention. (e) and (f) are high-level features without or with
channel-wise attention. (g) and (h) represent the results from our
method and the boundary map of (g) generated by Laplace operator.

hand-craft features to preserve the boundaries of salient
objects[18, 28]. [18] extracts the hand-craft features to compute the salient values of super-pixels. [28] partitions the
image into regions by hand-craft features. When generating
saliency maps, the hand-craft features and the CNN highlevel features are complementary but extracted separately in
these methods. However, it is difficult to effectively fuse the
complementary features extracted separately. Furthermore,
hand-craft features extraction is a time-consuming procedure.
Besides hand-craft features, some works discover that
the features from different layers of the network are also
complementary and integrate the multi-scale features for
saliency detection [15, 43, 29]. More specifically, the features at deep layers typically contain global context-aware
information, which are suitable to locate the salient regions
correctly. The features at shallow layers contain the spatial
structural details, which are suitable to locate boundaries.
These methods fused different scale features without considering their different contribution for saliency, which is
not optimal for saliency detection. To overcome these problems, attention model [45] and gate function [42] are introduced to the saliency detection networks. However, the
13085

