The Perfect Match: 3D Point Cloud Matching with Smoothed Densities
Zan Gojcic

Caifa Zhou

Jan D. Wegner

Andreas Wieser

ETH Zurich
{firstname.lastname@geod.baug.ethz.ch}

Abstract
We propose 3DSmoothNet, a full workflow to match
3D point clouds with a siamese deep learning architecture
and fully convolutional layers using a voxelized smoothed
density value (SDV) representation. The latter is computed per interest point and aligned to the local reference frame (LRF) to achieve rotation invariance. Our compact, learned, rotation invariant 3D point cloud descriptor achieves 94.9% average recall on the 3DMatch benchmark data set [49], outperforming the state-of-the-art by
more than 20 percent points with only 32 output dimensions. This very low output dimension allows for near realtime correspondence search with 0.1 ms per feature point
on a standard PC. Our approach is sensor- and sceneagnostic because of SDV, LRF and learning highly descriptive features with fully convolutional layers. We show
that 3DSmoothNet trained only on RGB-D indoor scenes
of buildings achieves 79.0% average recall on laser scans
of outdoor vegetation, more than double the performance
of our closest, learning-based competitors [49, 17, 5, 4].
Code, data and pre-trained models are available online at
https://github.com/zgojcic/3DSmoothNet.

1. Introduction
3D point cloud matching is necessary to combine multiple overlapping scans of a scene (e.g., acquired using an
RGB-D sensor or a laser scanner) into a single representation for further processing like 3D reconstruction or semantic segmentation. Individual parts of the scene are usually captured from different viewpoints with a relatively low
overlap. A prerequisite for further processing is thus aligning these individual point cloud fragments in a common coordinate system, to obtain one large point cloud of the complete scene.
Although some works aim to register 3D point clouds
based on geometric constraints (e.g., [27, 48, 35]), most approaches match corresponding 3D feature descriptors that
are custom-tailored for 3D point clouds and usually de-

Figure 1: 3DSmoothNet generalization ability: our descriptor, trained solely on indoor scenes (top) can seamlessly generalize to outdoor scenes (bottom).
scribe point neighborhoods with histograms of point distributions or local surface normals (e.g., [16, 8, 28, 38]).
Since the comeback of deep learning, research on 3D local
descriptors has followed the general trend in the vision community and shifted towards learning-based approaches and
more specifically deep neural networks [49, 17, 5, 45, 4].
Although the field has seen significant progress in the last
three years, most learned 3D feature descriptors are either
not rotation invariant [49, 5, 45], need very high output dimensions to be successful [49, 4] or can hardly generalize to new domains [49, 17]. In this paper, we propose
3DSmoothNet, a deep learning approach for 3D point cloud
matching, which has low output dimension (16 or 32) for
very fast correspondence search, high descriptiveness (outperforms all state-of-the-art approaches by more than 20
percent points), is rotation invariant, and does generalize
across sensor modalities and from indoor scenes of buildings to natural outdoor scenes.
Contributions We propose a new compact learned local
feature descriptors for 3D point cloud matching that is efficient to compute and outperforms all existing methods
significantly. A major technical novelty of our paper is
the smoothed density value (SDV) voxelization as a new
input data representation that is amenable to fully convolutional layers of standard deep learning libraries. The gain
of SDV is twofold. On the one hand, it reduces the sparsity

5545

