An End-to-End Network for Panoptic Segmentation
Huanyu Liu1†, Chao Peng2 , Changqian Yu3†, Jingbo Wang4†, Xu Liu5†, Gang Yu2 , Wei Jiang1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Megvii Inc. (Face++), 3 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
4
Peking University, 5 The University of Tokyo
{liuhy, jiangwei zju}@zju.edu.cn, mikejay0520@163.com, changqian yu@hust.edu.cn
wangjingbo1219@pku.edu.cn, liuxu@kmj.iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp, yugang@megvii.com

Abstract
Panoptic segmentation, which needs to assign a category
label to each pixel and segment each object instance simultaneously, is a challenging topic. Traditionally, the existing
approaches utilize two independent models without sharing
features, which makes the pipeline inefficient to implement.
In addition, a heuristic method is usually employed to merge
the results. However, the overlapping relationship between
object instances is difficult to determine without sufficient
context information during the merging process. To address
the problems, we propose a novel end-to-end Occlusion
Aware Network (OANet) for panoptic segmentation, which
can efficiently and effectively predict both the instance and
stuff segmentation in a single network. Moreover, we introduce a novel spatial ranking module to deal with the occlusion problem between the predicted instances. Extensive
experiments have been done to validate the performance
of our proposed method and promising results have been
achieved on the COCO Panoptic benchmark.

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation [18] is a new challenging topic
for scene understanding. The goal is to assign each pixel
with a category label and segment each object instance
in the image. In this task, the stuff segmentation is employed to predict the amorphous regions (noted Stuff ) while
the instance segmentation [14] solves the countable objects
(noted Thing). Therefore, this task can provide more comprehensive scene information and can be widely used in autonomous driving and scene parsing.
Previous panoptic segmentation algorithms [18] usually
contain three separated components: the instance segmentation block, the stuff segmentation block and the merging
block, as shown in Figure 1 (a). Usually in these algorithms,
the instance and stuff segmentation blocks are independent
† This work was done during an internship at Megvii Inc.

Traditional method
Network1

Stuff
branch

Heuristics
Merging

(a)
Network2

Instance
branch

Stuff
branch

(b)

Spatial
Ranking Moduel

Network
Instance
branch

Our method

Figure 1. An illustration of our end-to-end network in contrast to
the traditional method. Traditional methods [18] train two subnetwork and do heuristics merge. Our method can train a single
network for two subtasks, and realize a learnable fusion approach.

without any feature sharing. This results in apparent computational overhead. Furthermore, because of the separated
models, these algorithms have to merge the corresponding
separated predictions with post-processing. However, without the context information between the stuff and thing, the
merge process will face the challenge of overlapping relationships between instances and stuff. Exactly as mentioned
above, with the three separate parts, it is hard to apply this
complex pipeline to the industrial application.
In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end algorithm
shown in Figure 1 (b). As far as we know, this is the first
algorithm which can deal with the issues above in an endto-end pipeline. More specifically, we incorporate the instance segmentation and stuff segmentation into one network, which shares the backbone features but applies different head branches for the two tasks. During the training
phase, the backbone features will be optimized by the accumulated losses from both the stuff and thing supervision
while the head branches will only fine-tune on the specific
task.

6172

