Learning without Memorizing
Prithviraj Dhar*1 , Rajat Vikram Singh*2 , Kuan-Chuan Peng2 , Ziyan Wu2 , Rama Chellappa1
1
University of Maryland, College Park, MD
2
Siemens Corporate Technology, Princeton, NJ
{prithvi,rama}@umiacs.umd.edu, {singh.rajat,kuanchuan.peng,ziyan.wu}@siemens.com

Abstract
Incremental learning (IL) is an important task aimed at
increasing the capability of a trained model, in terms of
the number of classes recognizable by the model. The key
problem in this task is the requirement of storing data (e.g.
images) associated with existing classes, while teaching the
classifier to learn new classes. However, this is impractical as it increases the memory requirement at every incremental step, which makes it impossible to implement IL
algorithms on edge devices with limited memory. Hence, we
propose a novel approach, called ‘Learning without Memorizing (LwM)’, to preserve the information about existing
(base) classes, without storing any of their data, while
making the classifier progressively learn the new classes. In
LwM, we present an information preserving penalty: Attention Distillation Loss (LAD ), and demonstrate that penalizing the changes in classifiers’ attention maps helps to
retain information of the base classes, as new classes are
added. We show that adding LAD to the distillation loss
which is an existing information preserving loss consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art performance in the
iILSVRC-small and iCIFAR-100 datasets in terms of the
overall accuracy of base and incrementally learned classes.

1. Introduction
Most state-of-the-art solutions to visual recognition
tasks use models that are specifically trained for these tasks
[6, 13]. For the tasks involving categories (such as object
classification, segmentation), the complexity of the task
(i.e. the number of target classes) limits the ability of these
trained models. For example, a trained model aimed for
object recognition can only classify object categories on
which it has been trained. However, if the number of target
classes increases, the model must be updated in such a way
that it performs well on the original classes on which it has
*These authors have contributed equally to this work, which was
partially done during PD’s internship at Siemens Corporate Technology.

Figure 1: Our problem setup does not store data/model pertaining
to information about classes learned in previous incremental steps.

been trained, also known as base classes, while it incrementally learns new classes as well.
If we retrain the model only on new, previously unseen
classes, it would completely forget the base classes, which
is known as catastrophic forgetting [9, 10], a phenomenon
which is not typically observed in humane learning. Therefore, most existing solutions [4, 14, 18] explore incremental learning (IL) by allowing the model to retain a
fraction of the training data of base classes, while incrementally learning new classes. Yu et al. [18] proposed
retaining trained models encoding base class information, to
transfer their knowledge to the model learning new classes.
However, this process is not scalable. This is because
storing base class data or models encoding base class information is a memory expensive task, and hence is cumbersome when used in a lifelong learning setting. Also, in an
industrial setting, when a trained object classification model
is delivered to the end user, the training data is kept private
for proprietary reasons. Therefore, the end user will be
unable to update the trained model to incorporate new target
classes in the absence of base class data.
Moreover, storing base class data for incrementally learning new classes is not biologically inspired.
For example, when a toddler learns to recognize new
shapes/objects, it is observed that it does not completely
forget the shapes or objects it already knows. It also does
not always need to revisit the old information when learning

5138

