Turn a Silicon Camera into an InGaAs Camera
Feifan Lv1

Yinqiang Zheng2

Bohan Zhang1

Feng Lu1,3,4,∗

1

State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
3
National Institute of Informatics, Japan
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data-Based Precision Medicine, Beihang University, Beijing, China

Abstract

Virtual InGaAs Camera

Short-wave infrared (SWIR) imaging has a wide range
of applications for both industry and civilian. However, the
InGaAs sensors commonly used for SWIR imaging suffer
from a variety of drawbacks, including high price, low resolution, unstable quality, and so on. In this paper, we propose a novel solution for SWIR imaging using a common
Silicon sensor, which has cheaper price, higher resolution
and better technical maturity compared with the specialized
InGaAs sensor. Our key idea is to approximate the response
of the InGaAs sensor by exploiting the largely ignored sensitivity of a Silicon sensor, weak as it is, in the SWIR range.
To this end, we build a multi-channel optical system to collect a new SWIR dataset and present a physically meaningful three-stage image processing algorithm on the basis of
CNN. Both qualitative and quantitative experiments show
promising experimental results, which demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

+

1. Introduction
Human eyes can perceive a small portion of light only,
usually lying in the wavelength range of 400-700nm. To
mimic the trichromatic color perception of human eyes, existing digital cameras are usually equipped with a Silicon
sensor, together with a color filter array to filter out light beyond the visible spectrum (VIS). However, a typical Silicon
sensor itself is highly sensitive to light in a wide range of
300-950nm. This property has allowed numerous applications of Silicon based cameras in the ultraviolet (UV) range
less than 400nm and the near infrared (NIR) range beyond
700nm. For example, security surveillance cameras utilize
the sensitivity of a Silicon sensor around 940nm, so as to
see objects clearly illuminated by NIR LED lamps.
Short-wave infrared (SWIR) lies between NIR and mid∗ Corresponding Author: Feng Lu (lufeng@buaa.edu.cn)

This work is partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 61602020 and Grant 61732016.

Real World Scene

Longpass Filter

Silicon Camera

InGaAs Camera

High Resolution SWIR Image

Deep Network

Figure 1. The schematic diagram of our proposed solution for
short-wave infrared imaging using a Silicon sensor. Our solution
combines a Silicon camera, a longpass filter and a CNN based image processing algorithm to build a virtual InGaAs camera.

wavelength infrared (MWIR). It is less sensitive to thermal irradiation than MWIR, and thus allows high quality
imaging with sufficient contrast, similar to VIS and NIR
light. On the other hand, the relatively longer wavelength
of SWIR leads to stronger penetration capability, which
is proven crucial in industrial inspection and visibility enhancement under extreme weather condition. For instance,
the defects inside a nice-looking apple are invisible to our
eyes, yet become apparent when viewed by a SWIR imaging device, and objects hidden in the heavy fog are likely to
be seen in the SWIR range.
Capturing SWIR images requires special sensors. In
contrast to those alternatives like HgCdTe and InSb, the InGaAs sensor is most commonly used since it can work stably at the room temperature, and it also has the advantages
of relatively low power, small volume, high sensitivity, etc..
In spite of these, when compared with the Silicon sensor,
the InGaAs sensor suffer from a variety of drawbacks, including low spatial resolution, high price and high pixel defection rate, which severely limit the widespread use of InGaAs in SWIR imaging.
Efforts have been taken to resolve those drawbacks. For
example, the compressive sensing techniques have been utilized to boost the spatial resolution of a low-resolution InGaAs camera [6], or even construct an area SWIR camera

5987

