Recurrent MVSNet for High-resolution Multi-view Stereo Depth Inference
Yao Yao1∗

Zixin Luo1
1

Shiwei Li1

Tianwei Shen1

Tian Fang2†

Long Quan1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

{yyaoag, zluoag, slibc, tshenaa, quan}@cse.ust.hk
2

Shenzhen Zhuke Innovation Technology (Altizure)
fangtian@altizure.com

Abstract
Deep learning has recently demonstrated its excellent
performance for multi-view stereo (MVS). However, one
major limitation of current learned MVS approaches is the
scalability: the memory-consuming cost volume regularization makes the learned MVS hard to be applied to highresolution scenes. In this paper, we introduce a scalable
multi-view stereo framework based on the recurrent neural network. Instead of regularizing the entire 3D cost volume in one go, the proposed Recurrent Multi-view Stereo
Network (R-MVSNet) sequentially regularizes the 2D cost
maps along the depth direction via the gated recurrent
unit (GRU). This reduces dramatically the memory consumption and makes high-resolution reconstruction feasible. We first show the state-of-the-art performance achieved
by the proposed R-MVSNet on the recent MVS benchmarks.
Then, we further demonstrate the scalability of the proposed method on several large-scale scenarios, where previous learned approaches often fail due to the memory constraint. Code is available at https://github.com/
YoYo000/MVSNet.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) aims to recover the dense representation of the scene given multi-view images and calibrated cameras. While traditional methods [24, 10, 29, 9]
have achieved excellent reconstruction performance, recent
works [14, 13, 30] show that learned approaches are able to
produce results comparable to the traditional state-of-thearts. In particular, MVSNet [30] proposed a deep architecture for depth map estimation, which significantly boosts
the reconstruction completeness and the overall quality.
One of the key advantages of learning-based MVS is
the cost volume regularization, where most networks ap∗ Intern at Shenzhen Zhuke Innovation Technology (Altizure).
† Corresponding author.

ply multi-scale 3D CNNs [14, 15, 30] to regularize the 3D
cost volume. However, this step is extremely memory expensive: it operates on 3D volumes and the memory requirement grows cubically with the model resolution (Fig. 1
(d)). Consequently, current learned MVS algorithms could
hardly be scaled up to high-resolution scenarios.
Recent works on 3D with deep learning also acknowledge this problem. OctNet [23] and O-CNN [27] exploit the
sparsity in 3D data and introduce the octree structure to 3D
CNNs. SurfaceNet [14] and DeepMVS [13] apply the engineered divide-and-conquer strategy to the MVS reconstruction. MVSNet [30] builds the cost volume upon the reference camera frustum to decouple the reconstruction into
smaller problems of per-view depth map estimation. However, when it comes to a high-resolution 3D reconstruction
(e.g., volume size > 5123 voxels), these methods will either
fail or take a long time for processing.
To this end, we present a novel scalable multi-view
stereo framework, dubbed as R-MVSNet, based on the recurrent neural network. The proposed network is built upon
the MVSNet architecture [30], but regularizes the cost volume in a sequential manner using the convolutional gated
recurrent unit (GRU) rather than 3D CNNs. With the sequential processing, the online memory requirement of the
algorithm is reduced from cubic to quadratic to the model
resolution (Fig. 1 (c)). As a result, the R-MVSNet is applicable to high resolution 3D reconstruction with unlimited
depth-wise resolution.
We first evaluate the R-MVSNet on DTU [1], Tanks and
Temples [17] and ETH3D [25] datasets, where our method
produces results comparable or even outperforms the stateof-the-art MVSNet [30]. Next, we demonstrate the scalability of the proposed method on several large-scale scenarios with detailed analysis on the memory consumption.
R-MVSNet is much more efficient than other methods in
GPU memory and is the first learning-based approach applicable to such wide depth range scenes, e.g., the advance
set of Tanks and Temples dataset [17].

5525

