Multi-source weak supervision for saliency detection
Yu Zeng1 , Yunzhi Zhuge1 , Huchuan Lu1 , Lihe Zhang1 , Mingyang Qian1 , Yizhou Yu2
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Deepwise AI Lab, China
zengyu@mail.dlut.edu.cn, zgyz@mail.dlut.edu.cn, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn,
zhanglihe@dlut.edu.cn, mingyangqian25@gmail.com, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
Category: Dog

The high cost of pixel-level annotations makes it appealing to train saliency detection models with weak supervision. However, a single weak supervision source usually does not contain enough information to train a wellperforming model. To this end, we propose a unified framework to train saliency detection models with diverse weak
supervision sources. In this paper, we use category labels,
captions, and unlabelled data for training, yet other supervision sources can also be plugged into this flexible framework. We design a classification network (CNet) and a caption generation network (PNet), which learn to predict object categories and generate captions, respectively, meanwhile highlight the most important regions for corresponding tasks. An attention transfer loss is designed to transmit
supervision signal between networks, such that the network
designed to be trained with one supervision source can benefit from another. An attention coherence loss is defined on
unlabelled data to encourage the networks to detect generally salient regions instead of task-specific regions. We
use CNet and PNet to generate pixel-level pseudo labels
to train a saliency prediction network (SNet). During the
testing phases, we only need SNet to predict saliency maps.
Experiments demonstrate the performance of our method
compares favourably against unsupervised and weakly supervised methods and even some supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection aims to detect the most informative
parts of an image. It can be applied to benefit a wide
range of applications [4, 6, 36], and thus has attracted a
lot of interest in recent years. Driven by the remarkable
success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), a
lot of attempts have been made to train CNNs for saliency
detection [9, 19, 28, 26]. CNN-based methods usually
need a large amount of data with pixel-level annotations
for training. Since it is expensive to annotate images with

Caption:
A dog returns a blue
frisbee that was
thrown on a beach.

Caption:
A very cute little bird
on a green leaf.

(a)

(a)

(b)

(b)

(c)

(c)

(d)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) annotations. (b) images. (c) saliency maps of the
models trained with single weak supervision source shown in the
first column of the corresponding row. (d) saliency maps of the
models trained with our proposed multi-source weak supervision
framework.

pixel-level ground-truth, attempts have been made to exploit higher-level supervision, e.g. image-level supervision,
to train CNNs for saliency detection [27].
However, it is challenging to train a network to cut the
salient objects accurately in weak supervision settings. On
the one hand, weak supervision sources are incomplete and
noisy. For example, the image-level category label is an
efficient weak supervision cue for saliency detection. It indicates the category of the principal objects in it, which are
much likely to be the salient foreground. However, category
labels are too simple to convey sufficient information. Without knowing the attribute or motion of a salient object, the
network trained with category tags might only highlight the
most discriminative region instead of the whole object. As
shown in the first row of Figure 1, the model trained with
category labels only highlights the face of the dog as the
face provides enough information to categorize it as a dog.
Another weak supervision cue is the image caption. Image
captions are a few sentences that describe the main content
of an image. Compared with image-level tags, captions provide more comprehensive descriptions of the salient objects.
As shown in the second row of Figure 1, for a picture of a

6074

