Curls & Whey: Boosting Black-Box Adversarial Attacks
Yucheng Shi, Siyu Wang, Yahong Han
College of Intelligence and Computing
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{yucheng, syuwang, yahong}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Image classifiers based on deep neural networks suffer
from harassment caused by adversarial examples. Two defects exist in black-box iterative attacks that generate adversarial examples by incrementally adjusting the noiseadding direction for each step. On the one hand, existing
iterative attacks add noises monotonically along the direction of gradient ascent, resulting in a lack of diversity and
adaptability of the generated iterative trajectories. On the
other hand, it is trivial to perform adversarial attack by
adding excessive noises, but currently there is no refinement mechanism to squeeze redundant noises. In this work,
we propose Curls & Whey black-box attack to fix the above
two defects. During Curls iteration, by combining gradient ascent and descent, we ‘curl’ up iterative trajectories to
integrate more diversity and transferability into adversarial examples. Curls iteration also alleviates the diminishing
marginal effect in existing iterative attacks. The Whey optimization further squeezes the ‘whey’ of noises by exploiting the robustness of adversarial perturbation. Extensive
experiments on Imagenet and Tiny-Imagenet demonstrate
that our approach achieves impressive decrease on noise
magnitude in ℓ2 norm. Curls & Whey attack also shows
promising transferability against ensemble models as well
as adversarially trained models. In addition, we extend our
attack to the targeted misclassification, effectively reducing
the difficulty of targeted attacks under black-box condition.

1. Introduction
The output of deep neural networks (DNNs) is highly
sensitive to tiny perturbation on input images [23, 5].
Among all methods that generate adversarial examples, iterative attacks [9, 4, 27] strike a better balance between
attack effect and efficiency of adversarial example generation. However, there are two severe drawbacks in current
mainstream black-box iterative attacks based on substitute
model [16]. In the first place, decision boundaries between

‫ݔ‬஻

snail

snow bird
‫ݔ‬

‫ݔ‬

‫ ݔ‬஺ െ ‫ ݔ‬ଶ = 4.11

‫כݔ‬
‫ݔ‬஺

snail

snail

‫ ݔ‬஻ െ ‫ ݔ‬ଶ = 6.38

‫ כ ݔ‬െ ‫ ݔ‬ଶ = 2.52

Figure 1. Iterative trajectory of Curls. Background is contour of
cross entropy. The redder the color, the lower the loss. The consecutive black curve represents decision boundary between category ‘snow bird’ and ‘snail’. Green and purple polylines represent
trajectories with simply gradient ascend and Curls iteration with
binary search, respectively. Blue and red rings represent the original image x and adversarial example found after binary search.
Original image and three adversarial examples on both sides correspond to four rings with the same color as the image border.

models in black-box scenario are far apart [11]. Iterative
trajectories have difficulties crossing decision boundary of
target model with a small noise magnitude, because they are
based on monotonic search along the gradient ascent direction of substitute model. This impairs adversarial examples’
transferability[11]. In the second place, although noise
magnitude determines the performance of attack methods,
adversarial examples generated by iterative attacks contain
a certain amount of redundant noises that cannot be completely removed by simply increasing the iteration number.
A post-iteration refinement mechanism is needed to squeeze
out the ‘whey’ of adversarial noises.
In this paper, we propose Curls & Whey black-box attack. During Curls iteration, we iterate along both the gradient ascent and descent directions of substitute model’s loss
function, as demonstrated by green and purple polylines in
Fig. 1. The dual-direction setting ‘curls’ up the iterative
trajectories and is hence more likely to cross target model’s
decision boundary at a closer distance, which effectively enhances the diversity as well as transferability of adversarial
examples. Diminishing marginal effect caused by monoton-

6519

