Universal Domain Adaptation
Kaichao You1 , Mingsheng Long1 (B), Zhangjie Cao1 , Jianmin Wang1 , and Michael I. Jordan2
1
KLiss, MOE; BNRist; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
1
Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, China
1
Beijing Key Laboratory for Industrial Big Data System and Application
2
University of California, Berkeley, USA
youkaichao@gmail.com, {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn, jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Domain adaptation aims to transfer knowledge in the
presence of the domain gap. Existing domain adaptation
methods rely on rich prior knowledge about the relationship
between the label sets of source and target domains, which
greatly limits their application in the wild. This paper introduces Universal Domain Adaptation (UDA) that requires no
prior knowledge on the label sets. For a given source label
set and a target label set, they may contain a common label
set and hold a private label set respectively, bringing up an
additional category gap. UDA requires a model to either (1)
classify the target sample correctly if it is associated with a
label in the common label set, or (2) mark it as “unknown”
otherwise. More importantly, a UDA model should work stably against a wide spectrum of commonness (the proportion
of the common label set over the complete label set) so that
it can handle real-world problems with unknown target label
sets. To solve the universal domain adaptation problem, we
propose Universal Adaptation Network (UAN). It quantifies
sample-level transferability to discover the common label set
and the label sets private to each domain, thereby promoting
the adaptation in the automatically discovered common label
set and recognizing the “unknown” samples successfully. A
thorough evaluation shows that UAN outperforms the state
of the art closed set, partial and open set domain adaptation
methods in the novel UDA setting.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has boosted the progress of computer vision and improved state of the art performance on diverse
vision tasks such as image classification [13], object detection [30] and semantic segmentation [12]. However, the
remarkable efficacy of deep learning algorithms highly relies
on abundant labeled training data, which requires tedious
labor work on collecting labeled data. Given a large-scale

Closed Set DA

Partial DA

Open Set DA (Busto et al. 2017)

Open Set DA (Saito et al. 2018)

Universal DA

?
Source Domain Label Set

Target Domain Label Set

Figure 1. Universal Domain Adaptation (UDA) and existing domain
adaptation settings with respect to label sets of source and target
domains (blue shades indicate shared labels). Only UDA is able to
deal with the setting that the label set of target domain is unknown.

unlabeled dataset, it is usually prohibitive to annotate enough
training data such that we can train a deep learning model
that generalizes well. An alternative is to leverage off-theshelf labeled data from a related domain (source domain) to
improve the model for the domain of interest (target domain).
The target domain may contain data collected by different
sensors, from different perspectives or under different illumination conditions compared with the source domain, leading
to large domain gap. Domain adaptation [33] aims to minimize the domain gap and successfully transfer the model
trained on the source domain to the target domain.
Existing domain adaptation methods tackle the domain
gap either by learning domain invariant feature representation, by generating features/samples for target domains or by
transforming samples between domains through generative

2720

