A Mutual Learning Method for Salient Object Detection with intertwined
Multi-Supervision
Runmin Wu1 , Mengyang Feng1 , Wenlong Guan1 , Dong Wang1∗, Huchuan Lu1 , Errui Ding2
1
Dalian University of Technology,
2
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.
josephinerabbit@mail.dlut.edu.cn, mengyangfeng@mail.dlut.edu.cn, guanwenlong@mail.dlut.edu.cn,
wdice@dlut.edu.cn, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn, dingerrui@baidu.com

Abstract
Though deep learning techniques have made great
progress in salient object detection recently, the predicted
saliency maps still suffer from incomplete predictions due
to the internal complexity of objects and inaccurate boundaries caused by strides in convolution and pooling operations. To alleviate these issues, we propose to train saliency
detection networks by exploiting the supervision from not
only salient object detection, but also foreground contour
detection and edge detection. First, we leverage salient object detection and foreground contour detection tasks in an
intertwined manner to generate saliency maps with uniform
highlight. Second, the foreground contour and edge detection tasks guide each other simultaneously, thereby leading
to precise foreground contour prediction and reducing the
local noises for edge prediction. In addition, we develop a
novel mutual learning module (MLM) which serves as the
building block of our method. Each MLM consists of multiple network branches trained in a mutual learning manner,
which improves the performance by a large margin. Extensive experiments on seven challenging datasets demonstrate
that the proposed method has delivered state-of-the-art results in both salient object detection and edge detection.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection aims to segment the most distinctive object regions in a given image, acting as an important pre-processing step for various vision tasks, including
image captioning [8], visual tracking [3], visual question
answering [15], and person re-identification [35].
By integrating multi-scale features, previous deep learning based methods [32, 10, 16, 22] are capable of detecting
the salient objects from a global and coarse view. Though
good performance has been achieved, they still suffer from
∗ Corresponding Author: Dr. Wang

(a) Input

(b) GT

(c) Ours

(d) Amulet

(e) RFCN

Figure 1. Visual comparison of different CNN based methods.

(a) E

(b) E-gt

(c) S

(d) S-gt

(e) FC-gt

Figure 2. The examples of our two inputs and three supervisions.
E and E-gt are collected from edge detection dataset. S and S-gt
are collected from salient object detection dataset, and FC-gt is the
foreground contour extracted from S-gt.

two major drawbacks shown in Figure 1: 1) the entire
salient objects can hardly be uniformly highlighted due to
their complex internal structures; 2) the predictions around
object contours are inaccurate due to the information loss
caused by strided convolution and pooling operations.
To address the above-mentioned issues, we present a new
training strategy and a network design which simultaneously leverage three tasks, including salient object detection, foreground contour detection and edge detection. We
feed two images into our network, one for salient object
detection and another for edge detection, with three kinds
of corresponding supervisions. The two input images are
collected from salient object detection and edge detection
data-sets respectively. For description convenience, we use
E and E-gt to denote the input image and ground truth from
the dataset for edge detection, and S and S-gt for the input
image and ground truth for salient object detection. Ad-

8150

