SelFlow: Self-Supervised Learning of Optical Flow
Pengpeng Liu†∗, Michael Lyu† , Irwin King† , Jia Xu§
†
Chinese University of Hong Kong, § Tencent AI Lab

Abstract
We present a self-supervised learning approach for optical flow. Our method distills reliable flow estimations
from non-occluded pixels, and uses these predictions as
ground truth to learn optical flow for hallucinated occlusions. We further design a simple CNN to utilize temporal information from multiple frames for better flow estimation. These two principles lead to an approach that yields
the best performance for unsupervised optical flow learning on the challenging benchmarks including MPI Sintel,
KITTI 2012 and 2015. More notably, our self-supervised
pre-trained model provides an excellent initialization for supervised fine-tuning. Our fine-tuned models achieve stateof-the-art results on all three datasets. At the time of writing, we achieve EPE=4.26 on the Sintel benchmark, outperforming all submitted methods.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation is a core building block for a variety of computer vision systems [30, 8, 39, 4]. Despite
decades of development, accurate flow estimation remains
an open problem due to one key challenge: occlusion. Traditional approaches minimize an energy function to encourage association of visually similar pixels and regularize incoherent motion to propagate flow estimation from nonoccluded pixels to occluded pixels [13, 5, 6, 38]. However,
this family of methods is often time-consuming and not applicable for real-time applications.
Recent studies learn to estimate optical flow end-toend from images using convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [10, 35, 15, 14, 43]. However, training fully supervised CNNs requires a large amount of labeled training
data, which is extremely difficult to obtain for optical flow,
especially when there are occlusions. Considering the recent performance improvements obtained when employing
hundreds of millions of labeled images [40], it is obvious
that the size of training data is a key bottleneck for optical
flow estimation.
∗ Work mainly done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.

In the absence of large-scale real-world annotations,
existing methods turn to pre-train on synthetic labeled
datasets [10, 28] and then fine-tune on small annotated
datasets [15, 14, 43]. However, there usually exists a large
gap between the distribution of synthetic data and natural scenes. In order to train a stable model, we have to
carefully follow specific learning schedules across different
datasets [15, 14, 43].
One promising direction is to develop unsupervised optical flow learning methods that benefit from unlabeled data.
The basic idea is to warp the target image towards the reference image according to the estimated optical flow, then
minimize the difference between the reference image and
the warped target image using a photometric loss [20, 37].
Such idea works well for non-occluded pixels but turns to
provide misleading information for occluded pixels. Recent
methods propose to exclude those occluded pixels when
computing the photometric loss or employ additional spatial and temporal smoothness terms to regularize flow estimation [29, 46, 18]. Most recently, DDFlow [26] proposes a data distillation approach, which employs random
cropping to create occlusions for self-supervision. Unfortunately, these methods fails to generalize well for all natural
occlusions. As a result, there is still a large performance
gap comparing unsupervised methods with state-of-the-art
fully supervised methods.
Is it possible to effectively learn optical flow with occlusions? In this paper, we show that a self-supervised approach can learn to estimate optical flow with any form of
occlusions from unlabeled data. Our work is based on distilling reliable flow estimations from non-occluded pixels,
and using these predictions to guide the optical flow learning for hallucinated occlusions. Figure 1 illustrates our idea
to create synthetic occlusions by perturbing superpixels. We
further utilize temporal information from multiple frames to
improve flow prediction accuracy within a simple CNN architecture. The resulted learning approach yields the highest accuracy among all unsupervised optical flow learning
methods on Sintel and KITTI benchmarks.
Surprisingly, our self-supervised pre-trained model provides an excellent initialization for supervised fine-tuning.
At the time of writing, our fine-tuned model achieves the
14571

