Sim-to-Real via Sim-to-Sim: Data-efficient Robotic Grasping via
Randomized-to-Canonical Adaptation Networks
Stephen James1 , Paul Wohlhart2 , Mrinal Kalakrishnan2 , Dmitry Kalashnikov3 ,
Alex Irpan3 , Julian Ibarz3 , Sergey Levine3,5 , Raia Hadsell4 , Konstantinos Bousmalis4
slj12@imperial.ac.uk, {wohlhart, kalakris}@x.team,
{dkalashnikov, alexirpan, julianibarz, slevine, raia, konstantinos}@google.com,
Abstract
Real world data, especially in the domain of robotics,
is notoriously costly to collect. One way to circumvent
this can be to leverage the power of simulation to produce
large amounts of labelled data. However, training models on simulated images does not readily transfer to realworld ones. Using domain adaptation methods to cross this
“reality gap” requires a large amount of unlabelled realworld data, whilst domain randomization alone can waste
modeling power. In this paper, we present Randomizedto-Canonical Adaptation Networks (RCANs), a novel approach to crossing the visual reality gap that uses no realworld data. Our method learns to translate randomized rendered images into their equivalent non-randomized, canonical versions. This in turn allows for real images to also
be translated into canonical sim images. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of this sim-to-real approach by training
a vision-based closed-loop grasping reinforcement learning agent in simulation, and then transferring it to the real
world to attain 70% zero-shot grasp success on unseen objects, a result that almost doubles the success of learning
the same task directly on domain randomization alone. Additionally, by joint finetuning in the real-world with only
5,000 real-world grasps, our method achieves 91%, attaining comparable performance to a state-of-the-art system
trained with 580,000 real-world grasps, resulting in a reduction of real-world data by more than 99%.

1. Introduction
Deep learning for vision-based robotics tasks is a
promising research direction [58]. However, it necessitates large amounts of real-world data, which is a severe
1 Imperial College London. Work done while Stephen James was at X
2 X, Mountain View, California, United States
3 Google Brain, United States
4 DeepMind, London
5 University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California, United States

Figure 1: We learn a generator that translates randomized
simulation images to a chosen canonical simulation version
which are then used to train a robot grasping agent (top).
The system can then be used to translate real-world images
to canonical images, and consequently allow for Sim-toReal transfer of the agent (bottom). Feeding both source
and target images to the agent allows for joint finetuning of
the agent in the real world.

limitation, since real-robot data collection is expensive and
cumbersome, often requiring days or even months for a
single task [34, 44]. Due to the availability of affordable
cloud computing services, it is becoming more attractive to
leverage large-scale simulations to collect experience from
a large number of agents in parallel. But with this comes
the issue of transferring gained experience from simulation
to the real world — a non-trivial task given the usually large
domain shift.
Reducing the reality gap between simulation and reality
is possible with recent advances in visual domain adaptation
[14, 36, 5, 55, 4, 66, 71, 30, 54, 59, 21]. Such techniques
usually require large amounts of unlabelled images from the
real world. Although such unlabelled images are easier to
capture than labelled, they can still be costly to collect in
112627

