ComDefend: An Efficient Image Compression Model to Defend Adversarial
Examples
Xiaojun Jia1,2 , Xingxing Wei3∗ , Xiaochun Cao1,2∗ , Hassan Foroosh4
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Cyberspace Security Research Center, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University,
4
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Central Florida
1

jiaxiaojun@iie.ac.cn, xwei11@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, caoxiaochun@iie.ac.cn, foroosh@cs.ucf.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
As we know, deep learning technique [14] plays the leading role in Artificial Intelligence (AI) area, and has ushered
in a new development climax in the fields such as image
recognition [8], natural language processing [3], and speech
processing [9]. However, Szegedy et al. [19] formally propose the concept of adversarial examples which bring the
great danger to the neural networks. Specifically, impercep* Corresponding Author

Image
classification
model

Label:dog
(wrong)

Adversarial
image

well-trianed

12bits map

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been demonstrated to be vulnerable to adversarial examples. Specifically, adding imperceptible perturbations to clean images can
fool the well trained deep neural networks. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end image compression model to
defend adversarial examples: ComDefend. The proposed
model consists of a compression convolutional neural network (ComCNN) and a reconstruction convolutional neural network (RecCNN). The ComCNN is used to maintain
the structure information of the original image and purify adversarial perturbations. And the RecCNN is used to
reconstruct the original image with high quality. In other
words, ComDefend can transform the adversarial image to
its clean version, which is then fed to the trained classifier. Our method is a pre-processing module, and does not
modify the classifier’s structure during the whole process.
Therefore, it can be combined with other model-specific defense models to jointly improve the classifier’s robustness.
A series of experiments conducted on MNIST, CIFAR10 and
ImageNet show that the proposed method outperforms the
state-of-the-art defense methods, and is consistently effective to protect classifiers against adversarial attacks.

well-trianed

ComCNN

Image
classification
model
RecCNN

Label:Panda
(Correct)

clean image

Figure 1. The main idea of our end-to-end image compression
model to defend adversarial examples. The perturbation between
the adversarial image and the original image is very tiny, but the
perturbation is amplified during the high-level representation of
the image classification model. We use ComCNN to remove the
redundant information of the adversarial image and RecCNN to reconstruct the clean image. In this way, the influence of adversarial
perturbations is suppressed.

tible perturbations added to clean images can induce networks to make incorrect predictions with high confidence
during the test time, even when the amount of perturbation is very small, and imperceptible to human observers.
What’s more, [12] has proved that adversarial examples also exist in the physical-world scenarios. The existence of
adversarial examples has become a major security concern
in real-world applications of deep networks, such as selfdriving cars and identity recognition, etc.
In recent years, a lot of methods defending the adversarial examples have been proposed. These methods can be
roughly categorized into two classes. The first class is to
enhance the robustness of neural networks itself. Adversarial training [20] is a typical method among them, which
injects adversarial examples into the training data to retrain
the network. Label smoothing [22], which converts one-hot
labels to soft targets, also belongs to this class. The second
4321
6084

