Towards Real Scene Super-Resolution with Raw Images
Xiangyu Xu Yongrui Ma Wenxiu Sun
SenseTime Research

Figure 1. Existing super-resolution method (RDN [38]) does not perform well for real captured images as shown in (c). We can obtain
sharper results (d) by re-training existing model [38] with the data generated by our method. Furthermore, we recover more structures and
details (e) by exploiting the radiance information recorded in raw images. The two input images (a) are captured by Leica SL Typ-601 and
iPhone 6s respectively, and both cameras are not seen by the models during training. Results best viewed electronically with zoom.

Abstract
Most existing super-resolution methods do not perform
well in real scenarios due to lack of realistic training data
and information loss of the model input. To solve the first
problem, we propose a new pipeline to generate realistic
training data by simulating the imaging process of digital
cameras. And to remedy the information loss of the input,
we develop a dual convolutional neural network to exploit
the originally captured radiance information in raw images.
In addition, we propose to learn a spatially-variant color
transformation which helps more effective color corrections. Extensive experiments demonstrate that super-resolution
with raw data helps recover fine details and clear structures, and more importantly, the proposed network and data
generation pipeline achieve superior results for single image super-resolution in real scenarios.

1. Introduction
In optical photography, the number of pixels representing an object, i.e. the image resolution, is directly proportional to square of the focal length of the camera [11]. While
one can use a long-focus lens to obtain a high-resolution im-

age, the range of the captured scene is usually limited by the
size of the sensor array at the image plane. Thus, it is often
desirable for users to capture the wide-range scene at a lower resolution with a short-focus camera (e.g. a wide-angle
lens), and then apply the single image super-resolution technique which recovers a high-resolution image from its lowresolution version.
Most state-of-the-art super-resolution methods [4, 18,
31, 34, 20, 32, 38, 37] are based on data-driven models,
and in particular, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [4, 27, 21]. While these methods are effective on
synthetic data, they do not perform well for real captured
images by cameras or cellphones (examples shown in Figure 1(c)) owing to lack of realistic training data and information loss of network input. To remedy these problems
and enable real scene super-resolution, we propose a new
pipeline for generating training data and a dual CNN model for exploiting additional raw information, which are described as below.
First, most existing methods cannot synthesize realistic
training data; the low-resolution images are usually generated with a fixed downsampling blur kernel (e.g. bicubic
kernel) and homoscedastic Gaussian noise [38, 35]. On one
hand, the blur kernel in practice may vary with zoom, fo-

1723

