Variational Information Distillation for Knowledge Transfer
Sungsoo Ahn ∗
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
Daejeon, Korea

Shell Xu Hu ∗
École des Ponts ParisTech
Champs-sur-Marne, France

sungsoo.ahn@kaist.ac.kr

hus@imagine.enpc.fr

Andreas Damianou
Amazon
Cambridge, United Kingdom

Neil D. Lawrence
Amazon
Cambridge, United Kingdom

Zhenwen Dai
Amazon
Cambridge, United Kingdom

damianou@amazon.com

lawrennd@amazon.com

zhenwend@amazon.com

Abstract
Transferring knowledge from a teacher neural network
pretrained on the same or a similar task to a student neural
network can significantly improve the performance of the
student neural network. Existing knowledge transfer approaches match the activations or the corresponding handcrafted features of the teacher and the student networks. We
propose an information-theoretic framework for knowledge
transfer which formulates knowledge transfer as maximizing the mutual information between the teacher and the
student networks. We compare our method with existing
knowledge transfer methods on both knowledge distillation
and transfer learning tasks and show that our method consistently outperforms existing methods. We further demonstrate the strength of our method on knowledge transfer
across heterogeneous network architectures by transferring
knowledge from a convolutional neural network (CNN) to a
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) on CIFAR-10. The resulting
MLP significantly outperforms the-state-of-the-art methods
and it achieves similar performance to the CNN with a single convolutional layer.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) play important roles in
various computer vision tasks, e.g., depth estimation [8],
pose estimation [26], optical flow [7], object classification
[11], detection [10], and segmentation [25]. A typical DNN
approach for a computer vision task is to train a sophisticated end-to-end neural network with a large amount of
labeled data. Such an approach often delivers state-of-theart performance if a sufficient amount of data is available.
∗ Contributed during an internship at Amazon.

Figure 1: Conceptual diagram of the proposed knowledge
transfer method. The student network efficiently learns the
target task by minimizing the cross-entropy (CE) loss while
retaining high mutual information (MI) with the teacher network. The mutual information is maximized by learning to
estimate the distribution of the activations in the teacher network, provoking the transfer of knowledge.

However, in many cases, it is impossible to gather sufficiently large data to train a DNN. For example, in many
medical image applications [24], the amount of available
data is constrained by the number of patients of a particular
disease.
A popular approach for handling such lack of data is
transfer learning [19], where the goal is to transfer knowledge from the source task to facilitate learning on the target task. Typically, one considers the source task to be
4321
9163

