You Look Twice: GaterNet for Dynamic Filter Selection in CNNs
Zhourong Chen1,2∗, Yang Li1 , Samy Bengio1 , Si Si1
1
Google Research, Mountain View
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
zchenbb@cse.ust.hk, {liyang, bengio, sisidaisy}@google.com

Abstract
The concept of conditional computation for deep nets
has been proposed previously to improve model performance by selectively using only parts of the model conditioned on the sample it is processing. In this paper, we investigate input-dependent dynamic filter selection in deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The problem is interesting because the idea of forcing different parts of the
model to learn from different types of samples may help
us acquire better filters in CNNs, improve the model generalization performance and potentially increase the interpretability of model behavior. We propose a novel yet simple framework called GaterNet, which involves a backbone
and a gater network. The backbone network is a regular
CNN that performs the major computation needed for making a prediction, while a global gater network is introduced
to generate binary gates for selectively activating filters in
the backbone network based on each input. Extensive experiments on CIFAR and ImageNet datasets show that our
models consistently outperform the original models with a
large margin. On CIFAR-10, our model also improves upon
state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
It is widely recognized in neural science that distinct
parts of the brain are highly specialized for different types
of tasks [20]. It results in not only the high efficiency in
handling a response but also the surprising effectiveness of
the brain in learning new events. In machine learning, conditional computation [3] has been proposed to have a similar mechanism in deep learning models. For each specific
sample, the basic idea of conditional computation is to only
involve a small portion of the model in prediction. It also
means that only a small fraction of parameters needs to be
updated at each back-propagation step, which is desirable
for training a large model.
∗ Student of The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Work is done when interning at Google.

Bottleneck

Prediction

Features

Features

Maps

Maps
Gating

Filters

Filters

Maps

Maps
Gating

Filters

Filters

Same RGB Image

Gater Network

Backbone Network

Figure 1. Model Architecture (better viewed in color). The gater
extracts features and generates sparse binary gates for selecting
filters in the backbone network in an input-dependent manner.

One line of work that is closely related to conditional
computation is Mixture of Experts (MoE) [15], where multiple sub-networks are combined via an ensemble using
weights determined by a gating module. Particularly, several recent works [25, 28] propose to ensemble a small subset of dynamically selected experts in the model for each
input. By doing so, these models are able to reduce computation cost while achieving similar or even better results
than baseline models. Note that both the expert architectures and the number of experts in these works are predefined and fixed. Another line of works that resemble conditional computation focus on dynamic network configuration [29, 1, 7, 2, 4]. There are no explicitly defined experts
in these methods. Rather, they dynamically select the units,
layers, or other components in the main model for each input. In these works, one small sub-module is usually added
to each position to be configured in the model. That is, each
sub-module added is making decisions locally specific to
the components it is configuring.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework called
GaterNet for input-dependent dynamic filter selection in
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), as shown in Figure 1. We introduce a dedicated sub-network called gater,

9172

