MVTec AD — A Comprehensive Real-World Dataset for Unsupervised
Anomaly Detection
Paul Bergmann

Michael Fauser

David Sattlegger

Carsten Steger

MVTec Software GmbH
www.mvtec.com
{paul.bergmann, fauser, sattleger, steger}@mvtec.com

Abstract
The detection of anomalous structures in natural image
data is of utmost importance for numerous tasks in the field
of computer vision. The development of methods for unsupervised anomaly detection requires data on which to train
and evaluate new approaches and ideas. We introduce the
MVTec Anomaly Detection (MVTec AD) dataset containing
5354 high-resolution color images of different object and
texture categories. It contains normal, i.e., defect-free, images intended for training and images with anomalies intended for testing. The anomalies manifest themselves in the
form of over 70 different types of defects such as scratches,
dents, contaminations, and various structural changes. In
addition, we provide pixel-precise ground truth regions for
all anomalies. We also conduct a thorough evaluation
of current state-of-the-art unsupervised anomaly detection
methods based on deep architectures such as convolutional
autoencoders, generative adversarial networks, and feature descriptors using pre-trained convolutional neural networks, as well as classical computer vision methods. This
initial benchmark indicates that there is considerable room
for improvement. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first comprehensive, multi-object, multi-defect dataset
for anomaly detection that provides pixel-accurate ground
truth regions and focuses on real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Humans are very good at recognizing if an image is similar to what they have previously observed or if it is something novel or anomalous. So far, machine learning systems, however, seem to have difficulties with such tasks.
There are many relevant applications that must rely on
unsupervised algorithms that can detect anomalous regions.
In the manufacturing industry, for example, optical inspection tasks often lack defective samples or it is unclear what

Figure 1: Two objects and one texture from the MVTec AD
dataset. For each of them, one defect-free image and two
images that contain anomalies are displayed. Anomalous
regions are highlighted in close-up figures together with
their pixel-precise ground truth labels. The dataset contains
objects and textures from several domains and covers various anomalies that differ in attributes such as size, color,
and structure.

kinds of defects may appear. In active learning systems,
structures that are identified as anomalous might indicate
the necessity of including a specific image for training.
Therefore, it is not surprising that recently a significant
amount of interest has been directed towards novelty detection in natural image data using modern machine learning
architectures. A number of algorithms have been proposed
that test whether a network is able to detect if new input
data matches the distribution of the training data. Many of
these algorithms, however, focus on classification settings
in which the inlier and outlier distributions differ significantly. This is commonly known as outlier detection or
one-class-classification. A common evaluation protocol is
to arbitrarily label a number of classes from existing object

9592

