AIRD: Adversarial Learning Framework for Image Repurposing Detection
Ayush Jaiswal, Yue Wu, Wael AbdAlmageed, Iacopo Masi, Premkumar Natarajan
USC Information Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, CA, USA
{ajaiswal, yue wu, wamageed, iacopo, pnataraj}@isi.edu

Abstract
Image repurposing is a commonly used method for spreading misinformation on social media and online forums, which
involves publishing untampered images with modified metadata to create rumors and further propaganda. While manual verification is possible, given vast amounts of verified
knowledge available on the internet, the increasing prevalence and ease of this form of semantic manipulation call
for the development of robust automatic ways of assessing
the semantic integrity of multimedia data. In this paper, we
present a novel method for image repurposing detection that
is based on the real-world adversarial interplay between
a bad actor who repurposes images with counterfeit metadata and a watchdog who verifies the semantic consistency
between images and their accompanying metadata, where
both players have access to a reference dataset of verified
content, which they can use to achieve their goals. The
proposed method exhibits state-of-the-art performance on
location-identity, subject-identity and painting-artist verification, showing its efficacy across a diverse set of scenarios.

Dr. Ford with Bill Clinton and Harvey Weinstein

(a) Subject-Identity

Human Chain in Venezuela

Amedeo Modigliani’s painting

(b) Location-Identity

(c) Painting-Artist

Figure 1: Image repurposing in different domains from real examples – (a) lookalike1 , (b) incorrect location2 , (c) wrongly-claimed
artist3 . Unmanipulated images are often reused in this way to
spread misinformation about a similar yet different entity or event.

1. Introduction
The internet-driven information age, in which we are currently living, has seen rapid advances in technology that
have made creation and transmission of information on a
large-scale increasingly easier. Consequently, the manner in
which people consume information has evolved from printed
media and cable-television to digital sources. Simultaneously, social networking platforms have evolved to make it
easier for people to disseminate information quickly within
communities and publicly. This provides an excellent way
for people to share news quickly, making social media a popular news source, especially among the youth [17]. However,
this ease of information propagation has also made social
networks a popular mode of transmission of fake news.
Given the potency of falsified information propagating
on the internet, several activist groups have launched crowd-

sourced efforts (such as Snopes4 ) towards debunking fake
news. However, the sheer volume and rate at which information is being created and disseminated necessitate developing
automated ways of validating information. Several methods
have, hence, been developed recently for detecting rumors
on online forums [5, 11, 14, 16, 27, 23], digital manipulations of images [3, 28, 29, 30], and semantic inconsistencies
in multimedia data [8, 24]. While the detection of digital
manipulation has gained most of the research attention over
the years, rumor detection and semantic integrity verification
are much newer areas of research.
1 https://twitter.com/jfnyc1/status/1043665540580081669
2 https://twitter.com/tachirense89/status/434844811548311552
3 https://bit.ly/2QLJjaC
4 www.snopes.com

11330

