MaxpoolNMS: Getting Rid of NMS Bottlenecks in Two-Stage Object Detectors
Lile Cai1

Bin Zhao2

Zhe Wang1

Jie Lin1

Chuan Sheng Foo1

Mohamed Sabry Aly3
Vijay Chandrasekhar1
{1 Institute for Infocomm Research, 2 Institute of Microelectronics}, A*STAR, Singapore
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{caill,wang zhe,lin-j,foo chuan sheng,vijay}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
zhaobin@ime.a-star.edu.sg, msabry@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Modern convolutional object detectors have improved
the detection accuracy significantly, which in turn inspired
the development of dedicated hardware accelerators to
achieve real-time performance by exploiting inherent parallelism in the algorithm. Non-maximum suppression (NMS)
is an indispensable operation in object detection. In stark
contrast to most operations, the commonly-adopted GreedyNMS algorithm does not foster parallelism, which can be
a major performance bottleneck. In this paper, we introduce
MaxpoolNMS, a parallelizable alternative to the NMS algorithm, which is based on max-pooling classification score
maps. By employing a novel multi-scale multi-channel maxpooling strategy, our method is 20× faster than GreedyNMS
while simultaneously achieves comparable accuracy, when
quantified across various benchmarking datasets, i.e., MS
COCO, KITTI and PASCAL VOC. Furthermore, our method
is better suited for hardware-based acceleration than GreedyNMS.

cantly slower [18].
Two-stage object detectors consist of a (first stage) region proposal network (RPN) that hypothesizes candidate
object locations and a (second stage) detection network that
refines region proposals. The RPN and detection network
share the same feature extractor network. Figure 1 displays
the typical blocks of two-stage object detectors. Typically
a significant portion of execution time is consumed in the
feature extractor, region proposal and object detection networks. These layers contain convolution and pooling operations, which in principle can be mapped to a highly-parallel
hardware accelerator (e.g., Google TPU [19]) – this is not
the case with remaining blocks, i.e., Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS).
Input Image
Feature Extractor
Region Proposal Network

Object Detection Network

Non-Maximum Suppression

Non-Maximum Suppression

Region Proposals

Final Detections

1. Introduction

Figure 1. System diagram of two-stage object detectors. This work
tackles the NMS in region proposal network (denoted in red box).

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have caused a major leap
in object detection accuracy. State-of-the-art DNN-based
object detection algorithms can be broadly classified into
one-stage and two-stage methods. One-stage object detectors (e.g., YOLO [24] and SSD [22]) operate in a slidingwindow manner that makes prediction for densely sampled
locations in the input image. Alternatively, two-stage approaches, such as Faster R-CNN [25] and R-FCN [5], first
generate a sparse set of region proposals and then perform
a second stage prediction to classify each proposal and refine its location. Two-stage methods consistently achieve
higher accuracy than one-stage methods, but are signifi-

NMS is an essential block as it removes duplicate detections, hence reducing false positives. Both the region proposal network and object detection network employ NMS
as a post-processing step. The commonly-adopted GreedyNMS [7] is a simple hand-crafted method. When applied in region proposal network, it first sorts all the candidate detection boxes according to their objectness scores,
followed by two nested loops to greedily select high score
boxes and delete other boxes that overlap significantly with
the selected ones. The inner loop is parallelizable, but the
outer loop is sequential in nature – without examining the
preceding box first, it cannot be decided whether the follow-

9356

