Weakly Supervised Image Classification through Noise Regularization
Mengying Hu1,3 , Hu Han1,2,∗, Shiguang Shan1,2,3,4 , Xilin Chen1,3
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, China
mengying.hu@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {hanhu, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Weakly supervised learning is an essential problem in
computer vision tasks, such as image classification, object recognition, etc., because it is expected to work in the
scenarios where a large dataset with clean labels is not
available. While there are a number of studies on weakly
supervised image classification, they usually limited to either single-label or multi-label scenarios. In this work, we
propose an effective approach for weakly supervised image
classification utilizing massive noisy labeled data with only
a small set of clean labels (e.g., 5%). The proposed approach consists of a clean net and a residual net, which
aim to learn a mapping from feature space to clean label space and a residual mapping from feature space to
the residual between clean labels and noisy labels, respectively, in a multi-task learning manner. Thus, the residual net works as a regularization term to improve the clean
net training. We evaluate the proposed approach on two
multi-label datasets (OpenImage and MS COCO2014) and
a single-label dataset (Clothing1M). Experimental results
show that the proposed approach outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods, and generalizes well to both single-label
and multi-label scenarios.

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised learning is receiving increasing attention in many computer vision tasks, e.g., image classification, object recognition, etc., because incomplete and inaccurate annotations widely exist in many practical scenarios.
For example, the diverse knowledge levels of different subjects can lead to different understanding of the same classes
of images. In addition, a massive dataset may be collected
automatically, and annotated by pre-trained models to re∗ Corresponding author.

cup, apple

bowl
apple

bowl

apple
cup

cup

hoodie

hoodie

T-shirt

T-shirt

T-shirt

Decision process

Figure 1. An illustration of distinguishing between the reliable and
unreliable parts in the massive noisy labels based on assumptions,
such as label-to-label relationship and image-to-label relationship.
The green and yellow lines denote positive and negative correlation, respectively. The thickness of a line denotes the strength of
the correlation.

duce the cost in annotation time and expense, and only a
small set of the labels can be verified by humans. It is challenging for the traditional supervised learning methods to
work on such datasets with noisy labels. Therefore, weakly
supervised learning from noisy data becomes valuable for
practical applications and has drawn increasing attentions
in recent years [5, 10, 11, 14, 25, 30].
Existing weakly supervised learning methods on image classification usually have certain assumptions with the
noise label type, i.e., single-label noise or multi-label noise.
Patrini et al. [23] defined a matrix T to describe the flipping
relation between each two classes under the single label assumption. Veit et al. [30] implicitly learned a structure in
the label space to do the prediction of multi-label. Both assumptions have their own characteristics. Single-label noise
can introduce methods like clustering similar images in the
training process [14] while multi-label noise can use label111517

