Spatio-temporal Video Re-localization by Warp LSTM
Yang Feng♯∗
Lin Ma♮†
Wei Liu♮
Jiebo Luo♯
♮
Tencent AI Lab ♯ University of Rochester
{yfeng23,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu

forest.linma@gmail.com

query

Abstract
The need for efficiently finding the video content a
user wants is increasing because of the erupting of usergenerated videos on the Web. Existing keyword-based or
content-based video retrieval methods usually determine
what occurs in a video but not when and where. In this paper, we make an answer to the question of when and where
by formulating a new task, namely spatio-temporal video
re-localization. Specifically, given a query video and a reference video, spatio-temporal video re-localization aims to
localize tubelets in the reference video such that the tubelets
semantically correspond to the query. To accurately localize the desired tubelets in the reference video, we propose
a novel warp LSTM network, which propagates the spatiotemporal information for a long period and thereby captures the corresponding long-term dependencies. Another
issue for spatio-temporal video re-localization is the lack
of properly labeled video datasets. Therefore, we reorganize the videos in the AVA dataset to form a new dataset for
spatio-temporal video re-localization research. Extensive
experimental results show that the proposed model achieves
superior performances over the designed baselines on the
spatio-temporal video re-localization task.

1. Introduction
Video sharing websites or APPs are becoming more popular than ever before. Besides the traditional video-sharing
websites, including YouTube1 and Facebook2 , the recently
emerged short video sharing APPs, such as SnapChat3 and
TikTok4 , arouse the passion of ordinary users for creating
and sharing video contents. With more and more videos
generated every day, exploring so many videos becomes increasingly challenging. It is necessary to build tools which
∗ This work was done while Yang Feng was a Research Intern with Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding author.
1 https://www.youtube.com
2 https://www.facebook.com
3 https://www.snapchat.com
4 https://www.tiktok.com

wl2223@columbia.edu

reference

Figure 1. The query is a video containing an action performed
by two characters. The reference video contains two boys performing the same action. Given the query, spatio-temporal video
re-localization aims to localize the tubelets in the reference video
such that the tubelets express the same visual concept as the query.
The desired tubelet in the reference is marked by green. Best
viewed in color.

can help users find the video contents they want efficiently.
Keyword-based video search is prevalent among users
when they want to find some videos. Although it is a
powerful method, keyword-based video search results are
largely determined by the text information associated with
the videos. As such, content-based video retrieval (CBVR)
methods [2, 3, 5, 11, 23, 30, 44, 47, 51] are proposed for
tackling this problem. With the indexing and retrieval techniques, a large list of videos is returned by the CBVR system. Only the top results will be viewed by a user, as it is
time-consuming to browse the whole video from the beginning to the end and thereby determine the relevance.
Two kinds of methods are designed to avoid browsing the
whole video. The first kind is video summarization methods [32, 58], which generate a short synopsis for a long
video. The second kind of methods [7, 8, 13, 14, 19, 22,
31, 37, 41] try to trim the video segment of interest. Using natural language as a query, [14, 19] retrieve a specific
temporal segment in a video, which shares the same semantic meaning as the query. By replacing the query sentence
with a sample video clip, video re-localization [13] aims
to temporally localize video segments, which semantically
correspond to the query video clip.
In this paper, we extend the temporal video relocalization [13] to the spatio-temporal domain. Specif-

1288

