Fast Spatially-Varying Indoor Lighting Estimation
Mathieu Garon⋆ *, Kalyan Sunkavalli† , Sunil Hadap† , Nathan Carr† , Jean-François Lalonde⋆
⋆
Université Laval, † Adobe Research
mathieu.garon.2@ulaval.ca

{sunkaval, hadap, ncarr}@adobe.com

jflalonde@gel.ulaval.ca

Abstract
We propose a real-time method to estimate spatiallyvarying indoor lighting from a single RGB image. Given an
image and a 2D location in that image, our CNN estimates a
5th order spherical harmonic representation of the lighting
at the given location in less than 20ms on a laptop mobile
graphics card. While existing approaches estimate a single,
global lighting representation or require depth as input, our
method reasons about local lighting without requiring any
geometry information. We demonstrate, through quantitative
experiments including a user study, that our results achieve
lower lighting estimation errors and are preferred by users
over the state-of-the-art. Our approach can be used directly
for augmented reality applications, where a virtual object is
relit realistically at any position in the scene in real-time.

1. Introduction
Estimating the illumination conditions of a scene is a
challenging problem. An image is formed by conflating
the effects of lighting with those of scene geometry, surface
reflectance, and camera properties. Inverting this image
formation process to recover lighting (or any of these other
intrinsic properties) is severely underconstrained. Typical
solutions to this problem rely on inserting an object (a light
probe) with known geometry and/or reflectance properties
in the scene (a shiny sphere [5], or 3D objects of known
geometry [9, 34]). Unfortunately, having to insert a known
object in the scene is limiting and thus not easily amenable
to practical applications.
Previous work has tackled this problem by using additional information such as depth [1, 25], multiple images
acquired by scanning a scene [12, 26, 36, 37] or user input [18]. However, such information is cumbersome to acquire. Recent work [8] has proposed a learning approach
that bypasses the need for additional information by predicting lighting directly from a single image in an end-to-end
* Parts of this work were completed while Mathieu Garon was an intern
at Adobe Research.

Figure 1. Indoor lighting is spatially-varying. Methods that estimate
global lighting [8] (left) do not account for local lighting effects
resulting in inconsistent renders when lighting virtual objects. In
contrast, our method (right) produces spatially-varying lighting
from a single RGB image, resulting in much more realistic results.

manner. While [8] represents a practical improvement over
previous approaches, we argue that this technique is still not
amenable for use in more interactive scenarios, such as augmented reality (AR). First, it cannot be executed in real-time
since it decodes full environment maps. Second, and perhaps
more importantly, this approach produces a single lighting
estimate for an image (more or less in the center of the image). However, indoor lighting is spatially-varying: light
sources are in close proximity to the scene, thus creating
significantly different lighting conditions across the scene
due to occlusions and non-uniform light distributions.
Commercial AR systems, such as Apple’s ARkit, provide
real-time lighting estimation capabilities. However, we observe that their capabilities are quite rudimentary: ARkit uses
“exposure information to determine the relative brightness”1 ,
and requires the user to scan part of the environment and
“automatically completes [this map] with advanced machine
learning algorithms”2 , but that is used only for environment
mapping (realistic reflections) and not as a light source.
In this work, we present a method that estimates spatiallyvarying lighting—represented as spherical harmonics (SH)—
from a single image in real-time. Our method, based on deep
1 Source:
WWDC 2017, session 602, https://developer.
apple.com/videos/play/wwdc2017/602/?time=2230
2 Source:
WWDC 2018, session 602, https://developer.
apple.com/videos/play/wwdc2018/602/?time=1614

6908

