Tracking by Animation:
Unsupervised Learning of Multi-Object Attentive Trackers
Zhen He1,2,3∗

Jian Li2

Daxue Liu2

Hangen He2

David Barber3,4

1

2

Academy of Military Medical Sciences
National University of Defense Technology
3
University College London
4
The Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
Online Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) from videos is a
challenging computer vision task which has been extensively
studied for decades. Most of the existing MOT algorithms
are based on the Tracking-by-Detection (TBD) paradigm
combined with popular machine learning approaches which
largely reduce the human effort to tune algorithm parameters. However, the commonly used supervised learning
approaches require the labeled data (e.g., bounding boxes),
which is expensive for videos. Also, the TBD framework is
usually suboptimal since it is not end-to-end, i.e., it considers the task as detection and tracking, but not jointly. To
achieve both label-free and end-to-end learning of MOT, we
propose a Tracking-by-Animation framework, where a differentiable neural model first tracks objects from input frames
and then animates these objects into reconstructed frames.
Learning is then driven by the reconstruction error through
backpropagation. We further propose a Reprioritized Attentive Tracking to improve the robustness of data association.
Experiments conducted on both synthetic and real video
datasets show the potential of the proposed model. Our
project page is publicly available at: https://github.
com/zhen-he/tracking-by-animation

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of online 2D multi-object tracking from videos. Given the historical input frames, the goal
is to extract a set of 2D object bounding boxes from the
current input frame. Each bounding box should have an
one-to-one correspondence to an object and thus should not
change its identity across different frames.
MOT is a challenging task since one must deal with:
(i) unknown number of objects, which requires the tracker
to be correctly reinitialized/terminated when the object appears/disappears; (ii) frequent object occlusions, which re∗ Correspondence to Zhen He (email: hezhen.cs@gmail.com).

quire the tracker to reason about the depth relationship
among objects; (iii) abrupt pose (e.g., rotation, scale, and
position), shape, and appearance changes for the same object, or similar properties across different objects, both of
which make data association hard; (iv) background noises
(e.g., illumination changes and shadows), which can mislead
tracking.
To overcome the above issues, one can seek to use expressive features, or improve the robustness of data association. E.g., in the predominant Tracking-by-Detection (TBD)
paradigm [1, 21, 7, 8], well-performed object detectors are
first applied to extract object features (e.g., potential bounding boxes) from each input frame, then appropriate matching
algorithms are employed to associate these candidates of different frames, forming object trajectories. To reduce the human effort to manually tune parameters for object detectors
or matching algorithms, many machine learning approaches
are integrated into the TBD framework and have largely improved the performance [68, 54, 53, 39]. However, most of
these approaches are based on supervised learning, while
manually labeling the video data is very time-consuming.
Also, the TBD framework does not consider the feature extraction and data association jointly, i.e., it is not end-to-end,
thereby usually leading to suboptimal solutions.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework to achieve
both label-free and end-to-end learning for MOT tasks. In
summary, we make the following contributions:
• We propose a Tracking-by-Animation (TBA) framework,
where a differentiable neural model first tracks objects
from input frames and then animates these objects into
reconstructed frames. Learning is then driven by the
reconstruction error through backpropagation.
• We propose a Reprioritized Attentive Tracking (RAT) to
mitigate overfitting and disrupted tracking, improving
the robustness of data association.
• We evaluate our model on two synthetic datasets
(MNIST-MOT and Sprites-MOT) and one real dataset
(DukeMTMC [49]), showing its potential.

1318

