Revisiting Self-Supervised Visual Representation Learning
Alexander Kolesnikov,* Xiaohua Zhai,* Lucas Beyer*
Google Brain
Zürich, Switzerland
{akolesnikov,xzhai,lbeyer}@google.com

55

Unsupervised visual representation learning remains
a largely unsolved problem in computer vision research.
Among a big body of recently proposed approaches for unsupervised learning of visual representations, a class of
self-supervised techniques achieves superior performance
on many challenging benchmarks. A large number of the
pretext tasks for self-supervised learning have been studied, but other important aspects, such as the choice of convolutional neural networks (CNN), has not received equal
attention. Therefore, we revisit numerous previously proposed self-supervised models, conduct a thorough large
scale study and, as a result, uncover multiple crucial insights. We challenge a number of common practices in selfsupervised visual representation learning and observe that
standard recipes for CNN design do not always translate
to self-supervised representation learning. As part of our
study, we drastically boost the performance of previously
proposed techniques and outperform previously published
state-of-the-art results by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Automated computer vision systems have recently made
drastic progress. Many models for tackling challenging
tasks such as object recognition, semantic segmentation or
object detection can now compete with humans on complex visual benchmarks [15, 45, 14]. However, the success
of such systems hinges on a large amount of labeled data,
which is not always available and often prohibitively expensive to acquire. Moreover, these systems are tailored to
specific scenarios, e.g. a model trained on the ImageNet
(ILSVRC-2012) dataset [38] can only recognize 1000 semantic categories or a model that was trained to perceive
road traffic at daylight may not work in darkness [5, 4].
As a result, a large research effort is currently focused on
systems that can adapt to new conditions without leverag* equal contribution

Downstream ImageNet Accuracy [%]

Abstract

RevNet50
ResNet50 v2
ResNet50 v1

50

45

40

35

Rotation [10]

Exemplar [8] Rel. Patch Loc. [6] Jigsaw [29]

Figure 1. Quality of visual representations learned by various selfsupervised learning techniques significantly depends on the convolutional neural network architecture that was used for solving the
self-supervised learning task. For instance, ResNet50 v1 excels
when trained with the relative patch location self-supervision [7],
but produces suboptimal results when trained with the rotation
self-supervision [11]. In our paper we provide a large scale indepth study in support of this observation and discuss its implications for evaluation of self-supervised models.

ing a large amount of expensive supervision. This effort includes recent advances on transfer learning, domain adaptation, semi-supervised, weakly-supervised and unsupervised
learning. In this paper, we concentrate on self-supervised
visual representation learning, which is a promising subclass of unsupervised learning. Self-supervised learning
techniques produce state-of-the-art unsupervised representations on standard computer vision benchmarks [11, 34, 2].
The self-supervised learning framework requires only
unlabeled data in order to formulate a pretext learning task
such as predicting context [7] or image rotation [11], for
which a target objective can be computed without supervision. These pretext tasks must be designed in such a way
that high-level image understanding is useful for solving
them. As a result, the intermediate layers of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) trained for solving these pretext
tasks encode high-level semantic visual representations that
are useful for solving downstream tasks of interest, such as
11920

