MBS: Macroblock Scaling for CNN Model Reduction
Yu-Hsun Lin, Chun-Nan Chou, and Edward Y. Chang
HTC Research & Healthcare (DeepQ)
{lyman lin, jason.cn chou, edward chang}@htc.com

Abstract

referred as removing redundant channels since each filter
outputs a corresponding channel in a CNN model [10].

In this paper we propose the macroblock scaling (MBS)
algorithm, which can be applied to various CNN architectures to reduce their model size. MBS adaptively reduces
each CNN macroblock depending on its information redundancy measured by our proposed effective flops. Empirical studies conducted with ImageNet and CIFAR-10 attest
that MBS can reduce the model size of some already compact CNN models, e.g., MobileNetV2 (25.03% further reduction) and ShuffleNet (20.74%), and even ultra-deep ones
such as ResNet-101 (51.67%) and ResNet-1202 (72.71%)
with negligible accuracy degradation. MBS also performs
better reduction at a much lower cost than the state-of-theart optimization-based methods do. MBS’s simplicity and
efficiency, its flexibility to work with any CNN model, and
its scalability to work with models of any depth make it an
attractive choice for CNN model size reduction.

There are two categories of macro-level reduction: optimization based and channel-scaling based. Each category
has multiple methods and algorithms. The optimizationbased category typically estimates the filter importance by
formulating an optimization problem with the adopted criteria (e.g., filter weight magnitude). Removing a filter (or a
channel, which is formally defined in Section 3) will affect
both the former and latter layers. The filter pruning step of
the optimization-based method must take into account the
inter-connected structures between CNN layers. Therefore,
a CNN model such as DenseNet [11] and ShuffleNet [31]
with more complex inter-connected structures may prevent
the optimization-based approach from being effective.

1. Introduction
CNN models have been widely used by image-based
applications, thanks to the breakthrough performance of
AlexNet [15]. However, a very deep and wide CNN model
consists of many parameters, and as a result, the trained
model may demand a large amount of DRAM and a large
number of multiplications to perform a prediction. Such
high resource and computation requirements lead to latency,
heat, and power consumption problems, which are suboptimal for edge devices such as mobile phones and IoTs [25].
Therefore, reducing CNN model size is essential for improving resource utilization and conserving energy.
Several CNN model reduction algorithms have recently been proposed [25]. These algorithms can be divided into two categories: micro-level (performing reduction/quantization inside a filter) and macro-level reduction
(removing redundant filters). These two categories are complement to each other. (More details are presented in the
related work section.) We focus our study in this paper on
macro-level reduction. For lucid exposition, we establish
an essential concept that removing redundant filters are also

The channel-scaling based category uses an α-scalar to
reduce channel width. For instance, MobileNet [10] uses
the same α-scaler to prune the widths of all channels. Applying the same α-scaler to all convolutional layers without
considering each information density is a coarse-grained
method. A fine-grained method that finds the optimal αscalar for each convolutional layer should be ideal. However, the increasingly complicated inter-layer connection
structures of CNN models forbid fine-grained scaling to be
computationally feasible.
To address the shortcomings of the current modelcompaction methods, we propose macroblock scaling
(MBS). A macroblock consists of a number of convolution layers that exhibit similar characteristics, such as having the same resolution or being a segment of convolution
layers with customized inter-connects. Having macroblock
as a structure abstraction provides the flexibility for MBS
to inter-operate with virtually any CNN models of various
structures, and also permits channel-scaling to be performed
in a “finer”-grained manner. To quantify information density for each macroblock so as to determine an effective
macroblock-dependent scalar, MBS uses effective flops to
measure each macroblock’s information density. (We define effective flops to be the number of convolution flops
required for the activated non-zero ReLU outputs.) Experimental results show that the reduction MBS can achieve is
19117

