Attention Based Glaucoma Detection:
A Large-scale Database and CNN Model
Liu Li† , Mai Xu†‡∗, Xiaofei Wang† , Lai Jiang† , Hanruo Liu§ ,
† School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡ Hangzhou Innovation InstituteBeihang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
§Beijing Institute of Ophthalmology, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Beijing, China
†{liliu1995, maixu, xfwang, jianglai.china}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recently years, the attention mechanism has been
successfully applied in deep learning based computer vision tasks, i.e., object detection [3, 31, 28], image caption
[35, 39, 2] and action recognition [30]. The basic idea of
the attention mechanism is to locate the most salient parts
of the features in deep neural networks (DNNs), such that
redundancy is removed for the vision tasks. In general, the
∗ Mai Xu is the corresponding author of this paper.

*URXQGWUXWK
DWWHQWLRQPDSV

)XQGXV
LPDJHV

,QFRUUHFWFODVVLILFDWLRQ

9LVXDOL]HG
KHDWPDSV

Recently, the attention mechanism has been successfully applied in convolutional neural networks (CNNs), signiﬁcantly boosting the performance of many computer vision tasks. Unfortunately, few medical image recognition
approaches incorporate the attention mechanism in the CNNs. In particular, there exists high redundancy in fundus images for glaucoma detection, such that the attention
mechanism has potential in improving the performance of
CNN-based glaucoma detection. This paper proposes an
attention-based CNN for glaucoma detection (AG-CNN).
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst establish a large-scale attention based
glaucoma (LAG) database, which includes 5,824 fundus images labeled with either positive glaucoma (2,392) or negative glaucoma (3,432). The attention maps of the ophthalmologists are also collected in LAG database through a
simulated eye-tracking experiment. Then, a new structure of
AG-CNN is designed, including an attention prediction subnet, a pathological area localization subnet and a glaucoma
classiﬁcation subnet. Different from other attention-based
CNN methods, the features are also visualized as the localized pathological area, which can advance the performance
of glaucoma detection. Finally, the experiment results show
that the proposed AG-CNN approach signiﬁcantly advances
state-of-the-art glaucoma detection.

&RUUHFWFODVVLILFDWLRQ

Figure 1. Examples of glaucoma fundus images, attention maps by ophthalmologists in glaucoma diagnosis and visualization results of a CNN model (Bottom) [15] by an occlusion experiment [40]. The Pearson
Correlation Coefﬁcient (CC) results between the visualized heat maps and
ground-truth ophthalmologist attention maps are 0.33 and 0.14 for correct
and incorrect glaucoma classiﬁcation, respectively.

attention mechanism is embedded in DNNs by leveraging
the attention maps. Speciﬁcally, on the one hand, the attention maps in [31, 28, 35, 30] are yielded in a self-learned
pattern, with other information weakly supervising the attention maps, i.e., the classiﬁcation labels. On the other
hand, [39, 37] utilize the human attention information to
guide the DNNs focusing on the region of interest (ROI).
Redundancy also exists in medical image recognition, interfering the recognition results. In particular, there exists
heavy redundancy in fundus images for disease recognition.
For example, the pathological areas of fundus images are in
the region of optic cup and disc, or its surrounding blood
vessel and optic nerve area [25]; other regions such as the
boundary of the eye ball are redundant for the medical diagnosis. As shown in Figure 1, glaucoma, an irreversible
optic disease, can be correctly detected by a convolutional
neural network (CNN) [15], when the visualized heat maps
are consistent with the attention maps of ophthalmologists. Otherwise, glaucoma is mislabeled by the CNN model
when the visualized heat maps focus on redundant regions.

10571

