Cascaded Generative and Discriminative Learning for Microcalcification
Detection in Breast Mammograms
Fandong Zhang1,5∗ Ling Luo2,3∗ Xinwei Sun2,5 Zhen Zhou2,5 Xiuli Li2,5
Yizhou Yu2 Yizhou Wang2,4,5
1
Center for Data Science, Peking University 2 Deepwise AI Lab
3
School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
4
Computer Science Department, School of EECS, Peking University 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{fd.zhang, z.zhou, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn {luoling, sunxinwei, lixiuli, yuyizhou}@deepwise.com

Abstract
Accurate microcalcification (µC) detection is of great
importance due to its high proportion in early breast cancers. Most of the previous µC detection methods belong
to discriminative models, where classifiers are exploited to
distinguish µCs from other backgrounds. However, it is still
challenging for these methods to tell the µCs from amounts
of normal tissues because they are too tiny (at most 14
pixels). Generative methods can precisely model the normal tissues and regard the abnormal ones as outliers, while
they fail to further distinguish the µCs from other anomalies, i.e. vessel calcifications. In this paper, we propose
a hybrid approach by taking advantages of both generative and discriminative models. Firstly, a generative model
named Anomaly Separation Network (ASN) is used to generate candidate µCs. ASN contains two major components.
A deep convolutional encoder-decoder network is built to
learn the image reconstruction mapping and a t-test loss
function is designed to separate the distributions of the reconstruction residuals of µCs from normal tissues. Secondly, a discriminative model is cascaded to tell the µCs
from the false positives. Finally, to verify the effectiveness
of our method, we conduct experiments on both public and
in-house datasets, which demonstrates that our approach
outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women
worldwide [28]. To discover it at the early state, breast
screening is necessarily applied [27]. Among the signs of
early breast cancers, the microcalcifications (µCs) belongs
to one of the most common kinds [2]. To analyze them, the
1 Authors contributed equally.

mammogram images are widely used. As shown in Fig.1,
µCs are tiny and vary in brightness, contrast, shape with
diverse surroundings. It is obviously difficult and time consuming for radiologists to detect them one by one. Therefore, an automatical µCs detection methods with high accuracy in mammography images is of great importance.
To achieve this goal, different methods are proposed,
among which most are discriminative models, i.e., classification models. Usually, various features, such as harr-like
features [31, 3], shape and texture features [14] and deep
features [4, 23] are extracted from images to train a binary
classifier that can tell µC pixels from the normal ones. However, these methods suffer from extremely imbalanced samples. The reason lies in that µCs are commonly too tiny,
generally smaller than 14 pixels in mammogram images,
and the vast majority of such image regions are normal tissues. Therefore, it is challenging to extract efficient features
for such small objects and also lead to terrible distribution
of µC and other tissues. In our experiments, the ratio between positive (µCs) samples and negative (normal tissues)
samples is around 4 × 103 .
To address the aforementioned problem, we try to firstly
distinguish normal pixels and abnormal ones, while µCs belongs to abnormal regions. In this way, we can reduce a lot
of negative samples that exist in discriminative models. To
this end, we rethink the µC detection task from the point of
image reconstruction. The normal samples are those regular
backgrounds and there are a huge mount of these regions.
Hence it is supposed to be not hard to find a dictionary to
reconstruct these normal samples. On the contrary, µCs are
irregular, rare and hard to be reconstructed. Therefore, it is
natural to learn a reconstruction model that normal samples
can be well reconstructed while µCs not. In this paper, we
design an image reconstruction network, which is modeled
as a deep convolutional encoder-decoder network, providing the reconstruction function with powerful learning abil-

12578

