Minimal Solvers for Mini-Loop Closures in 3D Multi-Scan Alignment
Pedro Miraldo
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
miraldo@kth.se

Surojit Saha and Srikumar Ramalingam
School of Computing, The University of Utah
{surojit,srikumar}@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
3D scan registration is a classical, yet a highly useful
problem in the context of 3D sensors such as Kinect and
Velodyne. While there are several existing methods, the
techniques are usually incremental where adjacent scans
are registered first to obtain the initial poses, followed by
motion averaging and bundle-adjustment refinement. In this
paper, we take a different approach and develop minimal
solvers for jointly computing the initial poses of cameras
in small loops such as 3-, 4-, and 5-cycles1 . Note that the
classical registration of 2 scans can be done using a minimum of 3 point matches to compute 6 degrees of relative
motion. On the other hand, to jointly compute the 3D registrations in n-cycles, we take 2 point matches between the
first n − 1 consecutive pairs (i.e., Scan 1 & Scan 2, . . . , and
Scan n − 1 & Scan n) and 1 or 2 point matches between
Scan 1 and Scan n. Overall, we use 5, 7, and 10 point
matches for 3-, 4-, and 5-cycles, and recover 12, 18, and
24 degrees of transformation variables, respectively. Using
simulations and real-data we show that the 3D registration
using mini n-cycles are computationally efficient, and can
provide alternate and better initial poses compared to standard pairwise methods.

1. Introduction
Many geometers working on algebraic minimal solvers
have attempted to solve the notorious and classical 3-view
4-point relative pose estimation. Given 4 triplets of point
matches, the goal is to jointly find the poses of the 3 cameras. There have been some great progress on this problem
using one-dimensional search [38] and semi-definite programming [27], but we still miss the simple and direct minimal algebraic solver that we usually derive for most geometric vision problems. If one manages to solve this problem for RGB cameras, what would be the next big challenge? Do we look at the 4-view 3-point relative pose problem? While there has been a great deal of effort to solve the
1 A cycle graph C , also referred to as n-cycles, is a subgraph with n
n
nodes and edge set {(1, 2), . . . , (n − 1, n), (n, 1)}.

Figure 1: At the left we show four scans and seven 3D point
matches (2 from Scans 1 & Scan 2; 2 from Scans 2 & Scan
3; 2 from Scans 3 & Scan 4; and 1 from Scans 1 & Scan 4).
At the right, we show the registered scan using our minimal
solver for 4-cycle, that jointly computes the pose parameters for all the four cameras.

higher-order pose estimation in the case of RGB sensors,
the equivalent problem with RGB-D cameras has received
no attention. In the case of RGB-D sensors, the number of
correspondences for the n-camera relative pose problem is
less notorious for n ≤ 5, and even practically deployable.
At this point, when the price point for commercial RGBD sensors is decreasing due to the progress in robotics and
self-driving industry, it would be a good time to fully equip
the arsenal with algebraic minimal solvers for depth sensors.
In Fig. 1 we show four different scans collected using a
Kinect sensor. We jointly compute the 3D registration for
all four scans using a minimal solver that uses a total of
seven point matches. We are able to compute 18 degrees
of transformation variables, and the points from all the four
scans are registered as shown in Fig. 1. Previous methods
for RGB-D registration typically employ pair-wise registration where the initial poses are computed between pairs of
cameras, and a final refinement is done using a non-linear
refinement technique. The pairwise methods (see Orthogonal Procrustes problem [45] that uses a minimum of three
point matches) typically accumulate drift even in the case
of three cameras. Our formulation naturally eliminates the

9699

