Answer Them All! Toward Universal Visual Question Answering Models
Robik Shrestha1
Kushal Kafle1
1
Rochester Institute of Technology

Christopher Kanan1,2,3
2
3
PAIGE
Cornell Tech

{rss9369, kk6055, kanan}@rit.edu

Abstract
Visual Question Answering (VQA) research is split into
two camps: the first focuses on VQA datasets that require
natural image understanding and the second focuses on
synthetic datasets that test reasoning. A good VQA algorithm should be capable of both, but only a few VQA algorithms are tested in this manner. We compare five state-ofthe-art VQA algorithms across eight VQA datasets covering
both domains. To make the comparison fair, all of the models are standardized as much as possible, e.g., they use the
same visual features, answer vocabularies, etc. We find that
methods do not generalize across the two domains. To address this problem, we propose a new VQA algorithm that
rivals or exceeds the state-of-the-art for both domains.

[ VQA- CP] What col or ar e her shoes?
QCG: bl ue
RN: bl ue

BAN: bl ue
MAC: bl ue

UpDn: whi t e
RAMEN( OURS) : whi t e

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) requires a model to
understand and reason about visuo-linguistic concepts to
answer open-ended questions about images. Correctly answering these questions demands numerous capabilities, including object localization, attribute detection, activity classification, scene understanding, reasoning, counting, and
more. The first VQA datasets contained real-world images
with crowdsourced questions and answers [36, 9]. It was
assumed that this would be an extremely difficult problem
and was proposed as a form of Visual Turing Test to benchmark performance in computer vision. However, it became
clear that many high performing algorithms were simply exploiting biases and superficial correlations, without really
understanding the visual content [24, 3]. For example, answering ‘yes’ to all yes/no questions in VQAv1 [9] results
in an accuracy of 71% on these questions [25]. Later natural
image VQA datasets endeavored to address this issue. By
associating each question with complementary images and
different answers, VQAv2 [16] reduces some forms of language bias. TDIUC [24] analyzes generalization to multiple
kinds of questions and rarer answers. CVQA [5] tests concept compositionality and VQACPv2 [4] tests performance
when train and test distributions differ.

[ CLEVR] What

shape i s t he smal l r ubber obj ect t hat i s
t he same col or as t he l ar ge r ubber cube?

QCG: spher e

BAN: spher e

RN: spher e

MAC: cube

UpDn: spher e
RAMEN( OURS) : cube

Figure 1: Many VQA algorithms do not transfer well across
natural and synthetic datasets. We argue it is necessary to do
well on both domains and present an algorithm that achieves
this goal.

While later natural image datasets have reduced bias, the
vast majority of questions in these datasets do not rigorously
test reasoning skills. Several synthetic datasets [20, 7] were
created as a remedy. They contain simple visual scenes with

10472

