MnasNet: Platform-Aware Neural Architecture Search for Mobile
Mingxing Tan1

Bo Chen2

Ruoming Pang1

Vijay Vasudevan1 Mark Sandler2 Andrew Howard2 Quoc V. Le1
Google Brain, 2 Google Inc.
{tanmingxing, bochen, rpang, vrv, sandler, howarda, qvl}@google.com
1

Abstract

Sample models

Controller from search space

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have made significant progress in image classification, object detection, and
many other applications. As modern CNN models become
increasingly deeper and larger [31, 13, 36, 26], they also become slower, and require more computation. Such increases
in computational demands make it difficult to deploy stateof-the-art CNN models on resource-constrained platforms

reward

Mobile
phones

accuracy

latency

Multi-objective
reward

Figure 1: An Overview of Platform-Aware Neural Architecture Search for Mobile.
77
76
Imagenet Top 1 Accuracy (%)

Designing convolutional neural networks (CNN) for
mobile devices is challenging because mobile models need
to be small and fast, yet still accurate. Although significant
efforts have been dedicated to design and improve mobile
CNNs on all dimensions, it is very difficult to manually
balance these trade-offs when there are so many architectural possibilities to consider. In this paper, we propose
an automated mobile neural architecture search (MNAS)
approach, which explicitly incorporate model latency into
the main objective so that the search can identify a model
that achieves a good trade-off between accuracy and
latency. Unlike previous work, where latency is considered
via another, often inaccurate proxy (e.g., FLOPS), our
approach directly measures real-world inference latency
by executing the model on mobile phones. To further
strike the right balance between flexibility and search
space size, we propose a novel factorized hierarchical
search space that encourages layer diversity throughout
the network. Experimental results show that our approach
consistently outperforms state-of-the-art mobile CNN
models across multiple vision tasks. On the ImageNet
classification task, our MnasNet achieves 75.2% top-1
accuracy with 78ms latency on a Pixel phone, which is
1.8× faster than MobileNetV2 [29] with 0.5% higher
accuracy and 2.3× faster than NASNet [36] with 1.2%
higher accuracy. Our MnasNet also achieves better mAP
quality than MobileNets for COCO object detection. Code
is at https://github.com/tensorflow/tpu/
tree/master/models/official/mnasnet.

Trainer

75

MnasNet

AmoebaNet-A
MobileNetV2(1.4)

74
NASNet-A

73
72
MobileNetV2

71
MobileNetV1

70
0

50

100
150
Inference Latency (ms)

200

Figure 2: Accuracy vs. Latency Comparison – Our MnasNet models significantly outperforms other mobile models
[29, 36, 26] on ImageNet. Details can be found in Table 1.

such as mobile or embedded devices.
Given restricted computational resources available on
mobile devices, much recent research has focused on designing and improving mobile CNN models by reducing
the depth of the network and utilizing less expensive operations, such as depthwise convolution [11] and group convolution [33]. However, designing a resource-constrained
mobile model is challenging: one has to carefully balance
accuracy and resource-efficiency, resulting in a significantly
large design space.

2820

