A Theoretically Sound Upper Bound on the Triplet Loss for Improving the
Efficiency of Deep Distance Metric Learning
Thanh-Toan Do1 , Toan Tran2 , Ian Reid2 , Vijay Kumar3 , Tuan Hoang4 , Gustavo Carneiro2
1

University of Liverpool 2 University of Adelaide 3 PARC 4 Singapore University of Technology and Design

Abstract
We propose a method that substantially improves the efficiency of deep distance metric learning based on the optimization of the triplet loss function. One epoch of such
training process based on a naı̈ve optimization of the triplet
loss function has a run-time complexity O(N 3 ), where N is
the number of training samples. Such optimization scales
poorly, and the most common approach proposed to address this high complexity issue is based on sub-sampling
the set of triplets needed for the training process. Another
approach explored in the field relies on an ad-hoc linearization (in terms of N ) of the triplet loss that introduces class
centroids, which must be optimized using the whole training set for each mini-batch – this means that a naı̈ve implementation of this approach has run-time complexity O(N 2 ).
This complexity issue is usually mitigated with poor, but
computationally cheap, approximate centroid optimization
methods. In this paper, we first propose a solid theory on
the linearization of the triplet loss with the use of class centroids, where the main conclusion is that our new linear
loss represents a tight upper-bound to the triplet loss. Furthermore, based on the theory above, we propose a training
algorithm that no longer requires the centroid optimization
step, which means that our approach is the first in the field
with a guaranteed linear run-time complexity. We show
that the training of deep distance metric learning methods using the proposed upper-bound is substantially faster
than triplet-based methods, while producing competitive retrieval accuracy results on benchmark datasets (CUB-2002011 and CAR196).

1. Introduction
Deep distance metric learning (DML) aims at training a
deep learning model that transforms training samples into
feature embeddings that are close together for samples that
belong to the same class and far apart for samples from different classes [4, 8, 9, 14, 20, 28, 29, 30, 35, 40, 46, 49].
The use of DML is advantageous compared to more traditional classification models because DML does not rely on

Figure 1. Left: the triplet loss requires the calculation of the loss
over 8 × 3 × 4 = 96 elements (cubic complexity in the number of
samples). Right: the proposed upper bound to the triplet loss only
requires the loss calculation for 8 × 2 = 16 elements (linear complexity in the number of samples and centroids). In addition, note
that the class centroids are fixed during training, overcoming the
expensive centroid optimization step, with quadratic complexity,
found in similar approaches [7, 32, 42, 45].

a classification layer that imposes strong constraints on the
type of problems that the trained model can handle. For instance, if a model is trained to classify 1000 classes, then
the addition of the 1001st class will force the design of a
new model structure that incorporates that extra classification node. In addition, DML requires no model structure update, which means that the learned DML model can simply
be fine-tuned with the training samples for the new class.
Therefore, DML is an interesting approach to be used in
learning problems that can be continuously updated, such
as open-world [2] and life-long learning problems [39].
One of the most common optimization functions explored in DML is the triplet loss, which comprises two
terms: 1) a term that minimizes the distance between pairs
of feature embeddings belonging to the same class, and 2)
another term that maximizes the distance between pairs of
feature embeddings from different classes. The training
process based on this triplet loss has run-time complexity
O(N 3 /C) per epoch, with N representing the number of
samples and C < N , the number of classes. Given that
training sets are becoming increasingly larger, DML training based on such triplet loss is computationally challenging, and a great deal of work has been focused on the reduction of this complexity without affecting much the ef110404

