ApolloCar3D: A Large 3D Car Instance Understanding Benchmark for
Autonomous Driving
Xibin Song1,2 , Peng Wang1,2 , Dingfu Zhou1,2 , Rui Zhu3 , Chenye Guan1,2 ,
Yuchao Dai4 , Hao Su3 , Hongdong Li5,6 and Ruigang Yang1,2
1

Baidu Research 2 National Engineering Laboratory of Deep Learning Technology and Application,
China 3 University of California, San Diego 4 Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
5
Australian National University, Australia 6 Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, Australia
{songxibin,wangpeng54,zhoudingfu,guanchenye,yangruigang}@baidu.com,
{rzhu,haosu}@eng.ucsd.edu, daiyuchao@gmail.com and hongdong.li@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Autonomous driving has attracted remarkable attention
from both industry and academia. An important task is to
estimate 3D properties (e.g. translation, rotation and shape)
of a moving or parked vehicle on the road. This task, while
critical, is still under-researched in the computer vision
community – partially owing to the lack of large scale and
fully-annotated 3D car database suitable for autonomous
driving research. In this paper, we contribute the ﬁrst largescale database suitable for 3D car instance understanding
– ApolloCar3D. The dataset contains 5,277 driving images and over 60K car instances, where each car is ﬁtted
with an industry-grade 3D CAD model with absolute model
size and semantically labelled keypoints. This dataset is
above 20× larger than PASCAL3D+ [65] and KITTI [21],
the current state-of-the-art. To enable efﬁcient labelling
in 3D, we build a pipeline by considering 2D-3D keypoint
correspondences for a single instance and 3D relationship
among multiple instances. Equipped with such dataset, we
build various baseline algorithms with the state-of-the-art
deep convolutional neural networks. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
segment each car with a pre-trained Mask R-CNN [22],
and then regress towards its 3D pose and shape based on
a deformable 3D car model with or without using semantic
keypoints. We show that using keypoints signiﬁcantly improves ﬁtting performance. Finally, we develop a new 3D
metric jointly considering 3D pose and 3D shape, allowing
for comprehensive evaluation and ablation study.

1. Introduction
Understanding 3D properties of objects from an image,
i.e. to recover objects’ 3D pose and shape, is an important
task of computer vision, as illustrated in Fig. 1. This task

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 1: An example of our dataset, where (a) is the input color
image, (b) illustrates the labeled 2D keypoints, (c) shows the 3D
model ﬁtting results with labeled 2D keypoints.

is also called “inverse-graphics” [27], solving which would
enable a wide range of applications in vision and robotics,
such as robot navigation [30], visual recognition [15], and
human-robot interaction [2]. Among them, autonomous
driving (AD) is a prominent topic which holds great potential in practical applications. Yet, in the context of AD the
current leading technologies for 3D object understanding
mostly rely on high-resolution LiDAR sensor [34], rather
than regular camera or image sensors.
However, we argue that there are multitude drawbacks
in using LiDAR, hindering its further up-taking. The most

5452

