RVOS: End-to-End Recurrent Network for Video Object Segmentation
Carles Ventura1 , Miriam Bellver2 , Andreu Girbau3 , Amaia Salvador3 ,
Ferran Marques3 and Xavier Giro-i-Nieto3
1

Universitat Oberta de Catalunya 2 Barcelona Supercomputing Center
3
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya

cventuraroy@uoc.edu, miriam.bellver@bsc.es, {andreu.girbau, amaia.salvador, ferran.marques, xavier.giro}@upc.edu

Abstract
Multiple object video object segmentation is a challenging task, specially for the zero-shot case, when no object
mask is given at the initial frame and the model has to find
the objects to be segmented along the sequence. In our
work, we propose a Recurrent network for multiple object
Video Object Segmentation (RVOS) that is fully end-to-end
trainable. Our model incorporates recurrence on two different domains: (i) the spatial, which allows to discover the
different object instances within a frame, and (ii) the temporal, which allows to keep the coherence of the segmented
objects along time. We train RVOS for zero-shot video object segmentation and are the first ones to report quantitative results for DAVIS-2017 and YouTube-VOS benchmarks.
Further, we adapt RVOS for one-shot video object segmentation by using the masks obtained in previous time steps as
inputs to be processed by the recurrent module. Our model
reaches comparable results to state-of-the-art techniques
in YouTube-VOS benchmark and outperforms all previous
video object segmentation methods not using online learning in the DAVIS-2017 benchmark. Moreover, our model
achieves faster inference runtimes than previous methods,
reaching 44ms/frame on a P100 GPU.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) aims at separating the
foreground from the background given a video sequence.
This task has raised a lot of interest in the computer vision
community since the appearance of benchmarks [21] that
have given access to annotated datasets and standardized
metrics. Recently, new benchmarks [22, 33] that address
multi-object segmentation and provide larger datasets have
become available, leading to more challenging tasks.
Most works addressing VOS treat frames indepen-

f0,4
f0,3
f
f0,2 0
f0,1

f1,4
f1,3
f
f1,2 1
f1,1

f2,4
f2,3
f
f2,2 2
f2,1

f0

RNN

f1

RNN

f2

RNN

f0

RNN

f1

RNN

f2

RNN

f0

RNN

f1

RNN

f2

RNN

Figure 1. Our proposed architecture where RNN is considered in
both spatial and temporal domains. We also show some qualitative results where each predicted instance mask is displayed with
a different color.

dently [3,4,17,30], and do not consider the temporal dimension to gain coherence between consecutive frames. Some
works have leveraged the temporal information using optical flow estimations [2,5,9,29] or propagating the predicted
masks through the video sequence [20, 34].
In contrast to these works, some methods propose to
train models on spatio-temporal features, e.g., [29] used
RNNs to encode the spatio-temporal evolution of objects
in the video sequence. However, their pipeline relies on an
optical flow stream that prevents a fully end-to-end trainable model. Recently, [32] proposed an encoder-decoder
architecture based on RNNs that is similar to our proposed
pipeline. The main difference is that they process only a
single object in an end-to-end manner. Thus, a separate forward pass of the model is required for each object that is
15277

