Invariance Matters: Exemplar Memory for Domain Adaptive
Person Re-identification
Zhun Zhong1,2 , Liang Zheng3 , Zhiming Luo5 , Shaozi Li1∗, Yi Yang2,4
1 Cognitive Science Department, Xiamen University
2 Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney
3 Research School of Computer Science, Australian National University
4 Baidu Research 5 Postdoc Center of Information and Communication Engineering, Xiamen University

Abstract
This paper considers the domain adaptive person reidentification (re-ID) problem: learning a re-ID model from
a labeled source domain and an unlabeled target domain.
Conventional methods are mainly to reduce feature distribution gap between the source and target domains. However, these studies largely neglect the intra-domain variations in the target domain, which contain critical factors influencing the testing performance on the target domain. In this work, we comprehensively investigate into
the intra-domain variations of the target domain and propose to generalize the re-ID model w.r.t three types of the
underlying invariance, i.e., exemplar-invariance, camerainvariance and neighborhood-invariance. To achieve this
goal, an exemplar memory is introduced to store features
of the target domain and accommodate the three invariance
properties. The memory allows us to enforce the invariance constraints over global training batch without significantly increasing computation cost. Experiment demonstrates that the three invariance properties and the proposed memory are indispensable towards an effective domain adaptation system. Results on three re-ID domains
show that our domain adaptation accuracy outperforms the
state of the art by a large margin. Code is available at:
https://github.com/zhunzhong07/ECN

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) [38, 41, 31, 14] is a
cross-camera image retrieval task, which aims to find
matched persons of a given query from the database. In
∗ Corresponding author (szlig@xmu.edu.cn).

This work was done when Zhun Zhong (zhunzhong007@gmail.com)
was a visiting student at University of Technology Sydney. Part of this
work was done when Yi Yang (yee.i.yang@gmail.com) was visiting Baidu
Research during his Professional Experience Program.

spite of the impressive achievement of supervised learning
in the re-ID community, learning a re-ID model that generalizes well on a target domain remains a challenge [7, 29].
Obtaining sufficient unlabeled data in the target domain is
relatively easy, and yet it is difficult to learn a deep re-ID
model without annotations. This work considers the problem of unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), where we
are provided with labeled source domain and unlabeled target domain. Our goal is to learn a discriminative representation for the target set.
In the traditional setting of UDA, most methods are developed under the closed-set scenario, assuming that the
source and target domains share entirely the same classes
[27, 10]. However, this assumption cannot be applied to
UDA in person re-ID, because the classes from the two domains are completely different. UDA in person re-ID is an
open set problem [3] which is more challenging than closedset one. During UDA in person re-ID, it is improper to directly align the distributions of the source and target domains as in existing closed-set UDA methods. Instead, we
should learn to well separate the unseen classes from the
target domain.
Recent advanced methods address the UDA problem
in person re-ID mostly by reducing the gap between the
source and target domains on the image-level [7, 30, 1] or
the attribute feature-level [29, 16]. These methods only
consider the overall inter-domain variations between the
source and target domains, but ignore the intra-domain variations of the target domain. In fact, the target variations
are critically influencing factors for person re-ID. In this
study, we explicitly take into account the intra-domain variations of target domain and investigate three underlying invariances, i.e., exemplar-invariance, camera-invariance, and
neighborhood-invariance, as described below.
First, given a deep re-ID model trained on a labeled set,
we observe that the top-ranked retrieval results always are
more likely to be visually correlated to the query. A similar
phenomenon is observed in image classification [33]. This

598

