Unsupervised Deep Tracking
Ning Wang1 Yibing Song2∗ Chao Ma3 Wengang Zhou1 Wei Liu2∗ Houqiang Li1
1
CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Tencent AI Lab
3
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wn6149@mail.ustc.edu.cn, dynamicstevenson@gmail.com, chaoma@sjtu.edu.cn
zhwg@ustc.edu.cn, wl2223@columbia.edu, lihq@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose an unsupervised visual tracking method in
this paper. Different from existing approaches using extensive annotated data for supervised learning, our CNN
model is trained on large-scale unlabeled videos in an unsupervised manner. Our motivation is that a robust tracker
should be effective in both the forward and backward predictions (i.e., the tracker can forward localize the target object in successive frames and backtrace to its initial position
in the first frame). We build our framework on a Siamese
correlation filter network, which is trained using unlabeled
raw videos. Meanwhile, we propose a multiple-frame validation method and a cost-sensitive loss to facilitate unsupervised learning. Without bells and whistles, the proposed
unsupervised tracker achieves the baseline accuracy of fully
supervised trackers, which require complete and accurate
labels during training. Furthermore, unsupervised framework exhibits a potential in leveraging unlabeled or weakly
labeled data to further improve the tracking accuracy.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is a fundamental task in computer vision,
which aims to localize the target object in the video given
a bounding box annotation in the first frame. The stateof-the-art deep tracking methods [1, 46, 15, 55, 27, 60, 58,
54, 4, 19, 33, 34] typically use pretrained CNN models for
feature extraction. These models are trained in a supervised
manner, requiring a large quantity of annotated ground-truth
labels. Manual annotations are always expensive and timeconsuming, whereas extensive unlabeled videos are readily
available on the Internet. It deserves to investigate how to
exploit unlabeled video sequences for visual tracking.
∗ Y. Song and W. Liu are the corresponding authors. This work is done
when N. Wang is an intern in Tencent AI Lab. The source code and results
are available at https://github.com/594422814/UDT.

Supervised Training:

Unsupervised Training:

Forward tracking

Forward and Backward tracking

Annotated sequences

Unlabeled sequences

Figure 1. The comparison between supervised and unsupervised
learning. Visual tracking methods via supervised learning require
ground-truth labels for every frame of the training videos. By utilizing the forward tracking and backward verification, we train the
unsupervised tracker without heavyweight annotations.

In this paper, we propose to learn a visual tracking model
from scratch via unsupervised learning. Our intuition resides on the observation that visual tracking can be performed in both the forward and backward manners. Initially, given the target object annotated on the first frame, we
can track the target object forward in the subsequent frames.
When tracking backward, we use the predicted location in
the last frame as the initial target annotation and track it
backward towards the first frame. The estimated target location in the first frame via backward tracking is expected to
be identical with the initial annotation. After measuring the
difference between the forward and backward target trajectories, our network is trained in an unsupervised manner1 by
considering the trajectory consistency as shown in Fig. 1.
Through exploiting consecutive frames in unlabeled videos,
our model learns to locate targets by repeatedly performing
forward tracking and backward verification.
The proposed unsupervised learning scheme aims to
acquire a generic feature representation, while not being
1 In this paper, we do not distinguish between the term unsupervised and
self-supervised, as both refer to learning without ground-truth annotations.

1308

