Disentangled Representation Learning for 3D Face Shape
Zi-Hang Jiang, Qianyi Wu, Keyu Chen, Juyong Zhang∗
University of Science and Technology of China
{jzh0103, wqy9619, cky95}@mail.ustc.edu.cn juyong@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel strategy to design disentangled 3D face shape representation. Specifically, a
given 3D face shape is decomposed into identity part and
expression part, which are both encoded in a nonlinear
way. To solve this problem, we propose an attribute decomposition framework for 3D face mesh. To better represent face shapes which are usually nonlinear deformed between each other, the face shapes are represented by a vertex based deformation representation rather than Euclidean
coordinates. The experimental results demonstrate that our
method has better performance than existing methods on
decomposing the identity and expression parts. Moreover,
more natural expression transfer results can be achieved
with our method than existing methods.

1. Introduction
A 3D face model is comprised of several components
like identity, expression, appearance, pose, etc., and the
3D face shape is determined by identity and expression attributes [19]. Decoupling 3D face shape into these two components is an important problem in computer vision as it
could benefit many applications like face component transfer [42, 36], face animation [12, 35], avatar animation [21],
etc. The aim of this paper is to develop an attribute decomposition model for 3D face shape such that a given face
shape can be well represented by its identity and expression
part.
Some existing 3D face parametric models already represent face shapes by the identity and expression parameters. Blanz and Vetter proposed 3D Morphable Model
(3DMM) [4] to model face shapes. The most popular form
of 3DMM is a linear combination of identity and expression basis [2, 43]. FaceWareHouse [13] adopts the bilinear
model and constructs face shapes from a tensor with identity and expression weights. Recently, FLAME [25] utilizes
articulated model along attributes like the jaw, neck et al. to
∗ corresponding author

achieve the state-of-the-art result. A common characteristic of these linear and bilinear models is that each attribute
lies in individual linear space and their combination from
each attribute is also linear. Linear statistical models have
limitations like limited expression ability and disentanglement. This limitation comes from the linear formulation
itself [38, 31]. However, facial variations are nonlinear in
the real world, e.g., the variations in different facial expressions. Although some recent works [7, 6, 5, 27, 23] are
proposed to improve statistical models, they still construct
the 3D face shape by linearly combining the basis.
Inspired by rapid advances of deep learning techniques,
learning-based approaches have been proposed to embed
3D face shape into nonlinear parameter spaces, and the representation ability of these methods gets greatly improved,
e.g., being able to represent geometry details [3], or reconstructing whole face shapes using very few parameters [31].
However, all of these methods encode the entire face shape
into one vector in the latent space, and thus cannot distinguish the identity and expression separately. On the other
hand, many applications like animation [11], face retargeting [37, 35], and more challenging task like 3D face recognition [30, 26] need to decompose 3D face shape into identity and expression component.
In this paper, we aim to build a disentangled parametric
space for 3D face shape with powerful representation ability. Some classical linear methods [4, 13] have already decomposed expression and identity attributes, while they are
limited by the representation ability of linear models. Although deep learning based method is regarded as a potential enhancement way, how to design the learning method
is not straightforward e.g. the neural network structure and
the 3D face shape representation features for deep learning.
Besides, another challenging issue is that how to make use
of the identity and expression labels in the existing datasets
like FaceWareHouse [13] for the network training.
To restate the problem, assuming that the identity and
expression are separately encoded as vector zid and zexp ,
the linear model like 3DMM decodes the shape via a linear
transformation in the form S̄ + Aid zid + Aexp zexp , where S̄
is mean shape, Aid and Aexp are the identity and expression
111957

