Deep Reinforcement Learning of Volume-guided Progressive View Inpainting
for 3D Point Scene Completion from a Single Depth Image
1,3

Xiaoguang Han, 2,3 Zhaoxuan Zhang, 3,4 Dong Du, 1,3 Mingdai Yang, 5 Jingming Yu, 5 Pan Pan
2
Xin Yang, 4 Ligang Liu, 6 Zixiang Xiong, 1,3 Shuguang Cui
1

CUHK(Shenzhen), 2 DUT, 3 SRIBD, 4 USTC, 5 Alibaba Group, 6 TAMU

Abstract
We present a deep reinforcement learning method of progressive view inpainting for 3D point scene completion under volume guidance, achieving high-quality scene reconstruction from only a single depth image with severe occlusion. Our approach is end-to-end, consisting of three
modules: 3D scene volume reconstruction, 2D depth map
inpainting, and multi-view selection for completion. Given
a single depth image, our method first goes through the 3D
volume branch to obtain a volumetric scene reconstruction
as a guide to the next view inpainting step, which attempts
to make up the missing information; the third step involves
projecting the volume under the same view of the input, concatenating them to complete the current view depth, and integrating all depth into the point cloud. Since the occluded
areas are unavailable, we resort to a deep Q-Network to
glance around and pick the next best view for large hole
completion progressively until a scene is adequately reconstructed while guaranteeing validity. All steps are learned
jointly to achieve robust and consistent results. We perform
qualitative and quantitative evaluations with extensive experiments on the SUNCG data, obtaining better results than
the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Recovering missing information in occluded regions of a
3D scene from a single depth image is a very active research
area of late [36, 56, 12, 23, 9, 47]. This is due to its importance in robotics and vision tasks such as indoor navigation,
surveillance, and augmented reality. Although this problem
is mild in human vision system, it becomes severe in machine vision because of the sheer imbalance between input
and output information. One class of popular approaches
[32, 2, 13, 11] to this problem is based on classify-andsearch: pixels of the depth map are classified into several
semantic object regions, which are mapped to most simi-

(a) depth

(b) visible surface

(c) output: two views

Figure 1. Surface-generated Scene Completion. (a) A single-view
depth map as input; (b) Visible surface from the depth map, which
is represented as the point cloud. In our paper, the color of depth
and point cloud is for visualization only; (c) Our scene completion results: directly recovering the missing points of the occluded
regions. Here we choose two views for a better display.

lar 3D ones in a prepared dataset to construct a fully 3D
scene. Owing to the limited capacity of the database, results from classify-and-search are often far away from the
ground truth. By transforming the depth map into an incomplete point cloud, Song et al. [36] recently presented
the first end-to-end deep network to map it to a fully voxelized scene, while simultaneously outputting the class labels each voxel belongs to. The availability of volumetric
representations makes it possible to leverage 3D convolutional neural networks (3DCNN) to effectively capture the
global contextual information, however, starting with an incomplete point cloud results in loss of input information and
consequently low-resolution outputs. Several recent works
[23, 12, 9, 47] attempt to compensate the lost information
by extracting features from the 2D input domain in parallel

234

