Multi-person Articulated Tracking with Spatial and Temporal Embeddings
Sheng Jin1,2 Wentao Liu1 Wanli Ouyang3,4 Chen Qian 1
1
SenseTime Research 2 Tsinghua University 3 The University of Sydney
4
SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
1

{jinsheng, qianchen}@sensetime.com, liuwtwinter@gmail.com

3

wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
We propose a unified framework for multi-person pose
estimation and tracking. Our framework consists of two
main components, i.e. SpatialNet and TemporalNet. The
SpatialNet accomplishes body part detection and part-level
data association in a single frame, while the TemporalNet
groups human instances in consecutive frames into trajectories. Specifically, besides body part detection heatmaps,
SpatialNet also predicts the Keypoint Embedding (KE) and
Spatial Instance Embedding (SIE) for body part association. We model the grouping procedure into a differentiable Pose-Guided Grouping (PGG) module to make the
whole part detection and grouping pipeline fully end-toend trainable. TemporalNet extends the spatial grouping of keypoints to temporal grouping of human instances.
Given human proposals from two consecutive frames, TemporalNet exploits both appearance features encoded in Human Embedding (HE) and temporally consistent geometric features embodied in Temporal Instance Embedding
(TIE) for robust tracking. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed model. Remarkably,
we demonstrate substantial improvements over the state-ofthe-art pose tracking method from 65.4% to 71.8% MultiObject Tracking Accuracy (MOTA) on the ICCV’17 PoseTrack Dataset.

(a)
KE

SIE

KE

SIE

HE

TIE

HE

TIE

Image

Mask

KE

KE+PGG

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Pose estimation with KE or SIE. SIE may oversegment a single pose into several parts (column 2), while KE may
erroneously group far-away body parts together (column 3). (b)
Pose tracking with HE or TIE. Poses are color-coded by predicted
track ids and errors are highlighted by eclipses. TIE is not robust
to camera zooming and movement (column 2), while HE is not robust to human pose changes (column 3). (c) Effect of PGG module. Comparing KE before/after PGG (column 3/4), PGG makes
embeddings more compact and accurate, where pixels with similar
color have a higher confidence of belonging to the same person.

1. Introduction
Multi-person articulated tracking aims at predicting the
body parts of each person and associating them across temporal periods. It has stimulated much research interest because of its importance in various applications such as video
understanding and action recognition [5]. In recent years,
significant progress has been made in single frame human
pose estimation [3, 9, 12, 25]. However, multi-person articulated tracking in complex videos remains challenging.
Videos may contain a varying number of interacting people
with frequent body part occlusion, fast body motion, large
pose changes, and scale variation. Camera movement and

zooming further pose challenges to this problem.
Pose tracking [14] can be viewed as a hierarchical detection and grouping problem. At the part level, body parts
are detected and grouped spatially into human instances in
every single frame. At the human level, the detected human
instances are grouped temporally into trajectories.
Embedding can be viewed as a kind of permutationinvariant instance label to distinguish different instances.
Body parts with similar embeddings have the higher
possibility of belonging to the same person. Previous
works [21] perform keypoint grouping with Keypoint Em15664

