Putting Humans in a Scene: Learning Affordance in 3D Indoor Environments
Xueting Li∗1 , Sifei Liu2 , Kihwan Kim2 , Xiaolong Wang3 , Ming-Hsuan Yang1,4 , and Jan Kautz2
1

University of California, Merced, 2 NVIDIA, 3 Carnegie Mellon University, 4 Google Cloud

fully-automatic 3D pose synthesizer

Abstract

semantic knowledge

geometry knowledge

1

Affordance modeling plays an important role in visual
understanding. In this paper, we aim to predict affordances
of 3D indoor scenes, specifically what human poses are afforded by a given indoor environment, such as sitting on
a chair or standing on the floor. In order to predict valid
affordances and learn possible 3D human poses in indoor
scenes, we need to understand the semantic and geometric
structure of a scene as well as its potential interactions with
a human. To learn such a model, a large-scale dataset of
3D indoor affordances is required. In this work, we build
a fully automatic 3D pose synthesizer that fuses semantic knowledge from a large number of 2D poses extracted
from TV shows as well as 3D geometric knowledge from
voxel representations of indoor scenes. With the data created by the synthesizer, we introduce a 3D pose generative
model to predict semantically plausible and physically feasible human poses within a given scene (provided as a single RGB, RGB-D, or depth image). We demonstrate that our
human affordance prediction method consistently outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods. The project website can be found at https://sites.google.com/
view/3d-affordance-cvpr19.

1. Introduction
There is a long history of studies on functional reasoning of objects and scenes. Instead of focusing on the semantics of objects and scenes, Gibson proposes the idea of
affordances [5], which can be seen as the “opportunities for
interactions” with the environment.
To infer the affordances of objects and scenes, researchers have studied the explicit modeling of physical interactions and contacts between human and the 3D scene
through simulations [35, 23, 7]. For example, Zhu et al. [35]
explicitly model sitting styles by inferring the forces and
∗ Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
1 Affordances are opportunities for interactions in a scene or environment. It represents what interactions an environment could provide for
humans, e.g., a chair provides the opportunity to sit.

pose synthesizer

…
data-driven 3D pose prediction model
where

what

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed method. Our method contains two stages. First, we propose a fully-automatic 3D pose synthesizer, which can synthesize an infinite number of 3D poses for
indoor scenes (see Sec. 3). We illustrate synthesized pose samples in the light blue box. Second, we learn an end-to-end 3D
affordance prediction model by jointly learning the distribution of
locations and 3D poses (see Sec. 4). We show generated poses in
the light orange box. Zoom-in to see details.

pressures from the interaction between humans and objects
in a scene. However, explicit modeling suffers from the
problem of generalization for other types of poses. To tackle
the problem of generalization, researchers have proposed to
directly infer affordances in a data-driven manner [4, 3, 27].
Specifically, Wang et al. [27] design a method to collect
human-scene interactions by processing video frames of
various TV shows and train CNNs for affordance reasoning. Though the method is able to generate semantically
plausible human poses aligned with scene images, it is not
able to follow the geometry of the 3D world and often produces results violating physics (e.g., first row in Fig. 7) due
to a lack of 3D geometric information of the scenes (as the
data consists only of video frames and 2D poses).
112368

