GS3D: An Efficient 3D Object Detection Framework for Autonomous Driving
Buyu Li1 Wanli Ouyang3 Lu Sheng1,4 Xingyu Zeng2 Xiaogang Wang1
1
CHUK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Research 3 The University of Sydney 4 Beihang University
{byli, lsheng, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au, zengxingyu@sensetime.com

Abstract
We present an efficient 3D object detection framework
based on a single RGB image in the scenario of autonomous
driving. Our efforts are put on extracting the underlying
3D information in a 2D image and determining the accurate 3D bounding box of the object without point cloud or
stereo data. Leveraging the off-the-shelf 2D object detector,
we propose an artful approach to efficiently obtain a coarse
cuboid for each predicted 2D box. The coarse cuboid has
enough accuracy to guide us to determine the 3D box of
the object by refinement. In contrast to previous state-ofthe-art methods that only use the features extracted from
the 2D bounding box for box refinement, we explore the 3D
structure information of the object by employing the visual
features of visible surfaces. The new features from surfaces
are utilized to eliminate the problem of representation ambiguity brought by only using a 2D bounding box. Moreover, we investigate different methods of 3D box refinement
and discover that a classification formulation with quality
aware loss has much better performance than regression.
Evaluated on the KITTI benchmark, our approach outperforms current state-of-the-art methods for single RGB image based 3D object detection.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is one of the key components of autonomous driving. It has drawn increasing attention in the
recent computer vision community. With 3D LIDAR laser
scanners, discrete 3D location data of objects in the form
of point cloud can be fetched, but the equipment is quite
expensive. On the contrary, on-board color cameras are
cheaper and more flexible for most vehicles, whereas they
can only provide 2D photos. Thus 3D object detection with
a single RGB camera becomes important as well as challenging for economical autonomous driving systems. This
paper focuses on detecting complete 3D object content using only monocular RGB image.
This paper proposes an efficient framework based on

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. The key idea of our method: (a) We first predict reliable
2D box and its observation orientation. (b) Based on the predicted
2D information, we utilize artful techniques to efficiently determine a basic cuboid for the corresponding object, called guidance.
(c) Features extracted from the visible surfaces of projected guidance as well as the tight 2D bounding box of it will be utilized
by our model to perform accurate refinement with classification
formulation and quality-aware loss.

3D guidance and using the surface feature for refinement
(GS3D) to detect complete 3D object content using only
monocular RGB image.
Typical single image 3D detection methods, e.g.
Mono3d [2], adopt the framework of traditional 2D detection, where exhaustive sliding windows in 3D space are utilized as proposals and the task is to select those covering
the objects well. The problem is that the 3D space is much
larger than the 2D space, which costs much more computation and is not necessary.
Our first observation is that a 3D coarse structure can be
recovered from 2D detection and prior knowledge on the
scene. Since state-of-the-art 2D object detection methods
can provide 2D bounding boxes with quite a high accuracy, proper utilization of them can significantly reduce the
search space, which is already applied in several point cloud
based methods [20, 12]. Furthermore, with prior knowledge
of the auto-driving scenario (e.g. the projection matrix), we
can even obtain an approximate 3D bounding box (cuboid)
for the object in the 2D box despite the lack of point cloud.
Inspired by this, we design an algorithm to efficiently determine a basic cuboid for the predicted object by a 2D detector. Although coarse, the basic cuboid has acceptable
accuracy and can guide us to determine the 3D setting, size
(height, width, length) and orientation of the object. Thus
the basic coarse cuboid is called Guidance by us.

1019

