Image-to-Image Translation via Group-wise Deep Whitening-and-Coloring
Transformation
Wonwoong Cho1
1

Sungha Choi1,2

Korea University

David Keetae Park1
2

LG Electronics

Abstract
Recently, unsupervised exemplar-based image-to-image
translation, conditioned on a given exemplar without the
paired data, has accomplished substantial advancements.
In order to transfer the information from an exemplar to
an input image, existing methods often use a normalization technique, e.g., adaptive instance normalization, that
controls the channel-wise statistics of an input activation
map at a particular layer, such as the mean and the variance. Meanwhile, style transfer approaches similar task to
image translation by nature, demonstrated superior performance by using the higher-order statistics such as covariance among channels in representing a style. In detail, it works via whitening (given a zero-mean input feature, transforming its covariance matrix into the identity).
followed by coloring (changing the covariance matrix of
the whitened feature to those of the style feature). However, applying this approach in image translation is computationally intensive and error-prone due to the expensive
time complexity and its non-trivial backpropagation. In response, this paper proposes an end-to-end approach tailored for image translation that efficiently approximates this
transformation with our novel regularization methods. We
further extend our approach to a group-wise form for memory and time efficiency as well as image quality. Extensive
qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate that
our proposed method is fast, both in training and inference,
and highly effective in reflecting the style of an exemplar.

1. Introduction
Since the introduction of image-to-image translation [16], in short, image translation, it has gained
significant attention from relevant fields and constantly
evolved propelled by the seminal generative adversarial networks [10]. The primary goal of image translation [16, 35]
is to convert particular attributes of an input image in an
original domain to a target one, while maintaining other semantics. Early models for image translation required train-

Inkyu Shin3
3

Jaegul Choo1

Hanyang University

ing data as paired images of an input and its corresponding output images, allowing a direct supervision. CycleGAN [35] successfully extends it toward unsupervised image translation [25, 2, 4, 35] by proposing the cycle consistency loss, which allows the model to learn the distinctive
semantic difference between the collections of two image
domains and translate the corresponding style without a direct pair-wise supervision.
Nonetheless, CycleGAN is still unimodal in that it can
only generate a single output for a single input. Instead,
image translation should be capable of generating multiple possible outputs even for a single given input, e.g., numerous possible gender-translated outputs of a single facial image. Subsequently, two notable methods, DRIT [20]
and MUNIT [14], have been proposed to address the multimodal nature of unsupervised image translation. They
demonstrate that a slew of potential outputs could be generated given a single input image, based on either a random
sampling process in the midst of translation or utilizing an
additional, exemplar image for a detailed guidance toward
a desired style.
They both have two separate encoders corresponding to
the content image (an input) and style image (an exemplar),
and combine the content feature and style feature together
to produce the final output. DRIT concatenates the encoded
content and style feature vectors, while MUNIT exploits the
adaptive instance normalization (AdaIN), a method first introduced in the context of style transfer. AdaIN matches two
channel-wise statistics, the mean and variance, of the encoded content feature with the style feature, which is proven
to perform well in image translation.
However, we hypothesize that matching only these two
statistics may not reflect the target style well enough, ending
up with the sub-optimal quality of image outputs on numerous occasions, as we confirm through our experiments in
Section 4. That is, the interaction effects among variables,
represented as the Gram matrix [8] or the covariance matrix [22], can convey critical information of the style, which
is agreed by extensive studies [8, 7, 22]. In response, to fully
utilize the style information of an exemplar, we propose a

10639

