Learning to Adapt for Stereo
Alessio Tonioni∗1 , Oscar Rahnama†2,4 , Thomas Joy†2 , Luigi Di Stefano1 , Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan∗3 ,
and Philip H. S. Torr2
1

University of Bologna

2

Abstract
Real world applications of stereo depth estimation require models that are robust to dynamic variations in the
environment. Even though deep learning based stereo methods are successful, they often fail to generalize to unseen
variations in the environment, making them less suitable for
practical applications such as autonomous driving. In this
work, we introduce a “learning-to-adapt” framework that
enables deep stereo methods to continuously adapt to new
target domains in an unsupervised manner. Specifically,
our approach incorporates the adaptation procedure into
the learning objective to obtain a base set of parameters
that are better suited for unsupervised online adaptation.
To further improve the quality of the adaptation, we learn
a confidence measure that effectively masks the errors introduced during the unsupervised adaptation. We evaluate
our method on synthetic and real-world stereo datasets and
our experiments evidence that learning-to-adapt is, indeed
beneficial for online adaptation on vastly different domains.

1. Introduction
Stereo correspondence estimation is one of the standard
methods for predicting the depth of a scene. State-of-theart algorithms treat stereo as a supervised learning problem
and employ deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
to directly predict the disparity values [15]. However, the
inability of deep stereo methods to generalize to new domains [21, 29] presents a serious problem in applications
where stereo vision is most useful. Consider an autonomous
car driving along the twisting turns, endless meanders and
through the frequent tunnels around Lake Como. With few
or ineffective barriers offering safety from the shear cliffs, it
is imperative that the autonomous car performs flawlessly.
Moreover, when passing through frequent tunnels where the
∗ Work done while at University of Oxford.
† Second two authors contributed equally.

3

University of Oxford

Australian National University

4

FiveAI

lighting conditions change dramatically, a learned stereo
system might fail to perform in the expected manner, potentially leading to fatal consequences.
Fine tuning a learned model on the target environment
may help to achieve good performance. However, acquiring real dense ground truth data for stereo is extremely
challenging, even with expensive equipment and human effort [17]. Moreover, considering the above example, one
cannot expect to collect ground truth data for all possible
seasons, times of the day, weather conditions, etc. To address this issue, we propose to investigate the use of synthetic data to learn a model offline, which, when deployed,
can quickly adapt to any unseen target domain online in an
unsupervised manner, eliminating the need for expensive
data collection.
We formulate this learning-to-adapt problem using a
meta-learning scheme for continuous adaptation. Specifically, we rely on a model agnostic meta-learning framework [5] due to its theoretical foundation [6], ease of use,
and its successful application on various domains [5, 3, 1].
Our goal is to learn a model offline using synthetic data,
which can continuously adapt to unseen real video sequences in an unsupervised manner at test time. This means
our model is always in training mode and its parameters
are automatically tuned to the current environment online
without the need for supervision. Such an online adaptation scenario has been considered previously in the literature [30, 34]. However, in this work, we explicitly learn-toadapt which allows us to achieve superior performance.
Our meta-learning approach directly incorporates the online adaptation step into the learning objective, thus allowing us to obtain a base set of weights that are better suited
for unsupervised online adaptation. However, since the
adaptation is performed in an unsupervised manner (e.g.,
based on re-projection loss [7, 10]), it is inherently noisy,
causing an adverse effect on the overall algorithm. To alleviate this deficiency, we learn a confidence measure on
the unsupervised loss and use the confidence weighted loss
to update the network parameters. This effectively masks
19661

