Pay attention! - Robustifying a Deep Visuomotor Policy through
Task-Focused Visual Attention
Pooya Abolghasemi ∗, Amir Mazaheri ∗, Mubarak Shah and Ladislau Bölöni
University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816
pooya.abolghasemi, amirmazaheri@knights.ucf.edu, shah@crcv.ucf.edu, lboloni@cs.ucf.edu
https://pouyaab.github.io/pay-attention/

Abstract

1. Introduction
Many recent researches show the possibility of end-toend training of deep visuomotor policies that perform object manipulation tasks such as pick-and-place, push-tolocation, stacking and pouring. These systems perform all
the components of the task (vision processing, grasp and
∗ Equal Contribution.

Motor Network
generating the
robot commands

Joint
Command a

Robot Moves
(Updates the State)

Task Spec g

tF
ra
ex

“Pick up
the box”

m

e

Visual
observation o

Primary latent
Encoding
z=z(o, g)

Physical

Visual Network
generating the
Task-Focused
Attention

N

Several recent studies have demonstrated the promise
of deep visuomotor policies for robot manipulator control.
Despite impressive progress, these systems are known to be
vulnerable to physical disturbances, such as accidental or
adversarial bumps that make them drop the manipulated object. They also tend to be distracted by visual disturbances
such as objects moving in the robot’s field of view, even if the
disturbance does not physically prevent the execution of the
task. In this paper, we propose an approach for augmenting
a deep visuomotor policy trained through demonstrations
with Task Focused visual Attention (TFA). The manipulation task is specified with a natural language text such as
“move the red bowl to the left”. This allows the visual attention component to concentrate on the current object that
the robot needs to manipulate. We show that even in benign
environments, the TFA allows the policy to consistently outperform a variant with no attention mechanism. More importantly, the new policy is significantly more robust: it regularly recovers from severe physical disturbances (such as
bumps causing it to drop the object) from which the baseline
policy, i.e. with no visual attention, almost never recovers.
In addition, we show that the proposed policy performs correctly in the presence of a wide class of visual disturbances,
exhibiting a behavior reminiscent of human selective visual
attention experiments.

Visual/Physical
Disturbance

RGB Camera

Visual

Figure 1. The robot performs a given command. Our proposed network attends the image regions that matter the most, and is robust
to physical and visual disturbance.

trajectory planning and robot control) using a neural network trained by variations of deep reinforcement learning
and learning from demonstration (supervised learning).
Deep visuomotor policies for manipulator control are
neural network architectures that have as input an observation composed of an image or video frame and possibly
other sensor data, ot , a task (or goal) specification, g, and
output robot commands, at = π(ot , g). The robot executes
these commands, enacting a change in the external environment, which creates a new observation ot+1 , and the cycle
repeats. Architecturally, most currently proposed systems
follow variations of the generic model of Figure 1, which
posits the existence of a primary latent encoding, z, the result of the visual processing of the input by a specialized
visual network. This encoding, of dimensionality orders
of magnitude smaller than the input, is then used by the
motor network to generate the next state joint angles command, a. While most demonstrations (supervised data) had
been made in unstructured but relatively benign environ14254

