Event Cameras, Contrast Maximization and Reward Functions: an Analysis
Timo Stoffregen1,2 , Lindsay Kleeman1
1

Dept. Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering, Monash University, Australia.
2
Australian Centre of Excellence for Robotic Vision, Australia.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Event cameras, also known as Dynamic Vision Sensors
or Neuromorphic Cameras [1], have presented vision and
robotics researchers with a new class of visual information.
Where traditional frame-based cameras sample the scene at
a fixed rate, event cameras capture visual information asynchronously, corresponding to intensity changes at each pixel
location. As the intensity at a pixel changes above a certain threshold, an event is generated as a tuple of x, y position, timestamp t and intensity change sign s. Event based
cameras offer several advantages over traditional cameras
in terms of low latency, high dynamic range (120 dB) and
low power consumption (10 mW) [2].
Event data is inherently sparse, because static backgrounds or otherwise slowly changing elements in the scene
don’t generate events. Since conventional cameras sample
the scene based on a fixed clock, they under-sample swiftly

(a) Event camera moves
around a scene.

(b) Events (red) generated
by intensity gradients in the
scene (black).

50
Reward

vy [pixels/second]

Event cameras asynchronously report timestamped
changes in pixel intensity and offer advantages over conventional raster scan cameras in terms of low-latency, low redundancy sensing and high dynamic range. In recent years,
much of research in event based vision has been focused on
performing tasks such as optic flow estimation, moving object segmentation, feature tracking, camera rotation estimation and more, through contrast maximization. In contrast
maximization, events are warped along motion trajectories
whose parameters depend on the quantity being estimated,
to some time tref . The parameters are then scored by some
reward function of the accumulated events at tref . The versatility of this approach has lead to a flurry of research in
recent years, but no in-depth study of the reward chosen
during optimization has yet been made. In this work we examine the choice of reward used in contrast maximization,
propose a classification of different rewards and show how
a reward can be constructed that is more robust to noise and
aperture uncertainty. We validate our work experimentally
by predicting optical flow and comparing to ground-truth.

0

50

50

0

50

vx [pixels/second]

(c) Plot of reward vs optical flow estimate. Red dotted lines = ground truth, black
circle = estimate.

(d) Motion-compensating the
events reveals the original
gradients.

Figure 1: Contrast Maximization: Events generated by
scene or camera motion (1a) form a point cloud in a spacetime volume (1b). If the events are motion-compensated
by some trajectory, the contrast at that point can be evaluated by some reward. Since the resulting reward has gradients with respect to trajectory parameters (1c), the original
trajectory can be estimated, giving optic flow and motioncorrection (1d) in one step.

changing scenes or redundantly over-sample slowly changing scenes. In contrast, an event camera samples the scene
at a rate proportional to the dynamics of the scene.
Events carry little information individually and so are not
meaningfully treated in isolation. So far, event based algorithms have been in one of two categories: those which operate on individual events to update some previous state and
those which operate on a set of events to perform a given
task or estimate a particular quantity [3]. Those methods
which operate on individual events typically require historic
112300

