Photon-Flooded Single-Photon 3D Cameras
Anant Gupta

Atul Ingle Andreas Velten Mohit Gupta

{agupta225,ingle,velten,mgupta37}@wisc.edu

University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) are starting to
play a pivotal role in the development of photon-efficient,
long-range LiDAR systems. However, due to non-linearities
in their image formation model, a high photon flux (e.g., due
to strong sunlight) leads to distortion of the incident temporal waveform, and potentially, large depth errors. Operating SPADs in low flux regimes can mitigate these distortions, but, often requires attenuating the signal and thus, results in low signal-to-noise ratio. In this paper, we address
the following basic question: what is the optimal photon
flux that a SPAD-based LiDAR should be operated in? We
derive a closed form expression for the optimal flux, which
is quasi-depth-invariant, and depends on the ambient light
strength. The optimal flux is lower than what a SPAD typically measures in real world scenarios, but surprisingly,
considerably higher than what is conventionally suggested
for avoiding distortions. We propose a simple, adaptive approach for achieving the optimal flux by attenuating incident flux based on an estimate of ambient light strength.
Using extensive simulations and a hardware prototype, we
show that the optimal flux criterion holds for several depth
estimators, under a wide range of illumination conditions.

1. Introduction
Single-photon avalanche diodes (SPAD) are increasingly
being used in active vision applications such as fluorescence lifetime-imaging microscopy (FLIM) [33], non-lineof-sight (NLOS) imaging [24], and transient imaging [23].
Due to their extreme sensitivity and timing resolution, these
sensors can play an enabling role in demanding imaging
scenarios, for instance, long-range LiDAR [6] for automotive applications [20], with only limited power budgets [25].
A SPAD-based LiDAR (Fig. 1) typically consists of a
laser which sends out periodic light pulses. The SPAD
detects the first incident photon in each laser period, after
which it enters a dead time, during which it cannot detect
any further photons. The first photon detections in each period are then used to create a histogram (over several periods) of the time-of-arrival of the photons. If the incident
flux level is sufficiently low, the histogram is approximately
† This research was supported in part by ONR grants N00014-15-12652 and N00014-16-1-2995 and DARPA grant HR0011-16-C-0025.

Figure 1. Pile-up in SPAD-based pulsed LiDAR. A pulsed
LiDAR consists of a light source that illuminates scene points with
periodic short pulses. A SPAD sensor records the arrival times of
returning photons with respect to the most recent light pulse, and
uses those to build a timing histogram. In low ambient light, the
histogram is the same shape as the temporal waveform received at
the SPAD, and can be used for accurate depth estimation. However, in high ambient light, the histogram is distorted due to pileup, resulting in potentially large depth errors.

a scaled version of the received temporal waveform, and
thus, can be used to estimate scene depths and reflectivity.
Although SPAD-based LiDARs hold considerable
promise due to their single-photon sensitivity and extremely
high timing (hence, depth) resolution, the peculiar histogram formation procedure causes severe non-linear distortions due to ambient light [12]. This is because of intriguing characteristics of SPADs under high incident flux:
the detection of a photon depends on the time of arrival of
previous photons. This leads to non-linearities in the image
formation model; the measured histogram gets skewed towards earlier time bins, as illustrated in Figs. 1 and 21 . This
distortion, also called “pile-up” [12], becomes increasingly
severe as the amount of ambient light increases, and can
lead to large depth errors. This can severely limit the performance of SPAD-based LiDAR in outdoor conditions, for
example, imagine a power-constrained automotive LiDAR
operating on a bright sunny day [20].
One way to mitigate these distortions is to attenuate
the incident flux sufficiently so that the image formation
model becomes approximately linear [26, 13]. However,
1 In contrast, for a conventional, linear-mode LiDAR pixel, the detection of a photon is independent of previous photons (except past saturation). Therefore, ambient light adds a constant value to the entire waveform.

6770

