Self-supervised Spatio-temporal Representation Learning for Videos
by Predicting Motion and Appearance Statistics
Jiangliu Wang1† Jianbo Jiao2† Linchao Bao3∗ Shengfeng He4 Yunhui Liu1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 University of Oxford
3
Tencent AI Lab 4 South China University of Technology

Abstract
1
We address the problem of video representation learning
without human-annotated labels. While previous efforts address the problem by designing novel self-supervised tasks
using video data, the learned features are merely on a
frame-by-frame basis, which are not applicable to many
video analytic tasks where spatio-temporal features are prevailing. In this paper we propose a novel self-supervised
approach to learn spatio-temporal features for video representation. Inspired by the success of two-stream approaches
in video classification, we propose to learn visual features
by regressing both motion and appearance statistics along
spatial and temporal dimensions, given only the input video
data. Specifically, we extract statistical concepts (fastmotion region and the corresponding dominant direction,
spatio-temporal color diversity, dominant color, etc.) from
simple patterns in both spatial and temporal domains. Unlike prior puzzles that are even hard for humans to solve,
the proposed approach is consistent with human inherent
visual habits and therefore easy to answer. We conduct extensive experiments with C3D to validate the effectiveness
of our proposed approach. The experiments show that our
approach can significantly improve the performance of C3D
when applied to video classification tasks. Code is available
at https://github.com/laura-wang/video repres mas.

1. Introduction
Learning powerful spatio-temporal representations is the
most fundamental deep learning problem for many video
understanding tasks such as action recognition [4, 17, 26],
action proposal and localization [5, 33, 34], video captioning [40, 42], etc. Great progresses have been made by training expressive networks with massive human-annotated
video data [37, 38]. However, annotating video data is very
laborious and expensive, which makes the learning from un† Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
∗ Corresponding authors.

4
7

2
5
8

Wei Liu3∗

3
6
9
Motion

(5, )

Appear.

(2, Blue)

Appear.

(4, Green)

Figure 1. The main idea of the proposed approach. Given a
video sequence, we design a novel task to predict several numerical labels derived from motion and appearance statistics for
spatio-temporal representation learning, in a self-supervised manner. Each video frame is first divided into several spatial regions
using different partitioning patterns like the grid shown above.
Then the derived statistical labels, such as the region with the
largest motion and its direction (the red patch), the most diverged
region in appearance and its dominant color (the yellow patch),
and the most stable region in appearance and its dominant color
(the blue patch), are employed as supervision during the learning.

labeled video data important and interesting.
Recently, several approaches [27, 11, 24, 12] have
emerged to learn transferable representations for video
recognition tasks with unlabeled video data. In these approaches, a CNN is first pre-trained on unlabeled video data
using novel self-supervised tasks, where supervision signals can be easily derived from input data without human
labors, such as solving puzzles with perturbed video frame
orders [27, 11, 24] or predicting flow fields or disparity
maps obtained with other computational approaches [12].
Then the learned representations can be directly applied to
other video tasks as features, or be employed as initialization during succeeding supervised learning. Unfortunately,
although these work demonstrated the effectiveness of selfsupervised representation learning with unlabeled videos,
their approaches are only applicable to a CNN that accepts
one or two frames as inputs, which is not a recommended
way for tackling video tasks. In most video understanding
tasks, spatio-temporal features that can capture information
of both appearances and motions are proved to be vital in
many recent studies [2, 35, 37, 4, 38].
In order to extract spatio-temporal features, a network ar-

4006

