SDC – Stacked Dilated Convolution:
A Unified Descriptor Network for Dense Matching Tasks
René Schuster1
Oliver Wasenmüller1
Christian Unger2
1
DFKI - German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence

Didier Stricker1
BMW Group

2

CPM [19]

Dense pixel matching is important for many computer vision tasks such as disparity and flow estimation. We present
a robust, unified descriptor network that considers a large
context region with high spatial variance. Our network has
a very large receptive field and avoids striding layers to
maintain spatial resolution. These properties are achieved
by creating a novel neural network layer that consists of
multiple, parallel, stacked dilated convolutions (SDC). Several of these layers are combined to form our SDC descriptor network. In our experiments, we show that our SDC
features outperform state-of-the-art feature descriptors in
terms of accuracy and robustness. In addition, we demonstrate the superior performance of SDC in state-of-the-art
stereo matching, optical flow and scene flow algorithms on
several famous public benchmarks.

SFF [33]

Abstract

ELAS [12]

firstname.lastname@{bmw,dfki}.de

Original Results

1. Introduction
Applications for driver assistance, robot navigation, autonomous vehicles, and others require a detailed and accurate perception of the environment. Many of these high
level computer vision tasks are based on finding pixel-wise
correspondences across different images (e.g. optical flow
or stereo, see Figure 1). Robust dense matching of pixel positions under unconstrained conditions typically is a very
challenging task for several reasons. Perspective deformations, changing lighting conditions, sensor noise, occlusions, and other effects can change the appearance of corresponding image points drastically. Thus, heuristic descriptors (e.g. SIFT [24] or CENSUS [42]) can produce very dissimilar descriptors for corresponding image points. A key
factor to overcome these issues is the size of context information that is considered by a descriptor. However, increasing the patch size introduces spatial invariance for stateof-the-art descriptors which results in less accurate matching. Recently, deep neural networks were shown to produce
more robust and expressive features. These networks rely

Improved with SDC

Figure 1: Our new SDC feature descriptor improves pixelwise matching in terms of accuracy and density in state-ofthe-art algorithms. From top to bottom: Disparity map for
ELAS [12] on ETH3D [30], optical flow for CPM [19] on
Sintel [6], and scene flow (disparity and optical flow components) for SFF [33] on KITTI [26].
on best practice design decisions from other domains which
results in the use of pooling or other striding layers. Such architectures typically achieve a medium sized receptive field
only and reduce the spatial resolution of the resulting feature descriptor. Both properties lower the accuracy of the
matching task.
In this paper, we present a deep neural network with a
large receptive field that utilizes a novel architecture block
to compute highly robust, accurate, dense, and discriminative descriptors for images. To this end, we stack parallel dilated convolutions (SDC). Our design follows two key
observations. First, image patches with low entropy lead
to poor descriptors and thus to incorrect matching. This

2556

