Unsupervised Deep Epipolar Flow for Stationary or Dynamic Scenes
Yiran Zhong1,4,5 , Pan Ji2 , Jianyuan Wang1,3 , Yuchao Dai3 , Hongdong Li1,4
1
Australian National University, 2 NEC Labs America,
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University, 4 ACRV, 5 Data61 CSIRO
{yiran.zhong, hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au, panji@nec-labs.com, daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised deep learning for optical flow computation has achieved promising results. Most existing deep-net
based methods rely on image brightness consistency and local smoothness constraint to train the networks. Their performance degrades at regions where repetitive textures or
occlusions occur. In this paper, we propose Deep Epipolar Flow, an unsupervised optical flow method which incorporates global geometric constraints into network learning. In particular, we investigate multiple ways of enforcing the epipolar constraint in flow estimation. To alleviate a “chicken-and-egg” type of problem encountered in
dynamic scenes where multiple motions may be present,
we propose a low-rank constraint as well as a union-ofsubspaces constraint for training. Experimental results
on various benchmarking datasets show that our method
achieves competitive performance compared with supervised methods and outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised deep-learning methods.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation is a fundamental problem in
computer vision with many applications. Since Horn and
Schunck’s seminal work [14], various methods have been
developed using variational optimization [2, 43, 5], energy
minimization [19, 24, 32, 40], or deep learning [7, 8, 25,
33]. In this paper, we particularly tackle the problem of unsupervised optical flow learning using deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). Compared to its supervised counterpart, unsupervised flow learning does not require groundtruth flow, which is often hard to obtain, as supervision and
can thus be applied in broader domains.
Recent research has been focused on transforming traditional domain knowledge of optical flow into deep learning,
in terms of either training loss formulation or network architecture design. For example, in view of brightness consistency between two consecutive images, a constraint that
has been commonly used in conventional optical flow meth-

ods, researchers have formulated photometric loss [42, 31],
with the help of fully differentiable image warping [15], to
train deep neural networks. Other common techniques including image pyramid [4] (to handle large flow displacements), total variation regularization [30, 37] and occlusion
handling [1] have also led to either new network structures
(e.g., pyramid networks [25, 33]) or losses (e.g., smoothness
loss and occlusion mask [35, 16]). In the unsupervised setting, existing methods mainly rely on the photometric loss
and flow smoothness loss to train deep CNNs. This, however, poses challenges for the neural networks to learn optical flow accurately in regions with repetitive textures and
occlusions. Although some methods [35, 16] jointly learn
occlusion masks, these masks do not mean to provide more
constraints but only to remove the outliers in the losses. In
light of the difficulties of learning accurate flow in these regions, we propose to incorporate global epipolar constraints
into flow network training in this paper.
Leveraging epipolar geometry in flow learning, however,
is not a trivial task. An inaccurate or wrong estimate of
fundamental matrices [13] would mislead the flow network
training in a holistic way, and thus significantly degrade the
model prediction accuracy. This is especially true when a
scene contains multiple independent moving objects as one
fundamental matrix can only describe the epipolar geometry of one rigid motion. Instead of posing a hard epipolar constraint, in this paper, we propose to use soft epipolar constraints that are derived using low-rankness when the
scene is stationary, and union of subspaces structure when
the scene is motion agnostic. We thus formulate corresponding losses to train our flow networks unsupervisedly.
Our work makes an attempt towards incorporating epipolar geometry into deep unsupervised optical flow computation. Through extensive evaluations on standard datasets,
we show that our method achieves competitive performance
compared with supervised methods, and outperforms existing unsupervised methods by a clear margin. Specifically,
as of the date of paper submission, on KITTI and MPI Sintel benchmarks, our method achieves the best performance
among published deep unsupervised optical flow methods.

12095

