Jumping Manifolds: Geometry Aware Dense Non-Rigid Structure from Motion
Suryansh Kumar
Australian National University, CECS, Canberra, ACT, 2601
suryansh.kumar@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Given dense image feature correspondences of a nonrigidly moving object across multiple frames, this paper
proposes an algorithm to estimate its 3D shape for each
frame. To solve this problem accurately, the recent state-ofthe-art algorithm reduces this task to set of local linear subspace reconstruction and clustering problem using Grassmann manifold representation [34]. Unfortunately, their
method missed on some of the critical issues associated with
the modeling of surface deformations, for e.g., the dependence of a local surface deformation on its neighbors. Furthermore, their representation to group high dimensional
data points inevitably introduce the drawbacks of categorizing samples on the high-dimensional Grassmann manifold
[32, 31]. Hence, to deal with such limitations with [34],
we propose an algorithm that jointly exploits the benefit of
high-dimensional Grassmann manifold to perform reconstruction, and its equivalent lower-dimensional representation to infer suitable clusters. To accomplish this, we project
each Grassmannians onto a lower-dimensional Grassmann
manifold which preserves and respects the deformation of
the structure w.r.t its neighbors. These Grassmann points in
the lower-dimension then act as a representative for the selection of high-dimensional Grassmann samples to perform
each local reconstruction. In practice, our algorithm provides a geometrically efficient way to solve dense NRSfM
by switching between manifolds based on its benefit and usage. Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm
is very effective in handling noise with reconstruction accuracy as good as or better than the competing methods.

1. Introduction
Non-rigid Structure-from-Motion (NRSfM), a problem
where the task is to recover the three-dimensional structure
of a deforming object from a set of image feature correspondences across frames. Any solution to this problem depends
on the proper modeling of structure ∈ M and an efficient
estimation of motion ∈ SE(3), where M denotes some
structure manifold and SE(3) denotes special Euclidean

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Dense 3D reconstruction of facial expression using our
algorithm. The result show the 3D reconstruction of 73,765 points
of a complex non-rigidly deforming surface. These results can
be useful for real world applications such as 3D modeling, virtual
reality etc. The example sequence is taken from Actor dataset [7].

group which is a differentiable manifold [20]. Though, after Bregler et al. factorization framework to NRSfM [48],
motion estimations are mostly relaxed to rotation estimation ∈ SO(3). Even after such relaxation, the problem still
remains unsolved for any arbitrary motion. The main difficulty in NRSfM comes from the fact that both the camera and the object are moving and, along with it the object
themselves are deforming, hence, it becomes difficult to distinguish camera motion from object motion using only image data. Despite such difficulties, many efficient and reliable solutions based on the priors are proposed to solve
NRSfM. A reliable solution to this problem is important as
it covers a wide range of applications from medical industry
to the entertainment industry and many more.
To solve NRSfM, the algorithms proposed in the past
can broadly be divided into two major classes 1) sparse
NRSfM and 2) dense NRSfM. This classification is based
on the number of feature points that the algorithm can efficiently process to model the deformation of the object.
Although many reliable solution to this problem exists for
sparse NRSfM [18, 37, 35, 3, 47, 42, 40, 26, 29], very few
work have been done towards solving the dense NRSfM re-

5346

