Weakly Supervised Video Moment Retrieval From Text Queries
Niluthpol Chowdhury Mithun* , Sujoy Paul* , Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Riverside
{nmithun, supaul, amitrc}@ece.ucr.edu

Abstract
There have been a few recent methods proposed in text to
video moment retrieval using natural language queries, but
requiring full supervision during training. However, acquiring a large number of training videos with temporal boundary annotations for each text description is extremely timeconsuming and often not scalable. In order to cope with
this issue, in this work, we introduce the problem of learning from weak labels for the task of text to video moment
retrieval. The weak nature of the supervision is because,
during training, we only have access to the video-text pairs
rather than the temporal extent of the video to which different text descriptions relate. We propose a joint visualsemantic embedding based framework that learns the notion of relevant segments from video using only video-level
sentence descriptions. Specifically, our main idea is to utilize latent alignment between video frames and sentence descriptions using Text-Guided Attention (TGA). TGA is then
used during the test phase to retrieve relevant moments. Experiments on two benchmark datasets demonstrate that our
method achieves comparable performance to state-of-theart fully supervised approaches.

1. Introduction
Cross-modal retrieval of visual data using natural language description has attracted intense attention in recent
years [10, 43, 15, 12, 40, 41, 24], but remains a very challenging problem [43, 6, 21] due to the differences and ambiguity between different modalities. The identification of
the video moment (or segment) is important since it allows
the user to focus on the portion of the video that is most relevant to the textual query, and is beneficial when the video
has a lot of non-relevant portions. (See Fig. 1). The aforementioned approaches operate in a fully supervised setting,
i.e., they have access to text descriptions along with the exact temporal location of the visual data corresponding to
the descriptions. However, obtaining such annotations is te* Joint first author

Query: Old man in white finishes filming then leaves.

12.6 sec.

24 sec.

Query: A man holding a camera comes into view.

29.2 sec.

41.3 sec.

Figure 1. Illustration of text to video moment retrieval task: given
a text query, retrieve and rank videos segments based on how well
they depict the text description.

dious and noisy, requiring multiple annotators. The process
of developing algorithms which demand a weaker degree of
supervision is non-trivial and is yet to be explored by researchers for the problem of video moment retrieval using
text queries. In this work, we focus, particularly on this
problem.
The text to video moment retrieval task is more challenging than the task of localizing categorical activities in
videos, which is a comparatively well-studied field [20, 38,
44, 39, 28, 31]. Although these methods show success on
activity localization, unlike text to moment retrieval, they
are limited to a pre-defined set of activity classes. In this regard, there has been a recent interest in localizing moments
in a video from natural language description [9, 8, 40, 3].
Supervision in terms of text description with their temporal boundaries in a video is used to train these models.
However, acquiring such dense annotations of text-temporal
boundary tuples are often tedious, as it is difficult to mark
the start and end locations of a certain moment, which introduces ambiguity in the training data.
On the contrary, it is often much easier to just describe
the moments appearing in a video with a set of natural
language sentences, than providing exact temporal boundaries associated with each of the sentences. Moreover,
such descriptions can often be obtained easily from captions through some sources on the web. Motivated by this,
we pose a question in this paper: is it possible to develop

11592

