Additive Adversarial Learning for Unbiased Authentication
Jian Liang1∗ , Yuren Cao1,2∗, Chenbin Zhang1,2 , Shiyu Chang3 , Kun Bai1 , Zenglin Xu2
1
Cloud and Smart Industries Group, Tencent, China
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research, USA
{joshualiang,laurenyrcao,kunbai}@tencent.com
ChenbinZhang@std.uestc.edu.cn, shiyu.chang@ibm.com, zenglin@gmail.com

Abstract
Authentication is a task aiming to confirm the truth between data instances and personal identities. Typical authentication applications include face recognition, person
re-identification, authentication based on mobile devices
and so on. The recently-emerging data-driven authentication process may encounter undesired biases, i.e., the
models are often trained in one domain (e.g., for people
wearing spring outfits) while required to apply in other
domains (e.g., they change the clothes to summer outfits). To address this issue, we propose a novel two-stage
method that disentangles the class/identity from domaindifferences, and we consider multiple types of domaindifference. In the first stage, we learn disentangled
representations by a one-versus-rest disentangle learning
(OVRDL) mechanism. In the second stage, we improve the
disentanglement by an additive adversarial learning (AAL)
mechanism. Moreover, we discuss the necessity to avoid
a learning dilemma due to disentangling causally related
types of domain-difference. Comprehensive evaluation results demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of the
proposed method.

1. Introduction
Authentication considers the problem of whether the
data instances match personal identities. There is a variety of authentication applications including biometric authentication [4, 22] (e.g. face recognition [41] and fingerprint verification [37]) and person re-identification [2, 43].
However, data-driven authentication process often suffers
from undesired biases, i.e., domain-difference, which refers
to the problem that a model is trained in one domain, but
tested and verified in other domains. For example, in the
field of person re-identification [2], the prediction may be
∗ Equal contribution from both authors.

Domain 1
Domain 2
Domain 3

Class Group 1

Class Group 2

Class Group 3

Train
Test
Test

Test
Test
Train

Test
Train
Test

Table 1. An example of the assumptions of our problem.

compromised due to the seasonal outfits changing or the angle variation between a camera and a pedestrian.
Faced with the domain-difference problem between
training and testing data, simply applying data-driven models may lead to undesired solutions that focus on the biases of domains, even if the training data is sufficient. To
alleviate the aforementioned problem, this paper addresses
the task of learning for unbiased authentication. For simplicity, we treat authentication as a recognition problem so
that each identity corresponds to a class. We consider that
there are multiple domains and multiple types of domaindifference, where a specific type of domain-difference may
include multiple domains. For example, for person reidentification, season and shooting angle are two types of
domain-difference, where season includes four domains:
spring, summer, autumn, and winter, and shooting
angle includes domains such as front, back, side, etc.
To better understand our problem, we present a toy example with only one type of domain difference in Table 1.
In the training phase, for each group of classes, we have
their data on only one domain. In other words, different
domains do not share classes. In the testing phase, we
need to do a recognition on data which corresponds to unseen hclass, domaini combinations. Mathematically, the
problem we attempt to tackle is related to domain adaptation [25, 8, 28, 32], but different from it, because domain
adaptation allows source and target domains to share classes
but provides no label on target domains. Domain adaptation has been extensively studied in the field of transfer
learning [24, 33, 32, 19]. Our problem can be transformed
111428

