Multi-task Self-supervised Object Detection
via Recycling of Bounding Box Annotations
Wonhee Lee Joonil Na Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{wonhee, joonil}@vision.snu.ac.kr, gunhee@snu.ac.kr
http://vision.snu.ac.kr/projects/mtl-ssl-detection

Abstract
In spite of recent enormous success of deep convolutional networks in object detection, they require a large
amount of bounding box annotations, which are often timeconsuming and error-prone to obtain. To make better use
of given limited labels, we propose a novel object detection approach that takes advantage of both multi-task learning (MTL) and self-supervised learning (SSL). We propose
a set of auxiliary tasks that help improve the accuracy of
object detection. They create their own labels by recycling
the bounding box labels (i.e. annotations of the main task)
in an SSL manner, and are jointly trained with the object
detection model in an MTL way. Our approach is integrable with any region proposal based detection models.
We empirically validate that our approach effectively improves detection performance on various architectures and
datasets. We test two state-of-the-art region proposal object
detectors, including Faster R-CNN [39] and R-FCN [10],
with three CNN backbones of ResNet-101 [22], InceptionResNet-v2 [45], and MobileNet [23] on two benchmark
datasets of PASCAL VOC [14] and COCO [30].

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been significant progress in the field
of object detection [39, 10, 21], leveraging deep convolutional networks that can learn hierarchical feature representation of input images. However, training a practical object detection model requires a large amount of bounding
box annotations, which are often time-consuming and errorprone to obtain.
To mitigate the label shortage problem for deep neural
networks, many studies have been conducted; in the context
of object detection, multi-task learning and self-supervised
learning may be two exemplary approaches for the problem.
Multi-task learning (MTL) aims at jointly training multiple
relevant tasks with less annotations to improve the perfor-

mance of each task [33, 13, 46]. Its effectiveness has been
well studied; for example, it leads the effect of regularization by providing inductive bias to each other [5]. It is
also proven that as the number of tasks increases, the upper bound of the number of annotated data for better generalization decreases [3]. One of the most successful examples where MTL is helpful for object detection is Mask RCNN [21], which enhances the performance of object detection by jointly performing an instance segmentation task.
However, one of its practical limitations is that segmentation mask labels, which are more expensive than bounding
box annotations, must be provided.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) aims at training the
model from the annotations generated by itself with no
additional human effort [9, 42]. In object detection literature, SSL has been applied to replace ImageNet pretraining [34, 53, 36, 25]. Its motivation is that creating
a large-scale database like ImageNet is highly challenging and requires a lot of human effort, so it tries to pretrain the network from relevant tasks that do not require
human-annotated data such as Jigsaw puzzles [34] or colorization [53]. However, the performance of most SSL algorithms is not as good as ImageNet pretraining, and thus it
mostly fail to deliver practical benefit to object detection.
In this work, we propose a novel object detection approach that takes advantage of both multi-task learning
and self-supervised learning. We start from a normal supervised object detection setting, where a region proposal
based detector (e.g. Faster R-CNN [39] and R-FCN [10])
is given and bounding box annotations are available from
the dataset. The key to our approach is to propose a set
of auxiliary tasks that are relevant but not identical to object detection. They create their own labels by recycling the
bounding box labels (i.e. annotations of the main task) in an
SSL manner while regarding the bounding box as metadata.
Then these auxiliary tasks are jointly trained with the object
detection model in an MTL way. Our focus here is to improve the performance of the main task (object detection)
rather than all main and auxiliary tasks.
14984

