Conditional Single-view Shape Generation for Multi-view Stereo Reconstruction
Yi Wei1,2∗ Shaohui Liu1,2∗ Wang Zhao1,2∗ Jiwen Lu1†
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
b1ueber2y@gmail.com, {wei-y15, zhaowang15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present a new perspective towards
image-based shape generation. Most existing deep learning
based shape reconstruction methods employ a single-view
deterministic model which is sometimes insufficient to determine a single groundtruth shape because the back part
is occluded. In this work, we first introduce a conditional
generative network to model the uncertainty for single-view
reconstruction. Then, we formulate the task of multi-view
reconstruction as taking the intersection of the predicted
shape spaces on each single image. We design new differentiable guidance including the front constraint, the diversity constraint, and the consistency loss to enable effective
single-view conditional generation and multi-view synthesis. Experimental results and ablation studies show that
our proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods on 3D reconstruction test error and demonstrates its
generalization ability on real world data.

1. Introduction
Developing generative models for image-based threedimensional (3D) reconstruction has been a fundamental
task in the community of computer vision and graphics.
3D generative models have various applications on robotics,
human-computer interaction and autonomous driving, etc.
Researchers have discovered effective pipelines on reconstructing scene structures [11, 32] and object shapes [15,
41]. Recently, inspired by the promising progress of deep
learning on 2D image understanding and generation, much
great work has been done on using differentiable structure
to learn either volumetric or point cloud predictions from
single-view [6, 39, 47] and multi-view [4, 14] images.
Despite the rapid progress on the task of single-view
image-based shape reconstruction, there remains a fundamental question: can a single image provide sufficient information for three-dimensional shape generation? It is in∗ indicates equal contribution
† corresponding author

Figure 1: In real-world scenarios, one single image cannot
sufficiently infer a single 3D shape due to occlusion. While
our predictions can handle the ambiguity including the chair
arm and the car length, deterministic methods can only predict one mean shape which is not necessarily correct. We
further extend this for multi-view stereo reconstruction.
tuitive that in one picture took or rendered from a specific
view, only the front of the object can be seen. Ideally, most
existing methods implicitly assume that the reconstructed
object has a relatively symmetrical structure, which enables
reasonable guess on the back part. However, this assumption may not be true when it becomes much more complex
in real world scenarios.
In this paper, we address the problem of modeling the
uncertainty for single-view object reconstruction. Unlike
conventional generative methods which reconstruct shapes
in a deterministic manner, we propose to learn a conditional generative model with a random input vector. As the
groundtruth shape is only a single sample of the reasonable
shape space for a single-view image, we use the groundtruth
in a partially supervised manner, where we design a differentiable front constraint to guide the prediction of the generative model. In addition, we use a diversity constraint to
get the conditional model to span the space more effectively.
Conditioning on multiple random input vectors, our conditional model can give multiple plausible shape predictions
from a single image.
Furthermore, we propose a synthesis pipeline to transfer
the single-view conditional model onto the task of multiview shape generation. Different from most existing methods which utilize a recurrent unit to ensemble multi-view
features, we consider multi-view reconstruction as taking

9651

