Sampling Techniques for Large-Scale Object Detection
from Sparsely Annotated Objects
Yusuke Niitani

Takuya Akiba

Tommi Kerola Toru Ogawa
Preferred Networks, Inc.

Shotaro Sano

Shuji Suzuki

{niitani,akiba,tommi,ogawa,sano,ssuzuki}@preferred.jp

Abstract
Efficient and reliable methods for training of object detectors are in higher demand than ever, and more and more
data relevant to the field is becoming available. However, large datasets like Open Images Dataset v4 (OID) are
sparsely annotated, and some measure must be taken in order to ensure the training of a reliable detector. In order to
take the incompleteness of these datasets into account, one
possibility is to use pretrained models to detect the presence
of the unverified objects. However, the performance of such
a strategy depends largely on the power of the pretrained
model. In this study, we propose part-aware sampling, a
method that uses human intuition for the hierarchical relation between objects. In terse terms, our method works by
making assumptions like “a bounding box for a car should
contain a bounding box for a tire”. We demonstrate the
power of our method on OID and compare the performance
against a method based on a pretrained model. Our method
also won the first and second place on the public and private test sets of the Google AI Open Images Competition
2018.

1. Introduction
With recent advances in automation technologies that are
dependent on the method of extracting information from the
images, the task of object detection has been becoming increasingly important in the field of artificial intelligence.
Also growing with the interest for the methods of object detection is the size of the dataset that is available for
training purpose. Recently published Open Images Dataset
v4 (OID) features up to 500 categories and 1.6M images
with 14M objects to be detected [11]. It is a dataset on an
unprecedented scale in terms of the number of annotated
images, and each image in the dataset on average contains
∼ 7 categories that were verified by humans (verified categories) . As a human-annotated dataset, however, the completeness of OID is inevitably somewhat questionable. As
claimed in their work, the annotation recall is 43%, which
means that more than half the objects in the images are

missing annotations.
The major problem with this kind of a dataset is that a
network would suffer from incorrect training signals due to
objects missing annotations. One naive but sure way to deal
with such case is to simply exclude regions surrounding objects missing annotations during the evaluation of the objective function. This task, however, is easier said than done,
because the validity of this approach depends on our ability
to detect the unverified object that is actually present. One
option is to train a pretrained model and use it as an oracle
to tell the presence of unverified object [26]. Nevertheless,
the performance of such an approach is limited by the power
of the pretrained model.
A more intuitive approach is to utilize the intuition that
we are born with. If ”car” is present in the image, ”tire”
should be present in the bounding box of ”car” with high
probability. If ”door” is present in the image, ”door handle” should be present in the bounding box of ”door” as
well. Therefore, leaving some pathological cases side, if
”car” is verified but ”tire” is not, then it probably represents the dangerous case that we are concerned with—that
is, ”tire” is an unverified but present object in the image,
and we should not include the cost regarding the ”tire” in
the objective function. Better yet, if ”car” is present, then
we should simply not question the presence of an object of
a part category like ”tire” in the bounding box of ”car”.
This is in fact exactly what our part-aware sampling
method does. Given a verified object in the image and a set
of all sub-bounding boxes contained in the bounding box of
the object, we refrain from asking the detector to detect in
the sub-boxes the objects that are, based on our intuition,
part of the object captured by the parent bounding box.
In order to find the better way to detect unannotated objects, we compared our approach against the method based
on the pretrained model. The method using a pretrained
model is optimized to work well for sparsely annotated
dataset by us. We call the method pseudo label-guided sampling, and verified its effectiveness on OID and artificially
created sparsely annotated data based on MS COCO [14].
Our part-aware sampling leads to an average 0.7 AP im16510

