Learning Actor Relation Graphs for Group Activity Recognition
Jianchao Wu Limin Wang∗ Li Wang Jie Guo Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
濧濤濝濟濙 濖濠濣濗濟濝濢濛

Abstract
Modeling relation between actors is important for recognizing group activity in a multi-person scene. This paper aims at learning discriminative relation between actors efficiently using deep models. To this end, we propose to build a flexible and efficient Actor Relation Graph
(ARG) to simultaneously capture the appearance and position relation between actors. Thanks to the Graph Convolutional Network, the connections in ARG could be automatically learned from group activity videos in an end-toend manner, and the inference on ARG could be efficiently
performed with standard matrix operations. Furthermore,
in practice, we come up with two variants to sparsify ARG
for more effective modeling in videos: spatially localized
ARG and temporal randomized ARG. We perform extensive experiments on two standard group activity recognition
datasets: the Volleyball dataset and the Collective Activity
dataset, where state-of-the-art performance is achieved on
both datasets. We also visualize the learned actor graphs
and relation features, which demonstrate that the proposed
ARG is able to capture the discriminative relation information for group activity recognition.

1. Introduction
Group activity recognition is an important problem in
video understanding [56, 47, 52, 14] and has many practical applications, such as surveillance, sports video analysis, and social behavior understanding. To understand the
scene of multiple persons, the model needs to not only describe the individual action of each actor in the context, but
also infer their collective activity. The ability to accurately
capture relevant relation between actors and perform relational reasoning is crucial for understanding group activity
of multiple people [30, 1, 7, 23, 39, 12, 24, 59]. However,
modeling the relation between actors is challenging, as we
only have access to individual action labels and collective
activity labels, without knowledge of the underlying interaction information. It is expected to infer relation between
actors from other aspects such as appearance similarity and
∗ Corresponding author.

濧濨濕濢濘濝濢濛
Left Spike

Actor Relation Graph

Figure 1: Understanding group activity in multi-person
scene requires accurately determining relevant relation between actors. Our model learns to represent the scene by
actor relation graph, and performs reasoning about group
activity (“left spike” in the illustrated example) according to
the graph structure and nodes features. Each node denotes
an actor, and each edge represents the relation between two
actors
relative location. Therefore, it is required to model these
two important cues when we design effective deep models
for group activity understanding.
Recent deep learning methods have shown promising results for group activity recognition in videos [3, 24, 45, 12,
32, 59, 23, 39]. Typically, these methods follow a two-stage
recognition pipeline. First, the person-level features are extracted by a convolutional neural network (CNN). Then,
a global module is designed to aggregate these personlevel representations to yield a scene-level feature. Existing methods model the relation between these actors with
an inflexible graphical model [23], whose structure is manually specified in advance, or using complex yet unintuitive
message passing mechanism [12, 39]. To capture temporal dynamics, a recurrent neural network (RNN) is usually used to model temporal evolution of densely sampled
frames [3, 24]. These models are generally expensive at
computational cost and sometimes lack the flexibility dealing with group activity variation.
In this work, we address the problem of capturing appearance and position relation between actors for group activity recognition. Our basic aim is to model actor relation
in a more flexible and efficient way, where the graphical
connection between actors could be automatically learned
from video data, and inference for group activity recognition could be efficiently performed. Specifically, we pro-

9964

