Scale-Adaptive Neural Dense Features: Learning via Hierarchical Context
Aggregation
Jaime Spencer,

Richard Bowden,

Simon Hadfield

Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing (CVSSP)
University of Surrey
{jaime.spencer, r.bowden, s.hadfield}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
How do computers and intelligent agents view the world
around them? Feature extraction and representation constitutes one the basic building blocks towards answering this
question. Traditionally, this has been done with carefully
engineered hand-crafted techniques such as HOG, SIFT or
ORB. However, there is no “one size fits all” approach that
satisfies all requirements.
In recent years, the rising popularity of deep learning
has resulted in a myriad of end-to-end solutions to many
computer vision problems. These approaches, while successful, tend to lack scalability and can’t easily exploit information learned by other systems.
Instead, we propose SAND features, a dedicated deep
learning solution to feature extraction capable of providing hierarchical context information. This is achieved by
employing sparse relative labels indicating relationships of
similarity/dissimilarity between image locations. The nature of these labels results in an almost infinite set of dissimilar examples to choose from. We demonstrate how the
selection of negative examples during training can be used
to modify the feature space and vary it’s properties.
To demonstrate the generality of this approach, we apply
the proposed features to a multitude of tasks, each requiring different properties. This includes disparity estimation,
semantic segmentation, self-localisation and SLAM. In all
cases, we show how incorporating SAND features results in
better or comparable results to the baseline, whilst requiring little to no additional training. Code can be found at:
https://github.com/jspenmar/SAND_features

1. Introduction
Feature extraction and representation is a fundamental
component of most computer vision research. We propose to learn a feature representation capable of supporting a wide range of computer vision tasks. Designing such
a system proves challenging, as it requires these features
to be both unique and capable of generalizing over radical
changes in appearances at the pixel-level. Areas such as

(a) Source

(b) Global

(c) Local

(d) Hierarchical

Figure 1: Visualization of SAND features trained using
varying context hierarchies to target specific properties.
Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping (SLAM) or Visual
Odometry (VO) tend to use feature extraction in an explicit
manner [2, 17, 20, 46], where hand-crafted sparse features
are extracted from pairs of images and matched against each
other. This requires globally consistent and unique features
that are recognisable from wide baselines.
On the other hand, methods for optical flow [32] or
object tracking [3] might instead favour locally unique or
smooth feature spaces since they tend to require iterative
processes over narrow baselines. Finally, approaches typically associated with deep learning assume feature extraction to be implicitly included within the learning pipeline.
End-to-end methods for semantic segmentation [6], disparity estimation [44] or camera pose regression [29] focus on
the learning of implicit “features” specific to each task.
Contrary to these approaches, we treat feature extraction
as it’s own separate deep learning problem. By employing
sparsely labelled correspondences between pairs of images,
we explore approaches to automatically learn dense representations which solve the correspondence problem while
exhibiting a range of potential properties. In order to learn
from this training data, we extend the concept of contrastive
loss [16] to pixel-wise non-aligned data. This results in a
fixed set of positive matches from the ground truth correspondences between the images, but leaves an almost infinite range of potential negative samples. We show how by
carefully targeting specific negatives, the properties of the

6200

