Hybrid Task Cascade for Instance Segmentation
Kai Chen1 Jiangmiao Pang2,3 Jiaqi Wang1 Yu Xiong1 Xiaoxiao Li1 Shuyang Sun4
Wansen Feng2 Ziwei Liu1 Jianping Shi2 Wanli Ouyang4 Chen Change Loy5 Dahua Lin1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Research 3 Zhejiang University
4
The University of Sydney 5 Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Cascade is a classic yet powerful architecture that has
boosted performance on various tasks. However, how to introduce cascade to instance segmentation remains an open
question. A simple combination of Cascade R-CNN and
Mask R-CNN only brings limited gain. In exploring a more
effective approach, we find that the key to a successful instance segmentation cascade is to fully leverage the reciprocal relationship between detection and segmentation. In
this work, we propose a new framework, Hybrid Task Cascade (HTC), which differs in two important aspects: (1) instead of performing cascaded refinement on these two tasks
separately, it interweaves them for a joint multi-stage processing; (2) it adopts a fully convolutional branch to provide spatial context, which can help distinguishing hard
foreground from cluttered background. Overall, this framework can learn more discriminative features progressively
while integrating complementary features together in each
stage. Without bells and whistles, a single HTC obtains
38.4% and 1.5% improvement over a strong Cascade Mask
R-CNN baseline on MSCOCO dataset. Moreover, our overall system achieves 48.6 mask AP on the test-challenge split,
ranking 1st in the COCO 2018 Challenge Object Detection
Task. Code is available at: https://github.com/
open-mmlab/mmdetection.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is a fundamental computer vision
task that performs per-pixel labeling of objects at instance
level. Achieving accurate and robust instance segmentation in real-world scenarios such as autonomous driving and
video surveillance is challenging. Firstly, visual objects are
often subject to deformation, occlusion and scale changes.
Secondly, background clutters make object instances hard
to be isolated. To tackle these issues, we need a robust representation that is resilient to appearance variations. At the
same time, it needs to capture rich contextual information
for discriminating objects from cluttered background.

Cascade is a classic yet powerful architecture that has
boosted performance on various tasks by multi-stage refinement. Cascade R-CNN [5] presented a multi-stage architecture for object detection and achieved promising results.
The success of Cascade R-CNN can be ascribed to two key
aspects: (1) progressive refinement of predictions and (2)
adaptive handling of training distributions.
Though being effective on detection tasks, integrating
the idea of cascade into instance segmentation is nontrivial. A direct combination of Cascade R-CNN and Mask
R-CNN [18] only brings limited gain in terms of mask AP
compared to bbox AP. Specifically, it improves bbox AP by
3.5% but mask AP by 1.2%, as shown in Table 1. An important reason for this large gap is the suboptimal information flow among mask branches of different stages. Mask
branches in later stages only benefit from better localized
bounding boxes, without direct connections.
To bridge this gap, we propose Hybrid Task Cascade
(HTC), a new cascade architecture for instance segmentation. The key idea is to improve the information flow
by incorporating cascade and multi-tasking at each stage
and leverage spatial context to further boost the accuracy.
Specifically, we design a cascaded pipeline for progressive
refinement. At each stage, both bounding box regression
and mask prediction are combined in a multi-tasking manner. Moreover, direct connections are introduced between
the mask branches at different stages – the mask features
of each stage will be embedded and fed to the next one,
as demonstrated in Figure 2. The overall design strengthens the information flow between tasks and across stages,
leading to better refinement at each stage and more accurate
predictions on all tasks.
For object detection, the scene context also provides useful clues, e.g. for inferring the categories, scales, etc. To
leverage this context, we incorporate a fully convolutional
branch that performs pixel-level stuff segmentation. This
branch encodes contextual information, not only from foreground instances but also from background regions, thus
complementing the bounding boxes and instance masks.
Our study shows that the use of the spatial contexts helps

4974

