Learning to Generate Synthetic Data via Compositing
⋆†

⋆

Shashank Tripathi1,2
Siddhartha Chandra1
Amit Agrawal1
1
1
Ambrish Tyagi
James M. Rehg
Visesh Chari1
1
Amazon Lab126 2 Carnegie Mellon University
{shatripa, chansidd, aaagrawa, ambrisht, jamerehg, viseshc}@amazon.com

Abstract
We present a task-aware approach to synthetic data generation. Our framework employs a trainable synthesizer
network that is optimized to produce meaningful training
samples by assessing the strengths and weaknesses of a
‘target’ network. The synthesizer and target networks are
trained in an adversarial manner wherein each network is
updated with a goal to outdo the other. Additionally, we
ensure the synthesizer generates realistic data by pairing it
with a discriminator trained on real-world images. Further,
to make the target classifier invariant to blending artefacts,
we introduce these artefacts to background regions of the
training images so the target does not over-fit to them.
We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach by applying it to different target networks including a classification network on AffNIST, and two object detection networks
(SSD, Faster-RCNN) on different datasets. On the AffNIST
benchmark, our approach is able to surpass the baseline results with just half the training examples. On the VOC person detection benchmark, we show improvements of up to
2.7% as a result of our data augmentation. Similarly on the
GMU detection benchmark, we report a performance boost
of 3.5% in mAP over the baseline method, outperforming
the previous state of the art approaches by up to 7.5% on
specific categories.

1. Introduction
Synthetic data generation is now increasingly utilized to
overcome the burden of creating large supervised datasets
for training deep neural networks. A broad range of
data synthesis approaches have been proposed in literature,
ranging from photo-realistic image rendering [22, 35, 48]
and learning-based image synthesis [36, 40, 46] to methods for data augmentation that automate the process for
generating new example images from an existing training
⋆ Equal Contribution
† Work done during an internship at Amazon Lab126

baseline

ours

baseline

ours

Figure 1: Comparison of object detection results using SSD.
Baseline: trained on VOC data, Ours: trained on VOC and
synthetic data generated using our approach. Green and red
bounding boxes denote correct and missed detections respectively. SSD fine-tuned with our synthetic data shows
improved performance on small, occluded and truncated
person instances.
set [9, 14, 15, 33]. Traditional approaches to data augmentation have exploited image transformations that preserve
class labels [3, 46], while recent works [15, 33] use a more
general set of image transformations, including even compositing images.
For the task of object detection, recent works have explored a compositing-based approach to data augmentation
in which additional training images are generated by pasting
cropped foreground objects on new backgrounds [6, 7, 10].
The compositing approach, which is the basis for this work,
has two main advantages in comparison to image synthesis:
1) the domain gap between the original and augmented image examples tends to be minimal (resulting primarily from
blending artefacts) and 2) the method is broadly-applicable,
as it can be applied to any image dataset with object annotations.
A limitation of prior approaches is that the process that

461

