AdaptiveFace: Adaptive Margin and Sampling for Face Recognition
Hao Liu1,2 Xiangyu Zhu1,2 Zhen Lei1,2∗ Stan Z. Li1,2,3
1
CBSR & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
3
Faculty of Information Technology, Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau SAR, China.
{hao.liu2016,xiangyu.zhu,zlei,szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Training large-scale unbalanced data is the central topic
in face recognition. In the past two years, face recognition
has achieved remarkable improvements due to the introduction of margin based Softmax loss. However, these methods
have an implicit assumption that all the classes possess sufficient samples to describe its distribution, so that a manually set margin is enough to equally squeeze each intraclass variations. However, real face datasets are highly unbalanced, which means the classes have tremendously different numbers of samples. In this paper, we argue that the
margin should be adapted to different classes. We propose
the Adaptive Margin Softmax to adjust the margins for different classes adaptively. In addition to the unbalance challenge, face data always consists of large-scale classes and
samples. Smartly selecting valuable classes and samples
to participate in the training makes the training more effective and efficient. To this end, we also make the sampling process adaptive in two folds: Firstly, we propose the
Hard Prototype Mining to adaptively select a small number
of hard classes to participate in classification. Secondly,
for data sampling, we introduce the Adaptive Data Sampling to find valuable samples for training adaptively. We
combine these three parts together as AdaptiveFace. Extensive analysis and experiments on LFW, LFW BLUFR
and MegaFace show that our method performs better than
state-of-the-art methods using the same network architecture and training dataset. Code is available at https:
//github.com/haoliu1994/AdaptiveFace.

1. Introduction
Face recognition, as one of the most common computer
vision tasks, has made dramatic improvements in recent
years [8, 3, 24, 36, 44, 33, 23, 18, 45, 40, 19, 5, 2]. It is
worth noting that in the last few years, most approaches
∗ Corresponding author

focus on loss functions which aim to reduce intra-class
variations and enlarge inter-class variations. As one of
milestone contributions, the margin based Softmax [17, 16,
34, 32, 4] explicitly adds a margin to each identity to improve feature discrimination. For example, L-Softmax [17]
and SphereFace [16] add multiplicative angular margin to
squeeze each class. CosFace [34, 32] and ArcFace [4]
achieve the state-of-the-art performance by adding additive cosine margin and angular margin respectively for easier optimization. Nonetheless, these methods have an implicit hypothesis that all the classes have sufficient samples
to describe their distributions, so that a constant margin is
enough to equally squeeze each intra-class variations. However, public face datasets are highly unbalanced, which indicates that they always have tremendously different numbers
of samples as shown in Fig 1. For those rich classes with
sufficient samples, the space spanned by existing training
samples can represent the real distribution. However, for
those poor classes with scarce samples, the space spanned
by the existing training samples may be only a small part of
the real distribution. Therefore, a uniform margin is not perfect to constrain classes with different sample distributions.
We prefer a larger margin to strongly squeeze the intraclass variations of those underrepresented classes to improve generalization. In this paper, we propose a novel loss
function, Adaptive Margin Softmax Loss (AdaM-Softmax),
to adaptively find the appropriate margins for different kind
of classes. Specifically, we make the margin m particular
and learnable for each class and directly train the CNN to
find the adaptive margins. Formally, we define the margin
of each class mi such that the decision boundary is given
by cos θ1 − m1 = cos θ2 , where θi is the angle between the
feature and weight of class i. In the experiments, we show
that AdaM-Softmax is superior to the baseline methods.
Besides, the large-scale face data always contains hundreds of thousands of classes and millions of samples,
where only a small fraction of them can contribute to the
discriminative training. How to select valuable classes and
samples for training is another important topic but attracts

11947

