ManTra-Net: Manipulation Tracing Network For Detection And Localization of
Image Forgeries With Anomalous Features

∗

Yue Wu∗§ , Wael AbdAlmageed∗ , and Premkumar Natarajan∗§
USC Information Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, CA, USA
§
Amazon, Manhattan Beach, CA, USA
wuayue@amazon.com, {wamageed, pnataraj}@isi.edu

Abstract
To fight against real-life image forgery, which commonly
involves different types and combined manipulations, we
propose a unified deep neural architecture called ManTraNet. Unlike many existing solutions, ManTra-Net is an
end-to-end network that performs both detection and localization without extra preprocessing and postprocessing.
ManTra-Net is a fully convolutional network and handles
images of arbitrary sizes and many known forgery types
such splicing, copy-move, removal, enhancement, and even
unknown types. This paper has three salient contributions.
We design a simple yet effective self-supervised learning
task to learn robust image manipulation traces from classifying 385 image manipulation types. Further, we formulate the forgery localization problem as a local anomaly
detection problem, design a Z-score feature to capture local anomaly, and propose a novel long short-term memory
solution to assess local anomalies. Finally, we carefully
conduct ablation experiments to systematically optimize the
proposed network design. Our extensive experimental results demonstrate the generalizability, robustness and superiority of ManTra-Net, not only in single types of manipulations/forgeries, but also in their complicated combinations.

1. Introduction
Image forgery has recently become an epidemic, negatively affecting many aspects of our life, e.g., fake news,
Internet rumors, insurance fraud, blackmail, and even academic publications [51]. Yet, most cases of image forgeries are not detected. Just in biomedical research publications alone, 3.8% of 20,621 papers (published in 40 scientific journals from 1995 to 2004) contained problematic
figures, with at least half exhibiting features suggestive of
This work was done prior to Amazon involvement of the authors.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Win the Photoshop battle [27] using ManTra-Net, which
is capable of localize various complicated real-life forgeries.
Columns from left to right are: pristine donor image, forged image
(also the input of ManTra-Net), and the ManTra-Net’s prediction.

deliberate manipulation [12]. In 2014, Stern et al. [41] estimate that each of the retracted articles could account for a
mean of $392,582 in direct costs, implying much higher indirect costs caused by misled research—and this is only in
the biomedical field and these numbers are five years outdated. It is therefore imperative to develop new algorithms
to assist in the fight against image manipulation and forgery.
Many image forgery techniques exist. However, splicing [19, 44, 28], copy-move [18, 43, 37, 46, 45], removal [58], and enhancement [9, 10, 17] are the four that
have been studied the most. Both splicing and copy-move
involve pasting image content to the target (i.e., forged)

9543

