Inverse Path Tracing for Joint Material and Lighting Estimation

Geometry & Target Views

MIT CSAIL

3

Facebook Reality Labs

Albedo

2

Matthias Nießner1

Emission

Technical University of Munich

Roughness

1

Anton Kaplanyan3

Tzu-Mao Li2,3

Inverse Path Tracing

Dejan Azinović1

Rendering

Figure 1: Our Inverse Path Tracing algorithm takes as input a 3D scene and up to several RGB images (left), and estimates
material as well as the lighting parameters of the scene. The main contribution of our approach is the formulation of an
end-to-end differentiable inverse Monte Carlo renderer which is utilized in a nested stochastic gradient descent optimization.

Abstract
Modern computer vision algorithms have brought significant advancement to 3D geometry reconstruction. However, illumination and material reconstruction remain less
studied, with current approaches assuming very simplified
models for materials and illumination. We introduce Inverse Path Tracing, a novel approach to jointly estimate the
material properties of objects and light sources in indoor
scenes by using an invertible light transport simulation. We
assume a coarse geometry scan, along with corresponding
images and camera poses. The key contribution of this work
is an accurate and simultaneous retrieval of light sources
and physically based material properties (e.g., diffuse reflectance, specular reflectance, roughness, etc.) for the purpose of editing and re-rendering the scene under new conditions. To this end, we introduce a novel optimization method
using a differentiable Monte Carlo renderer that computes
derivatives with respect to the estimated unknown illumination and material properties. This enables joint optimization for physically correct light transport and material models using a tailored stochastic gradient descent.

1. Introduction
With the availability of inexpensive, commodity RGB-D
sensors, such as the Microsoft Kinect, Google Tango, or
Intel RealSense, we have seen incredible advances in 3D
reconstruction techniques [27, 14, 28, 33, 8]. While tracking and reconstruction quality have reached impressive levels, the estimation of lighting and materials has often been
neglected. Unfortunately, this presents a serious problem
for virtual- and mixed-reality applications, where we need
to re-render scenes from different viewpoints, place virtual
objects, edit scenes, or enable telepresence scenarios where
a person is placed in a different room.
This problem has been viewed in the 2D image domain, resulting in a large body of work on intrinsic images
or videos [1, 26, 25]. However, the problem is severely
underconstrained on monocular RGB data due to lack of
known geometry, and thus requires heavy regularization
to jointly solve for lighting, material, and scene geometry. We believe that the problem is much more tractable
in the context of given 3D reconstructions. However, even
with depth data available, most state-of-the-art methods,
e.g., shading-based refinement [34, 37] or indoor re-lighting
[36], are based on simplistic lighting models, such as spher-

2447

