Emotion-Aware Human Attention Prediction
Macario O. Cordel II1∗, Shaojing Fan2 , Zhiqi Shen2 Mohan S. Kankanhalli2
1
De La Salle University – Manila, 2 National University of Singapore

Abstract
Despite the recent success in face recognition and object classification, in the field of human gaze prediction,
computer models are still struggling to accurately mimic
human attention. One main reason is that visual attention
is a complex human behavior influenced by multiple factors, ranging from low-level features (e.g., color, contrast)
to high-level human perception (e.g., objects interactions,
object sentiment), making it difficult to model computationally. In this work, we investigate the relation between object sentiment and human attention. We first introduce an
improved evaluation metric (AttI) for measuring human attention that focuses on human fixation consensus. A series
of empirical data analyses with AttI indicate that emotionevoking objects receive attention favor, especially when they
co-occur with emotionally-neutral objects, and this favor
varies with different image complexity. Based on the empirical analyses, we design a deep neural network for human attention prediction which allows the attention bias on
emotion-evoking objects to be encoded in its feature space.
Experiments on two benchmark datasets demonstrate its superior performance, especially on metrics that evaluate relative importance of salient regions. This research provides
the clearest picture to date on how object sentiments influence human attention, and it makes one of the first attempts
to model this phenomenon computationally.

1. Introduction
Predicting where humans will look in a scene (i.e.,
saliency prediction) has attracted a significant amount of
research because of its potential applications such as in
social advertising and robot vision. Classic bottom-up
methods like the Itti-Koch model [18] and Graph-Based
Visual Saliency (GBVS) [15] use low-level features such
as color, intensity, and orientations. Recently, numerous saliency models based on deep neural network (DNN)
have been proposed with largely improved performance
[17, 6, 20, 7, 22]. Although these DNN-based models are
∗ This work was done when the first author was an intern at National
University of Singapore. Email: macario.cordel@dlsu.edu.ph

Figure 1. (a) We first introduce an improved metric (AttI) for evaluating human attention. Analyses show that AttI can better reflect
human attention consensus on images of various complexity compared with previously used Attention Score (AS). (b) Motivated
by our empirical data analyses, we propose the Emotion-Aware
saliency model (EASal) that incorporates information of object
proposals with sentiment labels (red, gray, blue indicate positive,
neutral, and negative sentiments, respectively).

trained with massive amounts of labeled data [8, 19] and
equipped with superior object recognition ability, there is
still a large gap between their predictions and ground truth
human fixations. Aiming to address this limitation, Bylinskii and colleagues [4] re-examined current saliency models, and argued that to approach human-level performance,
saliency models need to discover high-level image concepts,
such as text or motion, and reason about the relative importance of image regions.
One possible high-level image concept is emotion, a fac-

4026

