3D Appearance Super-Resolution with Deep Learning
Yawei Li1 , Vagia Tsiminaki2 , Radu Timofte1 , Marc Pollefeys2,3 , and Luc van Gool1
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{yawei.li, radu.timofte, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch
2

Computer Vision and Geometry Group, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, 3 Microsoft, USA
{vagia.tsiminaki, marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We tackle the problem of retrieving high-resolution (HR)
texture maps of objects that are captured from multiple
view points. In the multi-view case, model-based superresolution (SR) methods have been recently proved to recover high quality texture maps. On the other hand, the
advent of deep learning-based methods has already a significant impact on the problem of video and image SR. Yet,
a deep learning-based approach to super-resolve the appearance of 3D objects is still missing. The main limitation of exploiting the power of deep learning techniques
in the multi-view case is the lack of data. We introduce
a 3D appearance SR (3DASR) dataset based on the existing ETH3D [42], SyB3R [31], MiddleBury, and our Collection of 3D scenes from TUM [21], Fountain [51] and
Relief [53]. We provide the high- and low-resolution texture maps, the 3D geometric model, images and projection
matrices. We exploit the power of 2D learning-based SR
methods and design networks suitable for the 3D multi-view
case. We incorporate the geometric information by introducing normal maps and further improve the learning process. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed
networks successfully incorporate the 3D geometric information and super-resolve the texture maps.

1. Introduction
Retrieving efficiently the appearance information of objects through multi-camera observations is of a great importance for the final goal of creating realistic 3D content. To
increase the realism of the reconstructed 3D object a detailed appearance needs to be added on top of geometry.
This high quality 3D content is used in applications such as
movie production, video games and digital culture heritage
preservation. Yet, even with highly accurate 3D geometric reconstruction, simply re-projecting the images onto the
geometry does not guarantee detailed appearance coverage.
To regain details from the low-resolution (LR) images,

Figure 1: We introduce the 3DASR, a 3D appearance SR
dataset and a deep learning-based approach to super-resolve
the appearance of 3D objects.
model-based super-resolution (SR) techniques have been
introduced in the multi-view case [22, 21, 45]. These methods introduce a single coherent texture space to define a
common texture map and they model the captured image
as a downgraded version of this high-resolution (HR) texture map. Through image formation model they exploit the
visual redundancy of the overlapping views [22, 21] and of
video frames [45]. Although these model-based SR techniques recover successfully high quality texture maps, they
are computationally demanding.
On the other hand, 2D example-based SR methods have
be shown to outperform the model-based methods. The basic assumption of example-based SR is the recurrence of
similar patches in different parts of an image or in different
images [18]. In particular, recent deep learning-based techniques have been proposed to learn the mapping between
the LR and HR images. Different networks are trained on
large image datasets that contain pairs of HR and LR images. Super-resolving LR images is then realized with a
feed forward step. Yet, a deep learning-based approach to
super-resolve the appearance of 3D objects is still missing.
In this paper, our goal is to introduce deep learning techniques into the problem of appearance SR in the multi-view
case. To exploit the capacity of 2D deep learning techniques, we first provide a 3D appearance dataset. Similar to
19671

